
INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY
A Reference Handbook

Selected Titles in ABC-CLIO’s
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Series
Adoption, Barbara A. Moe
Capital Punishment, Michael Kronenwetter
Chemical and Biological Warfare, Al Mauroni
Childhood Sexual Abuse, Karen L. Kinnear
Conflicts over Natural Resources, Jacqueline Vaughn
Domestic Violence, Margi Laird McCue
Energy Use Worldwide, Jaina L. Moan and Zachary A. Smith
Euthanasia, Martha L. Gorman and Jennifer Fecio McDougall
Food Safety, Nina E. Redman
Genetic Engineering, Harry LeVine III
Gun Control in the United States, Gregg Lee Carter
Human Rights Worldwide, Zehra F. Kabasakal Arat
Illegal Immigration, Michael C. LeMay
Internet and Society, Bernadette H. Schell
Mainline Christians and U.S. Public Policy, Glenn H. Utter
Mental Health in America, Donna R. Kemp
Nuclear Weapons and Nonproliferation, Sarah J. Diehl and James
Clay Moltz
Policing in America, Leonard A. Steverson
Sentencing, Dean John Champion
U.S. Military Service, Cynthia A. Watson
World Population, Geoffrey Gilbert
For a complete list of titles in this series, please visit 
www.abc-clio.com.

Books in the Contemporary World Issues series address vital
issues in today’s society such as genetic engineering, pollution,
and biodiversity. Written by professional writers, scholars, and
nonacademic experts, these books are authoritative, clearly
written, up-to-date, and objective. They provide a good starting
point for research by high school and college students, scholars,
and general readers as well as by legislators, businesspeople,
activists, and others.
Each book, carefully organized and easy to use, contains an
overview of the subject, a detailed chronology, biographical
sketches, facts and data and/or documents and other primary-
source material, a directory of organizations and agencies,
annotated lists of print and nonprint resources, and an index.
Readers of books in the Contemporary World Issues series will
find the information they need in order to have a better
understanding of the social, political, environmental, and
economic issues facing the world today.


INTELLECTUAL
PROPERTY
A Reference Handbook
Aaron Schwabach
CONTEMPORARY
WORLD ISSUES
Santa Barbara, California
Denver, Colorado
Oxford, England

Copyright © 2007 by ABC-CLIO, Inc.
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced,
stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any
means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise,
except for the inclusion of brief quotations in a review, without prior
permission in writing from the publisher.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Schwabach, Aaron.
Intellectual property : a reference handbook / Aaron Schwabach.
p. cm. —  (Contemporary world issues)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-59884-045-2 (hardcover : alk. paper) — 
ISBN 978-1-59884-046-9 (ebook : alk paper)  1.  Intellectual property —
United States. 2.  Intellectual property (International law)  I. Title.  
KF2979.S39 2007
346.7304—dc22
2007001209
11  10  09  08  07    1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9  10
ABC-CLIO, Inc.
130 Cremona Drive, P.O. Box 1911
Santa Barbara, California 93116-1911
This book is also available on the World Wide Web as an ebook. 
Visit www.abc-clio.com for details.
This book is printed on acid-free paper
Manufactured in the United States of America

This book is dedicated to
Qienyuan, Veronica, Jessica, and Daniel.


Contents
Preface, xiii
1
Background and History, 1
Development of Intellectual Property Rights and
Concepts, 1
Copyright: Invention of the Printing Press, 1
Trademark: From Bakers’ Marks to Metatags, 8
Patent, 12
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today, 14
Copyright Overview, 14
Trademark Overview, 26
Patent Overview, 34
Summary, 41
Treaties, 42
Regulations, 43
Statutes and Legislative Materials, 43
Cases, 44
Sources and Further Reading, 46
2
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions, 49
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs, 50
Is the Look and Feel of a Computer Program or a
Website Copyrightable?, 53
Is a Method of Doing Business Patentable?, 58
Is an Electronic Database Copyrightable?, 62
Can Content Owners Restrict or Prohibit the Sale of
Copying Devices?, 66
Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing, 69
ix

Copy Protection and Copyright, 82
Trademarks and the Web: Infringement and Fair Use
Online, 87
Trademarks and the Web: Cybersquatting, 90
Summary, 92
Treaties, 93
Statutes and Other Governmental Materials, 94
Cases, 94
Sources and Further Reading, 96
3
Worldwide Perspective, 99
Intellectual Property and International Law, 99
The World Wide Web, 104
The International Copyright Regime, 106
The International Trademark Regime, 114
The International Patent Regime, 116
Protection of Other Forms of Intellectual Property under
U.S. and International Law, 119
Summary, 123
Treaties, 123
European Union, ICANN, WIPO, and WTO
Documents, 126
Statutes and Legislative Materials, 127
Cases, 128
Sources and Further Reading, 128
4
Chronology, 131
5
Biographies, 149
Clara Barton, 149
Ernest Bourget, 151
Filippo Brunelleschi, 153
Laurens Coster, 155
Annie Ellsworth, 156
Johannes Gutenberg, 158
Victor Hugo, 159
Jon Lech Johansen, 160
Mary Kies, 162
Antonio Meucci, 163
Eadweard Muybridge, 164
Dmitri Sklyarov, 167
Jack Valenti, 169
x
Contents

Terri Welles, 171
Samuel Winslow and Joseph Jenks, 173
6
Data and Documents, 175
Copyright, 176
Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. § 102. Subject matter
of copyright: In general, 176
Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. § 106. Exclusive rights
in copyrighted works, 176
Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. § 107. Limitations on
exclusive rights: Fair use, 177
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. § 1201.
Circumvention of copyright protection systems, 178
TRIPs: Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights, 185
Part II: Standards Concerning the Availability, Scope
and Use of Intellectual Property Rights, 185
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 125
S.Ct. 2764 (2005), 186
Trademark, 198
15 U.S.C. § 1125. False designations of origin, false
descriptions, and dilution forbidden, 198
Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006, 203
Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006, H.R.683, One
Hundred Ninth Congress of the United States of
America, 204
TRIPs: Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights, 208
Part II: Standards Concerning the Availability, Scope
and Use of Intellectual Property Rights, 208
Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc., 537 F.2d
4, 210
Patent, 213
Patent Act, 35 U.S.C. § 101. Inventions patentable, 214
Patent Act, 35 U.S.C. § 102. Conditions for
patentability; novelty and loss of right to patent, 214
Patent Act, 35 U.S.C. § 103. Conditions for
patentability; non-obvious subject matter, 215
TRIPs: Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property Rights, 216
Part II: Standards Concerning the Availability, Scope
and Use of Intellectual Property Rights, 216
Contents
xi

In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526, 218
Endnotes, 222
7
Directory of Organizations, 225
8
Resources, 255
Books, 255
Similar Works, 256
Other Titles, 259
Journal, Magazine, and News Website Articles and
Pamphlets, 260
Journals, 264
U.S. Materials, 275
Federal Statutes, 276
Federal Cases, 291
State Case, 295
Treaties and Other International Agreements, 295
Other International and Foreign Materials, 298
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
Materials, 299
Other Web Resources, 300
Glossary, 303
Index, 307
About the Author, 318
xii
Contents

Preface
T
he human desire to claim property rights in an idea is innate,
as any child who has ever told another “Stop copying me!”
knows. Legal recognition of property in ideas, however—
intellectual property—is a comparatively recent phenomenon,
appearing centuries of millennia after the recognition of property
rights in objects and land.
Revolutions in technology bring about revolutions in law.
The human race has experienced four great revolutions in infor-
mation technology. The first, lost in prehistory and probably pre-
dating our emergence as a species, was language. The ability to
attach specific sound-symbols to specific thoughts is what makes
human civilization—including legal systems—possible. The sec-
ond revolution, the invention of writing, made more complex
legal systems possible. When written documents could only be
copied by hand, however, the incentive for making unauthorized
copies of entire works was limited—although disputes did arise,
including the possibly mythical dispute between St. Columba
and St. Finnian (discussed in Chapter 2) that may have led to
three thousand deaths.
The third revolution in information technology was the in-
vention of movable-type printing. The ability to reproduce
printed works quickly and easily created an incentive for printers
to copy the works of others, and a corresponding incentive for the
authors of those works to prevent unauthorized copying. Some
countries (Korea and England, for example) reacted by granting
monopolies to approved printers and forbidding all others from
operating printing presses. In addition to controlling unautho-
rized copying, this had the fringe benefit of preventing the print-
ing of any material criticizing the government. In many countries
xiii

several centuries passed before these monopolies were replaced
by freedom of the press and modern copyright regimes.
The three best-known forms of intellectual property—copy-
right, patent, and trademark—appeared in Europe during the Re-
naissance. After the printing revolution had taken place in east
Asia, but before it reached Europe, Europe’s commercial revolu-
tion led to laws requiring the use of symbols and words to iden-
tify the products of particular bakeries, breweries, and eventually
other businesses. And the increase in the rate of technological
change in the fifteenth century (the century that saw, among other
innovations, the arrival of the printing press in Europe) led the
Italian city-states to issue patents to inventors, granting them ex-
clusive rights to their inventions for limited periods of time.
The fourth revolution in information technology is happen-
ing right now. The advent of personal computing and the Internet
has solved the problem expressed by Abbott Joseph Liebling,
who in 1960 complained that “Freedom of the press is guaranteed
only to those who own one.” Today billions of people own
“presses”; the barrier to universal distribution of any content they
may choose to create is not expense, but the difficulty of getting
people interested—a problem commercial presses have always
faced. This revolution in information technology poses a dual
problem for traditional media. First, much Web content borrows
and incorporates existing material, and the extent to which such
borrowing should be permitted has not yet been fully resolved.
Second, many users create no content of their own, but merely
make and pass along unauthorized copies of existing content. Ex-
isting law clearly frowns on this copying, but enforcement is dif-
ficult.
The fourth information technology revolution has also accel-
erated the internationalization of intellectual property law. The
international nature of trade in intellectual property has been ap-
parent since at least the mid-nineteenth century; in the digital
age, however, barriers to international exchange of information
have vanished entirely. 
Intellectual property law has adapted more quickly to the
fourth information revolution than to the first three. The response
time to the first revolution might have been measured in tens or
hundreds of thousands of years; the response to the second revo-
lution, in millennia; and the response to the third, in centuries, or
at least decades. The legal system responded to the appearance of
the Internet, and especially the World Wide Web, much more
xiv
Preface

quickly. Within five years of the appearance of the first easily us-
able Web browser, the United States had enacted the Digital Mil-
lennium Copyright Act and other statutes, which were designed
to extend and strengthen copyright protection, and the Anticy-
bersquatting Consumer Protection Act, which was designed to
protect the interests of trademark holders in what was then called
“cyberspace.”
This book serves as a reference guide to humanity’s attempts,
up to and throughout the twentieth century and into the twenty-
first, to balance the interests of consumers and producers and cre-
ate a workable national and international intellectual property
law system. Intellectual property law is currently in crisis; this
book is designed to serve as a starting point for future research,
and the resources provided here will make it possible to locate
up-to-the-minute information in a wide variety of areas.
Chapter 1 begins with a historical overview of the develop-
ment of intellectual property and the laws regulating it. It looks at
the three traditional categories of intellectual property: copyright
from the invention of the printing press in China more than 1,200
years ago to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act and the Sonny
Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998; trademark from the
Bakers Marking Law of 1266 (requiring bakers in England to
place identifying marks on their bread) to the Anticybersquatting
Consumer Protection Act and search-engine spamming; and
patent from the fifteenth-century Florence of Filippo Brunelleschi
to business-method patents for one-click ordering. Chapter 1 also
includes an overview of the law currently in force in the United
States in each of these three areas of intellectual property law.
Chapter 2 looks at specific problems with intellectual prop-
erty law and the success (or lack of success) of the current legal
regime in addressing these problems. It looks first at a relative
failure: the slow and awkward adaptation of the intellectual
property regime, from the 1960s through the 1980s, to computer
software. Software is functional; thus, it might seem to be a
proper subject for patent. On the other hand it is composed of
text and can be expressive; thus it might also seem to be a proper
subject for copyright. The failure of the courts, lawmakers, and
administrators of the United States and Europe to resolve—or
even understand—this conflict when it first arose led to the dis-
astrous Supreme Court decision in Gottschalk v. Benson, which ap-
parently held (although much later the Court backtracked) that
software could not be patented. This rule was then adopted in the
Preface
xv

European Patent Convention. Rather than acknowledging the
problem and perhaps creating a new form of intellectual property
protection for software, the U.S. and European patent systems—
and those of the rest of the world as well—allowed copyright to
become the primary vehicle for protection of rights in computer
programs, with results that have distorted the industry and ar-
guably hindered progress. 
Chapter 2 also covers “look and feel” copyright, database
protection, business methods patents, and the conflict of interest
between copyright owners and equipment manufacturers, before
looking at perhaps the fiercest intellectual property battle of re-
cent years: the battle over online file sharing. Chapter 2 also dis-
cusses online trademark issues (cybersquatting, metatags, and
search-engine spamming).
Chapter 3 looks at international intellectual property law and
the organizations that administer it. The three traditional forms of
intellectual property are protected to varying degrees. The Berne
Convention and other copyright treaties create nearly seamless
and nearly universal copyright protection; almost all works are
protected almost everywhere. Patent protection is less compre-
hensive, and the trademark regime still less so. The Patent Coop-
eration Treaty and other patent treaties have created a single
patent-filing system, but obtaining global (or somewhat global)
patent protection is still a dauntingly complex, difficult, and ex-
pensive task. The global trademark regime is the least compre-
hensive of all, with no single filing system covering a majority of
the world’s countries. Chapter 3 also looks at other forms of in-
tellectual property outside the three traditional categories.
Chapter 4 provides a chronology of milestone events in the
development of intellectual property law. Chapter 5 provides bi-
ographical sketches of inventors, activists, authors, and others
who have played a role in the development of intellectual prop-
erty law. Chapter 6 provides annotated excerpts from important
documents in international intellectual property law, along with
explanatory text. A full library of primary source materials in U.S.
and international intellectual property law would not fit in this
book, but all of these materials can be found on the Internet and
in libraries. The resources listed in Chapters 7 and 8 will enable
readers to find them. Chapter 7 describes and provides contact in-
formation for a variety of international and national government
and nongovernment organizations. Chapter 8 provides a bibliog-
raphy, with descriptions of suggested books for further reading; a
xvi
Preface

list of articles, journals, and primary source materials; and a
guide to the most comprehensive online resources.
I’d like to thank all of the people who helped make this book
possible, including my research assistants, Candace Michaux and
Kaiya Tollefson; my editors, Dayle Dermatis and Cami Caccia-
tore; Professors Julie Cromer, Deven Desai,  K. J. Greene, and San-
dra Rierson, my colleagues at Thomas Jefferson School of Law;
and especially my family. I hope that you enjoy reading this book
as much as I did writing it (or possibly more) and that it will serve
as a starting point for further explorations in intellectual property
law.
Preface
xvii


1
Background and History
Development of Intellectual Property
Rights and Concepts
I
ntellectual property is the intangible but legally recognized
right to property in the products of one’s intellect. Intellectual
property rights allow the originator of certain ideas, inventions,
and expressions to exclude others from using those ideas, inven-
tions, and expressions without permission. The three tradition-
ally recognized forms of intellectual property are copyright,
trademark, and patent. Copyright protects expressive works—
movies, music, plays, books, and the like. Trademark protects
marks that are placed on goods to distinguish them from other
goods, generally by identifying the maker or distributor. Patent
protects inventions. Both U.S. and international law also protect
less well-known forms of intellectual property, such as trade se-
crets, know-how, and certain industrial designs.
Copyright: Invention of the Printing Press
As a practical matter, an author’s right to prohibit or profit from
the copying of his or her work required little or no protection be-
fore the invention of mechanical means of copying. Manually
copying books or paintings was too laborious for piracy to be
profitable. The invention of copying technologies, however, has
led to an ever-escalating legal regime of copyright protection as
authors seek to protect their works.
1

The first of these technologies was the printing press. Early
printing techniques, which were used in China and Japan as long
as 1,400 years ago, used block printing: A single block was carved
with all of the images and characters on a page. It could then be
used to make multiple copies—prints—of that page. The perfec-
tion of the block-printing technique can be seen in the world’s
oldest surviving printed book, the Diamond Sutra, published by
Wang Jie in AD 868 and bearing the words “reverently made for
universal free distribution.” (The Diamond Sutra, which is now in
the collection of the British Library, can be viewed at
http://www.bl.uk/onlinegallery/ttp/digitisation.html.) The
text is astonishingly clear and can be easily read by any twenty-
first century person who can read Chinese, although the use of
the language is somewhat archaic and hard to follow.
Although block printing made reproduction of pictures and
texts possible, it was the advent of movable type that brought
about cheap, high-volume reproduction of printed text and ulti-
mately gave rise to modern copyright laws. In AD 1041, a Chi-
nese inventor named Bi Sheng built the world’s first printing
press using movable type; about two centuries later the world’s
oldest surviving book printed with movable text, The New Code
of Etiquette, was published in Korea by Yi Gyu-bo. Because the
Chinese (and, at the time, Korean) language uses thousands of
characters, each representing a word, rather than a few dozen
letters, setting up pages with movable type in Chinese is more
time-consuming, and thus more expensive, than it is for lan-
guages that use an alphabet. Korea’s adoption of a phonetic al-
phabet (now called hangul but at the time called hunmin
jeongeum) in 1446 (two years after its invention) made printing
with movable type much easier and cheaper. The Korean gov-
ernment responded to this information explosion, and the prob-
lem of unauthorized copying, in the same way that the British
government would later respond to the same problem: Only
government-authorized printers could print books (Choi 2003,
646). The concept of “copyright” in the modern sense seems to
have first appeared in Korea in the 1880s, and the end of the gov-
ernment-granted monopoly or oligopoly on printing came with
the Japanese annexation in the early twentieth century.
2
Background and History

The Origin of Anglo-American Copyright Law: The Stationer’s
Company and the Statute of Anne
The copyright law of the United States descends from the copy-
right law of Britain. Between 1430 and 1450, Europeans, including
Johannes Gutenberg and Laurens Coster (see Chapter 5), built
movable-type printing presses in Europe. Gutenberg published
the first of his famous Bibles in 1455. (The British Library’s two
Gutenberg Bibles may be viewed at http://prodigi.bl.uk/treasures/
gutenberg/search.asp.) In 1474 the British printer William Caxton
published the first book printed in English using movable type—
an English translation of Raoul Lefèvre’s The Recuyell of the Histo-
ryes of Troye. (The British Library’s copy is not yet available online,
but a copy of Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury Tales, printed by
Caxton in 1476, may be viewed at http://www.bl.uk/treasures/
caxton/homepage.html.) 
The introduction of movable type to Britain led to the prob-
lem of copying, and more than eight decades after Caxton’s Can-
terbury Tales was printed the British government opted for the
solution that the Korean government had chosen about two cen-
turies earlier (Choi 2003, 646). In 1557 the British government
granted the Stationer’s Company a royal monopoly on book pub-
lishing. This monopoly lasted well over a century, until 1695. By
the time the monopoly expired, printing had arrived in the British
North American colonies, with the publication of the Eliot Indian
Bible (a translation of the Bible into Algonquin) in Cambridge,
Massachusetts, from 1661 to 1663.
From 1695, when the Stationer’s Company’s monopoly ex-
pired, until 1710, no copyright law existed in Britain and alterna-
tive publishers flourished. The Stationer’s Company lobbied for
further legal protection, with only partial success. In 1710 the
British parliament passed its first copyright act, the Statute of
Anne (Leaffer 1999, 4–5).
The Statute of Anne preserved the rights of the Stationer’s
Company in works already published until 1731 (an additional
twenty-one years) but effectively undermined the position of the
Stationer’s Company by viewing copyright as originating with
the writing rather than the publication of the work. The purpose
of the statute was to encourage “learned men to compose and
Development of Intellectual Property Rights and Concepts
3

write useful work.” For works created after the date of the statute,
copyright was to endure for fourteen years and was renewable
for a second fourteen-year term if the author was still alive at the
end of the first. It was not until 1774, however, that the hold of the
Stationer’s Company over works it had previously published was
finally broken by the holding in Donaldson v. Beckett that the term
of copyright is invariably finite (Leaffer 1999, 4–5).
The Beginning of U.S. Intellectual Property Law: The Patent and
Copyright Clause of the U.S. Constitution
Shortly thereafter, the Constitution of the newly independent
United States granted Congress the power “To promote the
Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times
to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective
Writings and Discoveries” (U.S. Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 8). This
clause, known as the Patent and Copyright Clause, provided the
basis for the 1790 Copyright Act, which provided authors and
their assignees with copyright protection for books, charts, and
maps for a term identical to that set out in the Statute of Anne: a
fourteen-year copyright, renewable once for an additional four-
teen years. As new technological developments enabled new
forms of copying, additional forms of subject matter were added
to the Copyright Act. In 1865, for example, photographs were
added to the list of copyrightable subject matter.
As Anglo-American copyright law was developing along
these lines, however, it was growing increasingly out of step with
copyright law on the European continent. While Anglo-American
law focused on the benefit of copyright (for a limited term) to so-
ciety, French law focused on its benefit to the author. Concepts of
copyright in France dated back at least to the reign of Francis I,
who in 1537 instituted the concept of dépôt légale, requiring that all
printers deposit a copy of each work they published and offered
for sale in France with the Bibliothèque Nationale at the Château
de Blois. This dépôt légale later served as a form of copyright reg-
istration. In the following centuries a state-regulated printing oli-
gopoly developed along the lines of those in Britain, Korea, and
elsewhere. By edict of 30 August 1777, the French crown extended
printing-monopoly privileges on a quite different basis than that
in the Statute of Anne. The right to publish a work was not de-
fined by a set term of years, but if granted to or assigned to a pub-
lisher, it lasted for the lifetime of the author, and if granted to and
held by the author, it was perpetual (Ginsburg 1990, 997). Decrees
4
Background and History

during the French Revolution limited the author’s rights some-
what and recognized and expanded the public domain—the
body of works not protected by copyright and available for copy-
ing (Ginsburg 1990, 1005–1009). Authors in France came to enjoy
rights known as moral rights, including the right to be identified
as the author of a work, the right to protect the work from
changes, and the right to withdraw a work from distribution. In
the United States, copyright continued to be viewed as an eco-
nomic rather than a moral right. The U.S. legal system, while
adopting copyright registration requirements derived from the
dépôt légale, remained unreceptive to moral rights and to the idea
of a lifetime (or longer) term of copyright protection.
Despite differences in national copyright laws, however, the
ease with which copyrights could be violated outside the country
in which they were granted made it increasingly apparent that
some sort of international copyright law was needed. In 1886 a
group of European countries adopted the Berne Convention, the
foundation of the regime that still governs international copy-
right today—but because U.S. copyright law differed so greatly
from that in other countries, the United States was not to join the
Convention until another century had passed.
The Copyright Act of 1909
The Copyright Act of 1909 doubled the term of U.S. copyright,
from the fourteen-year, once-renewable term originally set by
the Statute of Anne to a twenty-eight-year term, also renewable
once. It did not, however, adopt the Berne Convention’s mini-
mum term (for individually authored works) of the life of the au-
thor plus fifty years (Leaffer 1999, 6–7). The 1909 Act also required
registration formalities that were inconsistent with the Berne
Convention. In addition to these international problems, the Act
provided insufficient protection for most unpublished work, re-
sulting in the growth of a system of state law copyright protection
for these works (Leaffer 1999, 39).
The Copyright Act of 1976 and the 1988 Berne Convention
Implementation Act
In 1955, the United States became a party to the Universal Copy-
right Convention, an alternative to the Berne Convention, and
Congress embarked on what ultimately became a twenty-year
project to review and revise U.S. copyright law to bring it into line
with international norms. The Copyright Act of 1976, a sweeping
Development of Intellectual Property Rights and Concepts
5

revision of U.S. copyright law, marked a far more dramatic de-
parture from the Statute of Anne than had the 1909 Act. The 1976
Act eliminated the renewable twenty-eight-year term of copy-
right, replacing it with the Berne Convention minimum of the
lifetime of the author plus fifty years for individually authored
works, and with a term of seventy-five years from publication or
100 years from creation, whichever was less, for most other
works. It preempted state copyright law, eliminating the cumber-
some dual system. And it provided far clearer definitions of the
rights of copyright holders, and the limitations to which those
rights were subject, than previous statutes. The 1976 Act and a
subsequent 1988 statute finally made it possible for the United
States to join the Berne Convention, creating a universal copy-
right regime.
Changing the Rules: The Internet
Just as the United States and the last other major holdouts were
joining the Berne Convention, a new information revolution, as
dramatic as the invention of printing, was taking place: the ad-
vent of home computing and the Internet. Digital computing of-
fered something no other copying technology had been able to
offer: perfect copies, without any deterioration in quality, of any
work already in digital form. And the Internet made it possible to
disseminate these copies far more easily than any previous tech-
nology. In a few seconds and at no cost to the copier, a copied
work could be made available to every user of the Internet any-
where on the planet.
This new technological revolution has brought a quicker re-
sponse, in part because of the greater interconnectedness that the
Internet itself makes possible. Internationally, treaties promul-
gated by the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
and the World Trade Organization have addressed the problem of
digital piracy. In the United States, additional copyright laws in
the Internet era have included the No Electronic Theft Act of 1997,
and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA) and Sonny
Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, both enacted in 1998.
The No Electronic Theft Act of 1997 was enacted to control
warez trading. Warez are unauthorized copies of copyrighted
computer software. Warez can be unlawfully traded or given
away over the Internet or copied onto disks and given away or
sold. Although commercial copying was illegal under previously
existing law, before 1997 some noncommercial copying had been
6
Background and History

beyond the reach of criminal prosecution (United States v. LaMac-
chia, 871 F. Supp. 535). The No Electronic Theft Act greatly ex-
panded the government’s ability to impose criminal sanctions on
noncommercial warez traders. 
The DMCA, a multifaceted and complex revision of copy-
right law relating to digital works, had five distinct sections,
called “titles,” four of which addressed copyright in digital
works. (The fifth created a new form of intellectual property pro-
tection for vessel hull designs [17 U.S.C. §§ 1301–1332].) Title I,
the WIPO Copyright and Performances and Phonograms Treaties
Implementation Act, was enacted to fulfill the obligations of the
United States under two WIPO treaties. One aspect of Title I was
especially controversial: the prohibition of the circumvention of
technological measures designed to prevent digital copying (17
U.S.C. §§ 1201–1204). This provision, which makes it unlawful to
circumvent the copy protection on DVDs, for example, is seen as
unfair by many consumers. The prohibition has been extended
not only to the sale or free distribution of software that enables
copying of protected DVDs, but even to posting links on a web-
site to other sites from which such software may be downloaded
(Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429). 
Title II, the Online Copyright Infringement Liability Limita-
tion Act, addressed the concerns of Internet service providers
(ISPs) that they might be held liable for copyright infringement
committed on or over their networks. Title II provides a safe har-
bor from such liability for ISPs that comply with certain require-
ments (17 U.S.C. § 512). Without such a safe harbor, the ISPs
might be unable to function, as policing their networks for copy-
right-infringing material would be a near-impossible task. 
Title III, the Computer Maintenance Competition Assurance
Act, provides that a person who activates a computer for pur-
poses of maintenance or repair and makes a copy of a program by
doing so is not liable for copyright infringement, provided that
the new copy is not used for any other purpose or retained after-
ward (17 U.S.C. § 117(c)). While this may seem considerably less
earthshaking than the safe harbor provisions of Title II or the
anticircumvention provisions of Title I, Congress thought it nec-
essary to prevent the creation of vendor monopolies on mainte-
nance of computer equipment after the 1993 decision in MAI
Systems v. Peak Computer, which had held that the creation of such
copies during maintenance could provide a basis for liability for
copyright infringement (991 F.2d 511). Title IV of the DMCA was
Development of Intellectual Property Rights and Concepts
7

something of a catchall, addressing miscellaneous issues includ-
ing ephemeral recordings and webcasting, copies made for
distance education, library and archival preservation and interli-
brary loan copies, the effect of transfer of rights in motion pic-
tures on collective bargaining agreements, and certain functions
of the Copyright Office (17 U.S.C. §§ 106, 108–110, and 112).
The Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act (sometimes
derisively called the Mickey Mouse Protection Act because one of
its most notable supporters and beneficiaries was the Walt Disney
Company) increased the duration of most copyright terms by
twenty years, bringing U.S. terms into line with European Union
norms (and exceeding the requirements of the Berne Conven-
tion). Under the Act, U.S. copyright law now protects most
individually authored works for the lifetime of the author plus
seventy years, and most other works for ninety-five years from
publication or 120 years from creation, whichever is less (17
U.S.C. §§ 302, 304; see “Duration of Copyright”).
Trademark: From Bakers’ Marks to
Metatags
A trademark is a mark that can be placed on goods to distinguish
them from other goods. Other marks distinguish other things in
commerce: service marks, for example, identify providers of serv-
ices. The term “trademark” is often used to refer to the legal
regime governing all protected marks, and all such marks are
sometimes referred to as “trademarks.” The law of trademark in
the Anglo-American tradition has more ancient roots than copy-
right.
The association of a maker’s name or mark with his or her
work is probably as ancient as commerce itself. Many trade
names still in use today as marks date back more than a thousand
years. The Hoshi Ryokan, a Japanese inn, has operated under the
Hoshi family’s name—and management—for 1,300 years; the
Japanese construction firm Kongo Gumi has been using that
name for more than 1,400 years (World’s Oldest Companies
2004). In Europe, well-known beers Lowenbrau and Stella Artois
have been marketed under those names since the fourteenth cen-
tury; the more obscure Weihenstephan dates back to AD 1040.
Modern Anglo-American trademark law, however, had its
origin in the Bakers Marking Law of 1266. As the name says, the
8
Background and History

law required bakers to place a mark on loaves of bread that they
sold, identifying the baker. Originally these marks were intended
to protect the public, a rationale that continues to underlie much
of modern trademark law. If a loaf of bread was defective or of in-
sufficient weight, the incompetent or unscrupulous baker could
easily be tracked down. Not surprisingly, however, these marks
came to serve as marketing tools, as consumers sought out the
marks of especially competent bakers. 
By 1618 the urge to gain market share by counterfeiting a
more popular mark had given rise to Britain’s first reported deci-
sion in a case of trademark infringement: Southern v. How, in
which a clothier brought an action for deceit against another
clothier for using the first clothier’s mark to cause potential pur-
chasers to believe the cloth had been made by the first clothier.
Southern v. How refers to a yet earlier, presumably unreported
case involving a similar issue (Austin 2004, 840 n. 51).
Trademark had a rocky start in the United States. The Patent
and Copyright Clause of the U.S. Constitution makes no mention
of trademark. Although Thomas Jefferson, among others, favored
a national law of trademark protection, it was not until 1870 that
Congress passed a Trademark Act. Nine years later the Act was
struck down as unconstitutional by the Supreme Court (In re
Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U.S. 82).
In striking down the Trademark Act, the Supreme Court did
not reject the idea of trademark protection. Rather, it endorsed the
idea of protection of trademarks at the state level, whether
through common law (law made by judges in deciding reported
cases) or by state statute: 
The right to adopt and use a symbol or a device to dis-
tinguish the goods or property made or sold by the per-
son whose mark it is, to the exclusion of use by all other
persons, has been long recognized by the common law
and the chancery courts of England and of this country,
and by the statutes of some of the States. It is a property
right for the violation of which damages may be recov-
ered in an action at law, and the continued violation of it
will be enjoined by a court of equity, with compensation
for past infringement. This exclusive right was not cre-
ated by the act of Congress, and does not now depend
upon it for its enforcement. (In re Trade-Mark Cases, 100
U.S. at 92)
Development of Intellectual Property Rights and Concepts
9

The prospect of a continuing regime of different and incon-
sistent trademark laws in each state, each with its own registra-
tion system, was a bit daunting. The Supreme Court did leave
Congress an alternative, however. It pointed out that Congres-
sional authority over trademarks could not be based on the
Patent and Copyright Clause, because a trademark does not “de-
pend upon novelty, invention, discovery, or any work of the
brain. It requires no fancy or imagination, no genius, no laborious
thought. It is simply founded on priority of appropriation” (In re
Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U.S. at 94). Congress lacked all authority to
regulate trademark between citizens of the same state. However,
it might possess the authority under the Commerce Clause to reg-
ulate trademark insofar as it affected commerce between and
among states, with foreign nations, and with Indian tribes (see In
re Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U.S. at 94–95). 
Congress missed the hint and, in 1881, enacted a tentative
trademark act allowing national registration of marks used in
commerce with foreign nations and Indian tribes, but somehow
omitting interstate commerce. In 1905 Congress finally allowed
national registration of “fanciful” and “arbitrary” marks (but not
of merely “descriptive” marks) used in interstate commerce
(Berger 2004, 394). Like copyright, however, trademark is neces-
sarily international; companies need protection for their trade-
marks in all countries in which they do business. In 1910, the
United States and several Latin American countries entered into
the Inter-American Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property. In 1920, a new Trademark Act was enacted to carry out
the obligations of the United States under the convention.
Federal trademark law as it now exists in the United States
dates from the Lanham Trademark Act of 1946. Congress, in en-
acting the Lanham Act, attempted to modernize, simplify, and
unify existing federal trademark law and to carry out the obliga-
tions of the United States under international law. The Lanham
Act was also designed to create an incentive to register trade-
marks by attaching certain rights to registration (Robert 1996,
375). The Lanham Act itself has been amended several times,
most dramatically by the Trademark Law Revision Act of 1988,
the Federal Trademark Dilution Act of 1995, the Anticounterfeit-
ing Consumer Protection Act of 1996, the Anticybersquatting
Consumer Protection Act of 1999, and the Trademark Dilution Re-
vision Act of 2006. 
10
Background and History

In the years following the Lanham Act, international trade-
mark law continued to evolve, and the 1988 Revision Act, like
the earlier 1920 Act, was aimed at bringing U.S. law into con-
formity with international law. The 1996 Acts were inspired in
part by the increase in global trade. The Anticounterfeiting Act
provided remedies for U.S. trademark holders threatened by
“counterfeit” trademark-infringing goods originating outside
the United States, while the controversial Dilution Act provided
a remedy for holders of “famous” marks against those who used
the same or similar marks in ways that might “dilute” the
strength of the mark. This dilution can occur in two ways:
through “blurring,” which causes the mark to lose its distinctive
quality, and “tarnishment,” which associates undesirable quali-
ties with the mark. Thus, the Dilution Act can impose liability for
trademark dilution even when there is no likelihood that con-
sumers would be confused by the diluting use. This grants a
powerful weapon to the wealthiest (in intellectual property
terms) trademark holders, which has the potential for misuse to
quell legitimate criticism or innocent uses (Greene 2004). In a
2003 case, the Supreme Court questioned whether the federal
statute covered dilution by tarnishment; however, in the Trade-
mark Dilution Revision Act of 2006, Congress affirmed that dilu-
tion can occur by blurring or tarnishment (Mosely, 537 U.S. 418;
PL 109-312, 120 Stat. 1730).
The advent of the Internet led to the Anticybersquatting Con-
sumer Protection Act, which addressed the then-new problem of
protecting trademark holders from other Internet users who
might register the trademark holders’ trademarks as domain
names. The Act imposes liability on anyone who, with a bad-faith
intent to profit, registers a domain name that creates a likelihood
of confusion with or (in the case of “famous” marks) dilutes an-
other’s mark (15 U.S.C. § 1125(d)). This also has the potential for
abuse; for example, in Los Angeles, the parents of a two-year-old
girl, Veronica Sams, registered the name veronica.org to create a
website about their daughter, and were sued by Archie Comics
Publications, which holds a trademark in the name “Veronica” for
one of its characters (Greene 2004, 637). The suit was eventually
dropped. The idea that a company could entirely preempt all uses
of a given name seems absurd, but many parents confronted with
such a suit would be unwilling or unable to contest it and would
simply have yielded the domain name.
Development of Intellectual Property Rights and Concepts
11

The advent of the Internet has also given rise to the abuse of
trademarks in metatags and other forms of search-engine spam-
ming. Metatags are text inserted into an HTML document (such
as a Web page) in a way that makes them invisible when the doc-
ument is viewed in the usual way. (To view metatags, if any, on a
Web page, select “View/Source” or the equivalent from your
browser’s menu bar.) Metatags are mostly used for legitimate
purposes, but they can also include the use of a competitor’s
trademark to increase the page’s chance of being located by
search engines (and rank when located) when people search for
the competitor. Search-engine spammers can also use trademarks
in other ways to spam search engines (including Google) that do
not rely on metatags.
Patent
Patent, like copyright, has its origins in royal monopolies granted
to certain businesses. In medieval Europe some of these monopo-
lies may have been granted in response to innovation in particu-
lar fields; however, the first explicit linking of innovation to the
grant of a monopoly—and thus the first patent statute in the
modern sense—was the Venetian patent statute of 1474. The first
known patent had been issued more than fifty years earlier, in
1421, by the city of Florence to Filippo Brunelleschi. Brunelleschi
is remembered today as the architect of the Duomo di Firenze, the
cathedral of Santa Maria del Fiore. To transport marble for his
cathedral, Brunelleschi designed a new type of ship; it was for
this that the patent was granted (Nard and Morriss 2004, 8)
The Venetian statute, however, was the first governmental
act to systematize the granting of patents. (Some medieval guilds
had already done so for their own members.) Although Venice
may have granted patents as early as 1416, the 1474 statute pro-
vided inventors “who shall build any new and ingenious device
in this City, not previously made in our Commonwealth” with the
right to prevent all other persons from making the same device
(Nard and Morriss 2004, 8 n. 39, 9 n. 47). The term of the patent
was set at 10 years, and to receive the patent the inventor had to
disclose the way in which the invention was made and operated,
so that after the expiration of the ten-year period others could
freely copy the invention.
The patent statute may have helped to make Venice a hub of
technological innovation and development in the fifteenth and
12
Background and History

sixteenth centuries, or it may have arisen because Venice was al-
ready well on its way to becoming such a hub. At the same time,
however, England was a relative technological backwater. Al-
though a royal patent of monopoly was granted as early as 1449
(by King Henry VI to John of Utynam, for manufacturing stained
glass), patent law as a systematic means of rewarding and en-
couraging invention developed there somewhat later. Through-
out the late sixteenth century, patents were granted in England on
an occasional basis, as they had been in Venice and Florence in the
early and middle fourteenth century. The granting of patents was
haphazard; while a patent for a water closet was denied, a patent
for vinegar was granted (Nard and Morriss 2004, 33). 
By the early 1600s the granting of patents had become a
source of contention between Parliament and the Crown. Eventu-
ally this conflict led to the 1623 Statute of Monopolies, the Anglo-
American legal system’s first patent act. The 1623 Statute provided
that “the true and first inventor” should have the right to exclude
or prevent others from making an invention for a period of four-
teen years from the date of the grant of the patent (Statute of Mo-
nopolies, reprinted in Dinwoodie 2002, 39–40). This was not a
recognition of the rights of inventors outside England; it was re-
stricted to inventions “within this realm,” and a patent could be
granted to an “inventor” in Britain who merely copied something
that had already been done elsewhere (Kaufer 1989, 6–7). 
Patent laws based on the Statute of Monopolies were
adopted in the British North American colonies, beginning with
Massachusetts in 1641. After independence, patent law, like copy-
right law, was specifically placed under the authority of Congress
by the Patent and Copyright Clause of the U.S. Constitution,
which gives Congress the power to make laws “To promote the
Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for limited Times
to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to their respective
Writings and Discoveries” (Const. art. I, § 8, cl. 8). The first patent
statute, in 1790, marked a departure from the Statute of Monopo-
lies. The 1790 Act focused not on the right of the sovereign to
grant monopolies, but on the right of the individual inventor to
his (or, somewhat later, her) invention. The Act also required an
official examination before a patent could be granted, although
this requirement was eliminated in 1793 and not reinstituted until
1836 (Kaufer 1989, 8). 
A patent, like a copyright or a trademark, is initially limited
to the territory of the sovereign granting it, yet it may be infringed
Development of Intellectual Property Rights and Concepts
13

upon by persons outside that territory. Like copyrights and trade-
marks, patents require international protection if they are to be
effective in a global economy. At the outset of the nineteenth cen-
tury there was considerable international pressure against the
adoption of patent laws. This antipatent movement attempted to
repeal patent laws in the German states, successfully resisted six
attempts to introduce a patent law in Switzerland, and succeeded
(in 1869) in repealing the patent law of the Netherlands (Kaufer
1989, 8–10). By the end of the nineteenth century, however, the an-
tipatent movement had been defeated, and the Paris Convention
for the Protection of Industrial Property created the beginnings of
a global patent regime that covered much of Latin America,
North America, and Europe, including even Switzerland.
In the United States, the establishment of the U.S. Patent Of-
fice by the 1836 Patent Act marked the beginning of modern
patent law. A subsequent Patent Act, in 1870, unified and simpli-
fied existing law but made little substantive change. Patent law,
like copyright law, has continued to undergo modification to
adapt to new technologies. Occasionally these adaptations prove
controversial, as with the patenting of computer programs (dis-
cussed in detail in Chapter 2); living organisms (permitted since
1930 by the Plant Patent Act); or business methods (required
under the Treaty on Trade Related Aspects of Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights, or TRIPs, and permitted by the Federal Circuit’s de-
cision in State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Group).
The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (as it has been called since
1975) has also been subject to domestic and international criticism
for its perceived laxness in granting patents.
Intellectual Property Law in the
United States Today
Copyright Overview
Copyright, as the name says, is the exclusive right to make copies
of a work. The term “copyright” today also covers several other
rights, including the right to perform or display a work, the right
to publish or otherwise distribute a work, the right to digitally
broadcast a work, and the right to create derivative works based
on a work (17 U.S.C. § 106). These rights—the right to copy,
14
Background and History

distribute, perform, display, and make derivative works—can
collectively be described as “economic rights.” Another category
of rights, called “moral rights,” includes the right to be acknowl-
edged as the author of a work, the right to decide when and in
what form the work shall be presented to the public, and the right
to prevent the work from being altered or distorted. Moral rights
have not traditionally been protected in U.S. copyright law, al-
though some moral rights in certain works, especially works of
visual art, have been protected (17 U.S.C. § 106A). 
Copyrightable Subject Matter: What Can Be Copyrighted
Copyright protects “Original works of authorship fixed in any
tangible medium of expression” (17 U.S.C. § 102). In other words,
to be protected by copyright under U.S. law, a work must possess
three qualities: It must be original, it must be a work of author-
ship, and it must be fixed in a tangible medium of expression.
The “originality” requirement for copyright protection is
minimal. Compiling cases in a case reporter in a particular order,
together with the resulting page numbering, may satisfy the re-
quirement (Oasis, 924 F. Supp. 918). The requirement is not non-
existent, however. In the 1991 case of Feist Publications v. Rural
Telephone Service Co., the U.S. Supreme Court rejected the idea that
copyright can be a reward for hard work in the absence of origi-
nality (499 U.S. 340). Copyright, the Supreme Court held, cannot
be based on the “sweat of the brow” of the creator of a work. The
“originality” in Feist consisted of arranging names in a telephone
directory in alphabetical order; this was insufficiently original to
support a claim of copyright.
A list of “works of authorship” can be found in the Copy-
right Act (17 U.S.C. § 102(a)), including
1.
literary works; 
2.
musical works, including any accompanying words; 
3.
dramatic works, including any accompanying music; 
4.
pantomimes and choreographic works; 
5.
pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works; 
6.
motion pictures and other audiovisual works; 
7.
sound recordings; and 
8.
architectural works.
Computer programs have been protected as literary works,
defined in 17 U.S.C. § 101 as “works, other than audiovisual
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
15

works, expressed in words, numbers, or other verbal or numeri-
cal symbols or indicia” (17 U.S.C. § 101; Williams Electronics, 685
F.2d 870). This protection has been extended to operating systems
as well as applications (Apple Computer, 714 F.2d 1240). 
To be “fixed in a tangible medium of expression,” a work
must be recorded “by or under the authority of the author,” in a
form “sufficiently permanent or stable to permit it to be per-
ceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated for a period of
more than transitory duration” (17 U.S.C. § 101). The fixed work
need not be readable by the unaided human senses; a work is
fixed in a tangible medium even if it can only be perceived with
mechanical or electronic assistance (Williams Electronics, 685 F.2d
870; Midway Manufacturing, 704 F.2d 1009). Thus, computer pro-
grams and sound and video recordings on CDs, tape cassettes,
DVDs, and other magnetic, optical, and electronic media are all
“fixed” for copyright purposes. Live broadcast works can also be
“fixed” for copyright purposes: “A work consisting of sounds,
images, or both, that are being transmitted, is ‘fixed’ for purposes
of this title if a fixation of the work is being made simultaneously
with its transmission” (17 U.S.C. § 101). 
Some subject matter is specifically made noncopyrightable
even if it otherwise appears to meet the statutory requirements of
originality, work of authorship, and fixation. Copyright will not
protect “any idea, procedure, process, system, method of opera-
tion, concept, principle, or discovery,” even if embodied within
an otherwise copyrightable and copyrighted work (17 U.S.C. §
102(b)). Although a particular and original expression of an idea
can be copyrightable, when an idea can be expressed in only a
limited number of ways, the idea and the expression merge and
the expression is uncopyrightable (Baker, 101 U.S. 99; NEC, 10
U.S.P.Q.2d 1177). Certain works may also be uncopyrightable
under the scènes a fàire doctrine.
Procedures, processes, systems, and methods of operation, to
the extent that they can be protected as intellectual property, are
more properly the subjects of patent than of copyright—although
the unavailability of copyright does not mean that a particular
procedure, process, system, or method is eligible for patent pro-
tection. Concepts and principles may not be protectable at all, ex-
cept perhaps as trade secrets, while “discovery” is used in the
Patent Code as a synonym for “invention” (35 U.S.C. § 100). Un-
copyrightable methods of operation include the menu command
hierarchy of a computer program (Lotus Development, 140 F.3d 70).
16
Background and History

Operating systems, however, are, as already noted, copy-
rightable. They are not mere methods of operation but are pro-
tected literary works (Apple Computer, 714 F.2d 1240).
Scènes a fàire are works, or more often portions of works, that
are dependent on basic, common ways of treating particular sub-
ject matter to such an extent as to render them uncopyrightable
(Hoehling, 618 F.2d 972; Data East USA, 862 F.2d 204). A video
game based on the sport of karate, for instance, must include cer-
tain types of kicks and punches; these moves are scènes a fàire and
cannot be copyrighted (Data East USA, 862 F.2d 204). Similarly, a
book or movie about the Hindenburg airship disaster is likely to
include images of German soldiers drinking in beer halls, saying
“Heil Hitler” and singing the German national anthem. These im-
ages are scènes a fàire; they are a standard part of any depiction of
Germany in the Nazi era, and thus cannot be copyrighted
(Hoehling, 618 F.2d 972).
Copyright Formalities
Previously, U.S. law imposed notice and registration formalities
as a prerequisite for copyright protection. To obtain a copyright
under modern U.S. law, however, it is necessary to do nothing
more than to fix one’s original work of authorship in a tangible
medium of expression. This will afford the author copyright pro-
tection not only in the United States but also, subject to local law,
in all of the countries that are parties to the Berne Convention.
However, copyrights may still be registered with the U.S. Copy-
right Office, a division of the Library of Congress. (Forms for var-
ious types of copyrightable works can be downloaded from the
Copyright Office’s website at http://www.copyright.gov/
register/.) For most works, registration requires a completed ap-
plication form, a fee of $45, and one copy (for unpublished works,
works first published outside the United States, and collective
works or contributions thereto) or two copies (for most other
works first published in the United States) of the work to be reg-
istered (U.S. Copyright Office 2006a). Special rules apply to on-
line publications, computer programs, and databases. Special
provisions have been made to allow computer programs to be
registered without disclosing all of the program’s source code
(U.S. Copyright Office 2006b). The fee, completed form, and copy
or copies of the work must then be sent to the Copyright Office.
Special fees apply to serial publications, newspapers, changes to
existing registrations, and expedited requests.
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
17

The Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988 elimi-
nated the notice requirement for works fixed after 1 March 1989.
For earlier works, notice was required, and works first fixed be-
fore that date may have fallen into the public domain if notice of
a claim of copyright was not affixed. For these earlier works, the
copyright notice should take the form of the word “Copyright”
(or “Copr.”) or the copyright symbol “©” along with the year of
first publication (for most works) and the name of the copyright
owner or other information sufficient to identify the owner (17
U.S.C. § 401(b)). For later works, even though notice is not re-
quired, it is generally a good idea to include a notice of a claim of
copyright along with sufficient information to enable a reader to
identify and contact the copyright holder. This warns potential
copiers and facilitates licensing of the work.
Exclusive Rights of the Copyright Holder
The copyright holder has economic rights in the work, including
the right to control the copying, distribution, performance, or dis-
play of the work and the making of derivative works. For exam-
ple, Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., which owns the copyright in the 1964
Roy Orbison song “Pretty Woman,” has the right to prevent oth-
ers from making copies of the song and selling those copies at flea
markets or offering them for download over a file-sharing net-
work. (Several sets of rights are actually involved here: the rights
of the composer of the music, the rights of the writer of the lyrics,
and the rights of the performing artist. Unraveling the complex
sets of rights involved in music copyright is a daunting task, but
an excellent book on the subject is Kohn on Music Licensing [see
Chapter 8].) The holders of the copyright in “Pretty Woman” have
the right to prevent other musicians from performing the song,
unless those musicians first obtain permission, as Van Halen did
when it covered the song in 1982. The copyright holders have the
right to license the making of derivative works, including a movie
drawing its title and general theme from the song, such as the
1990 movie Pretty Woman, starring Richard Gere and Julia
Roberts. Visual artists also have limited moral rights in their
works, including the rights of integrity and attribution under the
Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990 (17 U.S.C. § 106A). 
However, there are limitations on these exclusive rights. The
right of first sale allows the purchaser or other lawful recipient of
a licensed copy of a work to sell, give away, destroy, or otherwise
dispose of that copy. A person who is dismayed to find a record-
18
Background and History

ing of Roy Orbison’s “Pretty Woman” in his or her Christmas
stocking may turn around and regift that copy to someone else
(17 U.S.C. § 109(a)). 
More worrisome to the content industry is the right of fair
use. While the right of first sale is not a right to copy, the right of
fair use permits the copying of a copyrighted work “for purposes
such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching (including
multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research” (17
U.S.C. § 107). The statute provides that
In determining whether the use made of a work in any
particular case is a fair use the factors to be considered
shall include— 
(1) the purpose and character of the use, including
whether such use is of a commercial nature or is for non-
profit educational purposes; 
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work; 
(3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used
in relation to the copyrighted work as a whole; and 
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for
or value of the copyrighted work. 
These factors are a bit fuzzy, and determining the boundaries
of fair use has been and continues to be the source of much work
for the courts. Among the fair uses of the song “Pretty Woman,”
however, are space shifting, time shifting, and parody. If you have
a lawfully obtained, licensed copy of “Pretty Woman” on CD, you
may copy it onto a tape cassette to play in your 1983 Toyota
Corolla, which lacks a CD player. You may also copy it onto your
computer to play at work (but not to upload to a file-sharing serv-
ice) or onto your MP3 player to listen to while you work out.
These uses—transferring the licensed copy to another medium
for use in another player—are space-shifting uses. When the copy
will be used by the same person, space shifting has been held to
be fair use (see Recording Industry Association of America v. Dia-
mond Multimedia Systems, Inc., 180 F.3d 1072). 
Time-shifting is similar. If you know the movie Pretty Woman
will be broadcast by a local television station at 1 p.m. on a work-
day, and you want to watch the movie, you may set your TiVo or
VCR to record it, then watch the show when you return home
from work. This is time shifting, and it has also been held to be
fair use (see Sony, 464 U.S. 417). 
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
19

Acuff-Rose Music also lacks the power to protect Roy Orbi-
son’s song from mockery. When the early rap group 2 Live Crew
requested Acuff-Rose’s permission to create a parody of the song,
Acuff-Rose denied permission. Without permission, 2 Live Crew
wrote, recorded, and distributed the parody, and Acuff-Rose, pre-
dictably, sued. The U.S. Supreme Court held that parody, within
certain limits, can be fair use and is protected by the First Amend-
ment’s guarantee of freedom of expression (Campbell, 510 U.S.
569).
The disassembly of a computer program to reverse engineer
for compatibility has also been found to fall within the parame-
ters of fair use (Sega Enterprises, 977 F.2d 1510; Sony Computer, 203
F.3d 596). In addition to the fair-use exception in 17 U.S.C. § 107,
the copyright code also provides exceptions to the exclusive
rights of the copyright holder for copies of software made as
backups or for diagnostic or maintenance purposes (17 U.S.C. §
117) and for copies made by ISPs in the routine course of infor-
mation transmission, storage, caching, or location (17 U.S.C.
§ 512).
Recent court battles related to fair use have tended to fall into
three categories: (1) attempts by content owners to restrict or pro-
hibit the sale of copying devices; (2) the ongoing battle over file
sharing; and (3) disputes arising from the DMCA’s provisions on
the circumvention of technological copy-protection measures (17
U.S.C. § 1201). Examples from each of these categories are dis-
cussed in Chapter 2.
Copyright Infringement
A person who violates an exclusive right of the copyright owner
has committed copyright infringement. In other words, the unau-
thorized copying, distribution, performance, or display of a copy-
righted work, or the unauthorized making of a derivative work,
is infringement unless it falls within a statutory exception such as
those already described. Importing infringing copies of a work
made outside the United States (even if made legally in some
other country) into the United States is also infringement (17
U.S.C. § 501(a)). Infringement can give rise to a civil lawsuit by
the copyright holder or a person authorized to enforce the copy-
right holder’s rights (17 U.S.C. §§ 501–505) and to criminal pros-
ecution in some cases (17 U.S.C. § 506).
The person committing the actual violation is a direct in-
fringer. Indirect infringers may also be liable as contributory in-
20
Background and History

fringers or as inducing infringers. Contributory infringement re-
quires that the contributory infringer have actual or constructive
knowledge of an underlying direct infringement by some other
person, and that the contributory infringer make a material con-
tribution to the direct infringer’s activities (Fonovisa, 76 F.3d 259).
Contributory infringement may also be found where one person
intentionally induces or encourages a direct infringement. This
can be done by distributing a device (including a computer pro-
gram) with the object of promoting its use to infringe copyright
(MGM v. Grokster, 125 S.Ct. at 2776, 2780). 
Vicarious infringement also requires an underlying direct in-
fringement and further requires that the vicarious infringer have
the right and ability to control the direct infringer’s actions and
receive a direct financial benefit from the infringing activity
(Fonovisa, 76 F.3d 259). In recent years the content industry has
used lawsuits for contributory and vicarious copyright infringe-
ment liability as its main weapon against peer-to-peer (P2P) file-
sharing networks (discussed in Chapter 2).
A civil suit for infringement, whether direct or indirect, can
lead to injunctive relief, the confiscation of infringing copies, and
an award of money damages. Serious infringements may also
lead to an action for criminal copyright infringement, which oc-
curs when the infringement is committed
(1) for purposes of commercial advantage or private fi-
nancial gain, or (2) by the reproduction or distribution,
including by electronic means, during any 180-day pe-
riod, of 1 or more copies or phonorecords of 1 or more
copyrighted works, which have a total retail value of
more than $1,000. (17 U.S.C. § 506(a)) 
Penalties for criminal copyright infringement can include
forfeiture and destruction of infringing copies and copying
equipment,  fines, and prison terms (18 U.S.C. § 2319).
Duration of Copyright
The current duration of copyright terms under U.S. law is set by
the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998. The Act
sets the term for copyrighted works created after 1 January 1978
at the lifetime of the author plus an additional 70 years for most
individually authored or coauthored works, and a term of 95
years from publication or 120 years from creation, whichever is
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
21

shorter, for most other works, including anonymously and pseu-
donymously authored works and works for hire.
This term is much longer than that set in the first U.S. Copy-
right Act. Like the Statute of Anne before it, the first Copyright
Act set the term of copyright at fourteen years, potentially re-
newable once for an additional fourteen years. The 1909 Copy-
right Act doubled this term, giving most works a copyright term
of twenty-eight years, renewable once for an additional twenty-
eight years. The 1976 Act replaced the renewable term with a sin-
gle term for works created after 1 January 1978, measured by the
life of the author plus an additional fifty years for most individu-
ally authored or coauthored works, and a term of seventy-five
years for most other works, including anonymously and pseudo-
nymously authored works and works for hire. The Sonny Bono
Copyright Term Extension Act extended these terms to life plus
seventy years and ninety-five years, respectively. It also extended
to sixty-seven years the renewal term for works published before
1 January 1978 and copyrighted under the 1909 Act, which had
previously been made automatic and extended to forty-seven
years (see generally Leaffer 1999, 223–226). 
What all of this means is that the copyright term is quite easy
to determine for works published after 1 March 1989, fairly easy
to determine for works published after 1 January 1978, and po-
tentially quite difficult to determine for works published in 1977
or earlier. For works fixed in a tangible medium of expression
after 1 March 1989, even if not formally published, the term is ei-
ther the life of the author plus seventy years or ninety-five years.
For works published between 1 January 1978, and 28 February
1989, the term is the same, provided that proper notice of a claim
of copyright was affixed to the work. If proper notice was not af-
fixed, the work may have fallen into the public domain, although
several exceptions apply to allow the copyright holder to remedy
the failure to affix notice. 
The Copyright Renewal Act of 1992 retroactively made copy-
right renewal automatic for works published between 1964 and
1977 and otherwise eligible for copyright renewal. The length of
this renewal term was subsequently extended to sixty-seven
years, so that all such works are still in copyright. For works cre-
ated in 1950 and earlier, it must first be determined whether the
copyright was renewed. If it was not, and if it was not otherwise
extended in some way, the copyright expired on 31 December of
the twenty-eighth year of the copyright. If the copyright was re-
22
Background and History

newed, the current sixty-seven-year extension applies automati-
cally, so that, for example, the copyright on a work published in
1940 and renewed in 1968 will expire on 31 December 2035.
Works originally copyrighted between 1 January 1951 and 31 De-
cember 1963, would still have been in their first copyright term on
1 January 1978, and renewal after that date was not automatic.
These works still had to be renewed to gain the benefit of the
sixty-seven-year renewal term (see generally U.S. Copyright Of-
fice 2004). In other words, for works published in 1963 and ear-
lier, the copyright expired twenty-eight years after publication
unless it was renewed. If copyright was renewed it expired or will
expire ninety-five years after publication.
The Public Domain
All works on which the copyright has expired, as well as all
works that have never been copyrighted, are in the public do-
main. While some works fixed before 1 March 1989, were either
deliberately or inadvertently placed in the public domain by fail-
ure to claim copyright, all newer works are copyrighted as soon
as they are fixed, with one exception: Original U.S. government
works are also in the public domain; they are never copyrighted
(17 U.S.C. § 105). Works in the public domain may be freely
copied, adapted, distributed, performed, and displayed without
the consent of the creator of the work. State and local government
works may be copyrighted, although many such works—
statutes, ordinances, reported decisions, and the like—are non-
copyrightable on the theory that the people must have free access
to the laws governing them (see, for example, Georgia v. The Har-
rison Co., 548 F. Supp. 110; Leaffer 1999, 93). This same logic ap-
plies even if the document was originally written by a private
party and is later adopted as law by the government (Building Of-
ficials, 628 F.2d 730). The same logic should apply to international
legal documents such as treaties or resolutions of the United Na-
tions Security Council and, somewhat more tenuously, to official
materials of foreign governments.
Much of the history of copyright law can be read as an at-
tempt by content owners to fence off increasingly large portions
of the public domain. In the twentieth century, the extensions of
the copyright term in 1909, 1976, and 1998 took portions of the
public domain and gave them to copyright holders. In the previ-
ous century, copyright holders had attempted, unsuccessfully, to
use trademark law for the same purpose. In 1890, the publishers
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
23

of the 1847 edition of Webster’s Dictionary, on which the copyright
had expired, brought suit against another publisher that had
reproduced and distributed for sale the entire 1847 edition. The
federal court hearing the case refused to allow trademark to be
used in this way. To do so, it observed, would “continue that mo-
nopoly indefinitely,” in effect granting a perpetual copyright
(Merriam, 43 F. 450).
Six years later, the U.S. Supreme Court reached the same re-
sult in a patent case, refusing to allow the makers of Singer
sewing machines to use trademark law to prevent others from
manufacturing those machines after the patent had expired
(Singer, 163 U.S. at 185–186). The Singer case also introduced the
term “public domain” (as “the domain of things public”) to U.S.
law, giving it a definition somewhat different from that given to
domaine publique in nineteenth-century French law and in the
Berne Convention.
Because the Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988
eliminated the requirements of registration and notice for copy-
right protection, all original works of authorship fixed in a tangi-
ble medium of expression are now copyrighted; U.S. copyright
law contains no procedure by which copyright holders may
choose to forgo copyright. Authors cannot place their works in
the public domain; those who wish to do so must opt for the next
best alternative, an open-source license. A wide variety of such li-
censes are available, including the well-known GNU General
Public License (for software) and the various licenses available
from Creative Commons for works of all types. The release of a
work under a public license is sometimes referred to as “placing
the work in the public domain,” but in fact the work remains
copyrighted, under the open-source license, for the full statutory
term. The term “copyleft” is sometimes used as an alternative.
Ownership, Transfer, and Licensing of Copyrights
Individual authors own the copyright in the works they create.
Joint authors not working for hire own the copyright jointly (17
U.S.C. § 201(a)). A collective work is not the same thing as a joint
work. The authors of a joint work intend that their work will form
part of a unitary whole (such as a course textbook, even if entire
chapters are written by a single author), while the pieces of a col-
lective work (such as articles in an encyclopedia) are themselves
independent works (17 U.S.C. § 101). When works are made for
hire, the employer owns the copyright (17 U.S.C. §§ 101, 201(b)). 
24
Background and History

Once acquired, ownership of a copyright may be freely trans-
ferred in whole or in part. The transfer may include some or all of
the copyright holder’s exclusive rights (Effects Associates, 908 F.2d
555). Transfers must ordinarily be in writing:
A transfer of copyright ownership, other than by opera-
tion of law, is not valid unless an instrument of con-
veyance, or a note or memorandum of the transfer, is in
writing and signed by the owner of the rights conveyed
or such owner’s duly authorized agent. (17 U.S.C. §
204(a))
While a certificate of acknowledgment of the transfer is not
required, it may serve as prima facie evidence that a transfer took
place (17 U.S.C. § 204(b)). Transfers of copyright, like the copy-
rights themselves, can be (and, if there is any chance that the
copyright might become valuable or that there might be conflict-
ing claims to the copyright, should be) recorded with the Copy-
right Office (17 U.S.C. § 205).
In addition to a transfer of all or part of the copyright, the
copyright holder may also license others to perform certain acts
(such as making and distributing copies) that would otherwise be
the exclusive right of the copyright holder. While exclusive li-
censes, like transfers, must be in writing, nonexclusive licenses
may be granted orally. Nonexclusive licenses may even be
granted by implication, in the absence of any explicit oral license,
if the conduct or relationship between the parties shows an intent
to grant the license (see Leaffer 1999, 219). Licenses, like transfers,
can be recorded with the Copyright Office, and should be if there
is any possibility that the copyright will become valuable or that
conflict or uncertainty might arise.
Copyright may be transferred involuntarily when the author
has placed the copyright as collateral for a debt or in bankruptcy.
It may not, however, be taken by a foreign government to sup-
press opinions with which that government disagrees (Leaffer
1999, 222; 17 U.S.C. § 20(e)). Sound and video recordings, how-
ever, may be subject to a compulsory license in some situations.
These compulsory licenses allow the licensee to use the work
without the copyright holder’s consent, so long as the licensee
pays an appropriate royalty fee (see Leaffer 1999, 285). Most hold-
ers of performance rights in music recordings license those rights
to a performing rights society such as ASCAP or BMI (in the
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
25

United States), or similar organizations outside the United States,
such as Buma/Stemra in the Netherlands. These organizations
then grant a blanket license to radio stations and similar entities
wishing to play the recordings and divide the fees received
among the performance right holders in proportion to the fre-
quency with and the size of the markets in which they are played.
While disputes inevitably arise concerning the allocation of li-
censing fees, the system persists because it is more workable than
the alternative—separately licensing millions of music recordings
to thousands of media outlets.
A similar logic underlies the open-source movement, al-
though the motive is not pecuniary. To work around the impossi-
bility of placing privately created works in the public domain,
open-source programmers and authors use a voluntary collective
license—a license under which the copyright owner relinquishes
the right to choose the licensee. The copyright owner does not
necessarily relinquish the right to be paid; much shareware, for
instance, is distributed under licenses that do not restrict copying
but do require the copier to pay the copyright holder. Voluntary
collective licenses used for open-source works require no pay-
ment (or, sometimes, payment only for commercial uses), but
may impose other conditions.
Trademark Overview
A trademark is not, surprisingly, a mark used in trade. In the nar-
row sense, a trademark is a mark used in commerce “to identify
and distinguish . . . goods . . . from those manufactured or sold by
others and to indicate the source of the goods” (15 U.S.C. § 1127).
Service marks are used “to identify and distinguish the services
of one person . . . from the services of others and to indicate the
source of the services”; collective marks “indicat[e] membership
in a union, an association, or other organization”; and certifica-
tion marks “certify regional or other origin, material, mode of
manufacture, quality, accuracy, or other characteristics of . . .
goods or services or that the work or labor on the goods or serv-
ices was performed by members of a union or other organization”
(15 U.S.C. § 1127). These four types of marks—trademarks, serv-
ice marks, collective marks, and certification marks—are often,
but inaccurately, collectively referred to as “trademarks.” The
body of law governing these types of marks and related concepts
may, however, be properly referred to as “trademark law.”
26
Background and History

The rationale for trademark is to protect the public as well as
the mark holder. Marks benefit consumers by providing an indi-
cation of quality. Infringement upon or dilution of the mark may
harm the mark holder, unjustly enrich the infringer, and confuse
the public.
What Can Be Trademarked?
A letter, word, logo, slogan, motto, design, phrase, picture, shape,
symbol, or some combination thereof can become a protected
mark. A color, such as the pink color of a brand of fiberglass in-
sulation, may become a trademark if it is sufficiently distinctive
(see Qualitex Co., 514 U.S. 159). Even a smell may become a trade-
mark, provided that it is distinctive and not merely functional;
thus, a particular scent for a brand of scented embroidery yarn
may be registered as a trademark (In re Clarke, 17 U.S.P.Q.2d 1238).
Certain things may not be registered as marks under federal
law, however. A mark that is immoral, deceptive, disparaging, or
scandalous may not be registered (15 U.S.C. § 1052(a)), although
this restriction is quite narrowly construed. While a logo show-
ing, in silhouette, a dog defecating, is scandalous, an “Old Glory”
condom, made to look like a U.S. flag, is not (In re Old Glory Con-
dom Corp., 26 U.S.P.Q.2d 1216). The flag itself, though, as well as
other insignia and flags of the federal, state, and foreign govern-
ments, cannot be registered as a mark (15 U.S.C. § 1052(b)). The
Washington Redskins’ mark has been the subject of years of liti-
gation by Native American activists seeking to cancel the mark’s
federal registration on the grounds that it disparages a particular
ethnic group.
Marks that are confusingly similar to an existing mark can-
not be registered. Nor can generic marks—for example, marks
that are merely the names of the goods or services they are used
to identify, such as “You have mail” as an e-mail service’s an-
nouncement that a message has arrived—be registered (15 U.S.C.
§ 1052(e)(1); America Online, 64 F. Supp.2d 549). Marks that are de-
ceptive cannot be registered, although marks that are deceptively
misdescriptive may be registered if they have acquired a second-
ary meaning. A mark is deceptive if it leads the consumer to
believe the product is something other than it actually is and in-
fluences the buying decision (see generally 15 U.S.C. § 1052(a)). It
is deceptively misdescriptive if consumers might be misled as to
the nature of the product, but their buying decisions would not be
influenced. Thus, the name “Lovee Lamb” for car seat covers
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
27

made of synthetic sheepskin is deceptive, because consumers
might prefer seat covers made of lambskin or sheepskin to syn-
thetic covers. And while the name “Glass Wax” for a glass and
metal cleaner that contains no wax may lead consumers to believe
the product contains wax, it is unlikely to affect their buying
choices. Consumers are probably indifferent to whether the prod-
uct contains wax (In re Budge Manufacturing, 857 F.2d 773; Gold
Seal Co., 129 F. Supp. 928).
Descriptive terms, geographic terms, and personal names
can become trademarks if and only if they acquire a secondary
meaning. This secondary meaning is acquired when the mark be-
comes established in the minds of the public, or at least in the
minds of the audience at which the mark is aimed, as referring to
the particular thing described and not to the broader class of
things to which it belongs (Abercrombie & Fitch, 537 F.2d at 9).
Terms that are suggestive, arbitrary, or fanciful are always eligible
for registration as marks, provided they are not scandalous, de-
ceptive, or otherwise ineligible. Suggestive terms suggest some-
thing about the goods or services to which they apply, without
directly describing them: “Windex” used to describe a window
cleaning fluid is suggestive.  Arbitrary marks are words and im-
ages whose everyday use neither suggests nor describes the
goods or services to which they are applied: “Element” used to
describe an automobile is arbitrary.  Fanciful marks are coined or
created for no reason other than to serve as a mark: “Aptiva” used
to describe a computer is fanciful. 
The term “element” would not be arbitrary in all cases,
however; the difficulty of placing terms within these categories
is “compounded because a term that is in one category for a par-
ticular product may be in quite a different one for another”
(Abercrombie & Fitch, 537 F.2d at 9). For example, the term
“‘ivory’ would be generic when used to describe a product
made from the tusks of elephants but arbitrary as applied to
soap” (Abercrombie & Fitch, 537 F.2d at 9 fn. 6). In addition, “a
term may shift from one category to another in light of differ-
ences in usage through time” (Abercrombie & Fitch, 537 F.2d at 9).
This is what happened to “the coined word ‘Escalator’, origi-
nally fanciful, or at the very least suggestive,” which by 1950
had become generic (Abercrombie & Fitch, 537 F.2d at 9 fn. 7). In
addition, “a term may have one meaning to one group of users
and a different one to others,” and “the same term may be put
28
Background and History

to different uses with respect to a single product” (Abercrombie &
Fitch, 537 F.2d at 9).
Abercrombie & Fitch involved several uses of the word “sa-
fari” to describe clothing, hats, and footwear. The court held that
“A&F could not apply ‘Safari’ as a trademark for an expedition
into the African wilderness. This would be a clear example of the
use of ‘Safari’ as a generic term. What is perhaps less obvious is
that a word may have more than one generic use” (Abercrombie &
Fitch, 537 F.2d at 11). The use of “safari” to describe “a broad flat-
brimmed hat with a single, large band” was generic; that type of
hat had become known as a safari hat, and Abercrombie & Fitch
could not claim a trademark in the name. Similarly, “a belted
bush jacket with patch pockets and a buttoned shoulder loop”
was generically known as a safari jacket, and “when the jacket is
accompanied by pants, the combination is called the ‘Safari suit’”
(Abercrombie & Fitch, 537 F.2d at 11–12).  A smaller version of the
safari hat was a “minisafari,” a term in which Abercrombie &
Fitch could also claim no trademark. However, “there is no evi-
dence that ‘Safari’ has become a generic term for boots.” The de-
fendant’s use may have been protected by the fair use defense,
because the defendant’s boots were called “Camel Safari,”
“Hippo Safari,” and “Chukka Safari,” and the defendant actually
operated safari tours to Africa.
Trademark Formalities
Unlike patents and copyrights, marks are protected by a signifi-
cant body of state law as well as by federal law. Thus, marks can
be protected at the state level even in the absence of a federal
trademark registration. The basic requirement for state common
law trademark protection is that the mark be used in commerce;
the first person to do so gains rights in the mark. Protection does
not stem from the act of creating the mark, as it would in copy-
right, but from prior, open, bona fide use of and control over the
mark. Registration of a mark may also ensure protection even
before the mark is actually used: “A person who has a bona fide
intention, under circumstances showing the good faith of such
person, to use a trademark in commerce may request registration
of its trademark . . .” (15 U.S.C. § 1051(b)). Although the registra-
tion will not actually issue until the use has occurred, the regis-
trant will be able to use the filing date to establish priority over
other claimants.
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
29

While unregistered marks may be suitable for very small or
very new businesses, marks that have or are likely to have
significant value should be registered. Federal registration is
available for marks used in interstate commerce. The U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office’s website provides a useful tool for new
registrants. The Trademark Electronic Search System (TESS) al-
lows users to search a database of more than three million regis-
tered trademarks in order to avoid submitting applications that
will be rejected because they are for marks identical or similar to
marks already registered to someone else for the same or similar
goods or services.
Once a mark has been selected, the applicant must draft a de-
scription of the goods or services to be covered by the mark. The
applicant then submits this description to the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office, along with a clear depiction of the mark itself
and an application fee ($325 for most applications if filed online
or $375 for most applications if filed in hard copy) (U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office website). Shortly after filing, the applicant
will receive a notice that the application has been received, but a
decision on the application may take six months to a year if no
difficulties arise, or much longer in unusual, difficult, or con-
tested cases. Registration in the United States does not, by itself,
provide protection outside the United States. The global trade-
mark protection regime (discussed in Chapter 3) is much less de-
veloped than that of copyright or even patent.
Notice of trademark: It is not necessary to give notice of a claim
of trademark for common-law trademark protection, but it is ad-
visable. Use of the superscripts “TM” (for trademark) and “SM”
(for service mark) indicate a claim in an unregistered trademark.
The trademark registration symbol “®” indicates a federally reg-
istered trademark, as do the words “Registered U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office” or “Reg. U.S. Pat. & TM Off.” The term “Marca
Registrada” or the superscript “MR” is required in some countries. 
Trademark Infringement
Property rights in protected marks can be harmed in two ways:
infringement and dilution. All marks are subject to infringement,
which occurs when an unauthorized person uses the mark in a
way that creates a likelihood of confusion. Not all marks are sub-
ject to dilution, however, which occurs when an unauthorized
person tarnishes the mark or blurs its distinctiveness; only fa-
mous trademarks can be diluted (15 U.S.C. § 1125(c)(1)).
30
Background and History

Infringement: Infringement occurs when an unauthorized
person uses a mark belonging to another, or a similar mark, in a
way that creates a likelihood of confusion in the minds of the
public. The various federal circuits have adopted similar, but not
identical, tests for determining whether a use creates a likelihood
of confusion. The Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals’ eight-factor test
examines (1) the strength of the mark, (2) the proximity of the
goods, (3) the similarity of the marks, (4) the evidence of actual
confusion, (5) the marketing channels used, (6) the type of goods
and the degree of care likely to be exercised by the purchaser, (7)
the defendant’s intent in selecting the mark, and (8) the likelihood
of expansion of the product lines (Playboy Enterprises,  279 F.3d
796). These are factors, not elements. A court may find a likeli-
hood of confusion if the balance of factors shows a likelihood of
confusion, even if one or perhaps more factors seem to weigh
against such a finding.
Dilution: The threshold question in any dilution action is
whether the mark in question is “famous” within the meaning of
the Trademark Dilution Act, which states:
For purposes of paragraph (1), a mark is famous if it is
widely recognized by the general consuming public of
the United States as a designation of source of the goods
or services of the mark’s owner. In determining whether
a mark possesses the requisite degree of recognition, the
court may consider all relevant factors, including the
following:
(i) The duration, extent, and geographic reach of ad-
vertising and publicity of the mark, whether advertised
or publicized by the owner or third parties.
(ii) The amount, volume, and geographic extent of
sales of goods or services offered under the mark.
(iii) The extent of actual recognition of the mark.
(iv) Whether the mark was registered under the Act of
March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905, or on the
principal register. (15 U.S.C. § 1125(c)(2)(A), as amended
by 120 Stat. 1730) 
It is not necessary for all of the listed factors to be present in
order for a mark to be famous. Even if some factors weigh against
a finding that the mark is famous, those factors may be out-
weighed by others (McCarthy 2004, 175–176). 
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
31

If the mark is famous, it has been diluted if an unauthorized
person has blurred or tarnished it. The diluting use must be a
commercial use, and it must have arisen after the mark became
famous. In addition to noncommercial uses, commercial uses for
purposes of parody, criticism, comment, news reporting, or com-
parative advertising are protected from liability for dilution (120
Stat. 1730).
Blurring occurs when a mark similar to the famous mark is
used on some other product, resulting in a diminution in the dis-
tinctiveness of the famous mark. Congress has defined blurring as
“association arising from the similarity between a mark or trade
name and a famous mark that impairs the distinctiveness of the fa-
mous mark” (15 U.S.C. § 1125(c)(2)(B), as amended by 120 Stat.
1730). To determine the likelihood of blurring, “the court may con-
sider all relevant factors, including” the degree of similarity be-
tween the marks, the distinctiveness and degree of recognition of
the famous mark, the extent to which the use of that mark is ex-
clusive, whether the user intends to create an association with the
secondary mark, and any actual association between them. 
Claims for blurring give somewhat broader protection to the
owners of famous marks than “likelihood of confusion” infringe-
ment claims give to the holders of all marks. However, when the
consumers at whom the marks are aimed are sophisticated and
there is no bad intent on the part of the second user, courts are un-
likely to find blurring. For example, the name “Lexus” for luxury
automobiles, although similar to the name “Lexis” already in use
for an online legal research service, does not blur the Lexis trade-
mark. The products are different, the Lexis name is famous only
among attorneys and virtually unknown elsewhere, and attor-
neys are sophisticated consumers who are not likely to be misled
as to the source of either the cars or the research service (Mead
Data Central, 875 F.2d at 1031–1032).
Tarnishment occurs when a famous mark is used in a way
that casts disrepute upon it or otherwise interferes with positive
mental associations attached to the mark. Congress has defined
“dilution by tarnishment” as “association arising from the simi-
larity between a mark or trade name and a famous mark that
harms the reputation of the famous mark” (15 U.S.C. §
1125(c)(2)(C), as amended by 120 Stat. 1730).   For example, a re-
production of the red and white Coca-Cola logo, substituting the
words “Enjoy Cocaine” for “Enjoy Coca-Cola,” tarnishes Coca-
Cola’s mark by associating dangerous and illegal drug use with
32
Background and History

the product (Coca-Cola, 346 F. Supp. 1183; although this case pre-
dates the Federal Trademark Dilution Act, the court discussed a
state trademark dilution statute). 
Third-party liability: As with copyright and patent, third par-
ties may be liable for trademark infringement by others. A party
who “intentionally induces another to infringe a trademark,
or . . . continues to supply its product to one whom it knows or
has reason to know is engaging in trademark infringement . . . is
contributorily responsible for any harm done as a result of the de-
ceit” (Inwood Labs, 456 U.S. at 854). This has potentially serious
repercussions for ISPs.
Fair use: As with copyright, a defendant in a trademark ac-
tion may claim that his or her infringing or diluting use is pro-
tected as a fair use. Trademark fair use may be either traditional
or nominative. Traditional or classic fair use occurs when a trade-
mark is also a descriptive term and is used by a person other than
the trademark holder in its descriptive sense. For example, the
use of “sweet-tart” to describe Ocean Spray cranberry juice does
not infringe on the trademark “SweeTarts” for candy. Ocean
Spray is using “sweet-tart” as a description of the taste of its cran-
berry juice, not as a trademark, and the description is accurate
(Sunmark, 64 F.3d 1055).
Nominative fair use occurs when one person uses another’s
trademark not, or not exclusively, to identify his or her own prod-
uct or service, but to identify the trademark holder’s product or
service. Thus, a mechanic repairing Toyota automobiles may use
the name “Toyota” in advertisements, because there is no other
simple way for the mechanic to identify his or her services. Simi-
larly, a temporary agency offering to place workers skilled in the
use of Microsoft Office may use the name “Microsoft Office” in its
advertisements, rather than some unwieldy circumlocution such
as “the principal business-oriented suite of software distributed
by a large software company headquartered in Redmond, Wash-
ington.” Nominative fair use has played a significant role in legal
disputes over search-engine spamming and related techniques
and is discussed in Chapter 2.
Transfer, Duration, and Termination of Trademark
Marks are alienable interests in property. They may be licensed
or assigned, provided the requirement of actual use of the mark
continues to be met. While patents and copyrights are constitu-
tionally required to be of limited duration, trademarks are not.
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
33

Trademarks may last forever, but trademark registrations must
be renewed periodically. Registrations issued after 16 November
1989 must be renewed every ten years (15 U.S.C. §§ 1058–1059).
Lapse of registration by itself does not terminate a trademark,
but a trademark that remains unused for three years may be
abandoned, in which case it can be claimed by another person.
(See Silverman, 870 F.2d 40, which discusses whether trademarks
in “Amos ‘n’ Andy” radio characters had been abandoned after
twenty-one years of nonuse.) Trademarks may also fall into the
public domain by becoming generic; everyday words such as
“escalator” and “aspirin” were once trademarks. The owners of
trademarks such as Coca-Cola, Xerox, Magic Marker, and
Frigidaire have waged successful campaigns to keep their trade-
marks from becoming generic.
Patent Overview
A patent is an intellectual property right that allows the holder to
exclude others from making, selling, using, or offering to sell an
invention, as well as from importing the invention or a device in-
corporating it into the United States, even if it was legally manu-
factured elsewhere (McCarthy 2004, 433–435). Unlike copyrights
and trademarks, patents do not arise automatically from the cre-
ative process; they must be affirmatively applied for. The U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office grants utility patents, design
patents, and plant patents. 
Patentable Subject Matter: What Can Be Patented?
Utility patents may be granted under U.S. law for “any new and
useful process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter,
or any new and useful improvement thereof” (35 U.S.C. § 101). In-
ventions can be patented if they are useful, novel, and nonobvi-
ous (35 U.S.C. §§ 101 [useful], 102 [novel], 103 [nonobvious]).
Novelty and nonobviousness are assessed in relation to the prior
art—the existing body of inventions and technical knowledge in
the area. Patents cannot be obtained for natural phenomena, ab-
stract ideas, or laws of nature. They may, however, be obtained
for a wide variety of things not traditionally thought of as inven-
tions, such as plants or business methods.
Design patents may be granted under U.S. law for “any new,
original, and ornamental design for an article of manufacture”
34
Background and History

(35 U.S.C. § 171), while plant patents may be granted for the in-
vention or discovery and asexual reproduction (such as repro-
duction by grafting) of “any distinct and new variety of plant,
including cultivated sports, mutants, hybrids, and newly found
seedlings, other than a tuber propagated plant or a plant found
in an uncultivated state” (35 U.S.C. § 161), as well as for sexually
reproduced plants and plants propagated from tubers (7 U.S.C.
§ 2402).
Patent Formalities
While the formalities for a grant of copyright were never onerous
and are now de minimis, and the formalities for a grant of trade-
mark are fairly straightforward, the formalities of the patent ap-
plication process are complex. The application form initially filed
must include the title of the invention (37 C.F.R. 1.72(a)), a speci-
fication, a drawing, and the applicant’s oath (35 U.S.C. § 111). The
specification contains the claims and is the heart of the patent ap-
plication.
The specification shall contain a written description of
the invention, and of the manner and process of making
and using it, in such full, clear, concise, and exact terms
as to enable any person skilled in the art to which it per-
tains, or with which it is most nearly connected, to
make and use the same, and shall set forth the best
mode contemplated by the inventor of carrying out his
invention. 
The specification shall conclude with one or more
claims particularly pointing out and distinctly claiming
the subject matter which the applicant regards as his in-
vention. (35 U.S.C. § 112) 
With regard to the drawing, the code provides that:
The applicant shall furnish a drawing where necessary
for the understanding of the subject matter sought to be
patented. When the nature of such subject matter admits
of illustration by a drawing and the applicant has not fur-
nished such a drawing, the Director may require its sub-
mission within a time period of not less than two months
from the sending of a notice thereof. (35 U.S.C. § 113) 
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
35

In the oath, the applicant must state “that he [or she] be-
lieves himself [or herself] to be the original and first inventor of
the process, machine, manufacture, or composition of matter, or
improvement thereof, for which he [or she] solicits a patent; and
shall state of what country he [or she] is a citizen” (35 U.S.C.
§ 115).
The application must also be accompanied by the appropri-
ate fee. Figuring out the fee is itself a complex task, requiring the
applicant (or his or her patent agent or attorney) to consult a ten-
page fee schedule published by the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office. For utility patent applications filed on or after 8 Decem-
ber 2004, the basic filing fee is $300, with “small entities” (small
businesses, nonprofit organizations, and individual inventors)
receiving a 50 percent discount. Small entities filing electronic
rather than hard-copy applications receive an additional dis-
count, paying only $75. If the application contains more than
twenty claims or more than three independent claims, additional
per-claim fees apply. Applications longer than 100 sheets also
pay a surcharge. The basic filing fee for design, plant, and provi-
sional patents filed on or after 8 December 2004 is $200; again,
small entities receive a 50 percent discount, and surcharges may
apply (U.S. Patent and Trademark Office website, FY 2006 Fee
Schedule).
With copyrights, the applicant’s role in the registration
process usually ends when the initial application is completed.
With registration of marks, too, there is little left for the applicant
to do, unless the registration is contested or unusual in some way.
The patent application process, however, typically takes two to
three years, during which there may be considerable communica-
tion and give and take between the applicant and the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office. If, at any time, the applicant fails to re-
spond to any action by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
within six months of the action, the office will consider the appli-
cation abandoned, unless the applicant can show that the delay
was unavoidable.
During this process a number of dates may be important.
The first, chronologically, is the invention date, also called the
conception date. This is the date upon which the inventor first
thinks of the invention. In most of the world the invention date
has no legal significance; the United States, however, is a “first-
to-invent” jurisdiction. In the United States, when there is a dis-
pute between two inventors who invented the same thing at
36
Background and History

more or less the same time, the inventor who first thought of the
invention wins, provided that the inventor can prove the date on
which he or she first thought of the invention and show that he
or she subsequently exercised diligence in reducing the inven-
tion to practice. In the rest of the world, the conflict is resolved
more simply, if perhaps less fairly: The first inventor to file a suf-
ficiently complete application wins. In effect, under U.S. law the
invention date may replace the priority date in some cases.
The next legally significant date in the application process is
the filing date—the date upon which the application papers are
received by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. This is fol-
lowed by the priority date—the date upon which the technical
disclosure that fully describes the invention covered by that claim
was first filed with some patent office. The patent office with
which the disclosure was first filed need not be the U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office; it could be a patent office outside the
United States. If the elements of a claim have been published else-
where before the priority date, the claim is invalid in most of the
world. In the United States, as already noted, an inventor may
substitute the invention date for the priority date in such a case,
provided that the invention date is less than one year earlier than
the priority date and, as noted, that the inventor can provide suf-
ficient proof (through notes, workbooks, or the like) of the inven-
tion date.
After the priority date—usually about eighteen months after,
although the time span may vary—comes the publication date.
This is the date on which a patent application is published and
the correspondence between the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of-
fice and the applicant is made public. This is a somewhat tense
time for the patent applicant, because at that point all of the
information necessary to duplicate the applicant’s invention or
discovery will be available to the whole world, including the ap-
plicant’s business competitors—but the applicant will not yet
have a patent. The applicant will be anxiously waiting for the
issue date—the date on which the patent application is granted
and matures into a patent. The issue date is the earliest date on
which the patent holder may sue for infringement.
The relationship between the U.S. Patent and Trademark Of-
fice and the applicant does not end there, however. Patents may
be adjusted; errors may be corrected, resulting in a reissue of the
patent. Additional fees must be paid at various stages in the ap-
plication process and must continue to be paid during the life of
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
37

the patent. These fees include, among others, search fees, exami-
nation fees, and maintenance fees. The maintenance fees, in
particular, can be quite hefty, with fees of $900, $2,300, and $3,800
due at 3.5, 7.5, and 11.5 years, respectively (U.S. Patent and Trade-
mark Office website, FY 2006 Fee Schedule; maintenance fees
apply only to utility patents). 
To be protected against patent infringement in other coun-
tries, the inventor must apply for and be granted a patent in each.
This application process is greatly simplified by the Patent Coop-
eration Treaty (discussed in Chapter 3). 
Exclusive Rights of the Patent Holder and Patent Infringement
Once the patent is granted, the patent holder has the right to ex-
clude others from using the patented invention or discovery. This
does not necessarily mean that the patent holder has a right to
make or use the invention or discovery; doing so may in turn re-
quire the use of inventions or discoveries patented by others. 
Under the doctrine of equivalents, patent infringement can
occur even when the infringing conduct or device does not ex-
actly duplicate the description in the patent claims. Conduct or
devices not literally within the scope of the patent are still cov-
ered by the patent if they differ only insubstantially. The breadth
or narrowness with which the doctrine of equivalents will be ap-
plied depends on the degree of innovation inherent in the patent.
Pioneer patents will be interpreted as covering a broad range of
equivalents, while minor patents in an already crowded field will
cover a narrower range. The doctrine of equivalents is also sub-
ject to three limitations. First, it can never be extended to cover
prior art; anything already known or obvious to a person having
ordinary skill in the prior art cannot be covered by the patent.
Second, the doctrine is limited by the colorfully named “nose of
wax rule”: the claims may not be treated “like a nose of wax,
which may be turned and twisted in any direction . . . so as to
make it include something more than, or something different
from, what its words express” (White, 119 U.S. at 51). Finally, the
doctrine of equivalents is limited by prosecution history estoppel,
also called file wrapper estoppel.
The file wrapper that gives the doctrine one of its names is
the folder in which the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office keeps
the papers filed during the process of a patent application. The
patent application process is called the prosecution of the patent,
and the papers in the file wrapper form the prosecution history
38
Background and History

that gives the doctrine its other name. During the course of pros-
ecuting a patent, an applicant may concede in writing that certain
things are not covered by the claims in the patent. The documents
containing these concessions will be placed within the file wrap-
per and will form part of the prosecution history. By either name,
the doctrine prevents a patent holder from asserting the doctrine
of equivalents against an alleged infringer if the conduct com-
plained of falls within these concessions. Patent holders may not
use the doctrine of equivalents to reclaim processes or products
that have been given up during the prosecution of the patent,
even though they might otherwise be covered by the doctrine.
They are “estopped” (legalese for prevented or prohibited) from
maintaining a suit for patent infringement based on those con-
ceded areas.
A patent holder who is able to prove infringement may ob-
tain injunctive relief and damages against the infringer, which
may include seizing and blocking importation of infringing
goods (35 U.S.C. §§ 281–284). An accused infringer may, as an af-
firmative defense, attack the validity of the patent. Although the
patent is presumed valid, an alleged infringer who establishes
that the patent is invalid is, of course, not an infringer (35 U.S.C.
§ 282). Other persons may also challenge the validity of a patent. 
As with copyright and trademark, third parties may be liable
for patent infringement under certain circumstances. Third-party
liability may be imposed for contributory patent infringement or
for induced infringement. Contributory infringement occurs
when a third party
offers to sell or sells within the United States or imports
into the United States a component of a patented ma-
chine, manufacture, combination or composition, or a
material or apparatus for use in practicing a patented
process, constituting a material part of the invention,
knowing the same to be especially made or especially
adapted for use in an infringement of such patent, and
not a staple article or commodity of commerce suitable
for substantial noninfringing use, shall be liable as a con-
tributory infringer. (35 U.S.C. § 271(c)) 
Thus, a claim of contributory patent infringement has four
elements: (1) someone must have sold, offered, or imported some
component of a patented device or something for use in a
Intellectual Property Law in the United States Today
39

patented process; (2) the component must be material—that is,
not inessential; (3) the person must know that the component is
made or adapted for use in that patented device or process; and
(4) the component must not be a staple article of commerce (i.e.,
it must not be capable of a substantial noninfringing use).
The statutory definition of induced infringement provides
only that “Whoever actively induces infringement of a patent
shall be liable as an infringer” (35 U.S.C. § 271(b)). Courts have in-
terpreted this as requiring that the inducer has knowledge of the
underlying direct infringement and provides active and knowing
assistance to the direct infringer (see Manville Sales, 917 F.2d at
553). In contrast to direct or contributory infringement, induced
infringement can occur even when the defendant’s conduct takes
place outside the United States. 
Duration of Patent
A valuable patent, such as a new pharmaceutical patent, may cost
ten times as much to bring to market as a valuable Hollywood
movie. The Hollywood movie studio will have little effort and ex-
pense obtaining a copyright, and once it has done so any who vi-
olate the copyright may be subject not only to civil penalties, but
also to criminal penalties, possibly including prison time. Most
dramatic is the difference in the length of the monopoly granted:
The movie studio’s copyright will last for ninety-five years, but
the pharmaceutical firm’s patent will last for less than twenty
years. The duration of utility patents is twenty years from the fil-
ing date—typically two to three years before the date on which
the patent is granted (35 U.S.C. § 154(a)(2)). If obtaining the
patent takes more than three years, the term may be extended by
the amount over three years (35 U.S.C. § 154(b)(1)(B); see also 35
U.S.C. § 154(b)(1)(C)). The twenty-year term is set by TRIPs and
was adopted by the United States in fulfillment of its TRIPs obli-
gations; patents granted before 8 June 1995 may be governed by
the earlier term of seventeen years from the date of issue (rather
than a term measured from the filing date), if doing so would be
beneficial to the patent holder. Such patents are valid for a term
of seventeen years from the issue date or twenty years from the
earliest regular patent filing date, whichever is longer (35 U.S.C.
§ 154(c)(1)). Plant patents are also valid for twenty years from the
filing date, but design patents have an even shorter duration. De-
sign patents are valid for fourteen years from the issue date (not
filing date) (35 U.S.C. § 173). Patents that have expired, as well as
40
Background and History

those that have been abandoned, are in the public domain. They
may be used freely but may not be recaptured by repatenting (35
U.S.C. § 102).
While the duration of copyright has increased dramati-
cally since the founding of the United States, the duration of
patents has not. The copyright term has increased from a maxi-
mum of twenty-eight years to life plus seventy years, so that a
work by a twenty-year-old who lives to be ninety would remain
in copyright for 140 years, or five times the original maximum
term. The first Patent Act, in contrast, set a term of fourteen
years, measured from the issue date. The current term of twenty
years from the filing date—in effect, seventeen years and per-
haps a few months from the issue date—represents no signifi-
cant increase, and may in part explain why so much creative en-
ergy in the United States has been channeled away from the
sciences and toward the creation of copyrightable works. 
Ownership, Transfer, and Licensing of Patents
The ownership of a patent arises from the act of creation, as with
copyright. The inventor is the initial owner of the patent interest,
but this interest may be assigned. A great many inventions are
created by employees of companies in the course of their em-
ployment, and these inventions are typically assigned to the com-
pany. This may be done before the application is filed, but no
assignment is valid unless it is recorded with the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office (35 U.S.C. § 261). An inventor or the inventor’s
assignee may also issue a license allowing another person or per-
sons to make, use, or sell the invention.
Summary
This chapter provides an overview of the development of intel-
lectual property law in the United States and elsewhere, from the
invention of printing through the advent of the Internet. It looks
at the legal treatment of the three main forms of intellectual prop-
erty—copyright, trademark, and patent—in U.S. law and intro-
duces the tensions and international issues that will be addressed
in Chapters 2 and 3.
The history of intellectual property law is closely connected
to the history of technology. As information technology has ad-
vanced, copyright law has been forced to adapt in response.
Summary
41

Trademark law has grown as trade has grown, and patents have
followed technical innovation. They came into being in the Ital-
ian Renaissance, and after the Industrial Revolution became the
subject of a government agency within the United States—the
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
We are now in the midst of a new wave of changes in intel-
lectual property law, made necessary by the Internet information
revolution. Computers and the Internet offer new scope for inven-
tions and discoveries, requiring changes to patent law. Internet do-
main names provide a new category of things to be trademarked,
while search engines provide new incentives for trademark in-
fringement. And the area under greatest stress is copyright: The
Internet provides enormously enhanced opportunities for content
creation and for copyright infringement, resulting in the passage
of laws that would have seemed shockingly harsh just a quarter of
a century ago.
Treaties
“Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPS), Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organiza-
tion, Annex 1C.” April 15, 1994. 33 I.L.M. 81.
“Buenos Aires Convention.” August 20, 1910. 38 Stat. 1785, 155 L.N.T.S.
179.
“Convention Concerning the Creation of an International Union for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Berne Convention).” Septem-
ber 9, 1886, as last revised at Paris, July 24, 1971 (amended 1979). 25
U.S.T. 1341, 828 U.N.T.S. 221. 
“Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization.”
July 14, 1967, as amended on September 28, 1979 (WIPO Convention). 21
U.S.T. 1749, 828 U.N.T.S. 3.
“Convention on the Grant of European Patents.” October 5, 1973. 13
I.L.M. 276. Text as amended through December 10, 1998, available at
http://www.european-patent-office.org/legal/epc/e/ma1.html. 
“Inter-American Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.”
August 20, 1910. 39 Stat. 1675; TS 626; 1 Bevans 772. Replaced by General
Inter-American Convention for Trademark and Commercial Protection.
February 20, 1929. 46 Stat. 2907, TS 833, 2 Bevans 751, 124 L.N.T.S. 357.
“Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
Marks.” April 14, 1891. As revised at Brussels on December 14, 1900, at
42
Background and History

Washington on June 2, 1911, at The Hague on November 6, 1925, at Lon-
don on June 2, 1934, at Nice on June 15, 1957, and at Stockholm on July
14, 1967, and as amended on September 28, 1979. 828 U.N.T.S. 389.
“Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.” March 20,
1883. As revised at Brussels on December 14, 1900, at Washington on
June 2, 1911, at The Hague on November 6, 1925, at London on June 2,
1934, at Lisbon on October 31, 1958, and at Stockholm on July 14, 1967,
and as amended on September 28, 1979. 21 U.S.T. 1583, 828 U.N.T.S. 305.
“Patent Cooperation Treaty.” Washington. June 19, 1970. As amended on
September 28, 1979, and as modified on February 3, 1984, and October 3,
2001. 28 U.S.T. 7645, 9 I.L.M. 978.
“Patent Law Treaty.” June 1, 2000. 39 I.L.M. 1047.
“Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the Interna-
tional Registration of Marks.” June 27, 1989. Available from http://www
.wipo.int/madrid/en/legal_texts/.
“Trademark Law Treaty.” October 27, 1994. Available at http://www
.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo027en.htm.
“Universal Copyright Convention.” September 6, 1952. 6 U.S.T. 2731. Re-
vised at Paris, July 24, 1971. 25 U.S.T. 1341.
“WIPO Copyright Treaty.” December 20, 1996. 36 I.L.M. 65 (1997).
“WIPO Performance and Phonograms Treaty.” December 20, 1996. 36
I.L.M. 76 (1997).
Regulations
Code of Federal Regulations, Title 37.
Statutes and Legislative Materials
Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1125(d). 
Copyright Act of 1976 (as amended), §§ 101–1331.
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 512, 1201–1205.
Lanham Trademark Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1052, 1058, 1059, 1125–1127.
No Electronic Theft Act, amending and codified at 17 U.S.C. §§ 101, 506
& 507 and 18 U.S.C. §§ 2319–2320.
Patent Act, 35 U.S.C. §§ 100 et seq.
Statutes and Legislative Materials
43

Penalties for Criminal Infringement of a Copyright, 18 U.S.C. § 2319.
Plant Variety Protection Act of 1970 (part), 7 U.S.C. §§ 2401–2404.
Semiconductor Chip Protection Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 901–914.
Statute of Monopolies (1623), 21 James I ch. 3.
Trademark Act of July 8, 1870, ch. 530, §§ 77–84, 26 Stat. 198. 
Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006, PL 109-312, Oct. 6, 2006, 120
Stat. 1730.
Vessel Hull Design Protection Act, codified at 17 U.S.C. §§ 1301–1332.
Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990, 17 U.S.C. § 106A.
Cases
A & M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2001), on remand,
2001 WL 227083 (N.D. Cal. 2001), affirmed, 284 F.3d 1091 (9th Cir. 2002).
Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc., 537 F.2d 4 (2d Cir. 1976).
America Online Inc. v. AT&T Corp., 64 F. Supp.2d 549 (E.D. Va. 1999).
AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341, 348–349 (9th Cir. 1979).
Apple Computer v. Franklin Computer, 714 F.2d 1240 (3d Cir. 1983).
Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99 (1880).
Building Officials & Code Administration v. Code Technology, Inc., 628 F.2d
730 (1st Cir. 1980).
Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 (1994).
Coca-Cola Co. v. Gemini Rising, Inc., 346 F. Supp. 1183 (E.D. N.Y. 1972).
Data East USA v. Epyx, 862 F.2d 204 (9th Cir. 1988).
Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U.S. 175 (1981).
Donaldson v. Beckett, (1774) 1 Eng. Rep. 837 (H.L.).
Effects Associates v. Cohen, 908 F. 2d 555 (9th Cir. 1990). 
Eldred v. Ashcroft, 123 S.Ct. 769 (2003).  
Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991).  
Fonovisa, Inc. v. Cherry Auction, Inc., 76 F.3d 259 (9th Cir. 1976).
Georgia v. The Harrison Co., 548 F. Supp. 110, vacated by agreement between
the parties, 559 F. Supp. 37 (N.D. Ga. 1983).
Gold Seal Co. v. Weeks, 129 F. Supp. 928 (D.C. Cir. 1956), affirmed, 230 F.2d
832, certiorari denied, 328 U.S. 829 (1956).
Goodis v. United Artists Television, Inc., 425 F.2d 397 (2d Cir. 1970).
44
Background and History

Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U.S. 63 (1972).
Hoehling v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 618 F.2d 972 (2d Cir. 1980).
In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
In re Budge Manufacturing Co., 857 F.2d 773 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
In re Clarke, 17 U.S.P.Q.2d 1238 (T.T.A.B. 1990).
In re Old Glory Condom Corp., 26 U.S.P.Q.2d 1216 (T.T.A.B. 1993).
In re Prater, 415 F.2d 1393 (C.C.P.A. 1969).
In re Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U.S. 82 (1879).
International Business Machines Corporation, Technical Board of Appeal of
the European Patent Office, Case No. T 0935/97–3.5.1 (1999).
Inwood Labs, Inc. v. Ives Labs, Inc., 456 U.S. 844 (1982).
Lotus Development Corp. v. Borland International, 140 F.3d 70 (1st Cir. 1998).
MAI Systems Corp. v. Peak Computer, 991 F.2d 511 (9th Cir. 1993).
Manville Sales Co. v. Paramount Systems, Inc., 917 F.2d 544 (Fed. Cir. 1990).
Mead Data Central, Inc. v. Toyota Motor Sales, Inc., 875 F.2d 1026 (2d Cir.
1989).
Merriam v. Holloway Publishing Co., 43 F. 450 (C.C.E.D. Mo. 1890)
MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 125 S.Ct. 2764 (2005).
Midway Manufacturing Co. v. Arctic International, 704 F.2d 1009 (7th Cir.
1982).
Mosely v. V Secret Catalog Inc., 537 U.S. 418 (2003).
NEC v. Intel, 10 U.S.P.Q.2d 1177 (N.D. Cal. 1989).
Oasis Publishing Co. v. West Publishing Co., 924 F. Supp. 918 (D. Minn.
1996).
Playboy Enterprises, Inc. v. Welles, 279 F.3d 796 (9th Cir. 2002).
Polaroid Corp. v. Polarad Electronics Corp., 287 F.2d 492 (2d Cir. 1961).
Qualitex Co. v. Jacobson Products Co., 514 U.S. 159 (1995).
Recording Industry Association of America v. Diamond Multimedia Systems,
Inc., 180 F.3d 1072 (9th Cir. 1999).
Sega Enterprises v. Accolade, 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992).
Silverman v. CBS Inc., 870 F.2d 40 (2d Cir. 1989).
Singer Manufacturing Co. v. June Manufacturing Co., 163 U.S. 169 (1896).
Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596 (9th Cir.
2000).
Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984).
Cases
45

Southern v. How, (1618) Popham 143.
State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Group, 149 F.3d 1368
(Fed. Cir. 1998); certiorari denied, 525 U.S. 1093.
Sunmark, Inc. v. Ocean Spray Cranberries, Inc., 64 F.3d 1055 (7th Cir. 1995).
UMG Recordings, Inc. v. MP3.Com, Inc., 92 F. Supp.2d 349 (S.D. N.Y. 2000).
United States v. LaMacchia, 871 F. Supp. 535 (D. Mass. 1994).
Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429 (2nd Cir. 2001), affirm-
ing Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp.2d 294 (S.D. N.Y.
2000).
Vault Corp. v. Quaid Software, 847 F.2d 255 (5th Cir. 1988).
White v. Dunbar, 119 U.S. 47 (1886).
Williams Electronics v. Arctic International, 685 F.2d 870 (3d Cir. 1982).
Sources and Further Reading
Austin, Graeme W. 2004. “Trademarks and the Burdened Imagination.”
Brooklyn Law Review 69: 827.
Berger, Eric. 2004. “Traffix Devices, Inc. v. Marketing Displays, Inc.: Intellec-
tual Property in Crisis: Rubbernecking the Aftermath of the United States
Supreme Court’s Traffix Wreck.” Arkansas Law Review 57: 383.
Bibliothèque Nationale de France. Histoire: Sept Siècles. http://www
.bnf.fr/pages/connaitr/siecle.htm (in French). 
British Library website. http://www.bl.uk.
Choi, Yunjeong. 2003. “Development of Copyright Protection in Korea:
Its History, Inherent Limits, and Suggested Solutions.” Brooklyn Journal of
International Law 28: 643.
Dinwoodie, Graeme B., William O. Hennessey, and Shira Perlmutter.
2002. International and Comparative Patent Law. Newark, NJ: Matthew Ben-
der.
Fishman, Stephen. 2001. Copyright Your Software. 3rd ed. Berkeley, CA:
Nolo Press.
Ginsburg, Jane C. 1990. “A Tale of Two Copyrights: Literary Property in
Revolutionary France and America.” Tulane Law Review 64: 991.
Greene, Kevin J. 2004. “Abusive Trademark Litigation and the Incredible
Shrinking Confusion Doctrine—Trademark Abuse in the Context of En-
tertainment Media and Cyberspace.” Harvard Journal of Law and Public
Policy 27: 609.
46
Background and History

History/Timeline: Lowenbrau Yesterday & Today. http://www.lowen
braubeer.com/b_history.html.
International Trademark Association. The Lanham Act: Alive and Well After
50 Years. http://www.inta.org/about/lanham.html.
Kaufer, Erich. 1989. The Economics of the Patent System. Chur, Switzerland:
Harwood Academic Publishers.
Leaffer, Marshall. 1999. Understanding Copyright Law. 3rd ed. New York:
Matthew Bender.
Lee, Ilhyung. 2001. “Culturally-Based Copyright Systems? The U.S. and
Korea in Conflict.” Washington University Law Quarterly 79: 1103.
Leuven, City of Beer. http://www.leuven.be/showpage.asp?iPageID
=1677.
McCarthy, J. Thomas, Roger Schechter, and David J. Franklyn. 2004. Mc-
Carthy’s Desk Encyclopedia of Intellectual Property. 3rd ed. Washington, DC:
Bureau of National Affairs.
Nard, Craig Allen, and Andrew P. Morriss. 2004. Constitutionalizing
Patents: From Venice to Philadelphia. Case Research Paper Series in Legal
Studies. Working Paper 04-12. http://www.law.nyu.edu/journals/lib
erty/Images/Morriss_Patents.pdf and at http://ssrn.com/abstract
=585661.
Nimmer, David. 2004. Copyright: Sacred Text, Technology, and the DMCA.
The Hague: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Robert, Daphne. 1996. “Commentary on the Lanham Trade-Mark Act.”
Trademark Reporter 6: 373.
Samuelson, Pamela. 1997. “The U.S. Digital Agenda at WIPO.” Virginia
Journal of International Law 37: 369.
Samuelson, Pamela, Randall Davis, Mitchell D. Kapor, and J. H. Reich-
man. 1994. “A Manifesto Concerning the Legal Protection of Computer
Programs.” Columbia Law Review 94: 2308.
Schechter, Frank I. 1925. Historical Foundations of the Law Relating to Trade-
marks. New York: Columbia University Press.
Sunder, Madhavi. 1996. “Authorship and Autonomy as Rites of Exclu-
sion: The Intellectual Propertization of Free Speech in Hurley v. Irish-
American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston.” Stanford Law Review
49: 143.
Staatliche Brauerei Weihenstephan. http://www.weihenstephan.de/
weihenstephan/plan/brauerei.html.
United States Copyright Office. 2004. “Duration of Copyright: Provisions
of the Law Dealing with the Length of Copyright Protection.” Circular
15a. December. http://www.copyright.gov/circs/circ15a.html.
Sources and Further Reading
47

United States Copyright Office. 2006a. “Copyright Registration: Literary
Works.” July 11, 2006. http://www.copyright.gov/register/literary
.html.
United States Copyright Office. 2006b. “Copyright Registration: Literary
Works—Deposit Requirements.” July 11, 2006. http://www.copyright
.gov/register/literary.html.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. 2006. “FY 2006 Fee Schedule, Oct. 14,
2006.” http://www.uspto.gov/web/offices/ac/qs/ope/fee2006october
14.htm.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. “TEAS Important Notice.”
http://www.uspto.gov/teas/eTEASimportantnotice.htm#NoRefund.
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office. “Trademark Electronic Search System
(TESS).” http://tess2.uspto.gov/.
“The World’s Oldest Companies: The Business of Survival.” 2004. The
Economist, December 16.
48
Background and History

2
Problems, Controversies,
and Solutions
T
he revolution in information technology in the last part of the
twentieth century imposed great stresses on information law.
Disputes arose as to whether computer programs were copy-
rightable or patentable, and whether the look and feel of those
programs could be copyrighted. The Internet has created new
methods of doing business, just as those methods have become
patentable. Computers have made it possible to compile enor-
mous electronic databases, and debate continues to rage about
how, or whether, the work that goes into creating those databases
should be protected.
Copyright owners have tried to reduce the impact of the
new technology with lawsuits aimed at prohibiting the sale of
copying devices; with lobbying to outlaw the circumvention of
copy-control measures; and most spectacularly in the pitched
three-way battle between content owners, consumers, and equip-
ment manufacturers over online file sharing. Trademark, too, has
been affected, as the Web creates new forms of trademark in-
fringement—cybersquatting and search-engine spamming.
49

Patent, Copyright, and Computer
Programs
Patent law is also under stress, as it has been since the beginning
of the computer era. In addition to the recent controversy over
business method patents already discussed, patent law has also
dealt poorly at times with the challenges posed by computer tech-
nology. In the 1960s, when computers were enormous machines,
filling entire buildings and orders of magnitude less powerful
than the average cell phone today, the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office considered itself overwhelmed by applications for com-
puter hardware patents and strongly opposed the idea that
software could also be patented. Then-president Lyndon Johnson
created a Commission on the Patent System that investigated,
among other things, the patentability of computer programs. In
1966 this commission issued a report opposing the grant of com-
puter program patents. Despite a 1969 case in the Federal Court
of Customs and Patent Appeals holding that software for an ana-
log computer was patentable, the report of the President’s Com-
mission and the stand of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office
helped influence the Supreme Court in its 1972 decision in
Gottschalk v. Benson. In Gottschalk, the Court held that a mathe-
matical algorithm used in a computer program was not
patentable (Gottschalk, 409 U.S. 63). The decision came at a time
when most people, the justices of the Supreme Court included,
had little or no experience with computers, and it had a signifi-
cant and possibly harmful effect on the subsequent development
of intellectual property rights in computer programs. 
Computer programs are composed of information, and they
can be protected as literary works because of their expressive
content. Few people read the code of a program for this content,
however; computer programs differ from books, movies, films,
photographs, and other literary works in that they are valued
more (much more) for their function than for their expressive
content. 
Yet if in 1972 computer programs did not precisely fit within
the traditional categories of works protected by copyright, they fit
even more awkwardly within the boundaries of patent law at the
time. In Gottschalk, the court’s opinion, although addressing only
algorithms used in programs, was widely interpreted as holding
50
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

that computer programs themselves were unpatentable. After
Gottschalk, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office suspended all
pending computer program patent applications. Other countries,
perhaps incorrectly assuming that the United States had carefully
considered all of the consequences and ramifications of its
actions, followed the U.S. lead. In Europe, for example, the Euro-
pean Patent Convention to this day provides that computer
programs are not patentable subject matter (European Patent
Convention, art. 52(2)(c)). To grant such patents, the European
Patent Office (itself authorized by art. 4(2)(a) of the same con-
vention) has had to go through awkward legal contortions (see
International Business Machines, Technical Board of Appeal of the
European Patent Office, Case No. T 0935/97—3.5.1).
As a result of Gottschalk, copyright rather than patent became
the main form of intellectual property protection for computer
programs. Copyright protection is far easier to obtain than patent
protection, and provides a far longer term of protection. The cur-
rent ninety-five-year term for works for hire is longer than the en-
tire history of digital computing, so far. As a practical matter, this
means that no computer program ever written, other than origi-
nal programs created by the United States or some other govern-
ments, is in the public domain—or is likely to be at any point in
the near future. (Open-source software, as discussed in Chapter 1,
is not in the public domain.) In other words, aside from a few
government-created programs, there is no software public do-
main. Many see this lack of a public domain as stifling creativity
and encouraging monopolies; the open-source movement is one
response to this perceived problem.
The problem might easily have been avoided, however. Pre-
sented with a new type of content, not fitting comfortably under
either “copyright” or “patent,” Congress could have created a
new form of intellectual property protection, as some scholars
have urged (Samuelson et al. 1994). The creation of a special cat-
egory of “software patent” or “software copyright” or “computer
program registration” would have been within the authority
granted Congress under the Patent and Copyright Clause “To
promote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by securing for
limited Times to Authors and Inventors the exclusive Right to
their respective Writings and Discoveries” (U.S. Constitution, art.
1, § 8, cl. 8). Indeed, Congress has created new forms of intellec-
tual property rights for “Authors and Inventors” of other types
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs
51

of Writings and Discoveries,” such as vessel hull designs (17
U.S.C. §§ 1301–1332) and semiconductor manufacturing mask
work registrations (17 U.S.C. §§ 901–914).
However, Congress has not chosen to do this, and computer
programs remain somewhat awkwardly protected by copyright
and patent, although subsequent changes in patent law have
smoothed out some of the difficulties that led to Gottschalk. In the
1981 case of Diamond v. Diehr, nine years after Gottschalk, the
Supreme Court backed down a bit, holding that a computer pro-
gram incorporating a mathematical formula and controlling a
rubber-curing press was patentable (Diamond, 450 U.S. 175).
After Diamond, the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office began to ac-
cept applications for, and issue, patents for computer programs,
but it was not until a later case that the U.S. Patent and Trade-
mark Office accepted the idea to the extent of actually publishing
guidelines on the patentability of computer programs as a gen-
eral category. 
The case that finally established the patentability of com-
puter programs as a general category was In re Alappat, a 1994
case from the Federal Circuit Court of Appeals. The Federal Cir-
cuit had been created in 1982, transferring some functions from
earlier courts to a new court with special expertise in certain
areas, including patents; its creation may have been in part the
result of a wish to avoid missteps such as Gottschalk. In In re Alap-
pat, the court upheld the patentability of a computer program
incorporating a mathematical algorithm. The program, an anti-
aliasing program for oscilloscopes, smoothed the edges of the
image in a digital display; the court held that the program was
not an unpatentable attempt to monopolize all possible uses of a
mathematical algorithm, but a patentable practical application (In
re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526).
In 1995, a year after Alappat, the U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office finally issued guidelines for software patents. But although
the controversy over patentability of computer programs appears
to have been resolved in the United States, it is still very much
alive in Europe. In 2005 the European Parliament threw out a bill
that would have permitted the European Union to issue such
patents (”EU Software Patent Law Faces Axe” 2005). A wide vari-
ety of groups continues to oppose software patents, while some
industry interests support them.
52
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Is the Look and Feel of a Computer
Program or a Website Copyrightable?
In the early days of personal computing, look-and-feel infringe-
ment was one of the first copyright battlegrounds. The “look” of
a program is the combined visual effect of its graphics, fonts,
color scheme, and on-screen layout. The “feel” is determined by
the way in which the various on-screen and off-screen compo-
nents—such as buttons, menus, keyboard and mouse commands,
links, and dialog boxes—are used to control and navigate the pro-
gram. The concept of menu command hierarchy is closely related
to look and feel. The menu command hierarchy consists of the
commands by which a user tells the program to do certain things
and the order in which those commands are arranged. 
Computer users invest considerable time and effort in learn-
ing to use new programs. Once they have learned to use one, they
will be reluctant to switch to another, even if the new program is
better, because of the time and effort involved in learning the new
program. Thus, the first program of a particular type to hit the
market has an advantage. This advantage can be overcome, to
some extent, if new programs are able to mimic the menu com-
mand hierarchy and the look and feel of existing programs. The
ability to mimic these characteristics thus benefits late entrants in
a field, but harms early entrants. These early entrants invoked
copyright theories in defense of their market share; more recently,
trademark theories have been proposed for the same purpose.
Copyright, as we saw in Chapter 1, protects the expression of
ideas rather than the ideas themselves. The late entrants, opposed
to the idea that a program’s menu command hierarchy or look
and feel could be copyrighted, insisted that these things, to the
extent that they were expressions and not ideas, were expressions
of ideas that could only be expressed in a very limited number of
ways. Thus, under the merger doctrine, the idea and the expres-
sion merged and the result could not be copyrighted.
One of the most closely watched battles over look and feel
pitted two industry leaders against each other. In 1985, sales of
personal computers (PCs) running Microsoft’s MS-DOS operat-
ing system still accounted for less than half of all PC sales (Reimer
2005). Apple, whose command-prompt interface Apple II
accounted for 12 percent of computer sales that year, had just
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs
53

introduced the Macintosh, a computer with a graphical user in-
terface (GUI) that was easier for technically unsophisticated users
to navigate. Although the Macintosh GUI has evolved over time,
the 1985 version would be recognizable to any Mac user today—
or to any Windows user. Microsoft’s Windows GUI looks and
feels a lot like the Macintosh GUI.
In that year (1985) Apple and Microsoft reached an agree-
ment regarding the development of Windows. In the agreement,
Microsoft acknowledged “that the visual displays in Windows 1.0
are derivative works of the visual displays generated by Apple’s
Lisa and Macintosh graphical user interface programs” (Rosenoer
1994). (The Lisa was a bulky, expensive precursor to the Macin-
tosh.) The deal fell apart, though, when subsequent versions of
Windows came to resemble the Macintosh GUI more closely than
Windows 1.0 had, especially after Microsoft licensed Windows to
Hewlett-Packard to develop Hewlett-Packard’s NewWave soft-
ware desktop. The Macintosh-like Windows 2.03 and NewWave
were released in 1988, and the parties wound up in court for the
next six years.
In 1994, after many intermediate skirmishes, the battle ended
in the federal Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals (Apple Computer, 35
F.3d 1435). The Ninth Circuit affirmed a decision of the federal
district court for the Northern District of California two years ear-
lier. Apple lost against Microsoft, although it did prevail in two
claims against Hewlett-Packard: The district court had found that
NewWave’s trash can and file folder icons were infringing, and
NewWave was consigned to the trash can of software history
(Apple Computer, 799 F. Supp. at 1034–1036). Apple petitioned for
certiorari to the U.S. Supreme Court, but the Court refused to
hear the case, denying certiorari in 1995. The reasoning of the dis-
trict court, as adopted and affirmed by the Ninth Circuit, remains
one of the most important sources of information about look and
feel infringement.
In its opinion, later affirmed by the Ninth Circuit, the district
court used the Ninth Circuit’s two-step analysis for finding copy-
right infringement in a case of this nature. 
The Ninth Circuit employs a two-part test to determine
whether a work infringes the copyright in another work.
First, the “ideas” of the works in suit are compared for
substantial similarity, using an “extrinsic test” or “objec-
tive analysis of expression.”. . . Analytic dissection, em-
54
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ploying a list of criteria of comparison informed by ex-
pert testimony, is a part of this exercise, which makes
this well-suited for determination as a matter of law. . . .
If the ideas are substantially similar, then an “intrinsic
test” or “subjective analysis of expression” is used.
(Apple Computer, 799 F. Supp. at 1020) 
The district court found most of Apple’s claims barred be-
cause Apple had consented to the use in the 1985 agreement, be-
cause the expression lacked sufficient originality to be protected
by copyright, or because the expression in question was uncopy-
rightable under the merger and scènes a fàire doctrines. For exam-
ple, the use of overlapping windows on the screen had been used
in twenty-six other computer interfaces in the previous decade. It
was evidently a standard treatment in the industry, and thus un-
copyrightable under the scènes a fàire doctrine (Apple Computer,
799 F. Supp. at 1027). The court rejected the idea that the rectan-
gular shape of the window could be protected, apparently be-
cause it lacked originality. Similarly, the use of a muted back-
ground behind the active window “hardly can be said to
represent the sort of creative achievement or expression which
the law should exert itself to protect” (Apple Computer, 799 F.
Supp. at 1028). The display of the active window as the top-most
window in a set of overlapping windows was not protected by
copyright “due to merger of idea and expression” as well as
under the scènes a fàire doctrine. The court pointed out that “it is
hard to imagine the usefulness of an obscured window being the
active window” (Apple Computer, 799 F. Supp. at 1032). Where one
of the three grounds for uncopyrightability applied, two or often
all three did; the court observed that it had “on an earlier occasion
in this case expressed its belief that the various doctrines that
limit copyright protection are often barely distinguishable from
one another” (Apple Computer, 799 F. Supp. at 1022, citing Apple
Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 779 F. Supp. at 134 (N.D. Cal.
1991)).
A year after the Ninth Circuit’s decision in Apple Computer,
the federal court of appeals for the First Circuit declared in Lotus
Development v. Borland that the menu command hierarchy of a
computer program was not copyrightable (Lotus Development, 49
F.3d 807). The First Circuit’s decision, later affirmed by the
Supreme Court (516 U.S. 233), followed more or less the same line
of reasoning as the Ninth Circuit’s decision in Apple Computer.
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs
55

In order to tell a computer program to do things, the user typ-
ically selects certain commands from a preset menu. These com-
mands are arranged under headings; the commands, the headings
under which they are arranged, and the order in which they ap-
pear under those headings form the menu command hierarchy.
The plaintiff and defendant in Lotus Development Corp. v. Borland
made spreadsheet programs, Lotus 1-2-3 and Quattro Pro, respec-
tively. Borland copied the menu command hierarchy of Lotus
1-2-3 into Quattro Pro (and another version, Quattro) “so that
spreadsheet users who were already familiar with Lotus 1-2-3
would be able to switch to the Borland programs without having
to learn new commands or rewrite their Lotus macros” (Lotus De-
velopment, 49 F.3d at 810). Borland did not copy Lotus 1-2-3’s code.
While the copying was undeniable, Borland maintained that
the menu command hierarchy was a mere method of operation
and thus not copyrightable under 17 U.S.C. § 102. The Ninth Cir-
cuit agreed:
In many ways, the Lotus menu command hierarchy is
like the buttons used to control, say, a video cassette
recorder (“VCR”). A VCR is a machine that enables one
to watch and record video tapes. Users operate VCRs by
pressing a series of buttons that are typically labelled
[sic] “Record, Play, Reverse, Fast Forward, Pause,
Stop/Eject.” That the buttons are arranged and labeled
does not make them a “literary work,” nor does it make
them an “expression” of the abstract “method of operat-
ing” a VCR via a set of labeled buttons. Instead, the but-
tons are themselves the “method of operating” the VCR.
When a Lotus 1-2-3 user chooses a command, either
by highlighting it on the screen or by typing its first let-
ter, he or she effectively pushes a button. Highlighting
the “Print” command on the screen, or typing the letter
“P,” is analogous to pressing a VCR button labeled
“Play.” (Lotus Development, 49 F.3d at 817) 
Clicking “Print” is no more an expressive act than is pressing
“Play” on the remote control of a VCR or, these days, a DVD
player. The purpose of the act is to print a document or play a
video, not to express an idea. The court went on to explain that
the menu command hierarchy was an indispensable functional
component of the program rather than an expressive one.
56
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Just as one could not operate a buttonless VCR, it would
be impossible to operate Lotus 1-2-3 without employing
its menu command hierarchy. Thus the Lotus command
terms are not equivalent to the labels on the VCR’s but-
tons, but are instead equivalent to the buttons them-
selves. Unlike the labels on a VCR’s buttons, which
merely make operating a VCR easier by indicating the
buttons’ functions, the Lotus menu commands are es-
sential to operating Lotus 1-2-3. Without the menu com-
mands, there would be no way to “push” the Lotus
buttons, as one could push unlabeled VCR buttons.
While Lotus could probably have designed a user inter-
face for which the command terms were mere labels, it
did not do so here. Lotus 1-2-3 depends for its operation
on use of the precise command terms that make up the
Lotus menu command hierarchy. (ibid.)
The decision in Lotus has been criticized as failing to ac-
knowledge, or to acknowledge sufficiently, that “user interfaces,
including menu commands,” may be expressive, original works
and thus “should receive at least narrow protection under copy-
right law” (Stagnone 1997, 948). The combined effect of Apple and
Lotus, however, seems to have been to put an end to copyright
suits based on menu command hierarchies and look and feel. Al-
though this might suggest that the law in this area is settled, some
scholars have suggested an alternative way to attack programs—
and websites—that imitate the look and feel of other programs
and websites.
The World Wide Web did not exist at the time Apple and Mi-
crosoft reached their 1985 agreement. It was still in its infancy at
the time Apple and Lotus were decided. Today, however, Web
pages number in the billions; some of those pages are valuable
commercial sites, with a distinctive look and feel created by their
graphics, layout, and even menu command hierarchies. If this
look and feel cannot be protected by copyright, perhaps it can be
protected by the trademark theory of trade dress. 
Trade dress protects the “total image and overall appear-
ance” of a product (Two Pesos, 505 U.S. at 764 n. 1, citing Blue Bell
Bio-Medical v. Cin-Bad Inc., 864 F.2d 1253, 1256 (5th Cir. 1989); see
also Restatement (Third) of Unfair Competition § 16, comment
a). It is the “manner in which . . . goods or services are presented
to prospective purchasers[.]” (Restatement (Third) of Unfair
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs
57

Competition § 16, comment a). Once this manner of presentation,
or image and appearance, has become an identifier of the source
of goods or services, it can function as a trademark (Restatement
(Third) of Unfair Competition § 16, comment a). Many websites,
such as Amazon.com or RottenTomatoes.com, have appear-
ances—a look and feel, in other words—that may sufficiently
identify the source of the goods or services offered through the
website, and may thus be protectable as trade dress.
To date, trade dress look-and-feel litigation has been more
anticipated than actual. There has been scholarly speculation, and
attorneys may advise clients on the possibility (see Nguyen 2000,
1244). But there are obstacles to the use of trade dress law to pro-
tect the appearance of websites. First, to the extent that the ele-
ments of a website are functional rather than expressive, they are
not protected as trade dress; purely functional elements are no
more eligible for trademark protection than they are for copyright
protection. Second, the appearance of many websites is con-
stantly changing. The text and images of the BBC’s home page
(http://news.bbc.co.uk) are different from one hour to the next,
although the look and feel of the site may remain the same be-
cause headers, layout, menu command hierarchy, and graphics
remain more or less the same over time. Finally, the appearance
of a website on a screen is the result not of the Web design alone,
but also of the interaction between the site and the user’s com-
puter and browser. Different computers and browsers will dis-
play the same site differently; even two identical computers—
running the same browser and connecting through the same
Internet service provider (ISP) at the same connection speed—
may display the site differently, because users can choose differ-
ent display settings. Whether such an interactive display, even at
default settings, can constitute trade dress infringement is a ques-
tion the courts have yet to address.
Is a Method of Doing Business Patentable?
A computer program’s menu command hierarchy, as we have
just seen, is a mere method of operation and thus not copy-
rightable (Lotus Development, 49 F.3d 807). If a method of operat-
ing a computer program or website is not copyrightable, is it
patentable? At one time, the answer would certainly have been
“no.” The Supreme Court that decided Gottschalk seemed un-
willing to grant any patents for software, let alone for something
58
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

as intangible as a method of doing business. That has changed,
however, not only as a result of the Court’s later willingness to
accept the idea of software patents, but also because of the entry
into force of the World Trade Organization’s intellectual property
treaty, the Marrakesh Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of In-
tellectual Property Rights (TRIPs). TRIPs provides that “patents
shall be available for any inventions, whether products or
processes, in all fields of technology,” with certain exceptions
(TRIPs art. 27). Article 27 was generally understood as requiring
World Trade Organization members to issue business methods
patents. 
In the United States, courts had historically rejected the
patentability of business methods, or so it appeared (Hotel Secu-
rity Checking, 160 F. at 469). After TRIPs entered into force on 1
January 1995, the United States was under an international legal
obligation to grant patents for methods of doing business;
whether there was a domestic statutory obligation to do so was,
at the time, unclear. The test came in 1996, with the decision in
State Street Bank & Trust v. Signature Financial Group. In 1993
Signature had obtained U.S. Patent No. 5,193,056, titled “Data
Processing System for Hub and Spoke Financial Services Con-
figuration,” which, the patent explained, “provides a data pro-
cessing system and method for monitoring and recording the
information flow and data, and making all calculations, necessary
for maintaining a partnership portfolio and partner fund (Hub
and Spoke) financial services configuration.” The patent was for
a method of managing complex investments, allowing mutual
funds to pool their assets. The full patent can be read on the U.S.
Patent and Trademark Office’s website by entering the patent
number into the patent Quick Search engine, although it makes
excruciatingly dull reading for all but the most dedicated afi-
cionados of investment method patents.
In State Street Bank & Trust the Federal Circuit held that busi-
ness methods were not unpatentable subject matter. A business
method could be patented if it met the statutory requirements of
usefulness, novelty, and nonobviousness (149 F.3d at 1375). In the
years following State Street Bank & Trust, a great many business
method patents have been granted amid considerable controversy.
Much of the public ridicule heaped upon business method patents
focuses on those patents that seem at best minimally innovative;
the scorn might better be directed at the U.S. Patent and Trade-
mark Office’s willingness to grant patents for almost everything
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs
59

than at the idea of business method patents. U.S. Patent No.
5,993,336 may be laughable (and is only a “business method” for
professional tennis players):
A method of executing a tennis stroke includes covering
a knee of a tennis player with a knee pad during tennis
play. The covered knee of the player is placed on a ten-
nis court surface with the knee pad positioned between
the knee and the surface. The tennis racket is swung to-
ward a tennis ball so as to hit the tennis ball with the
racket either while the covered knee is on the tennis
court surface, or just prior to the knee contacting the ten-
nis court surface. 
But it is not any more ridiculous than the infamous peanut
butter and jelly sandwich patent, U.S. Patent No. 6,004,596,
which, among its innovations, includes a method—independ-
ently discovered by every parent who has ever packed peanut
butter and jelly sandwiches in a child’s lunchbox—for preventing
the jelly from making the bread soggy:
The upper and lower fillings are preferably comprised
of peanut butter and the center filling is comprised of at
least jelly. The center filling is prevented from radiating
outwardly into and through the bread portions from the
surrounding peanut butter. [Italics in original.] 
This patent is more traditional in its subject matter, but no
less absurd. Yet it has already withstood at least one challenge
(Albie’s Foods, 170 F. Supp.2d 736).
Perhaps the most celebrated and controversial business
methods patent is U.S. Patent No. 5,960,411—Amazon.com’s
patent on one-click ordering. The patent was issued on 28 Sep-
tember 1999, in the early years of near-universal World Wide Web
use in the United States. The 1999 Christmas season came at the
end of the Internet bubble; it was heralded as the first true test of
online retailing as a business model, and no online retailer was
watched more closely than Amazon. 
Less than a month after the patent was issued, Amazon (then
still almost entirely a bookseller) obtained an injunction against
another online bookseller, Barnes & Noble. Barnes & Noble, the
60
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

country’s largest bricks-and-mortar bookseller, also sold books
online through its Barnesandnoble.com website. Amazon’s in-
junction prevented Barnes & Noble from using its own one-click
ordering system (Amazon.com, 239 F.3d 1343). Barnes & Noble re-
sponded by challenging the patent; it pointed out that similar or-
dering methods had been described in print and used by online
retailers long before Amazon filed its patent application (Ama-
zon.com, 239 F.3d at 1360–1366). The federal District Court for the
Western District of Washington (the district that includes Seattle,
where Amazon has its real-world headquarters) rejected Barnes &
Noble’s arguments. On appeal, the Court of Appeals for the Fed-
eral Circuit reversed, saying that Barnes & Noble had “raised sub-
stantial questions as to the validity of the ‘411 patent” and that
“we must conclude that the necessary prerequisites for entry of a
preliminary injunction are presently lacking” (Amazon.com, 239 F.
3d at 1366). In other words, Barnes & Noble won; the injunction
should not have been issued. But Barnes & Noble’s victory was a
Pyrrhic one; the Federal Circuit’s decision came on 14 February
2001, after the end of the 2000 Christmas shopping season and a
month before the Internet bubble began to burst. The injunction
had lasted long enough to allow Amazon to secure its position as
the leading online bookseller in the United States. In fact, Ama-
zon’s media sales now not only exceed Barnes & Noble’s online
sales by an order of magnitude, but also exceed Barnes & Noble’s
total sales. The October 1999 injunction is not, of course, the sole
factor in Amazon’s victory, but it did help.  
In 2006, the U.S. Supreme Court greatly limited the hitherto
nearly automatic right of patent holders to permanent injunctive
relief; patent holders are now required to make showings equiv-
alent to those made by parties seeking injunctive relief in areas
other than patent law (eBay, 126 S.Ct. 1837). In addition, Congress
has taken action to protect businesses, especially small busi-
nesses, from having to defend themselves against “inventors” ob-
taining patents on methods that the small businesses had already
been using: In 1999 Congress responded to State Street Bank with
the First Inventor Defense Act. The Act provides that:
It shall be a defense to an action for [patent] infringe-
ment . . . with respect to any subject matter that would
otherwise infringe one or more claims for a method in
the patent being asserted against a person, if such person
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs
61

had, acting in good faith, actually reduced the subject
matter to practice at least 1 year before the effective filing
date of such patent, and commercially used the subject
matter before the effective filing date of such patent. (35
U.S.C. § 273)
Under the First Inventor Defense Act, in other words, a busi-
ness that can show that it reduced a method to practice a year be-
fore the filing date and began to use the method at any time be-
fore the filing date is protected from liability for patent
infringement. While “reduction to practice” in patent law is a
term of art that can refer either to filing a patent application (con-
structive reduction to practice) or to constructing an apparatus or
carrying out the steps necessary for the invention, in this case it is
unlikely to be the former. The First Inventor Defense Act will pro-
tect not only any business actually using a method for over a year
before the filing date, but also those who have used the method
for less than a year, provided that they reduced the idea to prac-
tice in some way—perhaps by testing a business plan or carrying
out other necessary steps—over a year before the filing date.
As with software patents, the European Patent Convention
remains at odds with actual national and international practice; it
still provides that “schemes, rules and methods for . . . doing
business” are not patentable subject matter, even though the
countries that are parties to the Convention are also parties to
TRIPs (European Patent Convention, art. 52(2)(c)). 
Is an Electronic Database Copyrightable?
As we saw in Chapter 1, the Supreme Court in Feist held that col-
lecting names in a telephone directory and arranging those names
in alphabetical order—in other words, the creation of a database
of names and phone numbers—cannot be protected by copyright,
no matter how much work goes into its creation, because it lacks
the requisite originality (Feist, 499 U.S. 340). Yet creating data-
bases is a valuable service; so to encourage people to create data-
bases, intellectual property law has struggled to find some way to
protect databases from unauthorized copying. U.S. copyright law
allows compilations of data to be protected under certain condi-
tions. In U.S. copyright law, a “compilation” is defined as “a work
formed by the collection and assembling of preexisting materials
or of data that are selected, coordinated, or arranged in such a
62
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

way that the resulting work as a whole constitutes an original
work of authorship” (17 U.S.C. § 101). However, this protection
does not extend to the underlying data itself:
The copyright in a compilation or derivative work ex-
tends only to the material contributed by the author of
such work, as distinguished from the preexisting mate-
rial employed in the work, and does not imply any ex-
clusive right in the preexisting material. (17 U.S.C.
§ 103(b))
There also remains the problem that Feist and Section 101
provide no protection for databases, like telephone directories,
that are not original but do require hard work to create. One way
in which database creators have tried to protect their work under
U.S. law is through contract rather than intellectual property law:
The creator of the database distributes or allows use of the data-
base only to those who agree beforehand to certain conditions,
typically restricting the use of the database to form new data-
bases, the copying of more than a set amount of material from the
database, or the sharing of the database with persons not covered
by the contract. (The telephone directory in Feist was prepared
pursuant to a statutory duty, which might have precluded the
plaintiff from attempting to restrict the use of its database in this
way.) These restrictions can then be enforced under state contract
law.
Such attempts to create a quasi-copyright in databases
through contractual provisions run into difficulty because of the
preemption clause of the Copyright Act of 1976, which provides
that
. . . all legal or equitable rights that are equivalent to any
of the exclusive rights within the general scope of copy-
right . . . in works of authorship that are fixed in a tangi-
ble medium of expression and come within the subject
matter of copyright . . . are governed exclusively by this
title. Thereafter, no person is entitled to any such right or
equivalent right in any such work under the common
law or statutes of any State. (17 U.S.C. § 301) 
Interestingly, Section 301 omits the word “original” before
works of authorship. 
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs
63

Section 301 has been interpreted as prohibiting state law
from enforcing contractual clauses that conflict with federal copy-
right law. Vault Corporation v. Quaid Software, for example, dealt
with a Louisiana state contract statute. Vault made copy-protec-
tion software, ProLok, that it placed on disks and sold to other
software makers. The software makers, in turn, placed their own
programs on the disks and sold them to the public. Vault’s li-
censing agreement provided that the end users, by using the
disks containing the copy-protection software, agreed not to copy,
decompile, or disassemble that software. Quaid violated this
agreement to produce a program, RamKey, which enabled users
to copy programs protected with ProLok. (Today this would
probably be illegal under § 1201 of the Digital Millennium Copy-
right Act, a federal copyright statute.)
This type of agreement, which the end user sees only after re-
moving the shrink-wrap from a software package, is called a
shrink-wrap agreement; the online equivalent is a click-wrap
agreement. The federal Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit held
that Vault’s shrink-wrap agreement was an adhesion contract (a
“take it or leave it” contract between parties with unequal bar-
gaining power) that could only be permissible if authorized by
state law. In Louisiana there was such a law: the Louisiana Soft-
ware License Enforcement Act (La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 51:1961 et
seq.). The Louisiana statute allowed “a software producer to im-
pose a number of contractual terms upon software pur-
chasers. . . . Enforceable terms include the prohibition of: (1) any
copying of the program for any purpose; and (2) modifying
and/or adapting the program in any way, including adaptation
by reverse engineering, decompilation or disassembly” (Vault
Corp., 847 F.2d at 268–269, citing La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 51:1964).
The Fifth Circuit found that the Louisiana statute could not
be enforced against Quaid because it was preempted by the
Copyright Act; it impermissibly went beyond the scope of the
federal Copyright Act in protecting the interests of copyright
holders. (Among its flaws, the Louisiana statute set no time limit
to its protection and was thus unconstitutional as well as pre-
empted; copyrights, like patents, are to be granted only for lim-
ited times.)
A decade later the Ohio Supreme Court reached a similar re-
sult, striking down an Ohio statute as preempted by section 301.
Perry, the defendant, had been convicted of violating an Ohio
statute forbidding unauthorized use of software (Ohio Rev. Code
64
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

§ 2913.04). Perry was factually guilty; he had traded copies of
software over an online bulletin board. However, the court held
that he could not be convicted under the Ohio statute, because
everything prohibited by the Ohio law was already prohibited by
federal law, and the Ohio law was thus preempted. The Ohio
court pointed out that “allowing state claims where the core of
the complaint centers on wrongful copying would render the pre-
emption provisions of the Copyright Act useless” (Ohio v. Perry,
697 N.E.2d at 627).
Although these cases might seem to bode ill for state law
protection of databases, the computer programs in each case were
already the subjects of federal copyright law. Nonoriginal data-
bases are not, and they can still be protected to some extent by
state contract law, as they were in the 1996 Seventh Circuit case of
ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg. The facts were similar to the facts in
Feist: ProCD made a computer database incorporating the con-
tents of  3,000 telephone directories. This was made available sub-
ject to a shrink-wrap license with the usual prohibitions against
copying and other unauthorized use. ProCD invested more than
$10 million in creating the database and had ongoing mainte-
nance and updating costs. It offered different versions of the
database at different prices; those who wished to make more so-
phisticated uses of the database, such as compiling and exporting
lists of potential customers, paid a higher price and received a li-
cense to do these things. Zeidenberg bought the cheapest license
but exceeded its terms by selling information copied from the
database over the Web. When ProCD sued to enforce the shrink-
wrap agreement under Wisconsin state contracts law, Zeidenberg
claimed, among other defenses, that to the extent state law would
enforce the shrink-wrap agreement against copying, it was pre-
empted by Section 301.
The Seventh Circuit disagreed. The contract and the Wiscon-
sin statute permitting its enforcement, the court pointed out, did
not create rights equivalent to copyright, as the Louisiana and
Ohio statutes discussed above had. Rather, the contract created a
private obligation between two parties, not binding on others
outside the contract, and the statute permitted the enforcement of
that contract in the same way as it permitted the enforcement of
other contracts. Therefore, neither the statute nor the contract was
preempted by Section 301 (ProCD, 86 F.3d at 1454–1455).
Thus, the default setting in U.S. law appears to be that data-
bases lacking the requisite originality are not copyrightable;
Patent, Copyright, and Computer Programs
65

however, copying and other uses may be specifically restricted by
contract. The European Union, in contrast, has gone much farther
in protecting databases. In March 1996 the European Union
adopted its Database Directive, providing protection for data-
bases for a fifteen-year term even in the absence of originality (EU
Database Directive arts. 3, 7–8, 10). After the Database Directive
was adopted, the member states of the European Union pushed
for an international treaty requiring other countries to adopt sim-
ilar laws; the treaty was proposed and discussed in the World In-
tellectual Property Organization later in the same year, but was
opposed by the United States and developing countries and was
not adopted (Schneider 1998, 562–563). The United States has a
history of somewhat reluctantly following Europe’s lead in copy-
right matters, however, so a change in U.S. law on database pro-
tection remains possible, although efforts in that direction have
been unsuccessful (see, for example, Schneider 1998, 563–564).
Can Content Owners Restrict or Prohibit
the Sale of Copying Devices?
Copyright law was largely unnecessary in the days before me-
chanical copying devices existed, although even manual copying
could excite fierce passions. According to legend, in the sixth cen-
tury the Irish monk, later saint, Columba left Ireland as the result
of a dispute over copying. Columba had copied a psalter belong-
ing to Finnian, the abbot of Columba’s monastery (and also later
a saint). Finnian discovered the copy and claimed that it belonged
to him; the dispute was submitted to King Diarmait, who decided
that just as a cow’s calf belongs to the owner of the cow, the copy
of a book belonged to the owner of the book. Columba then went
to war against Diarmait, and 3,000 of Diarmait’s men were killed.
In penance, Columba left Ireland, never to see it again (see St.
Columba in Catholic Encyclopedia 1908).
A photocopier would have made St. Columba’s task far
easier. The content industry has been alarmed at each new devel-
opment in copying technology and has tried to suppress it in
various ways, although it has stopped short of actual war. Photo-
copiers and audio- and videocassette recorders were threatening
enough, and inspired lawsuits (see Sony Corp. of America, 464 U.S.
66
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

417). But digital copying was a threat of a different order: Digital
copies, unlike the analog copies made by VCRs, for example, can
be reproduced repeatedly with no deterioration in quality; if the
original from which the copies are made is also digital, each copy
will be an exact replica of the original. 
The first digital recording technology to become available to
individual consumers was digital audio tape (DAT). The music
content industry, still smarting from its defeat in the war against
analog tape recorders, lobbied for protection from DAT recorders.
The content industry’s efforts were successful; in 1992 Congress
enacted the Audio Home Recording Act (AHRA), which at-
tempted to control recording in two ways: through copy-control
technology and through a royalty on recorders and tapes.
The AHRA requires that “any digital audio recording device
or digital audio interface device” imported into, manufactured in,
or distributed in the United States include a primitive form of
electronic rights management technology called the Serial Copy
Management System (SCMS) (17 U.S.C. § 1002(a)). SCMS-
equipped recorders place an inaudible identifying code on copies
they make and will not make copies of originals bearing the iden-
tifying code. This makes second-generation copying (making
copies of copies) impossible, although it does nothing to prevent
the making of multiple copies of a single original master copy.
The SCMS requirement, by its terms, applies to digital audio
recording devices, not merely DAT recorders, that are “designed
or marketed for the primary purpose of, and that [are] capable of,
making a digital audio copied recording for private use” (17
U.S.C. § 1001(3)). This requirement remains in effect today, but it
does not apply to computers; this may have prevented the growth
of a market for stand-alone digital recording devices and may be
one reason that computers have become the most commonly used
devices for copying music.
The royalty provisions, on the other hand, were aimed
specifically at the DAT format. The AHRA imposes a royalty on
digital audio recording equipment and media (17 U.S.C. § 1003).
From the consumer’s point of view this royalty, paid in advance,
looks like a tax; it is collected by the Copyright Office and dis-
tributed to existing music industry copyright owners. Digital
audio recorders are taxed at 2 percent, with a maximum royalty
of eight dollars and a minimum of one dollar; digital recording
media are taxed at 3 percent (17 U.S.C. § 1004). This DAT tax may
have done more than anything else to kill off the DAT format and
Can Content Owners Restrict or Prohibit the Sale of Copying Devices?
67

encourage the use of computers for digital copying: The only
media taxed are those “primarily marketed or most commonly
used by consumers for the purpose of making digital audio
copied recordings by use of a digital audio recording device” (17
U.S.C. 1001(4)(A)). This neatly excludes most CDs and other
computer media; media for recording “motion pictures or other
audiovisual works” as well as “nonmusical literary works, in-
cluding computer programs or data bases,” is not covered (17
U.S.C. 1001(4)(B)(ii)). These royalty provisions were unpopular in
part because they presumed the consumer’s guilt: “We’re going
to charge you a royalty up front because we know you’re going to
use this to make unauthorized copies.” 
The AHRA was the opening skirmish in the content indus-
try’s war on digital copying; while it may have seemed a victory
at the time, the effect was to move digital copying to a far more
powerful device, the home computer. In 1984 the content industry
was able to win a battle against a device allowing users to make
copies of game cartridges (Atari, Inc., 747 F.2d 1422). It was much
less successful against the first MP3 player, the Diamond Rio.
The MP3 file format (actually an abbreviated form of MPEG-
1/2 Audio Layer 3; “MPEG” stands for “Motion Picture Experts
Group”) revolutionized digital music copying. MP3 files are com-
pressed versions of audio files; because they are much smaller
than the uncompressed files, hundreds of files can be stored in the
same amount of space in which dozens of uncompressed files can
be stored on a single CD. The compressed files can also be traded
easily over the Internet.
Before Diamond Multimedia manufactured the Rio, MP3 files
were of limited appeal. Technically unsophisticated users could
only play the files on a computer. The Rio made it possible for
users to transfer their MP3 files from the computer, after which
they could be played anywhere. The Ninth Circuit Court of Ap-
peals determined that this space shifting was a fair use analogous
to the time shifting in Sony. Because the Rio could be used to play
music already owned, it was capable of a substantial noninfring-
ing use (Recording Industry Association of America, 180 F.3d 1072).
By the time the Rio case was decided, however, the main bat-
tle had already moved on; the biggest threat to the content indus-
try’s interests was not mechanical copying devices but software.
While users might trade dozens of physical copies of a song with
their friends and acquaintances, it was far easier to trade millions
of files with total strangers over the Internet.
68
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing
No area of copyright law has been more hotly contested in recent
years than file sharing—the sharing of files on one computer with
other computers to which the computer is linked through some
sort of network. While most file sharing is routine and perfectly
legal, file-sharing networks can also be used by large numbers of
people who do not know each other to exchange copyrighted in-
formation—books, movies, photographs, computer programs,
and most of all music—over the Internet. In discussions of copy-
right law, the term “file sharing” is generally used not to refer to
routine, unquestionably legal file sharing but to this particular
type of file sharing.
The MP3 file format that made widespread Internet sharing
of popular music feasible also gave its name to a file-sharing pio-
neer. MP3.com, a company based in San Diego, California, pur-
chased CDs containing tens of thousands of copyrighted songs,
converted the songs to MP3 format, and placed them, as MP3
files, on its servers. MP3.com offered a service, MyMP3.com,
which allowed subscribers to access these songs. As a protection
against copyright infringement, subscribers had to place an au-
thorized recorded CD in their computer to demonstrate that they
owned (or had access to) an authorized copy of the song they
wished to download. This seems absurdly cumbersome today,
when any user with a copy of the CD can easily make his or her
own MP3, but at the time MyMP3.com provided a means of space
shifting. It also provided an opportunity for piracy; after verify-
ing their ownership of particular CDs, users could share pass-
words and user names—and thus CD collections—with each
other. To the content industry, MyMP3.com was a menace that
had to be stopped.
And it was. The federal district court for the Southern Dis-
trict of New York held that MP3.com’s copying and posting of its
CDs exceeded the limits of fair use (UMG Recordings, Inc., 92 F.
Supp. 2d 349). By this point the content industry had reluctantly
acknowledged, without becoming reconciled to, the idea that
copying licensed recordings from one medium to another for in-
dividual use was fair use. Copying to share with a family mem-
ber or a friend was fair use, too, although the content industry
was not very happy with that idea either. An individual who
bought 45,000 CDs and copied every song on each disk to his or
her own hard drive for personal use was probably committing no
Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing
69

copyright violation. But copying the music files to share them
with the whole world—with anyone with Internet access, a user
name, and a password—was not fair use.
In retrospect, it seems that the content industry’s litigation
strategy was more reactive than strategic. The lawsuit against
MP3.com achieved its immediate objective—the defeat of
MyMP3.com. But it, and subsequent lawsuits, served as lessons
for file sharers, showing the ways in which the technology would
have to evolve to remain legal. The rapid pace of the lawsuits also
forced correspondingly rapid innovation and evolution in file-
sharing technology. By 2000, when the decision in UMG Record-
ings v. MP3.com was published, Napster was already up and
running, with the music content industry in pursuit.
MP3.com lost its court battle because it was a direct infringer;
the act that violated the copyrights was the copying of the songs
onto MP3.com’s own servers. This was the first lesson file sharers
learned: An online file-sharing company is vulnerable if it copies
any music onto its own system. Napster avoided this by having
the users share the files directly with each other; at no point did
any MP3 files pass through any servers or equipment belonging
to or controlled by Napster. Napster did, however, maintain and
constantly update a searchable directory of music files available
for downloading on users’ computers. Napster and the networks
that followed it were peer-to-peer (P2P) networks; they functioned
not within the World Wide Web, but as a separate network on the
Internet created by the software they distributed—although they
did use the Web to advertise and distribute that software.
Because Napster made no copies, it could not be held liable as
a direct copyright infringer. For the music content industry to pre-
vail against Napster, it would have to prove that Napster was
liable as a third-party infringer. Third-party or indirect infringe-
ment, as discussed in Chapter 1, can occur in two ways: contribu-
tory infringement and vicarious infringement. In the Ninth Circuit
at the time of Napster, a contributory infringer was one who had
actual or constructive knowledge of an underlying direct infringe-
ment by some other person and made a material contribution to
that direct infringer’s activities (Fonovisa, 76 F.3d 259). One who
has the right and ability to control a direct infringer’s actions and
receives a direct financial benefit from the infringing activity is a
vicarious infringer (Fonovisa, 76 F.3d 259). Napster, it turned out,
was both a contributory infringer and a vicarious infringer.
70
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

There was no serious question as to whether there was an un-
derlying direct infringement; Napster’s users were exchanging
copyrighted files by the millions, far outside the fuzzy bound-
aries of fair use. Napster was a contributory infringer because it
had actual or constructive knowledge of this direct infringement,
and because it made a material contribution to the direct in-
fringers’ activities. The Ninth Circuit in A&M Records v. Napster
interpreted the knowledge requirement as leniently as possible; it
was willing to regard Napster’s service as “capable of a substan-
tial noninfringing use,” which according to the Ninth Circuit’s in-
terpretation of Sony meant that actual knowledge of specific acts of
infringement was required. Even this requirement was met,
though; Napster had actual knowledge. An e-mail from Napster
cofounder Sean Parker referred to the fact that Napster users
were “exchanging pirated music,” and Napster used screen shots
showing copyrighted material to promote its service (A&M
Records, 239 F.3d at 1020 n. 5). The material contribution was even
simpler to establish: Without the software and the searchable di-
rectory of downloadable files, maintained on Napster’s system,
the users would have been unable to share files with each other.
The Ninth Circuit stated that “Napster has actual knowledge that
specific infringing material is available using its system, [it can]
block access to the system by suppliers of the infringing material,
and . . . it failed to remove the material” (A&M Records, 239 F.3d
at 1022; italics in original). 
Napster was also a vicarious infringer, because it had the
right and ability to control the direct infringers’ actions and
because it received a direct financial benefit from the infringing
activity. It had the right and ability to control the users’ actions
because in its user agreement (a click-wrap agreement—users
had to click “I agree” to download and install the Napster soft-
ware), Napster reserved the right to block any user’s access to the
Napster website at its discretion. And it received a direct financial
benefit in the form of an increased customer base; more cus-
tomers meant a more valuable company and more potential in-
come in the future, even if that potential was not yet realized
(A&M Records, 239 F.3d 1004).
To the makers of file-sharing software, A&M Records v. Nap-
ster was just another decision to design around. File sharers
learned valuable lessons from Napster: First, try not to know what
users are sharing. Second, if just distributing the software is
Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing
71

enough to satisfy the “material contribution” requirement, not
much can be done—but try not to have anything at all on your
own servers. Third, don’t retain the right and ability to control the
users’ actions. About the fourth problem, there’s nothing much
that a for-profit enterprise can, or at least would want to, do to
avoid receiving a direct financial benefit.
The next generation of P2P networks that appeared in the
wake of A&M Records v. Napster was considerably more techni-
cally advanced. Two strategies were tried to avoid the problems
Napster had encountered: encryption and decentralization.
Aimster was an encrypted file-sharing service. It used en-
crypted communications over America Online’s instant messag-
ing system, AIM (from which it took its name), to prevent anyone
other than the users from monitoring or discovering the contents
of traded files. Encrypted communications networks of this sort,
piggybacking on existing networks, are called virtual private net-
works (VPNs). VPNs have many legitimate uses; they are far
cheaper and easier to set up than actual, dedicated private net-
works, making them especially well-suited for confidential busi-
ness communications. 
Aimster distributed software to its users; when an Aimster
user connected to AIM, the software identified all other Aimster
users logged on to AIM as “buddies” and therefore members of
the VPN. Using the software, Aimster users could then send en-
crypted files to each other. There was no way for Aimster to iden-
tify the content of the encrypted files that were being exchanged.
For a monthly fee, Aimster offered a premium version of its soft-
ware, Club Aimster, that included a tutorial, a website listing the
forty most popular downloads, and a one-click download option.
Predictably, content industry parties quickly sued Aimster.
At trial, Aimster did not argue that there had been no underlying
direct infringement; because Aimster itself had copied no files,
however, it—like Napster before it—could only be held liable as
a third-party infringer. The federal district court for the Northern
District of Illinois found that Aimster was, in fact, contributorily
and vicariously liable (In re Aimster Copyright Litigation, 252 F.
Supp.2d 634).
Aimster was contributorily liable because it had actual or
constructive knowledge of and materially contributed to its users’
direct infringement. The knowledge could be presumed from sev-
eral facts. First, the content industry plaintiffs had written letters
from the plaintiffs giving notice of direct infringements. (This
72
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

probably would not have met the Ninth Circuit’s more stringent
test in Napster, but the Northern District of Illinois is located in the
Seventh Circuit, which applied a different test.) Second, the Club
Aimster website identified and commented on copyrighted ma-
terial, and the tutorial used copyrighted titles as examples. Third,
although it was true that the encryption made it impossible for
Aimster to know what was being traded, the court found this self-
induced unawareness insufficient to negate the knowledge re-
quirement. The court reasoned that Aimster itself had made the
encryption available, and that “there is absolutely no indication
in the precedential authority that such specificity of knowledge is
required in the contributory infringement context.” It pointed out
that “Plaintiffs have provided defendants with screen shots of the
Aimster system showing the availability of Plaintiffs’ copy-
righted sound recordings on those users’ hard drives. . . . The
screen shots unequivocally identify the individual users (‘bud-
dies’) who possess the offending files” (In re Aimster Copyright Lit-
igation, 252 F. Supp.2d at 651).
The material contribution element was met, as in Napster, by
providing the software and services that enabled users to connect
with each other, as well as by ranking the songs, enticing poten-
tial infringers, and providing a one-click download option and
tutorial.
According to the district court, Aimster was also a vicarious
infringer. The district court found that Aimster had the right and
ability to control the infringers’ actions because it reserved the
right to bar users and required a user name and password for the
Club Aimster site. In addition, Aimster received a direct financial
benefit from the directly infringing activity, not least because of
the fee paid by Club Aimster users. On appeal the Seventh Circuit
was not so sure; it neither affirmed nor reversed the trial court’s
decision on this issue, saying only that it was “less confident” that
the plaintiffs would prevail on the merits of the vicarious liability
claim than on the merits of the contributory liability claim (In re
Aimster Copyright Litigation, 334 F.3d at 654).
The Aimster approach, despite the encryption, was too much
like the Napster approach; the Club Aimster website, like Nap-
ster’s directory, tied the company distributing the software too
closely to the file-sharing process. Decentralized P2P networks
were a better, if not perfect, solution to the legal and technical
problems encountered by earlier file-sharing networks. In the
wake of Napster and Aimster, the best-known P2P network was
Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing
73

KaZaA (later Kazaa). KaZaA Media Desktop was originally dis-
tributed by Consumer Empowerment, a company founded by
Swedish and Dutch citizens in the Netherlands. It used a new
technology to avoid a problem of earlier file-sharing networks:
Rather than placing the directory on a central server controlled by
the company, the file-sharing software placed and maintained di-
rectories on some users’ computers, knows as supernodes. All of
the computers running KaZaA Media Desktop could connect to
each other, view directories of available files on the supernodes,
and share files with each other, without Consumer Empower-
ment being involved in any way. In theory, this made Consumer
Empowerment less like Napster than like a seller of cassette
recorders, who has no ongoing connection with the purchaser
and no way to control what the purchaser does after the sale.
After a lawsuit in the Netherlands, Consumer Empower-
ment applied its decentralization strategy to its corporate struc-
ture as well as its software. Sharman Networks, a company
incorporated in the Pacific island nation of Vanuatu and head-
quartered in Australia, is now the principal owner, although the
original Dutch and Swedish owners retain some influence. Fast-
Track software, upon which KaZaA Media Desktop is based, is
now apparently the intellectual property of the founders and
Bluemoon Interactive, an Estonian company. FastTrack has been
licensed to many companies to create other P2P networks on the
KaZaA model; it has also been pirated to produce KaZaA clones,
capable of sharing with KaZaA Media Desktop.
KaZaA’s dispersion has made it a difficult target. On appeal,
Consumer Empowerment prevailed in the Netherlands; Sharman
Networks has also been involved in litigation in Australia. In the
United States, twenty-eight content-industry plaintiffs sued Shar-
man Networks, Consumer Empowerment, another FastTrack P2P
network called Grokster, and others in the district court for the
Central District of California. Both the trial court (in 2003) and the
federal Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit (in 2004) found that
Grokster was neither a contributory infringer nor a vicarious in-
fringer. (Sharman Networks, as a Vanuatuan company doing
business in Australia, had been dropped from the suit after the
trial stage.) Grokster did not have “actual knowledge of infringe-
ment at a time when [it could] use that knowledge to stop the par-
ticular infringement” (MGM v. Grokster, 259 F. Supp.2d at 1037).
Although the plaintiffs had notified Grokster of infringing con-
duct, Grokster could do nothing either to facilitate or prevent that
74
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

conduct. Thus, in the district and circuit courts’ view, the knowl-
edge requirement for contributory infringement was not met for
the same reason that the “right and ability to control” element of
vicarious liability was not met.
The district and circuit courts also found that the “material
contribution” element of contributory liability was not met, seem-
ing to tie this element to the “right and ability to control” element
as well. By the time of the litigation, Grokster no longer had con-
trol over a root supernode; the P2P network was operating with-
out any information passing through any computer controlled by
Grokster, and Grokster could not have shut down the P2P net-
work had it wished to. Grokster was more like a seller of photo-
copy machines or cassette recorders than like Napster (see MGM
v. Grokster, 259 F. Supp.2d at 1042–1043). 
Nor was Grokster vicariously liable. As noted, the element of
right and ability to control the direct infringers’ actions was not
met, although Grokster did receive a financial benefit from the in-
fringing activity, or at least from the distribution of its software. 
The district court’s and Ninth Circuit’s decisions in Grokster
were good news for file sharers, but they contained a weakness.
All of the elements of third-party liability that were not met came
down to a single fact—Grokster’s lack of ongoing control over the
users of its software. To Grokster’s allies, this made Grokster less
like Napster and more like Sony, which was not liable for in-
fringements committed with its VCRs. To Grokster’s opponents,
the better comparison—although they may not have used this spe-
cific case—was to Atari v. JS & A, the case lost by the distributors
of a device for copying Atari game cartridges. JS & A’s advertise-
ments seemed to encourage illegal copying; so did Grokster’s. To
allow Grokster to avoid liability, the content industry claimed,
would leave it defenseless. The Ninth Circuit was not unaware of
the problem; it was “not blind to the possibility that Defendants
may have intentionally structured their businesses to avoid
secondary liability for copyright infringement, while benefiting fi-
nancially from the illicit draw of their wares.” But the Ninth Cir-
cuit declined to create a new form of third-party liability to cover
the situation; the remedy, it said, lay with Congress rather than
with the judiciary (MGM v. Grokster, 259 F. Supp.2d at 1046).
The content industry did not have to wait for Congress to act,
however. In 2005 the Supreme Court vacated and remanded, in a
plurality opinion, in a way that probably left none of the parties,
even the winners, completely satisfied.
Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing
75

The Court declined to address vicarious infringement. “Be-
cause we resolve the case based on an inducement theory, there is
no need to analyze separately MGM’s vicarious liability theory”
(MGM v. Grokster, 125 S.Ct. at 2776 n. 9). It conflated contributory
infringement with the patent law doctrine of induced infringe-
ment; rather than the rule for contributory infringement applied
by the lower courts—knowledge of plus material contribution to
a direct infringement—it stated that “One infringes contributorily
by intentionally inducing or encouraging direct infringement”
(MGM v. Grokster, 125 S.Ct. at 2776). For this surprising rule the
Court cited Gershwin Publishing Corp. v. Columbia Artists Manage-
ment, a 1971 case from the Second Circuit. What the Gershwin
court actually said, though, was “Similarly, one who, with knowl-
edge of the infringing activity, induces, causes or materially con-
tributes to the infringing conduct of another, may be held liable as
a ‘contributory’ infringer” (Gershwin Publishing Corp., 443 F.2d at
1162). The familiar elements of knowledge and material contribu-
tion are still there, with inducement as an alternative to—perhaps
even intended as a synonym or subset of—material contribution.
The Supreme Court then continued its analysis on an in-
ducement theory, explaining that just as it had made sense in Sony
to borrow the staple article of commerce doctrine from patent law,
it made sense here to borrow the inducement theory of third-
party liability:
For the same reasons that Sony took the staple-article
doctrine of patent law as a model for its copyright safe-
harbor rule, the inducement rule, too, is a sensible one
for copyright. We adopt it here, holding that one who
distributes a device with the object of promoting its use
to infringe copyright, as shown by clear expression or
other affirmative steps taken to foster infringement, is li-
able for the resulting acts of infringement by third par-
ties. (MGM v. Grokster, 125 S.Ct. at 2780) 
Once the new rule was adopted, it was a simple matter to
find that Grokster had violated it:
Grokster’s name is apparently derived from Napster, it
too initially offered an OpenNap program, its software’s
function is likewise comparable to Napster’s, and it at-
tempted to divert queries for Napster onto its own web-
76
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

site. Grokster and StreamCast’s efforts to supply serv-
ices to former Napster users, deprived of a mechanism
to copy and distribute what were overwhelmingly in-
fringing files, indicate a principal, if not exclusive, intent
on the part of each to bring about infringement. (MGM
v. Grokster, 125 S.Ct. at 2781) 
The Court, while having declined to address the issue of vi-
carious liability, took time to reject the Ninth Circuit’s finding on
contributory liability. The Court’s wording here is not as clear as
it could be; it is not entirely clear that the Court is presenting the
inducement rule as an alternative rule of contributory liability,
rather than adopting an entirely new form of third-party liability
for copyright infringement. The Court explained that the Ninth
Circuit had misread Sony “as holding that distribution of a com-
mercial product capable of substantial noninfringing uses could
not give rise to contributory liability for infringement unless the
distributor had actual knowledge of specific instances of in-
fringement and failed to act on that knowledge” (MGM v.
Grokster, 125 S.Ct. at 2775). The Ninth Circuit had also found that
Grokster “did not materially contribute to their users’ infringe-
ment because it was the users themselves who searched for, re-
trieved, and stored the infringing files, with no involvement by
the defendants beyond providing the software in the first place”
(MGM v. Grokster, 125 S.Ct. at 2775). Nonetheless, the Supreme
Court found contributory liability.
The Supreme Court’s decision in MGM v. Grokster did not
spell the end of file sharing. It did, however, preempt one possi-
ble alternative; while some had speculated that the Court might
focus on the fact that Grokster profited from the use of its prod-
uct for copyright infringement, the Court’s inducement rule ap-
plies to nonprofit P2P networks as well. Other alternatives
remain, though. A file-sharing network that is a staple article of
commerce—capable of a substantial noninfringing use—might
not be covered. As Justice Breyer pointed out in his separate con-
curring opinion, about 10 percent of the files traded over Grokster
at the time of the litigation were noninfringing (MGM v. Grokster,
125 S.Ct. at 2778, 2786 n. 3, 2789–2790). This was more than the
percentage of time-shifting uses in Sony (9 percent; see ibid. at
2788–2789). Even accepting that times and circumstances have
changed since Sony, it seems unlikely that the Court would have
been willing to decide against Grokster had more than half of the
Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing
77

files traded with its software been noninfringing—however much
the content industry might wish it. And one obvious lesson is that
file-sharing networks should not advertise themselves as useful
tools for copyright infringement.
Another, slightly more subtle, lesson is that there is no need
for a P2P network to base itself in the United States. While many
other countries—Sweden, France, the United Kingdom—have
been as harsh or harsher in their treatment of file sharing, others
have not, and businesses based entirely on distributing software
are extremely mobile. Ultimately, international treaties and the
copyright laws of those foreign countries may provide remedies
for the content industry, but the process will be delayed.
The content industry is not willing to bet everything on the
eventual worldwide adoption and enforcement of a complete ban
on P2P networks. Although suits for third-party infringement are
simpler, because they offer a few large targets, the content indus-
try has chosen to go after the more numerous smaller targets as
well: the direct infringers. 
The Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA) has
filed thousands of suits against individual users of P2P file-shar-
ing networks. Although these lawsuits seem to have had the de-
sired deterrent effect, they have also brought a considerable
amount of negative publicity and may have inspired or encour-
aged the creation of nonprofit P2P software for ideological rea-
sons (hatred of the content industry) rather than pecuniary ones.
One of the first persons sued by the RIAA, often held up as a
symbol of all that is wrong about the content industry, was
twelve-year-old Brianna LaHara. Brianna was unaware that she
had been doing anything wrong; her mother paid a monthly fee
to KaZaA, and not surprisingly Brianna “thought it was OK to
download music because my mom paid a service fee for it”
(Younge 2003). A Dickensian “poor widows and orphans” flair
was added to Brianna’s tale by the fact that she lived with her
mother, a single parent, in public housing in New York City. 
Many perceived Brianna, and others like her, as victims, and
consequently perceived the RIAA as a bully. Although the content
industry’s figures for its losses from music piracy were over-
stated, it may have been a measure of the industry’s desperation
at the time that it was willing to be seen as a bully in order to re-
duce file sharing.
The music content industry, in particular, was slower to re-
spond to one of the main reasons for file sharing: dissatisfaction
78
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

with the music industry’s business model. At the time, the only
legal way to buy most songs was on albums—CDs containing
several songs. Singles were rarely available, and overpriced when
they were. Customers who wanted to buy one song would have
to buy the entire album; customers might end up paying $16 for
one song they wanted and ten they didn’t want. If the song was
obscure, they might have had to search in several stores or online
shops before finding an album that contained it; in 1999, for ex-
ample, people looking for the 1960 United Kingdom alternate
version of the Connie Francis song “Robot Man” would have had
to buy either an antique vinyl record, perhaps available on eBay,
or a five-disc set with 148 songs on it, costing more than $100. Or,
in the alternative, they could have searched for it online, found
some other Connie Francis completist who already had the song,
and downloaded it for free.
What the music companies were slow to realize was that
these file sharers weren’t thieves trying to rob them of a $100 sale.
They would gladly have paid a fair price for the song; they just
weren’t willing to pay a $100 or more to have 147 songs that they
didn’t want (or, perhaps, already had) bundled together with the
one that they did. When the music companies finally began to
offer their own individual-song download sites, the sites were
laughable and were understandably ignored. The songs were
often unplayable anywhere except on the computer that played
them; the catalogs were small and shallow. What consumers
wanted was not necessarily music for free; in fact, many of them
were already paying money for premium P2P software. What
they wanted was a single location at which they could find any
song they might want.
Finally, in April 2003, Apple’s iTunes opened for business.
At ninety-nine cents per song and with a deep catalog, iTunes
was the first service to offer most of the convenience of P2P net-
works. It wasn’t quite as good; ninety-nine cents was still more
than zero cents, although as compensation there was no
monthly fee, no adware, and no spyware. Some obscure songs
were not in the catalog, although Apple has continued to ex-
pand it; and as compensation, the quality of iTunes downloads
was ensured. And an .aap file is not quite as useful as an .mp3
file; it comes with some, though nondraconian, restrictions on
copying. And, of course, iTunes offers the benefit of not subject-
ing the user to a potential lawsuit from the RIAA—the carrot to
the RIAA’s stick.
Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing
79

The music industry also seems to be willing to make other
concessions to adapt to P2P file sharing, perhaps anticipating the
day when a P2P network will withstand the Supreme Court’s
new inducement test. One possible solution is the Voluntary Col-
lective License proposed by the Electronic Frontier Foundation,
an activist group. The Voluntary Collective License would set up
a system similar to that currently in place for radio, allowing the
industry to collect royalties and apportion them among artists ac-
cording to the frequency with which particular works were
downloaded:
[T]he music industry forms a collecting society, which
then offers file-sharing music fans the opportunity to
“get legit“ in exchange for a reasonable regular pay-
ment, say $5 per month. So long as they pay, the fans are
free to keep doing what they are going to do anyway—
share the music they love using whatever software they
like on whatever computer platform they prefer—with-
out fear of lawsuits. The money collected gets divided
among rights-holders based on the popularity of their
music. (Electronic Frontier Foundation 2004) 
Some record labels have reportedly already entered into ne-
gotiations with P2P networks (“I Want My P2P” 2004).
Other sectors of the content industry, particularly the movie
content industry, are also concerned about file sharing, although
for several reasons it does not pose as great a threat to them. Sales
of most books (other than some reference works, perhaps, which
are rarely read in their entirety) are unlikely to be seriously af-
fected by file sharing. Part of the appeal of a book is that it can be
read without mechanical assistance; it can be carried anywhere, it
never runs out of power, and it can still be read even after being
dropped on the floor or in a puddle. At some point e-paper or
some other new technology may offer these advantages, but for
the time being books, the oldest form of mass-produced informa-
tion storage, seem fairly secure in their market niche.
Movies are more at risk, partly because the savings from
copying a movie and recording it on a DVD are greater than the
savings from copying a book and printing it on paper—although
still much less than the savings from copying songs and record-
80
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ing them on a CD. Perhaps most importantly, movies, like books,
are not bundled; they are sold as individual works, and con-
sumers are not forced to buy several works they do not want in
order to get the one they do. In addition, movies on DVD are al-
ready compressed; they cannot be compressed much further
without a significant loss of quality, so the space-saving advantage
is considerably less than with CDs (or, for that matter, books). 
Consumers and the content industry are not the only parties
in the file-sharing battle. Equipment manufacturers and ISPs are
also concerned. Equipment manufacturers worry about potential
liability and the possible chilling effect of copyright lawsuits on
the development of new technology; they are also irritated by the
statutory imposition of requirements, at the insistence of the con-
tent industry, that equipment be manufactured in particular
ways. It was this tension that led Les Vadasz, then senior vice
president of Intel Corporation, to describe the content industry as
“a pimple on the elephant’s rear end.” (The elephant, of course,
was the equipment manufacturing industry.)
While Napster and Grokster were ISPs, their services were
specifically aimed at file sharing. ISPs such as America Online
and Verizon are not file-sharing networks, but file-sharing and
other copyright-infringing activities take place over their net-
works. These ISPs are also threatened by the content industry’s
pursuit of file sharers, and several (including AT&T, BellSouth,
MCI, SBC, and Verizon) filed an amicus curiae brief in the
Grokster case urging that the decision of the Ninth Circuit (favor-
ing Grokster) be affirmed. ISPs have also stood between their sub-
scribers and the RIAA’s individual user lawsuits. In December
2003 Verizon Internet Services won an important victory for on-
line privacy as well as for ISPs when the federal appellate court
for the District of Columbia agreed that Verizon, as a conduit ISP,
did not have to turn over the name of a subscriber who had al-
legedly shared copyrighted music files, even though the RIAA
had previously obtained a subpoena issued pursuant to the
streamlined procedure provided in Title I of the Digital Millen-
nium Copyright Act (Recording Industry Association of America v.
Verizon, 351 F.3d 1229). As a result, the RIAA must now bring
“John Doe” lawsuits against file-sharing defendants, and then ob-
tain a subpoena; this procedure is more difficult and provides
some protection for the subscribers through judicial oversight.
Copyright’s Front Line: File Sharing
81

Copy Protection and Copyright
Although file sharing has been perhaps the most furiously liti-
gated copyright battle in recent years, one other aspect of copy-
right law has inspired the same degree of emotional intensity:
copy protection. Fair use, discussed in Chapter 1, allows those
who legitimately obtain, say, a music CD or a movie on DVD to
make copies of part or all of that work under certain circum-
stances, notably for space shifting. A publisher who does not
want the work copied can include some form of technological
protection against copying, so that consumers will be unable to
copy the work even though it might otherwise be legal for them
to do so. And sufficiently motivated and technically sophisticated
consumers could overcome this copy protection and make fair-
use copies anyway. At least, that was the way things were until
the passage of the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998
(DMCA).
The DMCA is a complex law that does a great many things,
but mention the abbreviation “DMCA” to an information rights
activist and the response—probably quite heated—that you
receive will probably focus on the law’s anticircumvention
provisions. The anticircumvention provisions prohibit circum-
venting “a technological measure that effectively controls ac-
cess” to a copyrighted work (17 U.S.C. § 1201 (a)(1)(A)) as well
as trafficking in any “technology, product, service, device, com-
ponent or part” that “is primarily designed or produced for the
purpose of circumventing” such a technological protection
measure (17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(2)). In other words, even if the
copying would otherwise be fair use, it is unlawful if the work
is copy protected. 
“Circumvention” includes “to descramble a scrambled work,
to decrypt an encrypted work, or otherwise to avoid, bypass, re-
move, deactivate, or impair a technological measure, without the
authority of the copyright owner” (17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(3)(A)).
Although there are some exceptions, the space-shifting copying
practiced by most consumers would be prohibited. 
The DMCA’s use of the word “effectively” has also been
used by information rights activists to argue that easily broken
copy protection is not covered by the statute, because it is not “ef-
fective.” Some forms of “technological protection measures” can
be circumvented with a black marker or a piece of tape, or by
holding down the “Shift” key. The statute anticipates this, how-
82
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

ever, and provides that “a technological measure ‘effectively con-
trols access to a work’ if the measure, in the ordinary course of its
operation, requires the application of information, or a process or
a treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain ac-
cess to the work” (17 U.S.C. § 1201(a)(3)(B)). The copy-protection
measure is like a locked door; in other words, even though it may
be easy to force the door open, anyone doing so without authori-
zation is breaking the law—and the fact that the door is locked
provides notice of the illegality.
Fair use is a statutory, not a constitutional, right; there’s no
question that Congress can alter the scope of fair use if it chooses
to do so, as it evidently did by enacting Section 1201. Nonethe-
less, many people felt deeply wronged by this diminution of fair
use, and not only information pirates but also ideologues and or-
dinary consumers began to examine ways to circumvent copy
protection.
At the time, few music CDs were copy protected; the main
form of protected works were movies on VHS and DVD. Movies
on VHS tape are often protected by a form of copy protection
known, after the company that makes it, as Macrovision. Macro-
vision’s copy protection exploits the automatic gain and tracking
control features on VCRs to prevent analog copying of analog or
digital recordings. In a video recording, several lines of informa-
tion can be recorded in an area that is never displayed on the
screen during playback; repeatedly changing the brightness of
these lines from light to dark and back again will fool the VCR
into adjusting the brightness of the recording to compensate,
causing the “VCRs to make distorted copies, devoid of enter-
tainment value” (Macrovision 2003, 2). The Macrovision copy
protection has no effect on users watching an authorized VHS
cassette or DVD incorporating the protection, as the affected lines
are never displayed on the screen.
Macrovision’s copy protection can be circumvented, of
course, by using a VCR without automatic gain control. Some
very old VCRs lack these features, but the DMCA ensures that no
new ones will by providing that VCRs made in or imported to the
United States after 26 April 2002 must contain automatic gain
control (17 U.S.C. § 1201(k)). While the automatic gain control on
existing VCRs can be disabled, most users will lack the technical
skills to do so. To prevent technically skilled users from perform-
ing this service for others or offering devices to do so, Macrovi-
sion Corporation has obtained patents on many of the ways in
Copy Protection and Copyright
83

which this might be done. When devices or services for disabling
automatic gain control appear on the market, Macrovision can
suppress them through suits for patent infringement (see, for ex-
ample, “Macrovision Wins Preliminary Injunction” 2004).
Faced with such obstacles, and with VCRs and VHS a mori-
bund technology, opponents of the anticircumvention provisions
focused instead on the Content Scramble System (CSS) copy-pro-
tection technology for DVDs. On 6 October 1999, a fifteen-year-
old Norwegian citizen, Jon Lech Johansen (see Chapter 5),
posted DeCSS, a method for decrypting CSS-encrypted disks, to
a mailing list. At the time, CSS-encrypted disks could not be
played on Linux systems; DeCSS offered a way for Linux users
to play DVDs on their computers—a use that, prior to Section
1201, would have been a space-shifting fair use in the United
States. Norway’s statute on circumvention of technological
measures was similar to Section 1201, and Johansen was prose-
cuted. His arrest instantly became a cause célèbre among in-
formation rights activists worldwide. U.S. and international
content-industry groups had urged his arrest; the Electronic
Frontier Foundation, probably the best-known information
rights advocacy group, assisted in his defense. In January 2003
he was acquitted, but the prosecution appealed the verdict. (In
the United States this would have been impossible, but in many
countries the prosecution can appeal a verdict of acquittal.) The
appellate court agreed that decrypting disks to play the movies
they contained on Linux systems was not a crime and upheld the
acquittal in December 2003; the prosecution then dropped the
case (Sunde (for Norway) v. Johansen). 
Johansen’s trial was only one chapter, however. The battle
over DeCSS was to become for Section 1201 what the battle over
file sharing was for third-party infringement. Johansen himself,
then a Norwegian citizen living in Norway, was effectively out-
side the reach of the U.S. justice system. (He now lives in the
United States.) In November 1999, however, activists Shawn
Reimerdes, Roman Kazan, and Eric Corley posted DeCSS on
their websites—inside the United States. They also encouraged
others to post DeCSS as an act of civil disobedience. All three
were immediately sued by a group of eight movie studios. The
federal district court for the Southern District of New York held
that CSS was a technological measure that effectively controlled
access to copyrighted works and that DeCSS was a means of cir-
cumventing that control. Thus, DeCSS was within the scope of
84
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

the statute and, by distributing it, the defendants had violated
Section 1201(a)(2)(A). 
The defendants made no copies of movies with DeCSS; the
only thing they copied was DeCSS itself, for which they pre-
sumably had at least the author’s tacit permission. It seems
highly unlikely that the defendants could have been held liable
for any third-party infringement committed with DeCSS.
Although DeCSS may have materially contributed to some in-
fringements, they did not know of any infringements commit-
ted with it. They did not have the right and ability to control the
actions of those who downloaded DeCSS, nor did they profit
from distributing the code. Even under the Supreme Court’s
new inducement standard from MGM v. Grokster, they would be
unlikely to be held liable; nothing about their words or conduct
suggested that they had the object of promoting the use of
DeCSS to infringe copyright.
Nonetheless, they were liable. Section 1201 did not require
that any copyright infringement actually be committed; simply
trafficking in—in this case, distributing for free—something ca-
pable of breaking the copy protection on a protected work was
sufficient. Somewhat surprisingly, even providing links to other
sites from which DeCSS could be downloaded was sufficient to
constitute “trafficking” under Section 1201.
Reimerdes, Kazan, and Corley raised several arguments in
defense, including arguments based on statutory exceptions to
Section 1201 and on the First Amendment. The district court re-
jected the defendants’ contention that their conduct was pro-
tected under the reverse engineering, encryption research, or
security testing exceptions (17 U.S.C. § 1201(f), (g), and (j), re-
spectively). It also rejected the defendants’ First Amendment ar-
guments, although it accepted the underlying idea that computer
code can be expressive speech. The anticircumvention provisions
were not an unconstitutional restraint on this expressive speech,
because they were not aimed at the expression but at the function
of the program. Under the intermediate standard of review ap-
propriate to a content-neutral restriction of this sort, the interest
in freely expressing the expressive content was outweighed by
the interest in protecting copyrights and reducing video piracy
(Universal v. Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp.2d 294). 
According to the court, section 1201 did not unconstitution-
ally limit access to the information contained in the DVDs them-
selves either. Other, lawful methods of making fair-use copies
Copy Protection and Copyright
85

existed, although the quality of such copies would have been
lower than the quality of copies made with DeCSS (Universal v.
Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp.2d 294). Considering that a watchable copy
of a movie protected by both CSS and Macrovision could not
legally be made, the alternative would seem to have been to point
a camcorder at the screen while the movie was playing, resulting
in a copy of very poor quality indeed.
Corley appealed the district court’s decision to the Second
Circuit Court of Appeals, which for the most part agreed with the
trial court. Pointing a camcorder at the screen was apparently ex-
actly the fair use the court had in mind. Section 1201, the court
stated,
does not impose even an arguable limitation on the op-
portunity to make a variety of traditional fair uses of
DVD movies, such as commenting on their content,
quoting excerpts from their screenplays, and even
recording portions of the video images and sounds on
film or tape by pointing a camera, a camcorder, or a mi-
crophone at a monitor as it displays the DVD movie. The
fact that the resulting copy will not be as perfect or as
manipulable as a digital copy obtained by having direct
access to the DVD movie in its digital form, provides no
basis for a claim of unconstitutional limitation of fair
use. (Universal Studios, 273 F.3d at 459)
In addition to a federal action under Section 1201, the movie
industry pursued those who posted DeCSS under state laws. One
of these was Andrew Bunner; the DVD Copy Control Association,
which owns CSS, sued Bunner and many other defendants (in-
cluding “Emmanuel Goldstein,” an Internet alias drawn from
George Orwell’s 1984 and used by Eric Corley) under California’s
trade secrets law. CSS, the DVD Copy Control Association ar-
gued, was a trade secret, and Bunner had violated state laws pro-
tecting that secret. The California Supreme Court ultimately
agreed (DVD Copy Control Association, 4 Cal.Rptr.3d 69).
Although both state and federal courts in the United States
had ordered that it not be distributed, DeCSS refused to go away.
Free speech advocates, including many who had little interest in
the narrower copyright issues, picked up the cause. Artists, hack-
ers, and others expressed the code as a series of haiku, as a T-shirt,
as a work of graphic art, and even as a 1,401-digit prime number.
86
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

These works obviously have little or no functional value and
seem designed entirely as statements of protests—political ex-
pression, in other words—and thus entitled to the highest level of
First Amendment protection. (This did not stop the DVD Copy
Control Association from naming the T-shirt company as a code-
fendant in Bunner, however.) And for those who actually wish to
make copies of DVDs, programs far more sophisticated than
DeCSS have become widely available; DeCSS itself, now more of
a historical curiosity, can easily be downloaded from many web-
sites outside the United States.
As means of circumventing copy protection have grown
more sophisticated, however, so has copy protection. The content
industry, in addition to its lobbying efforts, has continued to work
on ways to make copying more difficult. Digital rights manage-
ment technology can be used to make all copies traceable. Trusted
computing can limit users’ abilities to make copies of recordings
played on their computers. Sometimes the content industry’s pro-
tective measures go too far and excite a furious public response,
as with Sony’s inclusion on some audio CDs of the First4Internet
rootkit. The rootkit, a dangerous piece of software that could
allow malicious users to take control of CD-buyers’ computers,
attracted the unfavorable notice not only of consumers but also of
the U.S. Department of Homeland Security (McMillan 2006). The
content industry is apparently not trusting to Section 1201 alone
to prevent copying of technologically protected works.
Trademarks and the Web: Infringement
and Fair Use Online
Like copyright and patent law, trademark law has been placed
under stress by the development of computers and the Internet.
Two areas of difficulty have been the use of trademarks to direct
search-engine traffic to a particular website and the use of trade-
marks as domain names. Unlawful uses of the first type fall under
the general category of search-engine spamming, while unlawful
uses of the second type are cybersquatting. Not all such uses are
unlawful, though.
Search-engine spammers can use a variety of techniques to
direct search-engine traffic to a particular website. One such
Trademarks and the Web: Infringement and Fair Use Online
87

technique is to direct searches for a competitor’s business name
or other trademark to one’s own site. In the days before Google
became the most-used search engine, one way to do this was
with metatags (discussed in Chapter 1). While metatags are now
obsolete (Google does not use metatags to rank search results),
other search-engine spamming techniques, such as splogging,
cloaking, and link farming, have arisen to take the place of
metatag abuse, and search-engine providers now maintain con-
stant vigilance against such spamming (see “Dancing with
Google’s Spiders” 2006).
Use of a competitor’s trademark in a way that influences
search-engine results is trademark infringement unless an excep-
tion applies. In New Kids on the Block v. News America Publishing,
the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals recognized a nominative fair
use defense; later, in a case involving a former model for Playboy
magazine, Terri Welles (see Chapter 5), the Ninth Circuit ex-
plained the fair use of trademarked terms as metatags. Welles had
used the trademarked terms “playboy” and “playmate” as
metatags on her site, and Playboy Enterprises, the owner of the
trademarks, had sued. The Ninth Circuit explained that Welles’
use of the terms met the requirements of nominative fair use: 
First, the product or service in question must be one not
readily identifiable without use of the trademark; sec-
ond, only so much of the mark or marks may be used as
is reasonably necessary to identify the product or serv-
ice; and third, the user must do nothing that would, in
conjunction with the mark, suggest sponsorship or en-
dorsement by the trademark holder. (Playboy Enterprises,
Inc. v. Welles, 279 F.3d at 801, citing New Kids on the Block
v. News America Publishing, Inc., 971 F.2d 302, 308 (9th
Cir. 1992)) 
The first element, the court explained, was met because
“Welles has no practical way of describing herself without using
trademarked terms” (Playboy Enterprises, 279 F.3d at 803). The sec-
ond element was met because “[t]he metatags use only so much
of the marks as reasonably necessary” and the third element was
met because “nothing is done in conjunction with them to suggest
sponsorship or endorsement by the trademark holder” (Playboy
Enterprises, 279 F.3d at 804).
88
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

The Ninth Circuit’s approach was not universally accepted,
however (see, for example, PACAAR v. TeleScan Technologies, 319
F.3d 243 (6th Cir. 2003)), and a 2004 Supreme Court decision has
called the Ninth Circuit’s three-part nominative fair-use test into
question (KP Permanent Make-Up, Inc v. Lasting Impression I, 543
U.S. 111). In the wake of KP Permanent Make-Up, another federal
appellate court, the Third Circuit, has adopted a new test. In con-
trast to the Ninth Circuit’s approach, the Third Circuit requires
the plaintiff (that is, the mark owner) to first establish a likelihood
of confusion.  If the likelihood of confusion is established, the
Third Circuit applies a slightly different three-factor test:
a defendant must show: (1) that the use of plaintiff’s
mark is necessary to describe both the plaintiff’s product
or service and the defendant’s product or service; (2)
that the defendant uses only so much of the plaintiff’s
mark as is necessary to describe plaintiff’s product; and
(3) that the defendant’s conduct or language reflect the
true and accurate relationship between plaintiff and de-
fendant’s products or services. (Century 21 Real Estate
Corp. v. LendingTree, 425 F.3d at 222) 
Regardless of the test applied, nominative fair use has strict
limits. In the early days of search-engine spamming, unsophisti-
cated search engines could be fooled, by repetition of a single
term dozens or hundreds of times, into giving the site repeating
that term a higher rank on searches for the term than other sites
using the term fewer times. The Ninth Circuit pointed out that it
was not giving its approval to such a use: “We note that our deci-
sion might differ if the metatags listed the trademarked term so
repeatedly that Welles’ site would regularly appear above [Play-
boy’s] in searches for one of the trademarked terms” (Playboy En-
terprises, 279 F.3d at 804).
Even a single use of a trademark is not necessarily a nomi-
native fair use. A company called Radiation Monitoring Devices,
Inc. included a metatag on its Web page that said “The Home
Page of Niton Corporation, makers of the finest lead, radon and
multi-element detectors.” The statement was completely untrue;
Niton was a competitor, and Radiation Monitoring Devices was
enjoined from using the metatag (Niton Corp., 27 F. Supp.2d at
104–105).
Trademarks and the Web: Infringement and Fair Use Online
89

Trademarks and the Web:
Cybersquatting
In the early days of the World Wide Web, many established busi-
nesses were slow to realize the new medium’s importance and
potential, and many failed to register their business names and
other trademarks as domain names. Many independent entre-
preneurs, known as cybersquatters, registered these domain
names, hoping to sell them to the owners. Many owners paid;
others took legal action to gain control of the domain name. For
owners of famous marks, an action for trademark dilution was a
possibility, especially because some cybersquatters placed
pornographic content on the sites they registered in order to
pressure the trademark owner. In such cases, an action for dilu-
tion by tarnishment was easy to maintain; even absent such con-
duct, the use of the domain name for some other purpose might
constitute dilution by blurring.
Owners of marks that were not famous, but were merely dis-
tinctive, had a much more difficult time. If the registrant chose to
use the site to compete with the mark owner in the line of busi-
ness for which the mark was protected, the mark owner might be
able to maintain an infringement action. If the registrant did noth-
ing with the domain name other than register it, the mark
owner’s options were limited.
To address the perceived problem of cybersquatting, Con-
gress enacted the Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act
(ACPA) in 1999. The ACPA provides that a person who, with a
bad faith intent to profit, registers, traffics in, or uses a domain
name that at the time of registration is either identical to or con-
fusingly similar to a distinctive mark, or that is identical to or con-
fusingly similar to or dilutive of a famous mark, is liable in a civil
action by the owner of the mark. If the mark owner prevails in an
ACPA action, the court can transfer the offending domain name
(15 U.S.C. § 1125(d)). 
Most of the text of the ACPA is taken up with an attempt to
define “bad faith intent to profit.” The Act provides nine factors
to be weighed in assessing this intent, and one exception that, if
present, will negate the bad faith intent regardless of the other
nine factors. The nine factors are
90
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

(I) the trademark or other intellectual property rights
of the person, if any, in the domain name; 
(II) the extent to which the domain name consists of
the legal name of the person or a name that is otherwise
commonly used to identify that person; 
(III) the person’s prior use, if any, of the domain name
in connection with the bona fide offering of any goods or
services; 
(IV) the person’s bona fide noncommercial or fair use
of the mark in a site accessible under the domain name; 
(V) the person’s intent to divert consumers from the
mark owner’s online location to a site accessible under
the domain name that could harm the goodwill repre-
sented by the mark, either for commercial gain or with
the intent to tarnish or disparage the mark, by creating a
likelihood of confusion as to the source, sponsorship, af-
filiation, or endorsement of the site; 
(VI) the person’s offer to transfer, sell, or otherwise as-
sign the domain name to the mark owner or any third
party for financial gain without having used, or having
an intent to use, the domain name in the bona fide offer-
ing of any goods or services, or the person’s prior con-
duct indicating a pattern of such conduct; 
(VII) the person’s provision of material and mislead-
ing false contact information when applying for the
registration of the domain name, the person’s inten-
tional failure to maintain accurate contact information,
or the person’s prior conduct indicating a pattern of
such conduct; 
(VIII) the person’s registration or acquisition of multi-
ple domain names which the person knows are identical
or confusingly similar to marks of others that are dis-
tinctive at the time of registration of such domain
names, or dilutive of famous marks of others that are fa-
mous at the time of registration of such domain names,
without regard to the goods or services of the parties;
and 
(IX) the extent to which the mark incorporated in the
person’s domain name registration is or is not distinc-
tive and famous. . . . (15 U.S.C. § 1125(d)(1)(B)(i))
Trademarks and the Web: Cybersquatting
91

The exception provides that “[b]ad faith intent . . . shall not
be found in any case in which . . . the person believed and had
reasonable grounds to believe that the use of the domain name
was a fair use or otherwise lawful.”
In cases where the registrant cannot be located or jurisdiction
over the registrant cannot be obtained (for example, because the
registrant is outside the United States), the mark owner may
bring an action in rem—that is, may proceed against the domain
name itself (15 U.S.C. § 1125(d)(2)(A)(ii)). Before proceeding in
rem, the mark owner must send notice of the alleged violation
and intent to proceed to the registrant at the postal and e-mail ad-
dress provided when registering the domain name and must then
wait a reasonable time for a response. 
Cybergriping, especially when the suffix “sucks” is used in a
site name (as in Lucentsucks.com), presents a slightly different
problem. While it is clearly intended to harm and tarnish the
mark—the point of a cybergriping site is to criticize someone or
something—it does not fit clearly within the nine “bad faith” fac-
tors of the ACPA. Cybergriping may also be protected by the First
Amendment (see Sorgen 2001; Bosley Medical Institute, 403 F.3d
672).
Cybersquatting outside the United States may be resolved by
an in rem proceeding under the ACPA, if a U.S. court has juris-
diction. If not, it may be resolved under the domestic law of some
other country, or under the Uniform Domain Name Dispute Res-
olution Policy of the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers. The anticybersquatting rule of the policy is similar,
but not identical, to the ACPA. It provides that a complaining
party must prove (1) that the domain name is identical or confus-
ingly similar to its trademark, (2) that the defendant has no rights
or legitimate interests in respect of the domain name, and (3) that
the domain name has been registered in bad faith and is being
used in bad faith (Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution
Policy, art. 4(a)). 
Summary
This chapter examines several recent intellectual property contro-
versies, many of which reflect the ongoing tensions between con-
92
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

sumers, content owners, and equipment makers. In the contro-
versy over the patentability of computer software, an early mis-
step led to copyright rather than patent becoming the main
vehicle for protection of software. While the mistake was eventu-
ally remedied and computer programs are now patentable in the
United States (although not in Europe), the damage could not be
completely undone. It remains to be seen which current resolu-
tions of intellectual property decisions will later turn out to have
been mistakes.
Although the “look and feel” of software seems not to be
copyrightable, questions remain about whether look and feel
can be protected as trade dress under trademark law. The pro-
tection, if any, to be given to nonoriginal databases is similarly
uncertain, but the patentability of business methods is now
firmly established.
The content industry has had mixed results in its attempts
to prohibit the sale of copying devices; devices that meet the
standard article of commerce test of Sony may still be sold. It has
had better luck in the battle over file sharing; the industry’s re-
cent victory in Grokster puts the law on its side, for the moment,
at least in the United States. The anticircumvention provisions
of Section 1201 and the content industry’s subsequent court vic-
tories in battles over the statute have restricted fair use—a loss
for consumers, a victory for the content industry, and a
headache for equipment manufacturers. Meanwhile trademark
owners have more or less successfully addressed the problems
of cybersquatting and the use of trademarks in cybersquatting,
with courts crafting solutions that nonetheless preserve trade-
mark fair use.
Treaties
“Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights,
Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organization,
Annex 1C.” April 15, 1994. 33 I.L.M. 81.
“Convention on the Grant of European Patents.” October 5, 1973. 13
I.L.M. 276. Text as amended through December 10, 1998. http://www
.european-patent-office.org/legal/epc/e/ma1.html. 
Treaties
93

Statutes and Other
Governmental Materials
Audio Home Recording Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 1001–1003, 1008.
Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. §§ 101–105.
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 512, 1201.
Digital Performance Right in Sound Recordings Act, 17 U.S.C. § 106(6).
Directive 96/9/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 11
March 1996 on the Legal Protection of Databases, 1996 O.J. (L 77) 20 (“EU
Database Directive”).
First Inventor Defense Act, 35 U.S.C. § 273.
Lanham Trademark Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1125.
Louisiana Software License Enforcement Act, La. Rev. Stat. Ann. § 51:1961
et seq. (West 1987).
Ohio Rev. Code § 2913.04.
Cases
A&M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2001).
Albie’s Foods, Inc. v. Menusaver, Inc., 170 F. Supp.2d 736 (E.D. Mich. 2001).
Amazon.com, Inc. v. Barnesandnoble.com, Inc., 239 F.3d 1343 (Fed. Cir. 2001).
Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 35 F.3d 1435 (9th Cir. 1994).
Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 799 F. Supp. 1006 (N.D. Cal. 1992).
Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 779 F. Supp. 133 (N.D. Cal. 1991).
Atari, Inc. v. JS & A Group, Inc., 747 F.2d 1422 (Fed. Cir. 1984).
Bihari v. Gross, 119 F. Supp.2d 309 (S.D. N.Y. 2000).
Bosley Medical Institute, Inc. v. Kremer, 403 F.3d 672 (9th Cir. 2005).
Buma/Stemra v. KaZaA, Amsterdam Court of Appeal (2002). Unofficial
English translation. www.eff.org/IP/P2P/BUMA_v_Kazaa/20020328
_kazaa_appeal_judgment.html. 
Century 21 Real Estate Corp. v. LendingTree, Inc., 425 F.3d 211 (3d Cir. 2005).
Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U.S. 175 (1981).
DVD Copy Control Association, Inc. v. Bunner, 113 Cal. Rptr.2d 338 (2001),
rev’d, 4 Cal.Rptr.3d 69 (2003).
eBay v. MercExchange, 126 S.Ct. 1837 (2006).
94
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991).  
Fonovisa, Inc. v. Cherry Auction, Inc., 76 F.3d 259 (9th Cir. 1996).
Gershwin Publishing Corporation v. Columbia Artists Management, Inc., 443
F.2d 1159 (2d Cir. 1971).
Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U.S. 63 (1972).
Hotel Security Checking Co. v. Lorraine Co., 160 F. 467 (2d Cir. 1908).
In re Aimster Copyright Litigation (Aimster II), 252 F. Supp.2d 634 (N.D. Ill.
2002); affirmed in part, 334 F.3d 643 (7th Cir. 2003); certiorari denied sub nom
Deep v. Recording Industry Association of America, Inc., 124 S.Ct. 1069
(2004).
In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
International Business Machines Corporation, Technical Board of Appeal of
the European Patent Office, Case No. T 0935/97—3.5.1 (1999).
KP Permanent Make-Up, Inc. v. Lasting Impression I, Inc., 543 U.S. 111
(2004).
Lotus Development Corporation v. Borland International, Inc., 49 F.3d 807 (1st
Cir. 1995); affirmed, 516 U.S. 233 (1996).
Lucent Technologies, Inc. v. Lucentsucks.com, 95 F. Supp.2d 528 (E.D. Va.
2000). 
MGM Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 259 F. Supp.2d 1029 (C.D. Cal. 2003);
affirmed, 380 F.3d 1154 (9th Cir. 2004); vacated & remanded, 125 S.Ct. 2764
(2005).
New Kids on the Block v. News America Publishing, Inc., 971 F.2d 302 (9th
Cir. 1992).
Niton Corp. v. Radiation Monitoring Devices, Inc., 27 F. Supp.2d 102 (D.
Mass. 1998).
Ohio v. Perry, 83 Ohio St. 3d 41, 697 N.E. 2d 624 (1998).
PACAAR Inc. v. TeleScan Technologies LLC, 319 F.3d 243 (6th Cir. 2003).
Playboy Enterprises, Inc. v. Welles, 279 F.3d 796 (9th Cir. 2002).
ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d 1447 (7th Cir. 1996).
Recording Industry Association of America v. Diamond Multimedia Systems,
Inc., 180 F.3d 1072 (9th Cir. 1999).
Recording Industry Association of America, Inc. v. Verizon Internet Services,
351 F.3d 1229 (D.C. Cir. 2003); certiorari denied, 125 S.Ct. 309, 125 S.Ct
347 (2004). 
Religious Technology Center v. Netcom On-Line Communication Services, Inc.,
907 F. Supp. 1361 (N.D. Cal. 1995).
Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984).
Cases
95

Sporty’s Farm L.L.C. v. Sportsman’s Market, Inc., 202 F.3d 489 (2nd Cir.
2000).
State of Ohio v. Perry, 83 Ohio St. 3d 41, 697 N.E.2d 624 (1998).
State Street Bank & Trust v. Signature Financial Group, Inc., 149 F.3d 1368
(Fed. Cir. 1999).
Sunde (for Norway) v. Johansen, Oslo First Instance Trial Court, January 7,
2003, No. 02-507 M/94, English translation by Professor Jon Bing.
http://www.eff.org/IP/Video/Johansen_DeCSS_case/20030109 
_johansen _decision.html; on appeal, Borgarting Appellate Court, Decem-
ber 22, 2003, No. LB-2003-00731, English translation by Professor Jon
Bing. http://www.efn.no/DVD-dom-20031222-en.html.
Two Pesos, Inc. v. Taco Cabana, Inc., 505 U.S. 763 (1992).
UMG Recordings, Inc. v. MP3.com, Inc., 92 F. Supp.2d 349 (S.D. N.Y. 2000).
Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp.2d 294 (S.D. N.Y.
2000); affirmed by Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429 (2nd
Cir. 2001).
Vault Corporation v. Quaid Software Ltd., 847 F.2d 255 (5th Cir. 1988).
Volkswagenwerk Aktiengesellschaft v. Church, 411 F.2d 350 (9th Cir. 1969).
Sources and Further Reading
Byerly, Lisa M. 1998. “Look and Feel Protection of Web Site User Inter-
faces: Copyright or Trade Dress?” Santa Clara Computer and High Technol-
ogy Law Journal 14: 221.
Cole, Rodger R. 1995. “Substantial Similarity in the Ninth Circuit: A ‘Vir-
tually Identical’ ‘Look and Feel?’” Santa Clara Computer and High Technol-
ogy Law Journal 11: 417.
“Dancing with Google’s Spiders.” 2006. Economist Technology Quarterly
March 11, 14–15.
Electronic Frontier Foundation. 2004. A Better Way Forward: Voluntary
Collective Licensing of Music File Sharing. “Let the Music Play” White
Paper. February. http://www.eff.org/share/collective_lic_wp.php.
“EU Software Patent Law Faces Axe.” 2005. BBC.com. February 17.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4274811.stm.
“Face Value: The Quiet Iconoclast—With KaZaA, Niklas Zennstrom Un-
dermined the Music Industry.” 2004. The Economist, July 3, 54.
Hasan, Amar A. 2005. “Sweating in Europe: The European Union Data-
base Directive.” Computer Law Review and Technology Journal 9: 479.
96
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

“I Want My P2P: Record Labels Are Trying to Do Deals with File-Sharing
Networks.” 2004. The Economist, November 20, 65.
“Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers. Uniform Do-
main Name Dispute Resolution Policy.” August 26, 1999. http://
www.icann.org/udrp/udrp-policy-24oct99.htm.
Kellner, Lauren Fisher. 1994. “Trade Dress Protection for Computer User
Interface ‘Look and Feel.’” University of Chicago Law Review 61: 1011.
Likourezos, George. 1995. “Trademark Law in the Computer Age: Ap-
plying Trademark Principles to the ‘Look and Feel’ of Software.” Journal
of the Patent and Trademark Office Society 77: 451.
Macrovision Corporation. 2003. “Preserving an Effective DVD Copy Pro-
tection System.” March 3. http://www.macrovision.com/pdfs/
Preserving-an-effective-DVD-Copying-System_0303.pdf.
“Macrovision Wins Preliminary Injunction Against 321 Studios In Patent
and Copyright Infringement Lawsuit.” 2004. Macrovision Press Release.
May 20. http://www.macrovision.com/company/news/press/news
detail.jsp?id=Thu%20May%2020%2010:28:39%20PDT%202004.
McMillan, Robert. 2006. “DHS: Sony Rootkit May Lead to Regulation:
U.S. Officials Aim to Avoid Future Security Threats Caused by Copy Pro-
tection.” ComputerWorld, February 16. softwarehttp://www.computer
world.com/governmenttopics/government/policy/story/0,10801,1087
93,00.html.
Menn, Joseph. 2003. All the Rave: The Rise and Fall of Shawn Fanning’s Nap-
ster. New York: Crown Business.
Nguyen, Xuan-Thao N. 2000. “Should It Be a Free for All? The Challenge
of Extending Trade Dress Protection to the Look and Feel of Web Sites in
the Evolving Internet.” American University Law Review 49: 1233.
Reimer, Jeremy. No date. Personal Computer Market Share: 1975-2004.
http://www.pegasus3d.com/total_share.html.
Reimer, Jeremy. 2005. “Total Share: 30 Years of Personal Computer Mar-
ket Share Figures.” Ars Technica, December 14. http://arstechnica
.com/articles/culture/total-share.ars/1.
Rosenoer, Jonathan. 1994. “Apple Loses.” Cyberlaw. http://www.cyberlaw
.com/cylw994.html.
“St. Columba.” 1908. In The Catholic Encyclopedia. New York: Robert Ap-
pleton Co. http://www.newadvent.org/cathen/04136a.htm.
Samuelson, Pamela, Randall Davis, Mitchell D. Kapor, and J. H. Reich-
man. 1994. “A Manifesto Concerning the Legal Protection of Computer
Programs.” Columbia Law Review 94: 2308.
Schneider, Mark.  1998. “The European Union Database Directive.”
Berkeley Technology Law Journal 13: 551.
Sources and Further Reading
97

Schortgen, Steven. 1994. “‘Dressing’ up Software Interface Protection:
The Application of Two Pesos to ‘Look and Feel.’” Cornell Law Review 80:
158.
Smith, Seagrumn. 2003. “From Napster to KaZaA: The Battle Over Peer-
to-Peer Filesharing Goes International.” 2003. Duke Law & Technology Re-
view 2003: 8.
Sorgen, Rebecca S. 2001. “Trademark Confronts Free Speech on the In-
formation Superhighway: ‘Cybergripers’ Face a Constitutional Colli-
sion.” Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law Review 22: 115.
Stagnone, Lauren A. 1997. “Copyright Law—Computer Program Menu
Command Hierarchy: An Uncopyrightable Method of Operation? Lotus
Development Corporation v. Borland International, Inc., 49 F.3d 807 (1995),
aff’d, 116 S. Ct. 804 (1996).” Suffolk University Law Review 30: 939.
Terry, Nicolas P. 1994. “GUI Wars: The Windows Litigation and the Con-
tinuing Decline of ‘Look and Feel.’” Arkansas Law Review 47: 93.
Thompson, Bill. 2005. “Patents: Gone but not Forgotten.” July 15.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/4685731.stm.
“Unexpected Harmony: The Music and Computer Industries Make
Peace, but Differences Remain.” 2003. The Economist, January 23.
Wells, Matthew G. 2001. “Internet Business Method Patent Policy.” Vir-
ginia Law Review 87: 729.
Woodford, Chad. 2004. “Trusted Computing or Big Brother? Putting the
Rights Back in Digital Rights Management.” University of Colorado Law
Review 75: 253.
Younge, Gary. 2003. “US Music Industry Sues 261 for Online Song Copy-
ing.” The Guardian,
September 10. http://www.guardian.co.uk/
online/news/0,12597,1038979,00.html.
98
Problems, Controversies, and Solutions

3
Worldwide Perspective
Intellectual Property and
International Law
I
ntellectual property rights are granted by national govern-
ments, which can only grant rights having effect within the ter-
ritory under the authority of those governments. Yet intellectual
property rights can easily be harmed by actions beyond the lim-
its of the granting government’s jurisdiction. To protect against
such harm, and to further international trade in intellectual prop-
erty, a system of global protection of intellectual property rights is
needed. This system must contain elements of international law
as well as effective intellectual property laws in every country at
the national level.
Public international law is law that governs interactions be-
tween states and other international actors. A traditional starting
point for examining the sources of international law can be found
in Article 38(1) of the Statute of the International Court of Justice:
The Court, whose function is to decide in accordance
with international law such disputes as are submitted to
it, shall apply: 
a. international conventions, whether general or par-
ticular, establishing rules expressly recognized by the
contesting states; 
b. international custom, as evidence of a general prac-
tice accepted as law; 
99

c. the general principles of law recognized by civilized
nations; 
d. subject to the provisions of Article 59, judicial deci-
sions and the teachings of the most highly qualified pub-
licists of the various nations, as subsidiary means for the
determination of rules of law.
The Statute’s list is far from complete, of course, and con-
tains a quaint vestige of the twentieth-century colonialist outlook
of many of the original parties to the Statute (“civilized na-
tions”). But for purposes of determining the sources of the
regime of international intellectual property law, it is safe to di-
vide the sources listed in the Statute into two categories: con-
ventional international law, which is defined by “international
conventions, whether general or particular, establishing rules ex-
pressly recognized”; and customary international law, which is a
set of normative expectations about the behavior of nations un-
dertaken out of a sense of legal obligation, sources of which can
be found in the other items listed in the Statute. To some extent
this is an oversimplification of nonconventional international
law, but all or nearly all international intellectual property law is
conventional.
The treaties and other international agreements to which the
United States is a party are a part of U.S. law under Article VI,
clause 2 of the U.S. Constitution. These agreements become part
of U.S. law after they are ratified by the president upon receipt of
the advice and consent of the Senate. In practice this means that
treaties supersede all prior federal law, but may later be modified
or deprived of effect by Congress. State law, however, may not
conflict with treaty law (Buergenthal 2002; Trimble 2002).
The ratification of an international agreement confers rights
and obligations on the United States with respect to other coun-
tries under international law. In most cases, though, ratification
alone does not confer any rights or obligations on U.S. citizens
under U.S. law. Most treaties are non-self-executing and have no
effect within U.S. law until Congress enacts legislation to imple-
ment them.
Specific treaty regimes govern each category of international
intellectual property law; these are examined in detail below. This
section addresses the overall administrative regime set up by the
various intellectual properties. Two bodies administer almost all
of the important multilateral intellectual property treaties now in
100
Worldwide Perspective

force: the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO) and
the World Trade Organization (WTO).
The WIPO administers most of the treaties discussed in this
chapter, with one significant exception—the Treaty on Trade Re-
lated Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights (TRIPs), which is the
intellectual property agreement of the WTO. Many of the treaty
regimes governing patent, copyright, and trademark, especially
the Berne Union (copyright) and the Paris Union (patent and
trademark), predate WIPO by many decades; however, these
regimes have now been brought within the WIPO framework.
This has greatly simplified the administration of international in-
tellectual property law. The Paris Union was the oldest interna-
tional intellectual property treaty organization, dating from the
1883 Paris Convention; the Berne Convention created the Berne
Union three years later, in 1886. Seven years later, the two com-
bined to form the Bureaux Internationaux Réunis pour la Protec-
tion de la Propriété Intellectuelle (United International Bureau for
the Protection of Intellectual Property or BIRPI). In 1893 BIRPI ad-
ministered the Paris and Berne Conventions and two other
treaties. Over time, as new treaties were added, the size of the or-
ganization had to increase. BIRPI maintained its headquarters in
Berne until 1960, when it moved to Geneva to be closer to the
United Nations. Seven years later, in 1967, BIRPI became WIPO.
A new treaty, the Convention Establishing the World Intellectual
Property Organization, became WIPO’s organic document—its
“constitution.” Seven years after that, in 1974, WIPO became a
specialized agency of the United Nations (WIPO 2001).
Nearly every country in the world is a member of WIPO; as
of 2006, WIPO has 183 members. In addition, 247 organizations
have observer status: 172 international nongovernmental organi-
zations (NGOs), 10 national NGOs, and 65 intergovernmental
organizations (WIPO 2006a). While many of these observers rep-
resent the content industry, some balance is provided by the pres-
ence of observers like the Electronic Frontier Foundation and Free
Software Foundation Europe. 
Today WIPO administers, in whole or in part, two dozen in-
ternational intellectual property treaties. This task requires the
work of nearly a thousand employees, mostly in Geneva and New
York. In addition to administering these treaties, WIPO is also
governed by three treaties: the Convention Establishing the World
Intellectual Property Organization, the Agreement between the
United Nations and WIPO, and the Agreement between WIPO
Intellectual Property and International Law
101

and the WTO. The treaties administered by WIPO include the
following:
1. The Berne Convention for the Protection of Literary and
Artistic Works 
2. The Brussels Convention Relating to the Distribution of
Programme-Carrying Signals Transmitted by Satellite 
3. The Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of
the Deposit of Microorganisms for the Purposes of
Patent Procedure 
4. The Convention for the Protection of Producers of
Phonograms Against Unauthorized Duplication of
Their Phonograms 
5. The Hague Agreement Concerning the International
Deposit of Industrial Designs 
6. The International Convention for the Protection of New
Varieties of Plants 
7. The Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of
Appellations of Origin and their International
Registration 
8. The Locarno Agreement Establishing an International
Classification for Industrial Designs 
9. The Madrid Agreement Concerning the International
Registration of Marks 
10. The Madrid Agreement for the Repression of False and
Deceptive Indications of Source on Goods 
11. The Nairobi Treaty on the Protection of the Olympic
Symbol 
12. The Nice Agreement Concerning the International
Classification of Goods and Services for the Purposes of
the Registration of Marks 
13. The Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property 
14. The Patent Cooperation Treaty
15. The Patent Law Treaty 
16. Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning
the International Registration of Marks
17. The Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers,
Producers of Phonograms and Broadcasting
Organizations 
18. The Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the
International Patent Classification 
102
Worldwide Perspective

19. The Trademark Law Treaty 
20. The Treaty on the International Registration of
Audiovisual Works
21. The Vienna Agreement Establishing an International
Classification of the Figurative Elements of Marks 
22. The Washington Treaty on Intellectual Property in
Respect of Integrated Circuits 
23. The WIPO Copyright Treaty 
24. The WIPO Performances and Phonograms Treaty 
(WIPO 2005; WIPO 2001) 
The Patent Cooperation Treaty is also a major source of rev-
enue for WIPO. The fees inventors pay to use the Treaty’s WIPO-
administered international patent filing system enable WIPO to
avoid dependence on contributions from member states. 
Decisions within WIPO are made by voting; each member
has one vote. This voting structure has been criticized as unreal-
istic and unjust, however, because the countries involved do not
have equal populations or equal levels of participation in the
global intellectual property marketplace. Large countries with
high levels of market participation—the United States, China,
India, Japan—are accorded no more voting weight than very
small countries with low levels of market participation—such as
Antigua and Barbuda, Comoros, and Monaco. On the whole,
though, this imbalance seems more beneficial to consumer inter-
ests than otherwise. The developing countries that make up a ma-
jority of the membership tend to be net importers of intellectual
property, which causes their interests to be those of consumers
rather than producers. In the debate over licensing of pharma-
ceutical patents during the 1980s, this polarization became quite
pronounced and was one of the factors leading the United States,
in particular, to seek an additional international intellectual prop-
erty treaty outside the WIPO regime.
The treaty that was ultimately adopted was the Agreement
on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights, Annex
1C to the Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Or-
ganization. With such an unwieldy name, the treaty is almost al-
ways referred to by its acronym, TRIPs. Because TRIPs is part of
the WTO Agreement, all countries that become parties to the
WTO also become parties to TRIPs. One hundred forty-nine
countries are now WTO members, the most recent to join being
Saudi Arabia on 11 December 2005.
Intellectual Property and International Law
103

While previous treaties dealt with one or a few areas of in-
tellectual property, TRIPs is comprehensive. It addresses not only
copyright, trademark, and patent, but also geographical indica-
tions, industrial designs, integrated circuit layouts, and trade se-
crets. Like many subject-specific intellectual property treaties,
TRIPs requires national treatment and most favored nation treat-
ment (TRIPs, arts. 3 and 4). “National treatment” means that
states that are parties to TRIPs must accord to all other parties the
same level of protection that they accord to their own nationals.
The term “most favored nation treatment” is confusing, and it is
often misunderstood as meaning that a country is receiving pref-
erential treatment. The actual meaning is the reverse: All WTO
members are required to give to every other WTO member the
same level of intellectual property protection that they give to the
nation they most favor, so that no WTO member is favored or dis-
favored over any other (TRIPs makes a partial exception to avoid
hardship to developing countries and allows those countries to
phase in their obligations more slowly (TRIPs, arts. 65–67).) TRIPs
also brings disputes arising under it within the scope of the
WTO’s dispute resolution mechanism. Specific provisions of
TRIPs are examined in the relevant sections below.
The World Wide Web
The terms “World Wide Web” and “Internet” are often confused.
The Internet is the older and vaster of the two; it consists of the
physical infrastructure and communications protocols that con-
nect hundreds of millions of host systems and countless other
computers and devices. The World Wide Web is a network of in-
formation contained on these host systems and accessible over
the Internet; it consists of billions of hypertext pages, all of which
can be accessed using a Web browser. While the Web is the best-
known such network, it is not the only one. Other familiar uses of
the Internet are e-mail and peer-to-peer networks.
While the Internet arose from a variety of sources and cannot
be traced to a single inventor or event, the U.S. government was
very heavily involved in its creation, a fact that continues to affect
the law and politics of Internet administration. Histories of the In-
ternet usually trace its inception to ARPANET, a U.S. Department
of Defense project that, in 1969, linked four computers at loca-
tions in California and Utah (Kristula 2001). By 1972 e-mail was
104
Worldwide Perspective

being sent over ARPANET, which by then connected more than
two dozen computers. In 1983 ARPANET, now connecting hun-
dreds of computers, switched to the TCP/IP networking proto-
cols still in use today. In 1990 ARPANET ceased to exist, but the
computers remained connected. New networks had grown up
using those connections, including NSFNet, another government-
sponsored project. These various networks were connected to
each other, making it possible, in theory, for a computer con-
nected to any one network to communicate with computers con-
nected to one of the other networks. In the 1980s the Internet
moved from universities and government research facilities to
private homes, with the appearance of for-profit, proprietary net-
works like America Online, CompuServe, and Prodigy.
The World Wide Web, however, can be traced to a specific
event. In the late 1980s Tim Berners-Lee and Robert Cailliau,
working at the European Organization for Nuclear Research
(CERN), created a hypertext to find documents on CERN’s com-
puters. The system differed from previous hypertext systems in
using unidirectional, rather than bidirectional, links; this made it
possible for a person creating a hypertext document to link to an-
other document without having to alter that second document to
include a reciprocal link. This made it possible to create a con-
stantly expanding network of linked pages. Berners-Lee had cre-
ated his first Web page and the first Web browser by 1991 (CERN
no date). 
The ease of creating additional pages was one factor in the
success of the Web, but another was just as important: CERN
chose to make the underlying technology freely available to all.
Had CERN chosen to assert an intellectual property right in Bern-
ers-Lee’s and Cailliau’s inventions, the Web today would proba-
bly be as forgotten as many of the proprietary networks of the
1980s. This is a case in which intellectual property rights were
more of a threat to innovation than an encouragement.
At this point using the Web still required a certain degree of
technical sophistication. The third step in the development of the
Web, and the one that ultimately resulted in connecting at least
half the world in an ongoing, multisided exchange of informa-
tion, was the development of easy-to-use Web browsers. This
breakthrough came in 1993 with the release of the Mosaic
browser by the National Center for Supercomputing Applications
at the University of Illinois (CERN no date). This was followed by
Netscape Navigator in 1994 and Microsoft Internet Explorer in
The World Wide Web
105

1995. The browser wars that followed are a saga in their own
right; by the time they had run their course, the Web had grown
into more or less its present form.
Governing the Internet and the Web has been difficult be-
cause they are not restrained by geographic boundaries. The in-
volvement of the U.S. government and its citizens in setting up so
much of the early Internet has led to a regime governing Web
“real estate”—domain names—that many critics charge is un-
fairly skewed to reflect U.S. concerns. In the 1990s, as the Web ex-
panded and the demand for domain names grew, the previously
relatively informal allocation of domain names had to be made
more systematic. 
By the mid-1990s, the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority
(IANA) was doing the actual work of assigning domain names
and numbers. The IANA was essentially a one-man band, the one
man being the late Dr. Jon Postel of the University of Southern
California. In 1995 the function of registering domains within the
.com, .net, and .org top-level domains was assigned to a private
U.S. company, Network Solutions, Inc. (Gilwit 2003, 271).
Dr. Postel died in October 1998. A month later, the U.S. De-
partment of Commerce, by agreement with representatives of
IANA, created the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers (ICANN), a nonprofit organization incorporated in
California. ICANN has been embattled since its inception, but it
still administers the top-level domain name system; it authorizes
new top-level domains and authorizes private registrars to as-
sign domain names within some of those top-level domains
(ICANN 2005; ICANN 2006). It works with national govern-
ments to delegate administration of country-code top-level
domains (“.uk,” “.jp,” “.de,” and so forth). And it resolves
domain-name disputes, including cybersquatting and other
trademark-related disputes. The controversy over ICANN, espe-
cially over its power over domain names and its connection to
the U.S. government, is ongoing.
The International Copyright Regime
By the nineteenth century it had become apparent that copyright
protection was an international issue. A work copyrighted in one
country might be freely and legally copied in another. And al-
though some countries might allow foreign authors to register
106
Worldwide Perspective

copyrights, no system existed for the global protection of foreign
copyrights. Certain countries developed a reputation as havens
for copyright pirates who engaged in widespread copying of
works from other countries. Perhaps the most notorious of these
countries was the United States. In opposing the idea of a global
copyright convention, the United States argued that the ability to
make copies without paying royalties aided developing countries
(among which the United States, at the time, could be numbered)
to achieve greater dissemination of knowledge and learning than
would otherwise be possible (Tiefenbrun 1999, 5–6). Charles
Dickens, one of the British authors whose work was heavily pi-
rated in the United States, took a more cynical view in a conver-
sation with fellow author (and fellow piracy victim) Anthony
Trollope:
[I]n this matter the American decision had been, accord-
ing to [Dickens’] thinking, dishonest, therefore no other
than dishonest decision was to be expected from Amer-
icans. Against that idea I [Trollope] protested, and now
protest. American dishonesty is rampant; but it is ram-
pant only among a few. It is the great misfortune of the
community that those few have been able to dominate
so large a portion of the population among which all
men can vote, but so few can understand for what they
are voting. (Trollope 1883, chapter 17) 
In the case of international copyright, the “few” were Amer-
ican publishers, who made profits from the piracy of foreign
works. American authors, however, suffered from piracy in Eng-
land as well. Uncle Tom’s Cabin sold over half a million copies in
its first year of publication in England, for which Harriet Beecher
Stowe received no compensation at all (Samuels 2000). Trollope
himself traveled to the United States on behalf of the British gov-
ernment in an unsuccessful attempt to negotiate a bilateral copy-
right treaty. Despite the support of prominent American authors
such as Louisa May Alcott, Mark Twain, Walt Whitman, and
Oliver Wendell Holmes, the United States refused to grant pro-
tection to foreign works until 1891. 
Five years earlier, in 1886, a group of European countries, re-
sponding to pressure from European copyright holders led by
Victor Hugo, had adopted the Berne Convention protecting copy-
rights internationally. The Convention instantly became, and
The International Copyright Regime
107

remains to this day, the primary instrument for such protection.
The United States, however, was not to join the Convention for
more than a hundred years.
In 1891, Congress enacted a statute giving limited copyright
protection to some foreign authors. U.S. publishers were ap-
peased with the Manufacturing Clause, an astonishing piece of
protectionist legislation requiring all books sold in the United
States to be printed in the United States. While this did not excuse
U.S. publishers from paying royalties on protected foreign works,
it insulated them from foreign competition in a way that must
have been the envy of all other U.S. industries, even agriculture
and defense. Although modified somewhat over the years, espe-
cially by the Universal Copyright Convention in 1955, this barrier
to trade remained in place until 1986 (House Report No. 94-1476,
sec. 601; Samuels 2000).
The early twentieth century saw an increase in copyright
awareness and lawmaking around the world. The United States
adopted a sweeping reform of copyright law in 1909; many more
countries joined the Berne Convention; and many emerging in-
dustrial economies, notably in East Asia, adopted copyright
codes based on European models. Japan joined the Berne Con-
vention in 1899, but China and the two Koreas were to hold out
even longer than the United States.
Copyright protection in the United States grew steadily more
complex over the first nine decades of the twentieth century. Dif-
fering protection for works from different countries, revisions
and renewals of copyright terms, parallel systems of state and
federal copyright law, the need for U.S. authors to simultaneously
publish works in one Berne Convention country (usually
Canada) in order to be protected in all Berne Convention coun-
tries, and even the Manufacturing Clause combined to create a
maze difficult for anyone but a professional copyright lawyer to
navigate. Some simplification was achieved with two bilateral
treaties, the Buenos Aires Convention of 1910 (ratified by the
United States in 1911) and the Universal Copyright Convention,
in force for the United States in 1955 and substantially revised in
1971. The Buenos Aires Convention provided that the United
States and seventeen Latin American countries would honor each
others’ copyrights. Once a work was granted copyright protec-
tion in any member nation, that same protection would be ex-
tended by all without further formalities, other than the inclusion
of the declaration “all rights reserved” or words to that effect.
108
Worldwide Perspective

(The Buenos Aires Convention is now a dead letter, having been
superseded by later treaties, but the habit of including the words
persists.)
The twentieth century brought new technologies and new
challenges for copyright law. With the commercial development
of movies and recorded music (both invented during the previ-
ous century), the role of the United States shifted from copyright
pirate to major exporter of copyrighted works. With the 1909
Copyright Act making it impossible for the United States to join
the Berne Convention, and Congress unwilling or unable to cor-
rect the situation, some alternative international structure was
needed. This need was met by the Universal Copyright Conven-
tion, which allowed the United States to keep its shorter copy-
right term and its registration formalities while still enjoying
copyright protection for its works in the territories of other mem-
ber states. In turn, the United States was obligated to honor
copyrights in works from member states, provided that the
works included the copyright symbol “©,” the year of first pub-
lication, and the name of the person claiming copyright (Uni-
versal Copyright Convention, art. III(1)). Nearly a hundred
countries are now parties to the Universal Copyright Conven-
tion, yet the convention has become nearly as irrelevant as the
Buenos Aires Convention: all but two of the parties to the Uni-
versal Copyright Convention (Cambodia and Laos) are also par-
ties to the near-universal Berne Convention.
The complete revision of U.S. copyright law in the Copyright
Act of 1976 replaced the fixed, renewable copyright term (dating
back to the Statute of Anne) with a unitary term measured by the
life of the author plus fifty years for individually or jointly au-
thored works and by a set seventy-five-year term for most other
works. This brought the duration of U.S. copyrights into compli-
ance with Berne Convention norms. The 1976 Act did not, how-
ever, succeed in its goal of bringing the United States into
compliance with the Berne Convention and thus making the
United States eligible for membership. The 1976 Act still required
registration formalities and the affixing of a copyright notice to
the work—two things the Berne Convention rejected. Eliminating
these provisions from U.S. copyright law required an additional
twelve years. The Berne Convention Implementation Act of 1988
finally made it possible for the United States to join the Berne
Convention, and the Convention came into force for the United
States in 1989. Other major holdouts soon followed. China, where
The International Copyright Regime
109

the printing revolution had begun, became a party in 1992, Rus-
sia in 1995, and the two Koreas in 1996 (South) and 2003 (North).
Now, less than a thousand years after the invention of movable
type, the world has achieved a relatively uniform and nearly uni-
versal system of copyright law.
Although copyrights are granted and enforced under na-
tional law, the nearly seamless coverage of the Berne/WIPO
regime makes global copyright protection a relatively simple
matter, at least by comparison with other forms of intellectual
property protection. The Berne Convention, like TRIPs and the
Universal Copyright Convention, requires national treatment.
The parties must protect authors and works from other countries
as they would their own:
1) The protection of this Convention shall apply to:
(a) authors who are nationals of one of the countries of
the Union, for their works, whether published or not;
(b) authors who are not nationals of one of the coun-
tries of the Union, for their works first published in one
of those countries, or simultaneously in a country out-
side the Union and in a country of the Union. 
(2) Authors who are not nationals of one of the coun-
tries of the Union but who have their habitual residence
in one of them shall, for the purposes of this Convention,
be assimilated to nationals of that country. (Berne Con-
vention art. 3) 
The definition of copyrightable subject matter is less succinct
than and possibly not coextensive with the U.S. Copyright Act’s
“original works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of
expression” (17 U.S.C. § 102). The Berne Convention requires
members to protect “every production in the literary and artistic
domain whatever shall be the mode or form of its expression”
(Berne Convention art. 2(1)). Enumerated types of subject matter
include
books, pamphlets and other writings; lectures, ad-
dresses, sermons and other works of the same nature;
dramatic or dramatico-musical works; choreographic
works and entertainments in dumb show; musical com-
positions with or without words; cinematographic
works to which are assimilated works expressed by a
110
Worldwide Perspective

process analogous to cinematography; works of draw-
ing, painting, architecture, sculpture, engraving and
lithography; photographic works to which are assimi-
lated works expressed by a process analogous to pho-
tography; works of applied art; illustrations, maps,
plans, sketches and three-dimensional works relative to
geography, topography, architecture or science. (Berne
Convention art. 2(1)) 
Similarly, the Berne Convention’s description of the exclu-
sive rights of copyright holders differs somewhat from that in
U.S. law, particularly in the area of the moral rights to integrity
and attribution (Berne Convention art. 6bis; see also 17 U.S.C. §
106A). The Convention also allows for what has become known
in the United States as fair use (Berne Convention arts. 9(2), 10,
10bis).
All parties to the Berne Convention must provide a mini-
mum term of copyright protection of the lifetime of the author
plus fifty years or, for anonymously or pseudonymously au-
thored works, a minimum of fifty years; for cinematographic
works, fifty years from the date the work is released to the pub-
lic; and for photographic works or works of applied art, twenty-
five years (Berne Convention art. 7; see also art. 5(3)). 
Other important recent treaties under the WIPO umbrella in-
clude the WIPO Copyright Treaty (WCT) and the WIPO Perfor-
mance and Phonograms Treaty (WPPT); the United States became
a party to both in 2002. The WCT provides heightened protections
for computer programs, original compilations of data, and sound
recordings, but its most significant effect—and the most signifi-
cant effect of the WPPT—was to require provisions for anticir-
cumvention and digital rights management protection along the
lines of those that were adopted in the United States in 1998 in the
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (17 U.S.C. §§ 1201 through
1204; see also EU Directive 2001/29/EC). These are required
under articles 11 and 12 of the WCT and articles 18 and 19 of the
WPPT. Article 11 of the WCT requires the parties to “provide ad-
equate legal protection and effective legal remedies against the
circumvention of effective technological measures that are used”
for copy protection. Article 18 of the WPPT is nearly identical. Ar-
ticle 12 of the WCT and Article 19 of the WPPT also require the
parties to “provide adequate and effective legal remedies against
any person knowingly” removing or altering “any electronic
The International Copyright Regime
111

rights management information,” or distributing, importing for
distribution, broadcasting, or communicating to the public any
works from which electronic rights management information has
been removed, if in either case the person does not have the au-
thority to do so and knows or has reason to know that doing so
“will induce, enable, facilitate or conceal an infringement of any
right covered by this Treaty or the Berne Convention” (Article 19
of the WPPT omits the words “or the Berne Convention”).
The Berne Convention and the two WIPO treaties demon-
strate some of the most dramatic effects that international law has
had on U.S. intellectual property law—or on almost any area of
U.S. law. The Berne Convention has brought about a lengthened
duration of copyright, resulting in an as yet uncalculated transfer
of property rights—probably measurable in billions of dollars—
from the public domain to private copyright holders. The first,
unsuccessful U.S. reaction—the Copyright Act of 1909—doubled
the length of the copyright term; the second, successful reaction
increased it yet further. U.S. law is now in compliance with—in
fact, exceeds—the Berne Convention’s duration requirement, al-
though achieving this result took a century. The WIPO treaties, in
contrast, took only a few years to complete—and led to one of the
most deeply resented copyright statutes ever enacted in the
United States. In one area, though, international law has not yet
brought about a complete change. The WPPT was also intended
in part to protect the moral rights of performers in live perform-
ances and phonograms (WPPT art. 5); U.S. law remains out of
step with international norms on this issue.
The other major recent copyright treaty to which the United
States is a party is TRIPs, which, as noted, requires national treat-
ment and most favored nation treatment (TRIPs arts. 3–4).
Through TRIPs, all members of the WTO agree to comply with
the 1971 revision of the Berne Convention; TRIPs incorporates by
references the major substantive provisions of the Berne Conven-
tion, with the exception of those dealing with moral rights (TRIPs
arts. 1(3), 9; see also arts. 2(2), 3(1)). TRIPs also addresses, incon-
clusively, such still-debated issues as the protection of databases:
Compilations of data or other material, whether in ma-
chine readable or other form, which by reason of the
selection or arrangement of their contents constitute in-
tellectual creations shall be protected as such. Such pro-
tection, which shall not extend to the data or material
112
Worldwide Perspective

itself, shall be without prejudice to any copyright sub-
sisting in the data or material itself. (TRIPs art. 10(2)) 
TRIPs also requires WTO members to grant authors of com-
puter programs and, in certain circumstances, of motion pictures
the right to prohibit the commercial rental of those works. The re-
quirement only applies to movie rentals in countries where such
rentals have led to widespread piracy, and it only applies to soft-
ware rentals where the software itself is not the object of the rental;
in other words, a rental of some piece of equipment, such as a car,
that contains software would not be covered (TRIPs art. 11). 
Article 14 of TRIPs deals with live performances, sound
recordings, and broadcasting organizations. Performers “shall
have the possibility of preventing the fixation” (that is, recording)
or broadcast of their live audio performances. (The use of the
word “possibility” rather than “right” is interesting.) Producers
of phonograms (sound recordings) “shall enjoy the right to au-
thorize or prohibit the direct or indirect reproduction of their
phonograms.” Performers and producers are to be given the ex-
clusive reproduction and rental rights to their recordings for a
minimum term of fifty years, although Article 14(4) provides a
grandfather clause: states that previously had “in force a system
of equitable remuneration of right holders in respect of the rental
of phonograms” may maintain their existing systems so long as
“the commercial rental of phonograms is not giving rise to the
material impairment of the exclusive rights of reproduction of
right holders”—that is, excessive unauthorized copying. Articles
14(3) and 14(5) set forth the right of broadcasting organizations to
prevent unauthorized recording, reproduction, or rebroadcast of
their broadcasts for a minimum term of twenty years. Here, as be-
fore the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, there is an in-
consistency between the duration of protection under U.S. and
European Union law, although this time it is the European Union
that offers the shorter term. Content-industry interests in the Eu-
ropean Union are now lobbying to extend the European Union’s
term, which complies with TRIPs’ fifty-year minimum, to match
the ninety-five-year term provided by U.S. law (Withers 2006).
In the developing world and among information rights
activists in the United States, it was Article 13 of TRIPs that trig-
gered the most discontent. A casual reading of Article 13 is un-
likely to alarm anyone; the meaning only becomes apparent with
context. Article 13 provides that
The International Copyright Regime
113

Members shall confine limitations or exceptions to ex-
clusive rights to certain special cases which do not con-
flict with a normal exploitation of the work and do not
unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the
right holder. 
Among developing countries, this was seen, in light of dis-
cussion leading up to the adoption of the article, as aimed at na-
tions with poor records of copyright enforcement. In the United
States some saw it as a sneak attack on fair use, using the WTO
process to achieve what the content industry had been unable, de-
spite its best efforts, to achieve in Congress. 
The United States is also party to several other copyright-re-
lated treaties, including the Geneva Phonograms Convention, an
earlier treaty protecting sound recordings, and the Brussels Satel-
lite Convention, which prohibits the hijacking of satellite trans-
mission capability.
The International Trademark Regime
While obtaining international copyright protection is automatic,
or nearly so, obtaining international trademark protection is
somewhat more difficult. The Paris Convention for the Protection
of Industrial Property requires its 169 members to accord nation-
als of other member states the same rights and protection in
trademark law that they would accord to their own nationals, and
to provide certain minimum levels of trademark protection. All
this does, though, is require countries to allow foreigners to ob-
tain protection for marks in the same way and to the same extent
as local residents. To the extent that trademark registration is re-
quired for protection, the Paris Convention does nothing more to
simplify the international application process. 
The Paris Union was followed a few years later by the 1891
Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
Marks. The United States never became a party to the Madrid
Agreement, but joined the Agreement’s Madrid Union in 2003
when it became a party to the Madrid Protocol. The Madrid
Agreement (also known as the Madrid Arrangement) and its 1989
Madrid Protocol provide some simplification by making it possi-
ble for a mark holder to obtain protection in multiple countries
without having to register or otherwise apply for protection in
114
Worldwide Perspective

each individual country. The Protocol provides a single applica-
tion process for the seventy-eight Madrid Union members. (Sixty-
seven of these are parties to the Protocol; eleven are parties to the
Agreement but not to the Protocol. The United States is a party to
the Protocol but not to the Agreement.) While this is more con-
venient than filing seventy-eight separate applications, it leaves
the majority of the world’s countries uncovered. International
trademark law is far less advanced in this respect than copyright
or even patent.
Other important international trademark treaties to which
the United States is a party include the Trademark Law Treaty
(TLT) and the TRIPs. The TLT and the U.S. implementing legis-
lation, the Trademark Law Treaty Act of 1998, help to simplify
and reduce the cost of the trademark registration process. As of
March 2006 it had thirty-three parties. The TLT applies to trade-
marks and service marks, making no distinction between the
two, but it does not apply to “collective marks, certification
marks and guarantee marks” (TLT art. 2(2)). All parties to the
TLT must adopt uniform filing and renewal processes (TLT arts.
3, 13), with a renewable ten-year term of protection (TLT art.
13(7)). Through the TLT and the Trademark Law Treaty Act, the
United States ostensibly abandoned its previously existing re-
quirement that anyone seeking to register or renew a mark sub-
mit a declaration or proof that the mark was actually being used
(TLT art. 13(6)), although in fact the United States retained the ac-
tual use requirement but made it independent of the registration
and renewal process (McCarthy 2004, 614).
TRIPs brings trademark law within the WTO’s enforcement
and dispute-resolution framework and sets uniform standards
for the eligible subject matter and other requirements for pro-
tection: 
Any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of dis-
tinguishing the goods or services of one undertaking
from those of other undertakings, shall be capable of
constituting a trademark. Such signs, in particular
words including personal names, letters, numerals, fig-
urative elements and combinations of colours as well
as any combination of such signs, shall be eligible for
registration as trademarks. Where signs are not inher-
ently capable of distinguishing the relevant goods or
services, Members may make registrability depend on
The International Trademark Regime
115

distinctiveness acquired through use. Members may
require, as a condition of registration, that signs be vi-
sually perceptible. (TRIPs art. 15(1))
In contrast to the TLT, TRIPs permits WTO members to
“make registrability depend on use” (TRIPs art. 15(3)). TRIPs also
allows for prospective registration, though—registration in ad-
vance of an intended use: “[A]ctual use of a trademark shall not
be a condition for filing an application for registration” (TRIPs
art. 15(3)). While WTO members must grant the mark owner the
right to prevent others from using the mark for similar goods and
services (TRIPs art. 16), they may make exceptions for fair use
(TRIPs art. 17). The term of trademark registration must be at
least seven years (the United States, with its ten-year term, ex-
ceeds this), and must be renewable indefinitely (TRIPs art. 18; see
also 15 U.S.C. §§ 1058–1059). Trademark registrations may be
made dependent on use, as they are in the United States, but a
trademark registration may be lost for nonuse “only after an un-
interrupted period of at least three years of non-use,” and even
then it may not be lost if “valid reasons based on the existence of
obstacles to such use are shown by the trademark owner” (TRIPs
art. 19). Trademarks may be transferred and may not be made
subject to compulsory licensing (TRIPs art. 21).
The International Patent Regime
Toward the end of the nineteenth century, however, the increas-
ing industrialization of many of the world’s leading economies
led to greater acceptance of patent laws, even among those who
had previously opposed them as barriers to free trade. In 1883
eleven European and Latin American countries (including
Switzerland, which did not yet have a patent law) signed the
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, setting
up the Paris Union to govern international patent (and trade-
mark) relations. The United States joined the Paris Union in 1887,
around the time Switzerland finally adopted a domestic patent
law. The Swiss statute, reflecting Swiss concerns about foreign
copying of Swiss watches, covered mechanical inventions. At the
time Switzerland’s chemical industry was less advanced than
Germany’s; chemical process inventions were not covered by
Swiss statute until 1907, giving the Swiss industry twenty years
116
Worldwide Perspective

of protection from suits within Switzerland by German compa-
nies (Kaufer 1989, 9–10). Today 169 countries are parties to the
Paris Convention and members of the Paris Union, the most re-
cent being the island nation of Comoros, for which the Conven-
tion entered into force on 3 April 2005. 
While the Paris Union remains an important tool in ensuring
a degree of uniformity in international patent law, other agree-
ments have been formed to address other problems. Particularly
important are the patent provisions of TRIPs and the Patent Co-
operation Treaty. TRIPs set a patent term “for any inventions,
whether products or processes, in all fields of technology,” with a
few exceptions, for “a period of twenty years counted from the
filing date” (TRIPs arts. 27, 33). Previously U.S. utility patents had
been granted for a term of seventeen years from the date the
patent was granted; the U.S. term was subsequently changed to
conform to TRIPs (35 U.S.C. § 154(a)(2)). Another provision of
TRIPs requiring member states to provide patent protection “for
any inventions, whether products or processes” has been inter-
preted as requiring the granting of business methods patents. The
Patent Cooperation Treaty provides a simplified multicountry ap-
plication process.
A patent is a territorial grant. As with trademark, and in con-
trast to copyright, there is no automatic enforcement of patents
among the member states of the various patent treaties. Instead,
the patent holder must apply for a patent in each country in
which he or she wishes to have patent protection. Unlike the
Berne Convention, which provides copyright protection in multi-
ple states for works copyrighted in any member state, the Paris
Convention provides no easy road to global protection. An in-
ventor who patents a device in the United States may exclude
others from making that device in the United States and may pre-
vent that device from being imported into the United States, but
under the Paris Convention’s regime may do nothing to prevent
a person in, say, France from making that device in France and
selling it in France. To be protected in France, the U.S. inventor
would have to apply for and obtain a patent in France. To be pro-
tected around the world, the inventor would have to apply for
and obtain patents in nearly 200 countries—a daunting task. The
Patent Cooperation Treaty simplifies the task: An inventor who
files an application in any state that is a party to the Patent Co-
operation Treaty can simultaneously file patent applications in
any or all of the other states. Including the United States, 128
The International Patent Regime
117

states are now parties to the Patent Cooperation Treaty, the most
recent being Libya and Saint Kitts-Nevis, for which the treaty
came into force on 15 September 2005 and 27 October 2005, re-
spectively. 
The Patent Cooperation Treaty is not as seamless as the Berne
Convention’s effectively universal copyright process. While filing
a single patent application will suffice for any or all member
states, the inventor must still pay application fees—including
translation fees, where necessary—for each state. And there is no
guarantee that all of the states will grant the patent; a patent
granted in one state may be denied in others. It is, however, more
comprehensive in its coverage than the Madrid Union, as it has
128 member states to the Madrid Union’s seventy-eight.
One of the major discrepancies remaining between U.S.
patent law and the patent law of other countries is the “first-to-in-
vent” rule applied in the United States, which, as discussed in
Chapter 1, in certain cases can allow an inventor to substitute the
conception date for the filing date. The Patent Law Treaty at-
tempts to address this discrepancy, with so much circumlocution
as to be nearly incomprehensible, by eliminating the first-to-in-
vent rule (see Patent Law Treaty, arts. 5,6; see also One Global
Patent System 2003). Inventors, and perhaps the people of the
United States generally, are attached to the first-to-invent rule be-
cause it seems more fair, if less efficient. The United States signed
the Patent Law Treaty in 2000 but has not ratified it. The treaty en-
tered into force in 2005 for the handful of countries that have rat-
ified it, but without the participation of the United States, it is
meaningless (see also Takenaka 2003, 261).
The Patent Law Treaty’s proponents see it as the first step to
a single, harmonized system of international patent law. Such
harmonization may still be a long way off; in the interim, the
Patent Cooperation Treaty provides a unified filing system, and
TRIPs provides a workable and enforceable means of addressing
several remaining concerns. TRIPs incorporates by reference the
basic protections of the Paris Convention (TRIPs art. 2) and pro-
vides for a uniform patent term of twenty years from the date of
filing (TRIPs art. 33). As discussed earlier, it also requires the
granting of business method patents (TRIPs art. 27; Conley 2003,
8). Under TRIPs, WTO members must grant patent holders the
exclusive right to prevent others from “making, using, offering
for sale, selling, or importing” a patented product, or products
made by a patented process (TRIPs art. 28). As with other intel-
118
Worldwide Perspective

lectual property rights, patents are made fully assignable, trans-
ferable, and licensable—which they already were in the United
States (TRIPs art. 28(2)). 
Protection of Other Forms of
Intellectual Property under U.S. and
International Law
Copyrights, trademarks, and patents are the best-known cate-
gories of intellectual property, and they have the most fully
evolved legal regimes to govern them. But there are other forms.
Some, like semiconductor manufacturing mask works and vessel
hull designs, are given the formal trappings of copyright, trade-
mark, and patent law: They have a registration process, a fixed
term of protection, and exclusive rights. The protection of others,
like trade secrets and know-how, is somewhat more incomplete.
A semiconductor manufacturing mask work is necessary to
the manufacture of computer chips. The design of the mask is a
long and expensive process requiring the work of skilled and
specialized engineers. Once the mask is designed, however, it
can be copied somewhat more cheaply. Using the copied mask is
not like playing a pirated DVD or a downloaded MP3—it re-
quires a chip manufacturing factory, a supply of blank wafers,
and, again, a skilled workforce. Even though the number of po-
tential pirates is small, the U.S. Congress has created a form of in-
tellectual property protection for the mask work: The Semicon-
ductor Chip Protection Act of 1984 provides for the registration
of mask work designs with the U.S. Copyright Office (17 U.S.C.
§ 908; 37 C.F.R. § 211.4). Notice of registration must be affixed to
the finished chips or their receptacles (17 U.S.C. § 909; 37 C.F.R.
§ 211.6). The registrant will enjoy, for a ten-year term, the usual
exclusive rights: the right to reproduce the mask work; the right
to import or distribute a chip embodying it; and the sole right to
authorize, induce, or knowingly cause any other person to re-
produce the work or import or distribute the chips (17 U.S.C. §§
904–905). It is also subject to a right of first sale (17 U.S.C. §
906(b)) and a reverse-engineering exception (17 U.S.C. § 906(a));
innocent infringers are also protected (17 U.S.C. § 907). Mask
work registrations are also protected by articles 35–38 of TRIPs,
Protection of Other Forms of Intellectual Property
119

which require WTO members to adopt protections similar to
those in the U.S. statute, and potentially by the 1989 Treaty on In-
tellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits (not yet in
force).
This type of fully realized regime for a narrow category of in-
tellectual property can also be found in the Vessel Hull Design
Protection Act (17 U.S.C. §§ 1301–1332), which allows registration
and protection of hull designs for vessels of 200 feet or less in
length. A similar form of protection, not so narrowly defined, can
be found in TRIPs, which protects industrial designs (TRIPs arts.
25–26; see also Hague Agreement Concerning the International
Deposit of Industrial Designs; Locarno Agreement Establishing
an International Classification for Industrial Designs). TRIPs also
protects geographical indications (TRIPs arts. 22–24), as do the
Madrid Agreement for the Repression of False or Deceptive Indi-
cations of Source on Goods and the Lisbon Agreement for
the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their International
Registration. 
In addition to these formally registered and protected types
of intellectual property, there are trade secrets and the wide
variety of activities covered under state contract and unfair com-
petition laws. The items in the latter category are too diverse to
permit ready categorization here. Trade secrets are easier to cate-
gorize, but difficult indeed to protect, as their value depends on
their not becoming widely known. For that reason they cannot be
registered; even a “secret” registration would provide less secu-
rity for the owner of the secret than nonregistration.
Trade secret law, in fact, is opposed to one of the policy in-
terests that patent law seeks to further. Patent offers inventors a
monopoly of limited duration as a reward for sharing their in-
ventions and discoveries with the public (rather than keeping it
as a trade secret). If the owners of the world’s most celebrated
trade secret—the secret formula for Coca-Cola—had patented the
formula, it would have fallen into the public domain nearly a cen-
tury ago. It is questionable how much of its success Coca-Cola
owes to its formula rather than to aggressive marketing and
trademark management, but the company evidently prefers to
keep the secret a secret.
This—the vigilance of the secret’s owner—is the main way in
which trade secrets are protected. State and federal law can pro-
vide remedies to one whose trade secret is wrongfully taken, but
can do nothing to recapture the secret once it has been widely dis-
120
Worldwide Perspective

closed (Religious Technology Center, 908 F. Supp. 1362). Nor are
trade secrets, in contrast to patents, protected against independ-
ent discovery. Someone who innocently happens upon the secret
by independent research is free to use or disclose it.
Trade secrets are protected at the state level by the Uniform
Trade Secrets Act (UTSA), which has been adopted in various
modified forms in forty-five states, the District of Columbia, and
the U.S. Virgin Islands, and is currently under consideration in
Massachusetts and New York. Under the UTSA, a trade secret is
information that
(i) derives independent economic value, actual or poten-
tial, from not being generally known to, and not being
readily ascertainable by proper means by, other persons
who can obtain economic value from its disclosure or
use, and 
(ii) is the subject of efforts that are reasonable under the
circumstances to maintain its secrecy. (UTSA § 1(4))  
The UTSA prohibits misappropriation of trade secrets. “Mis-
appropriation” means
(i) acquisition of a trade secret of another by a person
who knows or has reason to know that the trade secret
was acquired by improper means; or 
(ii) disclosure or use of a trade secret of another without
express or implied consent by a person who 
(A) used improper means to acquire knowledge of the
trade secret; or 
(B) at the time of disclosure or use knew or had reason
to know that his knowledge of the trade secret was 
(I) derived from or through a person who has uti-
lized improper means to acquire it; 
(II) acquired under circumstances giving rise to a
duty to maintain its secrecy or limit its use; or 
(III) derived from or through a person who owed a
duty to the person seeking relief to maintain its se-
crecy or limit its use; or 
(C) before a material change of his position, knew or
had reason to know that it was a trade secret and that
knowledge of it had been acquired by accident or mis-
take. (UTSA § 1(2)) 
Protection of Other Forms of Intellectual Property
121

What this rather complex definition boils down to is that anyone
who comes into possession of someone else’s trade secret by
stealing it, by accident, by mistake, or under a duty to keep the se-
cret cannot turn around and disclose the secret to someone else.
Trade secrets are protected not only at the state level but also
at the national and international level. At the national level, the
federal Economic Espionage Act of 1996 first defines trade secrets
in terms substantially similar to those in the UTSA. The owner
must have “taken reasonable measures to keep such information
secret,” and the information must derive “independent economic
value, actual or potential, from not being generally known to, and
not being readily ascertainable through proper means by, the
public” (18 U.S.C. § 1839(3)). The activities prohibited by the fed-
eral statute are somewhat more limited. The statute prohibits
anyone from taking the secret “intending or knowing that the of-
fense will benefit any foreign government, foreign instrumental-
ity, or foreign agent” (18 U.S.C. § 1831). Purely domestic economic
espionage is not left unaddressed by federal law; the federal
statute also prohibits taking a trade secret “with intent to con-
vert” (that is, to deprive the owner of a property right) by any of
a wide variety of listed means, provided that the taking is “to the
economic benefit of anyone other than the owner” of the secret,
that the taker intends or knows “that the offense will . . . injure
any owner of that trade secret,” and that the secret “is related to
or included in a product that is produced for or placed in inter-
state or foreign commerce” (18 U.S.C. § 1832). 
At the international level, trade secrets are protected by
TRIPs. To be protected, a trade secret must meet a definition simi-
lar to those in the UTSA and the Economic Espionage Act. It must
be lawfully under the owner’s control; it must be “secret in the
sense that it is not, as a body or in the precise configuration and as-
sembly of its components, generally known among or readily ac-
cessible to persons within the circles that normally deal with the
kind of information in question”; it must have “commercial value
because it is secret”; and it must have “been subject to reasonable
steps under the circumstances, by the person lawfully in control of
the information, to keep it secret” (TRIPs art. 39(2)). 
The prohibited conduct with regard to trade secrets is de-
fined in more general terms, without the exhaustive list of pro-
hibited acts found in the federal statute. Members of the WTO are
to ensure, through appropriate legislation and enforcement, that
122
Worldwide Perspective

trade secrets are not “disclosed to, acquired by, or used by others
without their consent in a manner contrary to honest commercial
practices” (TRIPs art. 39(2)). 
Summary
This chapter has examined the international legal regime govern-
ing intellectual property rights, as well as some of the challenges
and controversies that have arisen regarding that regime. While
most multilateral intellectual property agreements are adminis-
tered under the auspices of WIPO, the WTO’s comprehensive
TRIPs treaty provides a parallel system, often in harmony but
sometimes in conflict with the WIPO system. To a large extent the
international regime has been successful in harmonizing national
intellectual property laws, simplifying international rights pro-
tection for content owners, and reducing conflict. The copyright
regime has been the most successful; after more than a century of
independent development, the parallel U.S. and Berne Conven-
tion systems have finally been merged, and any copyrightable
work is protected from the moment of its creation in most of the
world. 
The patent and trademark regimes have been less successful.
Rather than a single patent or trademark process, they provide a
process by which one may simultaneously apply for a patent or
trademark in a large number of countries. The process remains
costly, cumbersome, and, in the case of trademark, not particu-
larly comprehensive. 
International law has not hesitated to go beyond the tradi-
tional categories of copyright, trademark, and patent to provide
protection for other categories of intellectual property, including
industrial designs and trade secrets.
Treaties
“Agreement Between the United Nations and the World Intellectual
Property Organization.” December 17, 1974. General Assembly Res.
3346, U.N. GAOR, 29th Sess., U.N. Doc. A/RES/3346 (XXIX).
“Agreement Between the World Intellectual Property Organization and
the World Trade Organization.” December 22, 1995. 35 I.L.M. 754.
Treaties
123

“Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property Rights
(TRIPs), Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World Trade Organiza-
tion, Annex 1C.” April 15, 1994. 33 I.L.M. 81.
“Brussels Convention Relating to the Distribution of Programme-Carry-
ing Signals Transmitted by Satellite.” May 21, 1974. 13 I.L.M. 1444.
“Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit of Mi-
croorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure.” April 28, 1977, as
amended on September 26, 1980. 32 U.S.T. 1241, 1861 U.N.T.S. 361.
“Buenos Aires Convention.” August 20, 1910. 38 Stat. 1785, 155 L.N.T.S.
179.
“Convention Concerning the Creation of an International Union for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Berne Convention).” Septem-
ber 9, 1886, as last revised at Paris, July 24, 1971 (amended 1979). 25
U.S.T. 1341, 828 U.N.T.S. 221. 
“Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Organization.”
July 14, 1967, as amended on September 28, 1979 (WIPO Convention). 21
U.S.T. 1749, 828 U.N.T.S. 3.
“Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms Against
Unauthorized Duplication of Their Phonograms.” October 29, 1971. 25
U.S.T. 309.
“Convention on the Grant of European Patents.” October 5, 1973. 13
I.L.M. 276. Text as amended through December 10, 1998. http://www
.european-patent-office.org/legal/epc/e/ma1.html.
“Hague Agreement Concerning the International Deposit of Industrial
Design.” November 6, 1925. 74 L.N.T.S. 343, revised at London, June 2,
1934, 205 L.N.T.S. 179, revised at The Hague, November 28, 1960. Sup-
plemented by the Additional Act of Monaco, November 18, 1961, the
Complementary Act of Stockholm, July 14, 1967, and the Protocol of
Geneva, April 10, 1975, 26 U.S.T. 571; and as amended September 1979.
“Inter-American Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.”
August 20, 1910. 39 Stat. 1675; TS 626; 1 Bevans 772. Replaced by “General
Inter-American Convention for Trademark and Commercial Protection.”
February 20, 1929. 46 Stat. 2907, TS 833, 2 Bevans 751, 124 L.N.T.S. 357.
“Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin and their
International Registration.” October 31, 1958. As revised at Stockholm on
July 14, 1967, and as amended on September 28, 1979. 923 U.N.T.S. 205.
“Locarno Agreement Establishing an International Classification for In-
dustrial Designs.” October 8, 1968. As amended September 28, 1979. 23
U.S.T. 1389.
“Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
Marks.” April 14, 1891. As revised at Brussels on December 14, 1900, at
124
Worldwide Perspective

Washington on June 2, 1911, at The Hague on November 6, 1925, at Lon-
don on June 2, 1934, at Nice on June 15, 1957, and at Stockholm on July
14, 1967, and as amended on September 28, 1979. 828 U.N.T.S. 389.
“Madrid Agreement for the Repression of False or Deceptive Indications
of Source on Goods.” April 14, 1891. As revised at Washington on June 2,
1911, at The Hague on November 6, 1925, at London on June 2, 1934, and
at Lisbon on October 31, 1958. Additional Act July 14, 1967. Stockholm.
828 U.N.T.S. 389.
“Nairobi Treaty on the Protection of the Olympic Symbol.” September 26,
1981. 1863 U.N.T.S. 367.
“Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of Goods
and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of Marks.” June 15, 1957.
As revised at Stockholm on July 14, 1967, and at Geneva on May 13, 1977,
and amended on September 28, 1979. 23 U.S.T. 1336, 550 U.N.T.S. 45.
“Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.” March 20,
1883. As revised at Brussels on December 14, 1900, at Washington on
June 2, 1911, at The Hague on November 6, 1925, at London on June 2,
1934, at Lisbon on October 31, 1958, and at Stockholm on July 14, 1967,
and as amended on September 28, 1979. 21 U.S.T. 1583, 828 U.N.T.S. 305.
“Patent Cooperation Treaty.” Washington. June 19, 1970. As amended on
September 28, 1979, and as modified on February 3, 1984, and October 3,
2001. 28 U.S.T. 7645, 9 I.L.M. 978.
“Patent Law Treaty.” June 1, 2000. 39 I.L.M. 1047.
“Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the Interna-
tional Registration of Marks.” June 27, 1989. http://www.wipo
.int/madrid/en/legal_texts/.
“Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of Phono-
grams and Broadcasting Organizations.” October 26, 1961. 496 U.N.T.S. 43.
“Statute of the International Court of Justice.” Art. 38(1), 59 Stat. 1055,
1060 (1945), T.S. No. 993, 3 Bevans 1153, 1976 Y.B.U.N. 1052.
“Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the International Patent Classifica-
tion.” March 24, 1971. As amended on September 28 1979. 26 U.S.T. 1793.
“Trademark Law Treaty.” October 27, 1994. http://www.wipo
.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo027en.htm.
“Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Circuits.” Wash-
ington. May 26, 1989. 28 I.L.M. 1477 (not in force).
“Treaty on the International Registration of Audiovisual Works.” April
20, 1989. http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/frt/trtdocs_wo004.html.
“Universal Copyright Convention.” September 6, 1952. 6 U.S.T. 2731. Re-
vised at Paris. July 24, 1971. 25 U.S.T. 1341.
Treaties
125

“Vienna Agreement Establishing an International Classification of the
Figurative Elements of Marks.” June 12, 1973. As amended October 1,
1985. http://www.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo031en.htm.
“WIPO Copyright Treaty.” December 20, 1996. 36 I.L.M. 65 (1997).
“WIPO Performance and Phonograms Treaty.” December 20, 1996. 36
I.L.M. 76 (1997).
European Union, ICANN, WIPO, and
WTO Documents
“Articles of Incorporation of Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers.” Revised November 21, 1998. http://www.icann
.org/general/articles.htm.
“Bylaws for Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers, a
California Nonprofit Public-Benefit Corporation.” Amended effective
April 19, 2004. http://www.icann.org/general/archive-bylaws/bylaws-
13oct03.htm.
“Council Directive 93/98/EEC of 29 October 1993 Harmonizing the
Term of Protection of Copyright and Certain Related Rights,” 1993 O.J.
(L 290) 9.
“EU Directive 2001/29/EC on the Harmonisation of Certain Aspects of
Copyright and Related Rights in the Information Society,” 2001 O.J.
(L 167) 10.
ICANN. 2006. “ICANN-Accredited Registrars.” March 10. http://www
.icann.org/registrars/accredited-list.html.
ICANN. 2005. “ICANN Information.” December 21. http://www.icann
.org/general/.
ICANN. 1999. “Internet Domain Name System Structure and Delegation
(ccTLD Administration and Delegation).” May. http://www.icann
.org/icp/icp-1.htm.
ICANN. 1998. “Memorandum of Understanding between the U.S. De-
partment of Commerce and the Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers.” http://www.icann.org/general/icann-mou-
25nov98.htm.
World Intellectual Property Organization. 2006a. Direct Filing of PCT Ap-
plications with the International Bureau as PCT Receiving Office.
http://www.wipo.int/pct/en/filing/filing.htm#P20_2204.
126
Worldwide Perspective

World Intellectual Property Organization. 2006b. Treaties and Contracting
Parties. Geneva, Switzerland: WIPO.
World Intellectual Property Organization. 2005. New Parties to WIPO-Ad-
ministered Treaties in 2004. WIPO Update 235/2005. Geneva, Switzerland:
WIPO, January 14.
World Intellectual Property Organization. 2002. Basic Facts about the
Patent Cooperation Treaty. (Leaflet.) Geneva, Switzerland: WIPO, April.
World Intellectual Property Organization. 2001. About WIPO. WIPO Pub-
lication No. 400(E). June. http://www.wipo.int/about-wipo/en/gib
.htm#P9_1980.
World Intellectual Property Organization. No date. Organisations Inter-
gouvernmentales Admises en Qualite d’Observateurs aux Reunions des Assem-
blees des États Membres, BIG/158/17. Geneva, Switzerland: WIPO.
World Trade Organization. Members and Observers. http://www.wto
.org/English/thewto_e/whatis_e/tif_e/org6_e.htm.
Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy. 1999. August 26.
http://www.icann.org/udrp/udrp-policy-24oct99.htm.
Statutes and Legislative Materials
Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. §§ 101–1331.
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 512, 1201–1204.
Economic Espionage Act of 1996, 18 U.S.C. § 1831 et seq.
House Report on the Copyright Act of 1976, H.R. Rep. No. 94-1476, sec.
601.
Lanham Trademark Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1058–1059.
National Conference of Commissioners on Uniform State Laws, Uniform
Trade Secrets Act, as amended 1985. http://nsi.org/Library/Espionage
/utsa.htm.
Patent Code, 35 U.S.C. §§ 1–376.
Patent Code, Right of Priority, 35 U.S.C. § 119.
Semiconductor Chip Protection Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 901–914.
Trademark Law Treaty Act of 1998, 15 U.S.C. § 1051.
Vessel Hull Design Protection Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 1301–1332.
Visual Artists’ Rights Act, 17 U.S.C. § 106A.
Statutes and Legislative Materials
127

Cases
Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991).
Religious Technology Center v. Lerma, 908 F. Supp. 1362 (E.D. Va. 1995).
State Street Bank & Trust Co. v. Signature Financial Group, 149 F.3d 1368
(Fed. Cir. 1998); cert. denied, 525 U.S. 1093.
Sources and Further Reading
Biegel, Stuart. 2001. Beyond Our Control? Confronting the Limits of Our
Legal System in the Age of Cyberspace. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Buergenthal, Thomas, and Sean D. Murphy. 2002. Public International Law
in a Nutshell. 3rd ed. St. Paul, MN: West.
CERN. “The World Wide Web.” http://public.web.cern.ch/Public/
Content/Chapters/AboutCERN/Achievements/WorldWideWeb/
WWW-en.html.
Conley, John M. 2003. “The International Law of Business Method
Patents.” U.S. Patent and Trademark Office Economic Review. October.
http://ideas.repec.org/a/fip/fedaer/y2003p15-33nv.88no.4.html.
D’Amato, Anthony, and Doris Estelle Long, eds. 1996. International Intel-
lectual Property Anthology. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing.
Dinwoodie, Graeme B., William O. Hennessey, and Shira Perlmutter.
2002. International and Comparative Patent Law. Newark, NJ: LexisNexis
Matthew Bender.
Froomkin, A. Michael. 2000. “Wrong Turn in Cyberspace: Using ICANN
to Route Around the APA and the Constitution.” Duke Law Journal 50: 17.
Gilwit, Dara B. 2003. “The Latest Cybersquatting Trend: Typosquatters,
their Changing Tactics, and How to Prevent Public Deception and Trade-
mark Infringement.” Washington University Journal of Law and Policy 11:
267.
Goldstein, Paul. 2000. International Copyright: Principles, Law, and Practice.
Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Kaufer, Erich. 1989. The Economics of the Patent System. Chur, Switzerland:
Harwood Academic Publishers.
Kristula, Dave. 2001. “The History of the Internet.” August. http://
www.davesite.com/webstation/net-history.shtml.
Leaffer, Marshall. 1990. “International Copyright from an American Per-
spective.” Arkansas Law Review 43: 373.
128
Worldwide Perspective

McCarthy, J. Thomas, Roger Schechter, and David J. Franklyn. 2004. Mc-
Carthy’s Desk Encyclopedia of Intellectual Property. 3rd ed. Washington, DC:
Bureau of National Affairs.
One Global Patent System? WIPO’s Substantive Patent Law Treaty. 2003.
GRAIN. October. http://www.grain.org/briefings_files/wipo-splt-
2003-en.pdf.
Pires de Carvalho, Nuno. 2002. The TRIPs Regime of Patent Rights. The
Hague: Kluwer Law International.
Samuels, Edward. 2000. The Illustrated History of Copyright. New York: St.
Martin’s Press. http://www.edwardsamuels.com/illustratedstory/
isc10.htm.
Samuelson, Pamela. 1997. “The U.S. Digital Agenda at WIPO.” Virginia
Journal of International Law 37: 369.
Takenaka, Toshiko. 2003. “The Best Patent Practice or Mere Compro-
mise? A Review of the Current Draft of the Substantive Patent Law
Treaty and a Proposal for a First-to-Invent Exception for Domestic Ap-
plicants.” Texas Intellectual Property Law Journal 11: 259.
Tiefenbrun, Susan. 1999. “A Hermeneutic Methodology and How Pirates
Misread the Berne Convention.” Wisconsin International Law Journal 17: 1.
Trimble, Phillip R. 2002. International Law: United States Foreign Relations
Law. New York: Foundation.
Trollope, Anthony. 1883. Autobiography of Anthony Trollope. Project Guten-
berg ed., 2004. Available at http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/etext04/
8auto10.txt 
Withers, Kay. 2006. “Copyright Sings to a Different Tune.” BBC.com. Feb-
ruary 17. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/4724664.stm.
World v Web: America Does Not Want the United Nations to Run the Internet.
2004. The Economist, November 20, 65.
Sources and Further Reading
129


4
Chronology
560–561
Columba, later to become Saint Columba, copies a
psalter without permission. The dispute over the
ownership of the copy leads to a battle in which thou-
sands are killed.
563
Columba leaves Ireland for exile on Iona. 
578
The Kongo family emigrates from Korea to Japan and
founds the construction company Kongo Gumi.
Today the company, led by Toshitaka Kongo, is still in
the construction business under the same name, mak-
ing it the owner of possibly the world’s oldest trade-
mark.
717
The Hoshi Ryokan hotel begins operating in Awazu,
Japan.
868
Wang Jie publishes what is now the world’s oldest
surviving block-printed work, a Chinese translation
of the Diamond Sutra. The work bears the notice “Rev-
erently made for universal free distribution by Wang
Jie on behalf of his two parents on the 13th day of the
4th moon of the 9th year of Xiantong.” With a bit of
wishful thinking, this might be seen as the first open-
source license.
131

1040
Benedictine monks in Weihenstephan (in what is now
Germany) open the Weihenstephan Brewery. Other
claimants for the title of the European business name
in longest continuous use include the Château de
Goulaine Vineyard in France and the Fonderia Pontif-
icia Marinelli, a bell foundry in Agnone, Italy; both
also date from the eleventh century.
1041
Bi Sheng, also in China, builds a printing machine that
uses movable type—probably the first in the world to
do so.
c. 1234
Yi Gyu-bo publishes the New Code of Etiquette in
Korea; today it is the world’s oldest surviving work
printed with movable type.
1266
The Bakers Marking Law requires English bakers to
place identifying marks on their loaves of bread.
1421
The government of the city of Florence grants a three-
year patent of monopoly to Filippo Brunelleschi for
the manufacture of a new type of ship for transporting
marble. The ship is built and later sinks in the Arno
River.
c. 1430–
Johannes Gutenberg and perhaps Laurens Coster 
1450
build printing presses in Europe; the extent to which
they are influenced by awareness of Chinese and Ko-
rean printing technology is uncertain, although they
were quite possibly aware of it.
1446
The Korean government adopts a phonetic script,
making typesetting much cheaper; an explosion in the
printing industry follows. The Korean government re-
sponds to complaints about copying by granting
printing monopolies over certain works to certain
printers.
1449
In England, King Henry VI grants John of Utynam a
patent of monopoly for the manufacture of stained
glass.
132
Chronology

1455
Johannes Gutenberg prints his first Bible.
1455–1468 After several lawsuits, Johannes Gutenberg loses con-
trol of his printing business.
1474
William Caxton prints The Recuyell of the Historyes of
Troye, the first book to be printed in English using
movable type.
The city of Venice adopts the world’s first patent
statute in the modern sense, granting a ten-year
patent of monopoly to any inventor of a “new and in-
genious device,” and requiring disclosure of the way
in which the device might be duplicated.
1476
William Caxton prints Geoffrey Chaucer’s Canterbury
Tales.
1537
King Francis I of France requires all printers to deposit
a copy of each work they publish and offer for sale in
the National Library. This requirement of dépôt légale
will influence U.S. copyright law and will persist in
the United States long after it is abandoned in France.
1557
The Stationer’s Company receives a monopoly on
printing from the English government.
1618
The British case of Southern v. How, the first published
trademark infringement case in the Anglo-American
common law tradition, is decided.
1623
In England, Parliament enacts the Statute of Monopo-
lies, granting a fourteen-year patent of monopoly to
“the true and first inventor” of any invention. This
“first to invent” rule later becomes the standard for
U.S. patent law, where it persists, even though it has
been abandoned by the rest of the world.
1641
In North America, the British colony of Massachusetts
adopts its first patent law.
Chronology
133

1661–1663 The first book is printed in English North America.
1695
The Stationer’s Company’s printing monopoly ends.
1695–1710 England sees a printing free-for-all as multiple print-
ing companies vie for market share.
1707
The Act of Union unites Scotland and England.
1710
The newly united British Parliament enacts the Statute
of Anne, the first modern copyright law. The Statute
sets a copyright term of fourteen years for new works,
renewable once.
1774
In Britain, the House of Lords decides Donaldson v.
Beckett, establishing that copyright terms are of finite
duration.
1777
The government of France sets the term of copyrights
granted to publishers at the lifetime of the author, and
copyrights are granted to authors in perpetuity. While
the perpetual copyright will eventually be aban-
doned, the difference between the lifetime-based
copyright in French law and the set term of years ap-
proach taken at the time in English law, and later in
U.S. law, will persist for another two centuries.
1789
Article I, Section 8, Clause 8 of the U.S. Constitution
declares that Congress shall have the power “To pro-
mote the Progress of Science and useful Arts, by se-
curing for limited Times to Authors and Inventors the
exclusive Right to their respective Writings and Dis-
coveries.” This gives Congress the power to grant
copyrights and patents, but not, it later turns out,
trademarks.
1790
The first U.S. Copyright Act, modeled on the Statute
of Anne, provides for a fourteen-year copyright term,
renewable once. The first U.S. Patent Act also takes its
lead from English law (the 1623 Statute of Monopo-
lies), setting the patent term at fourteen years. The
Patent Act requires an official examination before a
134
Chronology

patent can be granted. Samuel Hopkins of Pittsford,
Vermont, obtained the first U.S. patent on July 31.
1793
In the United States, Congress eliminates the 1790
Patent Act’s requirement of an examination.
1809
Mary Kies of Killingly, Connecticut, becomes the first
woman to obtain a U.S. patent.
1836
In the United States, Congress restores the require-
ment of an official examination before a patent can be
granted.
Nearly all of the existing models and records in the
U.S. Patent Office are destroyed in a fire.
1838
In France, the Société des Gens de Lettres, a writers’
group, is founded.
1843
In the United States, Annie Ellsworth, daughter of
Patent Commissioner Henry Ellsworth, becomes an
employee of the U.S. Patent Office.
1847
French composer Ernest Bourget is appalled to find a
Paris café playing his music for the entertainment of
patrons, including himself. He refuses to pay for his
drinks and later sues the café, successfully.
1849
The Cour d’Appel de Paris orders the Café Concert les
Ambassadeurs to pay royalties to Bourget for perform-
ing his music.
1850
Bourget and others form the Agence Centrale pour la
Perception Droits Auteurs et Compositeurs de Musique to
license and enforce music performance rights.
1854
Clara Barton, who would later found the American
Red Cross, becomes a clerk in the U.S. Patent Office.
1865
Photographs, a relatively new type of printed matter,
are made copyrightable under U.S. law.
Chronology
135

1867–1895 Moving pictures invented. 
1870
The U.S. Congress enacts the first federal Trademark
Act, later declared unconstitutional by the Supreme
Court, and the Patent Act of 1870, which revises and
simplifies existing U.S. patent law.
1873
The International Law Association is founded in
Brussels.
1877
In the United States, Thomas Edison invents the
phonograph, and Eadweard Muybridge takes “The
Horse in Motion,” a series of photographs that repre-
sent an important step toward the development of
motion-picture technology; these two innovations will
open new worlds of copyrightable material and po-
tential infringement.
1878
Victor Hugo and other copyright holders establish the
Association Littéraire et Artistique Internationale, an
organization whose goal is to push for an interna-
tional copyright protection system.
The International Trademark Association is founded.
1879
The Supreme Court strikes down the Trademark Act
of 1870, pointing out that the Patent and Copyright
Clause does not give Congress the authority to grant
trademarks.
1881
In the United States, Congress enacts a trademark act
allowing national registration of marks used in com-
merce with foreign nations and Indian tribes, but not
in interstate commerce. 
1883
Several countries, not including the United States,
adopt the Paris Convention for the Protection of In-
dustrial Property. The Convention creates the Paris
Union to govern international patent and trademark
law.
1886
Several countries, not including the United States,
136
Chronology

adopt the Berne Convention, beginning the process of
creating the international copyright regime in effect
today.
1887
The United States joins the Paris Union.
Switzerland adopts a domestic patent law, after sev-
eral unsuccessful attempts.
1890
In the United States, the court in Merriam v. Holloway
Publishing Co. holds that trademark cannot be used to
protect the entire content of a text on which copyright
had expired; to do so would be to grant an effectually
perpetual copyright.
1891
The United States grants copyright protection to some
foreign works.
Several countries, not including the United States,
adopt the Madrid Agreement Concerning the Inter-
national Registration of Marks and the Madrid
Agreement for the Repression of False or Deceptive
Indications of Source on Goods.
1893
The Paris and Berne convention treaty organizations
unite to form the Bureaux Internationaux Réunis pour
la Protection de la Propriété Intellectuelle, precursor
to the World Intellectual Property Organization.
1894
In the United States, the American Bar Association
forms its Section of Intellectual Property Law, which
will eventually grow to become the world’s largest in-
tellectual property law organization.
1895
In the United States, the Music Publishers Association
is founded.
1897
In the United States, the American Intellectual Prop-
erty Law Association is founded.
In Europe, the International Association for the Pro-
tection of Industrial Property is founded. 
Chronology
137

1899
In the United States, the Supreme Court decides
Singer Manufacturing Co. v. June Manufacturing Co.,
holding that just as trademark law cannot be used to
prevent others from duplicating a copyrighted work
after the copyright has expired, it cannot be used to
prevent others from duplicating a patented invention
after the patent has expired.
1905
In the United States, Congress enacts a trademark act
allowing national registration of fanciful and arbitrary
(but not descriptive) marks used in interstate com-
merce.
1906
The International Federation of Intellectual Property
Attorneys is founded.
1909
The U.S. Congress enacts the Copyright Act of 1909,
which doubles the length of the copyright term but
fails in almost all of its goals, most notably in bringing
U.S. law into compliance with Berne Convention stan-
dards. The Act’s deficiencies also give rise to an awk-
ward parallel system of state copyright law.
1910
The United States and several Latin American coun-
tries adopt the Inter-American Convention for the
Protection of Industrial Property and the Buenos Aires
Convention on Literary and Artistic Copyrights. 
1911
The United States ratifies the Buenos Aires Conven-
tion on Literary and Artistic Copyrights.
1914
In the United States, the American Society of Com-
posers, Authors and Publishers (ASCAP), a music
copyright clearinghouse, is formed.
1920
In the United States, Congress enacts a new Trade-
mark Act to carry out the obligations of the United
States under the 1910 convention.
In the United Kingdom, the Trade Marks, Patents and
Designs Federation is founded.
138
Chronology

1925
The International Association for the Protection of In-
dustrial Property finds a permanent home in Switzer-
land.
1930
In the United States, Congress enacts the Plant Patent
Act.
1934
In the United Kingdom, the Institute of Trade Mark
Attorneys is founded.
1938
In Japan, the Japan Intellectual Property Association is
founded.
1940
In the United States, Broadcast Music, Incorporated
(BMI), a music copyright clearinghouse, is formed.
1946
In the United States, Congress enacts the Lanham
Trademark Act of 1946, the foundation of modern fed-
eral trademark law.
1955
The United States becomes a party to the Universal
Copyright Convention, an alternative to the Berne
Convention.
1962
In Gabon, twelve French-speaking African countries
form the Organisation Africaine de la Propriété Intel-
lectuelle, a regional intellectual property organization. 
1963
In France, the Centre for International Industrial Prop-
erty Studies is founded.
1966
In the United States, the Association of Corporate
Patent Counsel is founded.
1967
The Bureaux Internationaux Réunis pour la Protection
de la Propriété Intellectuelle becomes the World Intel-
lectual Property Organization.
1969
ARPANET links four computers, three in California
and one in Utah.
1970
Patent Cooperation Treaty concluded.
Chronology
139

1971
Project Gutenberg begins distributing e-books online
for free.
1972
The U.S. Supreme Court decides Gottschalk v. Benson,
which holds that a mathematical algorithm used in a
computer program is not patentable. 
The U.S. Patent Office suspends all pending computer
program patent applications. 
European countries adopt the Convention on the
Grant of European Patents. Among other things, the
Convention excludes computer programs from its
definition of patentable subject matter.
E-mail begins to be sent over ARPANET.
1974
The World Intellectual Property Organization be-
comes an agency of the United Nations.
1975
The U.S. Patent Office becomes the U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office.
1976
The U.S. Congress enacts the Copyright Act of 1976,
the most radical revision of copyright law in U.S. his-
tory. The Act eliminates the parallel state copyright
system and replaces the renewable term with a uni-
tary term in compliance with the Berne Convention. It
does not, however, eliminate the notice requirement.
In Zambia, a group of English-speaking African coun-
tries adopts the Agreement on the Creation of the In-
dustrial Property Organization for English-speaking
Africa, forming the English-Speaking Africa Regional
Intellectual Property Organization, later to become the
African Regional Intellectual Property Organization.
1977
The International Association of Entertainment
Lawyers is founded.
In the Central African Republic (shortly before it be-
came the ill-fated and short-lived Central African
140
Chronology

Empire), the parties to the Organisation Africaine de
la Propriété Intellectuelle revise their 1962 agreement
to cover a broader range of intellectual property rights
and admit new members.
1978
Patent Cooperation Treaty enters into force for the
United States.
1981
The U.S. Supreme Court holds in Diamond v. Diehr that
some computer programs are patentable; U.S. Patent
and Trademark Office begins to accept applications
for software patents.
1982
In the United States, the Federal Circuit Court of Ap-
peals is created to hear, among other things, patent ap-
peals.
1983
ARPANET switches to TCP/IP protocol.
1984
In the United States, Congress enacts the Computer
Fraud and Abuse Act, an antihacking law, and the
Semiconductor Chip Protection Act, protecting semi-
conductor manufacturing mask works.
The U.S. Supreme Court decides Sony Corporation of
America v. Universal City Studios, holding that the fact
that a VCR can be used for copyright infringement
does not make the device unlawful, nor does it make
Sony liable for infringement by purchasers of VCRs;
the VCR is capable of substantial noninfringing uses
and is thus a “staple article of commerce.”
The Federal Circuit decides Atari, Inc. v. JS & A Group,
Inc., preventing the sale of a device allowing users to
make copies of game cartridges and marketed for that
purpose.
1985
Microsoft agrees “that the visual displays in Windows
1.0 are derivative works of the visual displays gener-
ated by Apple’s Lisa and Macintosh graphical user in-
terface programs.”
Chronology
141

1985
In Africa, the member states of the English-Speaking
(cont.)
Africa Regional Intellectual Property Organization
agree to open membership to most African countries;
the organization is renamed the African Regional In-
tellectual Property Organization.
1988
In the United States, Congress enacts the Berne Con-
vention Implementation Act, eliminating the notice
requirement and making it possible for the United
States to join the Berne Convention. 
Congress also enacts the Trademark Law Revision
Act.
Microsoft releases Windows 2.03 and Hewlett-
Packard releases NewWave; Apple sues for copyright
infringement.
1989
The United States joins the Berne Convention.
Many of the parties to the Madrid Agreement Con-
cerning the International Registration of Marks adopt
the Madrid Protocol.
1990
In the United States, Congress enacts the Visual
Artists Rights Act, granting very limited recognition
to moral rights in federal copyright law.
The Electronic Frontier Foundation is founded.
1991
Tim Berners-Lee’s first Web page, created the previous
year, becomes available online. By the end of the year
the first U.S. Web page (at the Stanford Linear Accel-
erator Center) is also online, as are many others.
In deciding Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service
Co., the U.S. Supreme Court rejects the “sweat of the
brow” theory—the idea that copyright can be a re-
ward for hard work even in the absence of originality.
1992
The Internet Underground Music Archive enables
142
Chronology

users with technical sophistication and lots of free
time to download copyrighted music files.
The U.S. Congress enacts the Audio Home Recording
Act and the Copyright Renewal Act.
The Ninth Circuit holds, in New Kids on the Block v.
News America Publishing, Inc., that the newspaper USA
Today had the right to use the name New Kids on the
Block in a contest asking readers to vote for their fa-
vorite member of the band of that name.
1993
The National Center for Supercomputing Applica-
tions at the University of Illinois releases Mosaic, the
first Web browser easily usable by the technically un-
sophisticated.
In the United States, the Ninth Circuit Court of Ap-
peals decides MAI Systems v. Peak Computer, holding
that the creation of copies of computer programs dur-
ing maintenance can infringe on a copyright. The ef-
fect of the decision is to grant computer makers and
software vendors exclusive rights to maintain their
own equipment, preventing independent operators
from doing so; five years later Congress passes the
Computer Maintenance Competition Assurance Act
to restore competition in this industry.
1994
Netscape releases Netscape Navigator.
The Uruguay Round of the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade leads to the creation of the World
Trade Organization (WTO). Annex 1C of the WTO
agreement, adopted by all the parties, is the Agree-
ment on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Prop-
erty Rights, better known as TRIPs. 
In the United States, the Federal Circuit holds, in In re
Alappat, that a wide range of computer programs are
patentable. The government fails to convict accused
warez trader David LaMacchia.
Chronology
143

1994
The Ninth Circuit holds that Microsoft’s Windows op-
(cont.)
erating system does not infringe on Apple’s copyright
in the Mac and Lisa operating systems. The decision
limits possible future actions for “look and feel” in-
fringement.
The Trademark Law Treaty is opened for signature.
1995
On 1 January, TRIPs enters into force.
The U.S. Patent and Trademark Office somewhat be-
latedly publishes guidelines for software patent appli-
cations.
The First Circuit, in Lotus Development v. Borland, holds
that the menu command hierarchy of a computer pro-
gram is not copyrightable. The U.S. Supreme Court
declines to review the Ninth Circuit’s decision in
Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp.
Microsoft releases Internet Explorer.
1996
The U.S. Supreme Court decides State Street Bank &
Trust v. Signature Financial Group, holding that meth-
ods of doing business are patentable subject matter.
Congress enacts the Economic Espionage Act, provid-
ing some protection for trade secrets.
Also in the United States, the National Association of
Patent Practitioners is founded.
The European Union adopts its Database Directive,
protecting compilations of data even without the orig-
inality required in U.S. law under Feist, although for a
far shorter term (fifteen years) than traditional copy-
right protection.
The World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
concludes and opens for signature the WIPO Copy-
right Treaty and the WIPO Performance and Phono-
grams Treaty.
144
Chronology

1997
MP3.com is founded in San Diego, California.
The U.S. Congress enacts the No Electronic Theft Act.
1998
The Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and
Numbers is founded.
Diamond Multimedia markets a portable MP3 player
and is promptly sued by the Recording Industry As-
sociation of America (RIAA).
The U.S. Congress enacts the Federal Trademark Dilu-
tion Act, the Trademark Law Treaty Act, and the Anti-
counterfeiting Consumer Protection Act.
The U.S. Congress also enacts a suite of laws designed
to address the developing crisis in copyright law, in-
cluding the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension
Act and the five sections of the Digital Millennium
Copyright Act.
The Ninth Circuit, in Playboy Enterprises, Inc. v. Welles,
holds that Welles has a right to refer to herself as
“Playmate of the Year 1981” on her website and to use
the terms “playmate” and “playboy” in metatags on
the site.
1999
In Norway, fifteen-year-old Jon Lech Johansen posts
DeCSS on the Internet. Johansen is arrested and pros-
ecuted in Norway. In the United States, many people
distribute DeCSS or provide links to sites from which
it can be downloaded; they are sued by motion picture
content companies.
In the United States, Napster begins operations and is
sued by the RIAA and others.
The U.S. Congress enacts the Anticybersquatting Con-
sumer Protection Act and the First Inventor Defense
Act.
Chronology
145

1999
Diamond Multimedia prevails in the lawsuit brought
(cont.)
against it by the RIAA.
Amazon.com obtains a U.S. patent for its one-click or-
dering system and obtains an injunction prohibiting
Barnes & Noble from using a similar system.
2000
In the Netherlands, Consumer Empowerment begins
distributing KaZaA Media Desktop and is sued by
Dutch content industry group Buma/Stemra.
In the United States, a federal trial court in Universal
City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes rejects the constitutional
arguments of the defendants who distributed or
linked to the decryption program DeCSS.
Also in the United States, MP3.com loses a lawsuit
brought by Universal Music Group and others and is
ordered to pay $250 million in damages. 
The Trademark Law Treaty enters into force for the
United States. The Patent Law Treaty is concluded; the
United States signs the treaty but does not ratify it.
Vivendi, a French company, purchases MP3.com.
Bertelsmann Music Group, a German company, in-
vests in Napster.
2001
In the United States, Napster is found potentially li-
able as a third-party copyright infringer.
The Federal Circuit decides, in Amazon.com, Inc. v.
Barnesandnoble.com, Inc., that the 1999 injunction
against Barnes & Noble should not have been issued,
because Barnes & Noble has “raised substantial ques-
tions as to the validity” of Amazon’s patent on one-
click ordering.
The Second Circuit, in Universal City Studios, Inc. v.
Corley, affirms the 2000 decision of the trial court in
Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes.
146
Chronology

Also in the United States, Dmitri Sklyarov, the author
of a program that can break the copy protection on
Adobe e-books, is arrested while visiting the country
for a conference.
2002
The WIPO Copyright Treaty and the WIPO Perfor-
mance and Phonograms Treaty come into force; the
United States is a party to both.
In the United States, the Supreme Court upholds the
constitutionality of the Sonny Bono Copyright Term
Extension Act.
In the United States, Aimster is found liable for indi-
rect copyright infringement. In the Netherlands, the
Amsterdam Court of Appeals holds that KaZaA is not
liable for indirect copyright infringement in the suit
brought by Buma/Stemra.
In Europe, European Digital Rights, a users’ rights
group, is founded.
The Open Society Institute adopts the Budapest Open
Access Initiative, an attempt to create greater access to
academic work.
2003
Apple launches iTunes.
In the United States, Verizon Internet Services wins a
court battle against the RIAA, which had attempted to
compel Verizon to disclose a subscriber’s name.
The United States becomes a party to the Madrid Pro-
tocol, an international trademark agreement.
The RIAA begins suing individual users for file
sharing.
In Norway, Jon Lech Johansen is acquitted of charges
arising from the distribution of DeCSS; the acquittal is
upheld on appeal.
Chronology
147

2005
The U.S. Supreme Court finds that Grokster may be li-
able as an indirect copyright infringer and remands
the case for further proceedings.
The European Parliament rejects a bill authorizing
software patents.
The Patent Law Treaty enters into force for those
countries that have ratified it, but not for the United
States.
2006
The U.S. Congress enacts the Trademark Dilution Re-
vision Act.
In Japan, Kongo Gumi Construction is taken over by
relative upstart Takamatsu Corporation, a construc-
tion company slightly less than 400 years old.  The
new owners keep the Kongo Gumi name, however. 
148
Chronology

5
Biographies
Clara Barton (1821–1912)
Clara Barton is internationally famous as the founder of the
American Red Cross. In her earlier career, however, she played a
role in the development of American intellectual property ad-
ministration: Before the Civil War, she worked in the U.S. Patent
Office as a patent clerk, rising to a position of considerable re-
sponsibility. At the beginning of the war, when Colonel Ephraim
Elmer Ellsworth (a former patent solicitor) was killed by Virginia
innkeeper James Jackson, becoming the first Union officer to die
in the war, Barton attended his funeral. Afterward she wrote
“I . . . wondered if he had not sold himself at his highest price for
his Country’s good—if the inspiration of ‘Ellsworth dead’ were not
worth more to our cause than the life of any man could be” (Bar-
ton 1922, 117). 
The U.S. Patent Office was disrupted by the war. In 1861 the
First Rhode Island Infantry Regiment was quartered in the model
rooms, where they broke hundreds of glass cases and stole many
of the models (Letter from Our Washington House 1861, 374).
During the war the U.S. Patent Office became a hospital; the poet
Walt Whitman, who worked as a volunteer in the hospital, wrote:
The vast area of the second story of that noblest of Wash-
ington buildings, the Patent Office, is crowded close with
rows of sick, badly wounded and dying soldiers. . . . Two
of the immense apartments are filled with high and pon-
derous glass cabinets, crowded with models in miniature
149

of every kind of utensil, machine or invention it ever en-
tered into the mind of man to conceive and with curiosi-
ties and foreign gifts. Between these cabinets are lateral
openings, perhaps eight feet wide and quite deep, and in
these openings are placed many of the sick. Many of
them are very bad cases, wounds and amputations.
There is also a great long double row of them up and
down through the middle of the hall. Then there is a
gallery running above the hall in which there are beds
also. It is, indeed, a curious scene, especially at night
when lit up. The glass cabinets, the beds, the forms lying
there, the gallery above, and the marble pavement under
foot—the suffering, and the fortitude to bear it in various
degrees—occasionally, from some, the groan that cannot
be repressed—sometimes a poor fellow dying, with ema-
ciated face and glassy eye, the nurse by his side, the doc-
tor also there, but no friend, no relative—such are the
sights in the Patent Office. (Whitman 1963)
After the war the U.S. Patent Office returned to its traditional
function, but Barton went on to work with the International Red
Cross, eventually returning to the United States to found the
American Red Cross. The Red Cross symbol itself, along with the
Red Crescent, is protected from misuse both during the conduct
of war and in commercial and other nonmilitary activities. The
latter protection amounts to a form of intellectual property pro-
tection similar to that accorded to service marks (see, for example,
18 U.S.C. § 706; Paris Convention, art. 6ter; Geneva Convention I,
art. 44; Geneva Convention II, arts. 44–45; Protocol Additional to
the Geneva Convention, art. 85(3)(f)).
Sources and Further Reading
18 U.S.C. § 706.
Barton, William E. 1922. The Life of Clara Barton. Reprinted. New York:
AMS, 1969.
Geneva Convention I. Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition
of the Wounded and Sick in Armed Forces in the Field, August 12, 1949,
6 U.S.T. 3114, 75 U.N.T.S. 31.
Geneva Convention II. Convention for the Amelioration of the Condition
of the Wounded, Sick and Shipwrecked Members of the Armed Forces at
Sea, August 12, 1949, 6 U.S.T. 3217, 75 U.N.T.S. 85.
150
Biographies

“Letter from Our Washington House.” 1861. Scientific American. June 15,
374. http://cdl.library.cornell.edu/cgi-bin/moa/pageviewer?frames
=1&coll=moa&view=50&root=%2Fmoa%2Fscia%2Fscia1004%2F&tif
=00378.TIF&cite=http%3A%2F%2Fcdl.library.cornell.edu%2Fcgi-bin%2
Fmoa%2Fmoa-cgi%3Fnotisid%3DABF2204-1004-26.
Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property, March 20,
1883, as revised at Brussels on December 14, 1900, at Washington on June
2, 1911, at The Hague on November 6, 1925, at London on June 2, 1934,
at Lisbon on October 31, 1958, and at Stockholm on July 14, 1967, and as
amended on September 28, 1979, 21 U.S.T. 1583, 828 U.N.T.S. 305.
Protocol Additional to the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949, and
Relating to the Protection of Victims of International Armed Conflicts,
June 8, 1977, 1125 U.N.T.S. 3.
Whitman, Walt. 1963. Prose Works, Volume I. Ed. Floyd Stovall. New York:
New York University Press.
Ernest Bourget (fl. 1847–1850)
Ernest Bourget was a French composer of popular music and
light works in the 1840s. It was as a litigant, however, and not as
a musician, that Bourget was to have the greatest impact on fu-
ture generations of musicians. In 1847 Bourget and two other
composers, Victor Parizot and Paul Henrion, visited the Café
Concert les Ambassadeurs, a popular café in Paris, where they
drank sugared ice-water. (This seems an odd choice today, but it
was very much in fashion in Paris at the time.) The Ambassadeurs
provided live musical entertainment, and Bourget was incensed
to hear the musicians playing songs that he had written. He de-
manded that the manager of the Ambassadeurs pay him royalties
for the songs. When the manager refused, Bourget and his com-
panions refused to pay for their drinks. 
The matter wound up in court, and in 1849 the Cour d’Ap-
pel de Paris ordered the Ambassadeurs to pay royalties to Bour-
get. This had two dramatic effects on the music world. First, it
recognized that the author of a musical work had the right to
control not only the copying of the work but also the public per-
formance of it. A musician or café owner who had purchased au-
thorized copies of sheet music had already paid a royalty by
doing so, but that royalty covered only the right to reproduce
Biographies
151

the sheet music. The right to perform the work before an audi-
ence was separate, and it required a separate royalty payment.
(This right had been set out in a 1793 statute but widely ignored
until the 1849 decision.)
The second effect was indirect. While the decision of the
Cour d’Appel recognized the performance right, it left the en-
forcement of that right in the hands of the composer. To collect all
of the royalties due to him, Bourget would have had to visit all
the musical venues not only in Paris but also in all of France, leav-
ing him no time to compose future works. (International copy-
right protection still lay in the future.) Some more efficient
administrative mechanism was needed. Ideally, the performance
right royalties could be collected by a single entity and distrib-
uted to the right holders.
In the following year, 1850, Bourget and others formed the
Agence Centrale pour la Perception Droits Auteurs et Composi-
teurs de Musique, the first such music copyright clearinghouse.
In 1851 the licensing functions of the Agence Central, as well as
some licensing functions of the Société des Gens de Lettres
(founded in 1838 by French authors, including Victor Hugo and
Honoré de Balzac—see Chapter 7), were taken over by a new or-
ganization, the Société des Auteurs, Compositeurs et Éditeurs de
Musique (SACEM). Music copyright clearinghouses modeled on
SACEM soon appeared in other European countries and, with the
founding of the American Society of Composers, Authors and
Publishers in 1914 and Broadcast Music, Inc. in 1940, in the
United States (BMI 1990; Caslon Analytics 2002; SACEM no date).
Ironically, considering the enormous benefit he conferred on
musicians who came after him, Bourget’s music is forgotten.
Today he is remembered as a figure in copyright law rather than
in music; musically he is remembered mostly for his association
with Jacques Offenbach, creator of The Tales of Hoffman.
Sources and Further Reading
Broadcast Music, Inc. 1990. BMI 50th Anniversary History Book. http://
www.bmi.com/library/brochures/historybook/index.asp.
Caslon Analytics. 2002. “Copyright Collecting Societies.” http://www
.caslon.com.au/colsocietiesprofile.htm.
SACEM. La Sacem: Une Histoire d’amour Entre la Musique et le Droit d’au-
teur.
http://www.sacem.fr/portailSacem/jsp/ep/channelView.do
?channelId=-536881293&channelPage=ACTION%3BBVCONTENT
%3B0%3B%2Fep%2FprogramView.do&pageTypeId=8586 (in French).
152
Biographies

Filippo Brunelleschi (1377–1446)
The Italian Renaissance sculptor, mathematician, and architect
Filippo Brunelleschi is best known for building the Duomo—the
Basilica di Santa Maria del Fiore—in Florence. He devoted the
greatest part of his professional life to the project, and during the
course of the construction earned another historical distinction,
becoming the first person to be awarded a patent, in the modern
sense, for an invention (see Chapter 1). The construction of the
Duomo required a great deal of marble, which had to be trans-
ported up the Arno River from Pisa to Florence. To transport this
marble Brunelleschi designed and built a barge, Il Badalone (The
Monster), which was quite different from earlier riverboats used
for the same purpose. Il Badalone used special hoisting gear to lift
the heavy blocks of marble on and off the boat. In the preamble to
his patent, Brunelleschi argued that he should be granted “some
prerogative concerning” his invention. This would actually in-
crease the eventual availability of the invention: If granted this
prerogative, “he would open up what he is hiding and would dis-
close it to all.” If not, he would “[refuse] to make such machine
available to the public, in order that the fruit of his genius and
skill [might] not be reaped by another without his will and con-
sent” (King 2005). 
Brunelleschi’s plans for Il Badalone brought derision from
university lecturer and architectural rival Giovanni da Prato, who
wrote:
O you deep fountain, pit of ignorance,
You Miserable beast and imbecile,
Who thinks uncertain things can be made visible:
There is no substance to your alchemy.
The fickle mob, eternally deceived
In all its hope, may still believe in you,
But never will you, worthless nobody,
Make that come true which is impossible.
So if the Badalon, your water bird,
Were ever finished—which can never be—
I would no longer read on Dante at school
But finish my existence with my hand.
For surely you are mad. You hardly know
Your own profession. Leave us, please, alone. 
Biographies
153

Brunelleschi responded with another sonnet, equally in-
sulting:
When hope is given us by Heaven,
O you ridiculous-looking beast,
We rise above corruptible matter
And gain the strength of clearest sight.
A fool will lose what hope he has,
For all experience disappoints him.
For wise men nothing that exists
Remains unseen; they do not share
The idle dreams of would-be scholars.
Only the artist, not the fool
Discovers that which nature hides.
Therefore untangle the web of your verses,
Lest they strike sour notes in the dance
When your “impossible” comes to pass.
(Translations reproduced in Walker 2002, 136–137) 
Da Prato later lost his job teaching Dante because of budget
cuts, but he did not take his life when Il Badalone was completed
(Walker 2002, 137).
In 1421 Brunelleschi received his groundbreaking patent,
which gave him a monopoly on the manufacture of vessels to his
design for three years—and the right to burn any infringing ves-
sel. Brunelleschi’s arguments and the city’s response were en-
tirely modern. To this day patent law is viewed as serving two
functions: encouraging inventors to invent by granting them a
monopoly, and ensuring that the public will eventually gain ac-
cess to the invention by placing a time limit on the monopoly.
Possession of what may have been the world’s first utility
patent brought Brunelleschi no wealth, however. Il Badalone’s
loading mechanism may have been ingenious, but its seaworthi-
ness (or riverworthiness) was less impressive. Il Badalone sank on
its first voyage, perhaps taking a hundred Florentine tons (about
37 avoirdupois tons) of Carrara marble to the bottom of the Arno
River near Empoli. History, unfortunately, has not preserved Gio-
vanni da Prato’s reaction to this news, although he must have
been delighted (King 2005; but see Walker 2002, 164–165: Il Bad-
alone may not have sunk, and thus “perhaps it was not a total fail-
ure; yet it could hardly be called a success”). 
154
Biographies

Despite the loss of Il Badalone, Brunelleschi managed to see
the Duomo through nearly to completion by the time of his death
and to leave his architectural stamp on Florence in the form of the
Ospedale degli Innocenti, the Basilica di San Lorenzo di Firenze,
and the Chiesa di Santa Maria del Santo Spirito. He is interred in
his masterpiece, the Basilica di Santa Maria del Fiore.
Sources and Further Reading
King, Jamie. 2005. “The Dissolving Fortress.” European Journal of Higher
Arts Education. February. http://www.ejhae.elia-artschools.org/Issue2/
2d-king.htm.
Misa, Thomas J. 2004. Leonardo to the Internet: Technology & Culture from
the Renaissance to the Present. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press. 
O’Connor, J. J., and E. F. Robertson. 2002. Filippo Brunelleschi. School of
Mathematics and Statistics, University of St. Andrews, Scotland. February.
http://www-history.mcs.st-andrews.ac.uk/Biographies/Brunelleschi
.html.
Walker, Paul Robert. 2002. The Feud that Sparked the Renaissance: How
Brunelleschi and Ghiberti Changed the Art World. New York: HarperCollins
(William Morrow).
Laurens Coster (ca. 1370–1440)
Laurens Janszoon Coster may have been an early printer—or may
not have been. The generally accepted view is that Johannes
Gutenberg was the first European to print with movable type.
Coster, who died more than a decade before Gutenberg printed
his first Bible, was a prominent citizen of Haarlem, in the Nether-
lands, where among other offices he served as a church sexton
and as city treasurer. Coster is rumored to have printed several
books in Haarlem. In one version of the story, Coster’s assistant,
Johann Fust, stole Coster’s printing presses, perhaps after
Coster’s death, and took them to Gutenberg.
The debate over whether Coster or Gutenberg was “first” can
grow quite heated, yet the answer is less interesting than the Eu-
rocentric view of history that the question reveals. Movable-type
printing had been in use in China, Korea, and elsewhere in East
Asia for centuries before either Coster or Gutenberg was born.
Biographies
155

Coster, Gutenberg, and other pioneering European printers of the
fifteenth century were products of history rather than shapers of
it. Printing came about more because of the availability of cheaper
paper and other materials than because of any brilliant techno-
logical breakthrough. The Costerites, for example, suggest that
the idea for his printing press came to Coster when he was cut-
ting letters from the bark of a tree for the amusement of his grand-
children: “The letters fell into the sand, and from the impression
that they left the idea came to him that letters such as these might
also be impressed upon paper in order to print books” (Psymon
Web Bindery). 
This is nonsense. Coster may or may not have printed books
before Gutenberg, and he may or may not have cut letters from
tree bark. But even if he was unaware of Chinese and Korean in-
novations in printing, he would have been familiar with block
printing. Block printing, in which an entire page is carved from a
single block, was already widely in use in Europe for pictures and
text. It would have required no moment of inspiration for Coster,
or for that matter Gutenberg or anyone else, to realize that indi-
vidual letters could also be used for printing. What was required
instead was a great deal of work to iron out the inevitable prob-
lems. Coster may have done some of this work, and Gutenberg
undoubtedly did. But development of printing did not stop after
Gutenberg, and today, ironically, it has come full circle: Typeset-
ting is nearly a vanished art, and pages today are “set” by com-
puter as a single piece, rather than as collections of bits of remov-
able (and reusable) type. Nonetheless, a statue of Coster still
stands in Haarlem’s central marketplace.
Sources and Further Reading 
Hadrianus Junius. Batavia (Antwerp, 1588; in Latin), page referring to
Coster available at http://www.psymon.com/koster/batavia.html.
Psymon Web Bindery. The Legend of Koster. http://www.psymon
.com/koster/.
Annie Ellsworth (1826–1900)
The Patent Act of 1836 (see Chapter 1) radically revamped and
modernized U.S. patent law. The Act created the modern U.S.
Patent Office (now the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office) to eval-
156
Biographies

uate patent applications and grant patents. A year earlier Henry
Ellsworth had been appointed patent commissioner; in 1836 the
U.S. Patent Office suffered a disastrous fire, destroying almost all
of the existing patent models and records. By 1843 Henry had
employed his seventeen-year-old daughter, Annie, as a patent
copyist. (In those days before the invention and patenting of
copying machines, copies of original patents had to be made by
hand.)
Henry’s nepotism might raise eyebrows today, but a truly
meritocratic civil service did not yet exist. Henry himself was the
son of Oliver Ellsworth, third chief justice of the U.S. Supreme
Court; Henry’s twin brother William became governor of Con-
necticut shortly after Henry became patent commissioner.
Nepotism notwithstanding, the two Ellsworths, father and
daughter, proved to be good hires, and they played a crucial role
in creating a modern patent review process in the United States.
From copying patents at the age of seventeen, Annie progressed
to more difficult assignments, paving the way for future female
U.S. Patent Office employees (such as Clara Barton) to rise yet
higher in the system. In 1844 Annie Ellsworth also initiated the
first link in the global electronic information network, sending
the world’s first telegraph message: “What hath God wrought?”
(Brown 1994, 177; the words are from Numbers 23:23). According
to family tradition, Annie was at the time infatuated with fifty-
two-year-old Samuel Morse, the inventor of the telegraph. If this
is true, there is an interesting postscript: A century and a half
later, Annie’s descendant Jennie Jackson married Samuel’s de-
scendant Brian Morse. The two were unaware of their historical
connection until after announcing their engagement (Dobyns
1994, 205–206).
Sources and Further Reading
Brown, Travis. 1994. Historical First Patents: The First United States Patents
for Many Everyday Things. Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press.
Dinwoodie, Graeme B., William O. Hennessey, and Shira Perlmutter.
2002. International and Comparative Patent Law. Newark, NJ: LexisNexis
Matthew Bender.
Dobyns, Kenneth W. 1994. The Patent Office Pony: A History of the Early
Patent Office. Spotsylvania, VA: Sergeant Kirklands Museum.
Kaufer, Erich. 1989. The Economics of the Patent System. Chur, Switzerland:
Harwood Academic Publishers.
Biographies
157

Johannes Gutenberg (ca. 1395–1468)
Johannes Gutenberg has become indelibly associated in the pop-
ular imagination with one of history’s greatest revolutions in in-
formation technology—the spread throughout Europe and the
Americas of commercial printing using movable type. Gutenberg
may or may not have been the first European to use movable type
(see the Laurens Coster entry in this chapter). However, even if oth-
ers in Europe had already experimented with movable type,
Gutenberg and his colleagues made dramatic innovations, bring-
ing European printing up to the technological level of East Asian
printing.
In the early to mid-fifteenth century, Gutenberg moved from
his hometown of Mainz to Strasbourg, where he became a part-
ner in a printing shop. The shop used the cumbersome block-
printing techniques of the day. The tremendous amount of labor
required to cut out each page-printing block meant that printing
was expensive, which in turn meant that most block-printed
works were short, often no more than a single page. The cost of
printing entire books by this method was prohibitive. 
While in Strasbourg, Gutenberg experimented with movable
type. Three technological problems had to be solved to make
movable type practical. First, Gutenberg had to find a metal alloy
with a sufficiently low melting point; the higher the melting
point, the greater the cost (in fuel and time, and thus in money) of
making the type. Second, he had to develop an ink that would ad-
here to the metal, but would not be so viscous as to gum up the
printing press. Third, the press itself had to be made. The equip-
ment used for block printing was unsuitable, so a wine press was
used instead.
In 1448 Gutenberg, having made considerable progress on
solving these problems, returned to his hometown of Mainz and
opened his own printing shop, with the financial backing of Jo-
hann Fust. (An alternate theory is that Fust, not Gutenberg, pro-
vided the necessary technological know-how, perhaps having
stolen it from Laurens Coster.) Seven years later, in 1455, Guten-
berg exhibited his Bible at the Frankfurt Trade Fair. This first
Bible, made with more than 300 pieces of type, was still expensive
and was probably aimed at institutional buyers. Within a few
years, however, Gutenberg and others had refined and simplified
158
Biographies

the printing process, bringing printed books within the reach of
most literate persons—and many illiterate ones, increasing the in-
centive to become literate.
Far more is known about the Gutenberg Bible, many copies
of which are still in existence, than about Gutenberg’s life—it is
not even certain that he actually printed the Bible. One thing that
is known, however, is that in 1455, the year in which the Bible was
exhibited at Frankfurt, Fust sued Gutenberg. Fust had advanced
a great deal of money to Gutenberg, possibly for the preparation
of the Bible. Gutenberg lost the suit and Fust apparently gained
control of part or all of the printing operation, which he then op-
erated with his son-in-law Peter Schoffer (Misa 2004, 21; Harry
Ransom Center 2002; Gray 1999). Gutenberg died thirteen years
later, but not, apparently, in poverty: He was granted a pension
by the archbishop of Mainz, and he may have started a new print-
ing business.
Sources and Further Reading
Gies, Frances, and Joseph Gies. 1994. Cathedral, Forge and Waterwheel:
Technology and Invention in the Middle Ages. New York: HarperCollins.
Gray, Paul. 1999. “Most Important People of the Millennium—Johann
Gutenberg (c. 1395–1468): The Obscure Printer’s Innovation Kindled Re-
formations and a Yet Unfinished Information Revolution.” Time, Decem-
ber 31.
Harry Ransom Center (University of Texas at Austin). 2002. “The Guten-
berg Bible at the Ransom Center.” http://www.hrc.utexas.edu/
exhibitions/permanent/gutenberg/.
Misa, Thomas J. 2004. Leonardo to the Internet: Technology and Culture from
the Renaissance to the Present. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins University
Press. 
Victor Hugo (1802–1885)
France’s most celebrated author and poet of the nineteenth cen-
tury, the author of Les Misérables and The Hunchback of Notre Dame,
did perhaps more than any other individual to bring about the
current international copyright regime. In 1838 (seven years after
the publication of The Hunchback of Notre Dame) he cofounded the
Société des Gens de Lettres with other famous writers including
Biographies
159

Honoré de Balzac, Alexandre Dumas, and George Sand. The So-
ciété is still in existence and continues to advise writers on intel-
lectual property issues. Forty years later, in 1878 (sixteen years
after the first publication of Les Misérables), the Société served as
a vehicle for Hugo to found the Association Littéraire et Artis-
tique Internationale (ALAI), an organization that had as its pur-
pose the pursuit of an international copyright convention (see
Chapter 7). Like the Société des Gens de Lettres, the ALAI is still
in existence. Across the top of its home page are the words
“Fondée à Paris par Victor Hugo en 1878” (“Founded in Paris by
Victor Hugo in 1878”).
The ALAI’s moment of triumph came in 1886, with the cre-
ation of the Berne Convention—but Hugo did not live to see it.
He died in May 1885, more than a year before the signing of the
Berne Convention in September 1886.
Sources and Further Reading
Association Littéraire et Artistique Internationale. Home page. http://
www.alai.org/index-f.php?sm=0 (in French); English translation at
http://www.alai.org/index-a.php?sm=0. 
Convention Concerning the Creation of an International Union for the
Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Berne Convention), Sept. 9,
1886, as last revised at Paris, July 24, 1971 (amended 1979), 25 U.S.T. 1341,
828 U.N.T.S. 221.
Société des Gens de Lettres. Découvrez la SGDL: Historique. http://
www.sgdl.org  (in French). 
Jon Lech Johansen (1983–)
Movies sold on DVD are encrypted to make them harder to copy.
The encryption method used, Content Scramble System (CSS) is
owned by the DVD Copy Control Association (DVD CCA). The
DVD CCA licenses decryption keys to the makers of DVD players;
without these keys, the players would be unable to play encrypted
DVDs. The distribution of the decryption keys is carefully con-
trolled, because any technically sophisticated person who gained
access to a decryption key would be able to decrypt (and make or
enable the making of unauthorized copies of) the encrypted work.
Even stringent security precautions, however, cannot prevent the
decryption keys from being reverse engineered.
160
Biographies

In 1999, a program called DeCSS, which was capable of de-
crypting CSS-encrypted DVDs, appeared. It was first posted on 6
October 1999, by a fifteen-year-old Norwegian, Jon Lech Johansen.
The DVD CCA, the Motion Picture Association of America, and
other content-industry groups were outraged; lawyers in Norway
for these groups demanded that the Norwegian government do
something, and on 23 January 2000, Johansen was arrested at his
home by three police officers. Two years later, on 9 January 2002,
he was indicted for violating Norwegian copyright law.
Breaking the copy protection encryption on copyrighted
DVDs was forbidden under Norwegian law at the time, as it is
under U.S. law. However, the attempt to prosecute “DVD Jon”
backfired on those in the content industry who had encouraged it.
Johansen became an instant celebrity, a poster child for consumer
rights advocates. Many consumers had bitterly resented the
restrictions placed on copyrighted DVD content that they had pur-
chased, and Johansen’s trial provided a focus for that anger. Infor-
mation rights advocacy groups, including the Electronic Frontier
Foundation (see Chapter 7), assisted in Johansen’s defense. 
At the time, no decryption keys were licensed for playing
CSS-encrypted DVDs on Linux systems. A consumer who had a
Linux system, but no Macintosh or Windows system and no li-
censed DVD player, could not play an encrypted DVD. Johansen
did not copy DVDs; he ostensibly intended DeCSS to be used to
play CSS-encrypted DVDs on Linux systems. On 7 January 2003,
a year after his indictment and three years after his arrest, Jo-
hansen was acquitted by the trial court. In Norway, however, as
in many countries (but not the United States), the prosecution can
appeal an acquittal, and Økokrim, the Norwegian government’s
economic crimes division, chose to do so. 
The appeal was heard by the Borgarting Appellate Court,
which upheld the trial court’s decision on 22 December 2003. Jo-
hansen had committed no crime, the appellate court decided (with-
out using his name, because he was a minor). In January 2004,
Økokrim announced that it would not pursue the case further. 
While the decision of the Borgarting Appellate Court was a
victory for consumer and information rights advocates, as well as
for Johansen personally, it was a limited one. DeCSS had taken on
a life of its own outside Norway, and information rights activists
in other countries, notably the United States, had deliberately
challenged laws forbidding its distribution. In the United States,
especially, these challenges were less successful than in Norway
Biographies
161

(see Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429; DVD Copy
Control Association, Inc. v. Bunner, 4 Cal.Rptr.3d 69). 
Like DeCSS, Johansen (who now lives in the United States)
has not vanished from the public eye. Shortly before his appeal
was heard by the Borgarting Appellate Court, someone—appar-
ently Johansen—posted a program capable of decrypting the .aap
files used by Apple’s iTunes. Throughout 2004, 2005, and 2006 Jo-
hansen’s website (http://nanocrew.net/) has continued to pro-
vide downloadable software.
Sources and Further Reading
Chu, Jeff. 2002. “Enemy At The Gates? Jon Johansen’s Trial for Hacking
May Be a Key Battle in the Struggle between Industry and Innovation.”
Time, July 8, 46.
DVD Copy Control Association, Inc. v. Bunner, 4 Cal.Rptr.3d 69 (2003).
Johansen, Jon Lech. So Sue Me: Jon Lech Johansen’s Blog. http://
nanocrew.net/.
Lessig, Lawrence. 2004. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Technology and
the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativity. New York: Penguin. 
“Norwegian Hacker Cracks iTunes Code.” 2003. November 27. http://
www.cnn.com/2003/TECH/internet/11/27/itunes.code.ap/index.html.
Sunde (for Norway) v. Johansen, Oslo First Instance Trial Court, January 7,
2003, No. 02-507 M/94, English translation by Professor Jon Bing available
at 
http://www.eff.org/IP/Video/Johansen_DeCSS_case/20030109 
_johansen_decision.html; on appeal, Borgarting Appellate Court, Dec. 22,
2003, No. LB-2003-00731, English translation by Professor Jon Bing avail-
able at http://www.efn.no/DVD-dom-20031222-en.html.
Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d 429 (2nd Cir. 2001).
Mary Kies (1752–1837)
In 1809, Mary Kies, of Killingly, Connecticut, became the first
woman to obtain a U.S. patent. Kies invented an improved
method of weaving straw with silk or thread for making hats. She
was not the first U.S. woman to create an innovation in hatmak-
ing. In 1798 Betsy Metcalf had invented, but not patented, a
method of braiding straw that was in widespread use at the time
of Kies’ invention. Kies, however, applied for a patent. The patent
was signed by then-President James Madison; Dolley Madison,
the president’s wife, wrote a note to Kies congratulating her.
162
Biographies

Her achievement earned her a small place in history, but un-
fortunately no money. Her son Daniel and others invested con-
siderable money in a hatmaking enterprise using her invention,
but they failed to profit, perhaps because of changes in fashion
and the resumption of trade with Europe after the end of the
Napoleonic wars. After her husband died in 1813, Kies moved in
with Daniel and lived with him until her death. She died in
poverty and was buried in a pauper’s grave, although a belated
recognition of her significance to U.S. history led to a monument
in 1965.
No copy of the Kies patent survives; a fire in the U.S. Patent
Office in 1836 destroyed thousands of patent records, including
hers. However, two samples of her patented straw fabric, woven
by Kies herself, can be seen at the Bugbee Memorial Library in
Killingly.
Sources and Further Reading
Killingly Historical Society. 2005. “Mary (Dixon) Kies, America’s First Fe-
male Patent Holder.” http://www.killinglyhistory.org/jol7/page5.htm.
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.  2004. Inventor of the Week
Archive. “Mary Kies: Process for Weaving Straw.” January. http://
web.mit.edu/invent/iow/kies.html.
Antonio Meucci (1808–1889)
Landmark accomplishments often invite controversy; just as Jo-
hannes Gutenberg had his Laurens Coster, Alexander Graham
Bell, inventor of the telephone, had his Antonio Meucci.
Meucci was an immigrant from Italy. Between 1859 and 1883
he received fourteen U.S. patents, none for a telephone or any
form of electric communications device. According to his sup-
porters, though, he exhibited a telephone in New York in 1860. It
is known that in 1871 he filed a patent caveat for a telephonic
communications device. This caveat was a notice of an impend-
ing patent, preserving the inventor’s rights for a renewable one-
year period. The caveat expired in 1874 when the impoverished
Meucci was unable to pay the ten-dollar renewal fee; had Meucci
been able to maintain the caveat, Bell’s 1876 patent could not have
been granted (H.Res. 269, 2002). 
Biographies
163

Meucci had invented his communications device, which may
or may not have been a telephone, to communicate with his par-
alyzed wife from various parts of his house. Later, when Meucci
was severely injured in a steamship explosion, his wife sold his
working models to pay for his medical care; she received six dol-
lars. In a striking similarity to the Coster-Fust-Gutenberg theory,
Meucci’s advocates believe the models may have eventually
found their way into Bell’s hands. 
Meucci sued Bell; eventually the U.S. government joined in,
filing suit against Bell for fraud. Meucci was not the only person
to feel wronged by Bell; other claimants for inventor of the tele-
phone include Charles Bourseul, Sylvanus Cushman, Amos Dol-
bear, Daniel Drawbaugh, Edward Farrar, Elisha Gray (who filed a
caveat on the same day Bell filed his patent application, although
Bell’s application was received earlier in the day), Innocenzo
Manzetti, James McDonough, and Johann Philipp Reis (Bellis no
date). Meucci died in poverty in 1889, and in 1893 Bell’s patent ex-
pired. The underlying issue in Meucci’s lawsuit—the question of
who invented the telephone—was never resolved (H.Res. 269,
2002). In 2002 his accomplishments were belatedly recognized by
the U.S. House of Representatives.
Sources and Further Reading
Bellis, Mary. “Antonio Meucci and the Invention of the Telephone.”
http://inventors.about.com/library/inventors/bl_Antonio_Meucci.htm.
H.Res. 269, 107th Cong., June 11, 2002. 
Levy, Daniel S. 2000. “Man-Made Marvels; and Other Bumps on the
Road of Progress . . .” Time, December 4, 91.
Eadweard  Muybridge (1830–1904)
A technology as complex as that required for making and dis-
playing motion pictures cannot be said to have a single inventor;
many innovators played a part in bringing still pictures to life on
the screen. One of the more notable—and controversial—pio-
neers in the motion picture industry was Eadweard  Muybridge,
inventor of the zoopraxiscope.
Muybridge (born Edward Muggeridge) emigrated from Eng-
land to the United States in 1850, at the age of twenty, and in the
164
Biographies

early days of photography became known for his photographs of
California’s coast and Yosemite region. In 1877 he took “The
Horse in Motion,” the series of photographs that guaranteed his
place in the history of photography and is regarded as an impor-
tant milestone in the development of motion picture technology.
In 1872, former California governor Leland Stanford com-
missioned Muybridge to take the photographs to determine
whether, when a horse is galloping, there is ever a point at which
all four of the horse’s hooves are off the ground simultaneously.
(Debate rages between Stanford’s biographer and Muybridge’s as
to whether Stanford wanted to answer the question to settle a bet
or from simple curiosity.) Muybridge’s first attempts were incon-
clusive, but in 1877 he set up 12 cameras along a Palo Alto race-
track, triggered by threads at the height of the horse’s chest; his
photos showed that there is indeed a moment at which all four of
the horse’s hooves are tucked underneath its body.
Muybridge’s breakthrough inspired a wave of innovation in
stop-motion camera technology, and Muybridge himself became
perhaps the best-known taker of such pictures. His second inno-
vation was the zoopraxiscope, which displayed pictures in rapid
succession, creating the illusion of motion. With the zoopraxis-
cope, the horse begins to gallop again, and it is no longer possible
for the unaided eye to tell whether all of its feet are off the ground
simultaneously.
Muybridge was a pioneer not only of Hollywood’s technol-
ogy but also of its mystique. He became a celebrity. His many
“films” of moving male and female nudes raised eyebrows, and
his “Woman Walking Downstairs” inspired Marcel Duchamp’s
“Nude Descending a Staircase, No. 2,” although Muybridge was
not alive to enjoy the controversy Duchamp’s painting generated.
The lesser scandals of Muybridge’s life were eclipsed by his
pioneering of what has become another entertainment-industry
tradition, however: the celebrity trial (and inexplicable acquittal).
In 1870, or perhaps earlier, Muybridge met Flora Stone, the wife of
San Francisco saddler Lucius Stone. In December 1870, Flora and
Lucius Stone divorced. At the time Muybridge was forty-one, and
Flora Stone was nineteen. Two years later the two were married,
and shortly after that Flora (now Flora Muybridge) began an affair
with Harry Larkyns. In 1874 Flora bore a son, Floredo Helios Muy-
bridge; she and Harry Larkyns continued their affair. At one point
Muybridge threatened to kill Harry if the affair continued. Late in
Biographies
165

1874 Muybridge discovered a photograph of Floredo with the
name “Little Harry” written on the back, suggesting that Flora
and Harry considered Floredo to be their son. He then spent most
of the day traveling by boat and stagecoach to Calistoga, eighty
miles away. Along the way he fired a test round from his pistol. In
Calistoga he knocked on the door of the mine superintendent and
asked for Harry Larkyns. Larkyns, who had been playing crib-
bage, came to the door. Muybridge said “Good evening, Major.
My name is Muybridge. Here is the answer to the message you
sent my wife.” He then shot Harry in the chest, killing him.
It seems incredible that Muybridge was not convicted. He
was undeniably guilty, beyond any reasonable doubt, of premed-
itated murder. There were multiple witnesses to the shooting. The
length of the journey to Calistoga, the lack of any reason for going
there other than to kill Harry Larkyns, the test shot, and the pre-
vious death threat all amounted to overwhelming evidence of
premeditation. Nonetheless, Muybridge was acquitted. His attor-
neys used an “honor killing” defense: “Muybridge was not only
avenging the wrongs done him when he shot the man dead, but
was protecting Mrs. Muybridge against him in the future”
(Prodger 2003, 261).
After his acquittal, Muybridge left for Central America. Flora,
who had filed for divorce, died, and Floredo was placed in an or-
phanage. As an adult, Floredo greatly resembled Muybridge.
Muybridge returned to the United States to create “The Horse in
Motion” and the many works that followed from it. Eventually
this too would lead to what has become an entertainment-
industry tradition: the intellectual property dispute. Stanford
commissioned a book based on “The Horse in Motion,” crediting
Muybridge not as the creator of the work but as a technician and
using lithographic reproductions rather than the higher-quality
(and more expensive to print) original photographs. Muybridge
sued Stanford, but lost. The rights he sought to protect were the
moral rights of integrity and paternity—the right to protect one’s
work against alteration and to be identified as the author of a
work—and, with very limited exceptions, these rights have never
been acknowledged in U.S. copyright law (see Chapter 1).
Sources and Further Reading
Prodger, Phillip. 2003. Time Stands Still: Muybridge and the Instantaneous
Photography Movement. New York: Oxford University Press.
166
Biographies

Sandler, Martin W. 2002. Photography: An Illustrated History. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Dmitri Sklyarov (1974– )
Like Jon Lech Johansen, Dmitri Sklyarov wrote a decryption pro-
gram; also like Johansen, Sklyarov probably did not expect to be-
come a symbol of the information rights movement by doing so.
Sklyarov, a Russian citizen living in Russia and working for a
Russian company, ElcomSoft, wrote a program called Advanced
E-Book Processor. E-books, like DVDs, are often encrypted to pro-
tect their content from unauthorized copying. Advanced E-Book
Processor made it possible to decrypt e-books protected by en-
cryption used by Adobe Systems, Inc. for its Adobe e-Book
Reader. Like Johansen’s distribution of DeCSS, this might be
characterized as resistance to expanded controls on copyrighted
content. Unlike Johansen, however, Sklyarov and ElcomSoft had
a financial motive: They sold the Advanced E-Book Processor,
presumably with the knowledge that it would be used to circum-
vent copyright protection. However, this was apparently not ille-
gal in Russia at the time.
In July 2001, Sklyarov came to the United States to deliver a
presentation, “eBook Security—Theory and Practice,” at DefCon,
a hacker convention in Las Vegas. Acting on a complaint from
Adobe, the FBI arrested Sklyarov (see, for example, Newman
2001).
Sklyarov’s arrest was a public relations disaster for Adobe
and a diplomatic embarrassment for the United States. Sklyarov
had indeed written Advanced E-Book Processor, and Advanced E-
Book Processor was illegal in the United States. However, Skl-
yarov had not written the program in the United States, nor had
he sold or distributed it while he was in the United States. In Rus-
sia, at the time only recently emerged from communism, the press
seized on the Sklyarov case to ridicule perceived U.S. hypocrisy on
issues of free speech. In the United States and around the world,
the information rights community instantly went into action.
Within hours of the arrest the Free Dmitri Sklyarov campaign was
distributing information, suggesting a boycott of Adobe, and ar-
ranging Sklyarov’s defense. 
Biographies
167

Adobe backed down almost immediately. On July 23, a week
after the arrest, Adobe issued a press release saying that Sklyarov
should be released (“Adobe, in a Reversal” 2001). The U.S. gov-
ernment, however, was less flexible. Sklyarov remained in jail,
first in Las Vegas, then in Oklahoma City, and finally in San Jose,
until 6 August, when he was released on $50,000 bail. He was not
allowed to return to Russia until 13 December, and then only on
condition that he return the following year to testify in the case
against his employer, ElcomSoft. Unlike Johansen, Sklyarov has
not remained in the public eye. He announced his intention to
seek “a quiet life from here on,” and at last report was living in
Russia with his family (Silicon.com 2003).
Sources and Further Reading
“Adobe, in a Reversal, Says U.S. Should Free Russian Programmer.”
2001. Wall Street Journal, July 24, B11.
“Charges Dropped Against Russian Programmer.” 2001. Wall Street Jour-
nal, December 14, A12.
Chu, Jeff. 2002. “Enemy At The Gates? Jon Johansen’s Trial for Hacking
May Be a Key Battle in the Struggle between Industry and Innovation.”
Time, July 8, 46.
Newman, Matthew. 2001. “The Rules—So Many Countries, So Many
Laws: The Internet May Not Have Borders; but the Legal System Cer-
tainly Does.” Wall Street Journal, April 28, R8.
“Programmer Claims Microsoft’s Technology For E-Book Is Defeatable.”
2001. Wall Street Journal, August 30, B7.
“Russian Programmer In Copyright Case Is Released on Bail.” 2001. Wall
Street Journal, August 7, B11.
Samuelson, Pamela, and Suzanne Scotchmer. 2002. “The Law and Eco-
nomics of Reverse Engineering,” Yale Law Journal 111: 1575.
Silicon.com. 2003. Top 50 Agenda Setters 2003. http://www.siliconagen-
dasetters .com/list29.html.
United States v. Elcom Ltd., 203 F. Supp.2d 1111 (N.D. Cal. 2002).
“U.S. Agents Arrest Russian Programmer Over Allegations of Copyright
Violation.” 2001. Wall Street Journal, July 18, B4.
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. 2004. The Anarchist in the Library: How the Clash Be-
tween Freedom and Control is Hacking the Real World and Crashing the Sys-
tem. New York: Basic Books.
168
Biographies

Jack Valenti (1921– )
While modern intellectual property disputes have made celebri-
ties of perceived rebels like Jon Lech Johansen and Dmitri Skl-
yarov, the content industry is not without colorful, mediagenic
personalities of its own. One of the most colorful and most
durable is Jack Valenti, the octogenarian former president of the
Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA).
A child prodigy, Valenti graduated from high school at fifteen.
In World War II, he served with the U.S. Army Air Corps as a
bomber pilot and flew 51 combat missions over Italy. After the war
he received an M.B.A. from Harvard and became a political
consultant. He can be seen in the famous picture of Lyndon B.
Johnson being sworn in as president on Air Force One after the as-
sassination of John F. Kennedy. Immediately afterward, he was ap-
pointed a special assistant to the president; he worked with the
Johnson White House until 1966, when he resigned to become the
president of the MPAA. During the next thirty-eight years Valenti
redefined the MPAA and its role in copyright enforcement and the
film industry. His first target was the MPAA’s censorship of the
movie industry: At the time, the MPAA’s Motion Picture Produc-
tion Code (also known as the Hays Code, after the MPAA’s first
president) explicitly forbade or restricted a wide variety of depic-
tions, from interracial dating and marriage to the portrayal of a
minister as a comic character or villain. Valenti created the now-
familiar MPAA rating system, which classifies movies according
to the age of the audience for which they are deemed appropriate.
The 1970s brought the Sony Betamax VCR into American
households, and Valenti became notorious for his colorfully
worded attacks on the technology. He told a Congressional panel
that “the VCR is to the American film producer and the American
public as the Boston strangler is to the woman home alone”
(Greenhouse 2004). Later he declared that twin-drive VCRs were
“the latest piece of evil magic doing the devil’s work . . . It’s like
being able to market an ignition key that would start any car in
America” (“Hollywood Nightmares” 1985). The VCR, Valenti
claimed, provided a test of whether “copyright is real or whether
it is mush . . . the future of creative entertainment of the American
Biographies
169

family is what’s at stake here” (Stengel 1984). Another problem,
Valenti pointed out, was the threat to TV networks’ advertising
revenue: With a VCR, viewers could “assassinate” commercials
(Stengel 1984). 
The movie industry’s first battle against the VCR, however,
ended in defeat. In 1984 the U.S. Supreme Court held that
recording television programs for time-shifting purposes was a
protected fair use (see Chapter 1). Improvements in copying
technology led to more court battles, but Valenti was more di-
rectly involved with lobbying and was instrumental in bringing
about some of the major revisions of U.S. copyright law in the
1990s. The Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, with its
anticircumvention and digital rights managements provisions
and its requirement that anti–copying enabling technology be
included in VCRs sold in the United States, went a long way to-
ward solving the VCR problem and even the problem of more
sophisticated copying technologies. The Sonny Bono Copyright
Term Extension Act of the same year extended copyright terms
by twenty years, providing movie studios with a continued in-
come stream for its older properties, perhaps measured in the
billions of dollars. In arguing for the latter statute, Representa-
tive Mary Bono proposed that at some point Congress might
want to consider “Jack Valenti’s proposal for [the copyright]
term to last forever less one day” (Statement of Representative
Mary Bono 1998).
Online file sharing threatened (and continues to threaten) the
movie industry, although perhaps to a lesser degree than it threat-
ened the music industry. Anxious to avoid making enemies of its
customers, as the music industry had, Valenti handled file shar-
ing cautiously, saying “The movie studios are trying to prevent
themselves from becoming the next music industry” (Greenhouse
2004). In confronting online rebroadcaster iCrave TV, however, he
was characteristically blunt, calling iCrave’s service “one of the
largest and most brazen thefts of intellectual property ever com-
mitted in the U.S.” (Borland 2000).
Valenti retired as MPAA president in 2004, at the age of
eighty-two. Since then he has continued to be an active voice in
the ongoing debate over mass media and copyright.
170
Biographies

Sources and Further Reading
Bansal, Monisha. 2006. “Parents in ‘Complete Control’ of TV, Says Jack
Valenti.” CNS News, May 11. http://www.cnsnews.com/ViewCulture
.asp?Page=/Culture/archive/200605/CUL20060511a.html.
Borland, John. iCraveTV.com exec discusses his start-up’s short life.
C/Net News.com, Feb. 29, 2000, http://news.com.com/2100-1033-
237450.html.
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. §§ 1201–1205.
Greenhouse, Linda. 2004. “Justices Agree To Hear Case On File Sharing.”
NY Times, December 11, 5.
Hamilton, Anita. 2004. “Failed Merger: TV On The Net.” NY Times, De-
cember 11, 1.
“Hollywood Nightmares.” 1985. Time, February 11, 73.
Landro, Laura. 1984. “The Scene-Stealer: Hollywood’s Lobbyist, Jack
Valenti, Upstages Industry’s Opponents.” Wall Street Journal, October 2.
Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417 (1984).
Statement of Representative Mary Bono Regarding the Sonny Bono
Copyright Term Extension Act. 1998. October 7. 144 Cong. Rec. H9946-
01, H9952.
Stengel, Richard. 1984. “Tape It to the Max; The Supreme Court Says a
VCR Switch in Time Is Not a Crime.” Time, January 30, 67.
Valenti, Jack. 1982. “Protecting the Artist.” Time, January 4, 6.
Valenti, Jack. 1981. “Renew America.” Time, March 16, 6.
Terri Welles (1956– )
While in recent years copyright battles have captured the head-
lines (when intellectual property disputes make the news at all,
that is), the Internet has brought about a somewhat quieter crisis
in trademark law. Questions that have been addressed in tradi-
tional media often have to be addressed anew online, and the In-
ternet also raises new questions.
In May and December 1980, United Airlines flight attendant
Terri Welles posed for Playboy magazine. In 1981 the magazine
Biographies
171

proclaimed her its “Playmate of the Year,” a term that has com-
mercial value and is claimed as a trademark by Playboy Enter-
prises, Inc. Sixteen years later, in 1997, Welles set up a commercial
website, terriwelles.com, offering pictures of herself and other
content to subscribers. On the site she used Playboy’s trademarks
in three ways: She used the term “Playmate of the Year” in banner
advertisements and in the headline of the Web page, she used the
repeated term “PMOY 1981” as a wallpaper design, and she used
the terms “playboy” and “playmate” in metatags. The first two
uses were similar to uses that might have occurred in the pre-In-
ternet era and might still occur in print media. The third use was
specific to the Internet: The metatags were invisible to persons
viewing the site, but were visible to search engines. Welles used
them, as many Web designers did, to direct search-engine traffic to
her site. Thus, persons searching for “playboy” or “playmate”
would be directed to her site (as well as to others using those
terms, including Playboy Enterprises’ own site).
The Court of Appeals for the Ninth Circuit held that the use
of the terms in metatags and the use of “Playmate of the Year” in
banner ads and the headline were permissible (see Chapter 2).
The “PMOY 1981” wallpaper design was not, however, and
Welles subsequently removed it from her site. Her blog entry for
11 February 2002 celebrates the Ninth Circuit’s decision and
points out that Playboy Enterprises would have fared better had
it paid her not to use the name rather than suing her:
It’s finally OVER! 
*** Playboy could have saved millions on lawyers,
(giving me a mere pittance of what they actually spent
to LOSE the . . . case), saved face and looked as if they
won. The other Playmates would have had nowhere to
go but to the Playboy site to sell their goods. Now, the
Playmates can actually STATE they are PLAYMATES!!!!!
And on their own web sites!!!! (Welles 2002)
In other words, Welles’s victory affirmed the right of other
people—models, contest winners, professional athletes, actors—
to use the trademark of the event or enterprise for which they are
known in order to identify themselves. Welles’s blog and the
Ninth Circuit’s opinion both refer to former Chicago Bulls player
Michael Jordan, pointing out that there is no practical way for
172
Biographies

him to describe his team affiliation without using the (trade-
marked) name of the team.
Welles’s blog was last updated in late 2003; the last entries
are concerned with the unusual California gubernatorial election
of that year, in which 135 candidates for governor appeared on
the ballot. Welles expresses support for the Republican Party,
Arnold Schwarzenegger, U.S. troops, and the University of
Southern California Trojans, among others.
Sources and Further Reading
Playboy Enterprises, Inc. v. Welles, 279 F.3d 796 (9th Cir. 2002).
Welles, Terri. My Autobiography—and a Few Other Facts . . . http://
www.terriwelles.com/free/faq.html.
Welles, Terri. TerriTalk
(blog). http://www.terriwelles.com/free/
talk.html.
Samuel Winslow (fl. 1641) and
Joseph Jenks (1602–1683)
The first patent granted to an inventor in the British North Amer-
ican colonies was granted in 1641 by the Massachusetts Bay
Colony to Samuel Winslow. Little is known about Winslow other
than the information contained in his patent, granted in accor-
dance with Massachusetts’ first patent law, which provided that
“there shall be no monopolies granted or allowed among us, but
of such new inventions as are profitable to the country, and that
for a short time” (Brown 1994, 88). Winslow’s patent was for the
manufacture of salt “by a means and way which hitherto hath not
been discovered[.]” The patent granted “to him and his associ-
ates, for the space of ten years,” the exclusive right to use the salt-
making process, although the monopoly did not extend to other
means of making salt (Brown 1994, 88; spelling modernized).
Five years later, in 1646, Massachusetts granted Joseph Jenks
a patent “for the making of engines for mills, to go with water, for
the more speedy dispatch of work than formerly, and mills for the
making of scythes and other edged tools, with a new invented
sawmill” (Brown 1994, 88; spelling modernized). By the end of
the seventeenth century the British colonies in Virgina and South
Biographies
173

Carolina had also granted patents to inventors. New York’s first
patent was granted somewhat later, in 1712.
Jenks was a prominent figure in early Massachusetts history.
He had come to Massachusetts from England in 1643 to set up
British colonies’ first ironworks. In 1652 he created the dies used
to make the first money minted in the British colonies, and in
1654 he built the colonies’ first fire engine. While these innova-
tions resulted in no patents, in 1655 he obtained a second patent,
this time for a new type of scythe blade (Brown 1994, 89). 
Sources and Further Reading
Brown, Travis. 1994. Historical First Patents: The First United States Patents
for Many Everyday Things. Metuchen, NJ: The Scarecrow Press.
Dahn, Frank W. 1921. “Colonial Patents in the United States of America.”
Journal of the Patent Office Society 3: 342.
Dinwoodie, Graeme B., William O. Hennessey, and Shira Perlmutter.
2002. International and Comparative Patent Law. Newark, NJ: LexisNexis
Matthew Bender.
174
Biographies

6
Data and Documents
T
his chapter presents a selection of documents on U.S. and in-
ternational intellectual property law. Space does not permit
the inclusion of all of the relevant documents, or even all of the
important ones—such a collection of documents would be con-
siderably longer than this book. Instead, this chapter presents se-
lected documents from the three traditional areas of intellectual
property (omitted sections are indicated by three asterisks [***]).
For each, crucial U.S. statutes are included, along with relevant
sections from one treaty (the World Trade Organization’s [WTO]
Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights [TRIPs]). Each of the three sections—copyright, trade-
mark, and patent—also includes one reported court opinion.
All of these documents and other statutes, cases, regulations,
treaties, international organization documents, and other materi-
als produced by governmental and intergovernmental organiza-
tions can be found online. Chapter 8 provides an expanded list of
source materials, and Chapter 7 includes a list of organizations
from which many of these documents are available. Most of these
materials can also be located using Google or another search en-
gine. Materials created by governments and international organi-
zations are almost always available for free. Academic articles,
reports from nongovernmental organizations, and some books
are also available online for free. Some materials may be available
online only from fee-based proprietary databases, such as those
listed at the end of Chapter 8; however, these may also be avail-
able in hard copy in libraries.
175

Copyright
The Copyright Act of 1976, as amended, is the current U.S. copyright
law; it is contained in Title 17 of the United States Code. Section 102 of
the law sets the scope of copyright protection by defining the things that
can and cannot be copyrighted. A careful examination will show that
Section 102 also sets forth (as much by omission as by specification) the
process (or lack thereof) by which copyright protection may be obtained:
No formalities are required. The act of fixing an original work of au-
thorship in a tangible medium of expression is sufficient.
Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. § 102.
Subject matter of copyright: In general
(a) Copyright protection subsists, in accordance with this title, in
original works of authorship fixed in any tangible medium of
expression, now known or later developed, from which they can be
perceived, reproduced, or otherwise communicated, either directly or
with the aid of a machine or device. Works of authorship include the
following categories:
(1) literary works;
(2) musical works, including any accompanying words;
(3) dramatic works, including any accompanying music;
(4) pantomimes and choreographic works;
(5) pictorial, graphic, and sculptural works;
(6) motion pictures and other audiovisual works;
(7) sound recordings; and
(8) architectural works.
(b) In no case does copyright protection for an original work of
authorship extend to any idea, procedure, process, system, method of
operation, concept, principle, or discovery, regardless of the form in
which it is described, explained, illustrated, or embodied in such work.
Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. § 106.
Exclusive rights in copyrighted works
While Section 102 describes what may be protected by copyright, it does
not explain the extent or nature of that protection. Section 106 fills this
gap by according six rights to the copyright holder. (Moral rights, which
are not widely recognized in U.S. law, are the subject of a separate
statute, Section 106A).
176
Data and Documents

Subject to sections 107 through 122, the owner of copyright under
this title has the exclusive rights to do and to authorize any of the
following:
(1) to reproduce the copyrighted work in copies or phonorecords;
(2) to prepare derivative works based upon the copyrighted work;
(3) to distribute copies or phonorecords of the copyrighted work to
the public by sale or other transfer of ownership, or by rental,
lease, or lending;
(4) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic
works, pantomimes, and motion pictures and other audiovisual
works, to perform the copyrighted work publicly;
(5) in the case of literary, musical, dramatic, and choreographic
works, pantomimes, and pictorial, graphic, or sculptural works,
including the individual images of a motion picture or other
audiovisual work, to display the copyrighted work publicly; and
(6) in the case of sound recordings, to perform the copyrighted
work publicly by means of a digital audio transmission. 
Copyright Act of 1976, 17 U.S.C. § 107.
Limitations on exclusive rights: Fair use
The rights granted to the copyright holder by Section 106 are not ab-
solute; they are subject to several exceptions. Perhaps the most impor-
tant and most controversial of these exceptions is the right of fair use.
Notwithstanding the provisions of sections 106 and 106A, the fair
use of a copyrighted work, including such use by reproduction in
copies or phonorecords or by any other means specified by that section,
for purposes such as criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching
(including multiple copies for classroom use), scholarship, or research,
is not an infringement of copyright. In determining whether the use
made of a work in any particular case is a fair use the factors to be
considered shall include—
(1) the purpose and character of the use, including whether such
use is of a commercial nature or is for nonprofit educational
purposes; 
(2) the nature of the copyrighted work; 
(3) the amount and substantiality of the portion used in relation to
the copyrighted work as a whole; and 
(4) the effect of the use upon the potential market for or value of
the copyrighted work. 
Copyright
177

The fact that a work is unpublished shall not itself bar a finding of
fair use if such finding is made upon consideration of all the above
factors. 
Digital Millennium Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. §
1201. Circumvention of copyright protection
systems
The advent of digital recording, and in particular the advent of digitally
recorded movies, posed a threat to the content industry: Any number of
copies, and copies of copies, of a work could be made, with no diminu-
tion in quality. To prevent such copying, content owners encrypted their
content, then licensed decryption keys to equipment makers. The prob-
lem with such an approach was that eventually someone would figure
out how to break the encryption. The content industry succeeded in con-
vincing the U.S. Congress to back up technological measures such as en-
cryption with a law prohibiting anyone from breaking the encryption.
However, this anticircumvention provision proved enormously unpopu-
lar with consumers; it may have done more than anything else to galva-
nize organized opposition to the content industry’s attempts to expand
the scope of intellectual property protection.
Take a look at Section 1201(k). What all of this verbiage is aiming
at is requiring the use of Macrovision’s copy-protection system for ana-
log video recorders (see Chapter 2). Could you think of a less verbose
way to have drafted the law?
(a) Violations regarding circumvention of technological measures.—
(1)
(A) No person shall circumvent a technological measure that
effectively controls access to a work protected under this title.
The prohibition contained in the preceding sentence shall take
effect at the end of the 2-year period beginning on the date of
the enactment of this chapter.
(B) The prohibition contained in subparagraph (A) shall not
apply to persons who are users of a copyrighted work which
is in a particular class of works, if such persons are, or are
likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely affected
by virtue of such prohibition in their ability to make
noninfringing uses of that particular class of works under this
title, as determined under subparagraph (C).
(C) During the 2-year period described in subparagraph (A),
and during each succeeding 3-year period, the Librarian of
178
Data and Documents

Congress, upon the recommendation of the Register of
Copyrights, who shall consult with the Assistant Secretary for
Communications and Information of the Department of
Commerce and report and comment on his or her views in
making such recommendation, shall make the determination
in a rulemaking proceeding for purposes of subparagraph (B)
of whether persons who are users of a copyrighted work are,
or are likely to be in the succeeding 3-year period, adversely
affected by the prohibition under subparagraph (A) in their
ability to make noninfringing uses under this title of a
particular class of copyrighted works. In conducting such
rulemaking, the Librarian shall examine—
(i) the availability for use of copyrighted works;
(ii) the availability for use of works for nonprofit archival,
preservation, and educational purposes;
(iii) the impact that the prohibition on the circumvention
of technological measures applied to copyrighted works
has on criticism, comment, news reporting, teaching,
scholarship, or research;
(iv) the effect of circumvention of technological measures
on the market for or value of copyrighted works; and
(v) such other factors as the Librarian considers
appropriate.
(D) The Librarian shall publish any class of copyrighted works
for which the Librarian has determined, pursuant to the
rulemaking conducted under subparagraph (C), that
noninfringing uses by persons who are users of a copyrighted
work are, or are likely to be, adversely affected, and the
prohibition contained in subparagraph (A) shall not apply to
such users with respect to such class of works for the ensuing
3-year period.
(E) Neither the exception under subparagraph (B) from the
applicability of the prohibition contained in subparagraph (A),
nor any determination made in a rulemaking conducted under
subparagraph (C), may be used as a defense in any action to
enforce any provision of this title other than this paragraph.
(2) No person shall manufacture, import, offer to the public,
provide, or otherwise traffic in any technology, product, service,
device, component, or part thereof, that—
(A) is primarily designed or produced for the purpose of
circumventing a technological measure that effectively
controls access to a work protected under this title;
Copyright
179

(B) has only limited commercially significant purpose or use
other than to circumvent a technological measure that
effectively controls access to a work protected under this title;
or
(C) is marketed by that person or another acting in concert
with that person with that person’s knowledge for use in
circumventing a technological measure that effectively
controls access to a work protected under this title.
(3) As used in this subsection—
(A) to “circumvent a technological measure” means to
descramble a scrambled work, to decrypt an encrypted work,
or otherwise to avoid, bypass, remove, deactivate, or impair a
technological measure, without the authority of the copyright
owner; and
(B) a technological measure “effectively controls access to a
work” if the measure, in the ordinary course of its operation,
requires the application of information, or a process or a
treatment, with the authority of the copyright owner, to gain
access to the work.
(b) Additional violations. —
(1) No person shall manufacture, import, offer to the public,
provide, or otherwise traffic in any technology, product, service,
device, component, or part thereof, that—
(A) is primarily designed or produced for the purpose of
circumventing protection afforded by a technological measure
that effectively protects a right of a copyright owner under
this title in a work or a portion thereof;
(B) has only limited commercially significant purpose or use
other than to circumvent protection afforded by a
technological measure that effectively protects a right of a
copyright owner under this title in a work or a portion thereof;
or
(C) is marketed by that person or another acting in concert
with that person with that person’s knowledge for use in
circumventing protection afforded by a technological measure
that effectively protects a right of a copyright owner under
this title in a work or a portion thereof.
(2) As used in this subsection—
(A) to “circumvent protection afforded by a technological
measure” means avoiding, bypassing, removing, deactivating,
or otherwise impairing a technological measure; and
180
Data and Documents

(B) a technological measure “effectively protects a right of a
copyright owner under this title” if the measure, in the
ordinary course of its operation, prevents, restricts, or
otherwise limits the exercise of a right of a copyright owner
under this title.
(c) Other rights, etc., not affected. —
(1) Nothing in this section shall affect rights, remedies, limitations,
or defenses to copyright infringement, including fair use, under
this title.
(2) Nothing in this section shall enlarge or diminish vicarious or
contributory liability for copyright infringement in connection with
any technology, product, service, device, component, or part
thereof.
(3) Nothing in this section shall require that the design of, or
design and selection of parts and components for, a consumer
electronics, telecommunications, or computing product provide for
a response to any particular technological measure, so long as such
part or component, or the product in which such part or
component is integrated, does not otherwise fall within the
prohibitions of subsection (a)(2) or (b)(1).
(4) Nothing in this section shall enlarge or diminish any rights of
free speech or the press for activities using consumer electronics,
telecommunications, or computing products.
(d) Exemption for nonprofit libraries, archives, and educational
institutions. [omitted]
***
(e) Law enforcement, intelligence, and other government activities.
[omitted]
***
(f) Reverse engineering. [omitted]
***
(g) Encryption research. [omitted]
***
(h) Exceptions regarding minors. [omitted]
***
(i) Protection of personally identifying information. [omitted]
***
(j) Security testing. [omitted]
***
(k) Certain analog devices and certain technological measures. —
(1) Certain analog devices. —
Copyright
181

(A) Effective 18 months after the date of the enactment of this
chapter, no person shall manufacture, import, offer to the
public, provide or otherwise traffic in any—
(i) VHS format analog video cassette recorder unless such
recorder conforms to the automatic gain control copy
control technology;
(ii) 8mm format analog video cassette camcorder unless
such camcorder conforms to the automatic gain control
technology;
(iii) Beta format analog video cassette recorder, unless
such recorder conforms to the automatic gain control copy
control technology, except that this requirement shall not
apply until there are 1,000 Beta format analog video
cassette recorders sold in the United States in any one
calendar year after the date of the enactment of this
chapter;
(iv) 8mm format analog video cassette recorder that is not
an analog video cassette camcorder, unless such recorder
conforms to the automatic gain control copy control
technology, except that this requirement shall not apply
until there are 20,000 such recorders sold in the United
States in any one calendar year after the date of the
enactment of this chapter; or
(v) analog video cassette recorder that records using an
NTSC format video input and that is not otherwise
covered under clauses (i) through (iv), unless such device
conforms to the automatic gain control copy control
technology.
(B) Effective on the date of the enactment of this chapter, no
person shall manufacture, import, offer to the public, provide
or otherwise traffic in—
(i) any VHS format analog video cassette recorder or any
8mm format analog video cassette recorder if the design
of the model of such recorder has been modified after
such date of enactment so that a model of recorder that
previously conformed to the automatic gain control copy
control technology no longer conforms to such
technology; or
(ii) any VHS format analog video cassette recorder, or any
8mm format analog video cassette recorder that is not an
8mm analog video cassette camcorder, if the design of the
model of such recorder has been modified after such date
of enactment so that a model of recorder that previously
182
Data and Documents

conformed to the four-line colorstripe copy control
technology no longer conforms to such technology.
Manufacturers that have not previously manufactured or
sold a VHS format analog video cassette recorder, or an
8mm format analog cassette recorder, shall be required to
conform to the four-line colorstripe copy control
technology in the initial model of any such recorder
manufactured after the date of the enactment of this
chapter, and thereafter to continue conforming to the four-
line colorstripe copy control technology. For purposes of
this subparagraph, an analog video cassette recorder
“conforms to” the four-line colorstripe copy control
technology if it records a signal that, when played back by
the playback function of that recorder in the normal
viewing mode, exhibits, on a reference display device, a
display containing distracting visible lines through
portions of the viewable picture.
(2) Certain encoding restrictions.—No person shall apply the
automatic gain control copy control technology or colorstripe copy
control technology to prevent or limit consumer copying except
such copying—
(A) of a single transmission, or specified group of
transmissions, of live events or of audiovisual works for which
a member of the public has exercised choice in selecting the
transmissions, including the content of the transmissions or
the time of receipt of such transmissions, or both, and as to
which such member is charged a separate fee for each such
transmission or specified group of transmissions;
(B) from a copy of a transmission of a live event or an
audiovisual work if such transmission is provided by a
channel or service where payment is made by a member of the
public for such channel or service in the form of a subscription
fee that entitles the member of the public to receive all of the
programming contained in such channel or service;
(C) from a physical medium containing one or more
prerecorded audiovisual works; or
(D) from a copy of a transmission described in subparagraph
(A) or from a copy made from a physical medium described in
subparagraph (C).
In the event that a transmission meets both the conditions set
forth in subparagraph (A) and those set forth in subparagraph
(B), the transmission shall be treated as a transmission
described in subparagraph (A).
Copyright
183

(3) Inapplicability. —This subsection shall not—
(A) require any analog video cassette camcorder to conform to
the automatic gain control copy control technology with
respect to any video signal received through a camera lens;
(B) apply to the manufacture, importation, offer for sale,
provision of, or other trafficking in, any professional analog
video cassette recorder; or
(C) apply to the offer for sale or provision of, or other
trafficking in, any previously owned analog video cassette
recorder, if such recorder was legally manufactured and sold
when new and not subsequently modified in violation of
paragraph (1)(B).
(4) Definitions. —For purposes of this subsection:
(A) An “analog video cassette recorder” means a device that
records, or a device that includes a function that records, on
electromagnetic tape in an analog format the electronic
impulses produced by the video and audio portions of a
television program, motion picture, or other form of
audiovisual work.
(B) An “analog video cassette camcorder” means an analog
video cassette recorder that contains a recording function that
operates through a camera lens and through a video input that
may be connected with a television or other video playback
device.
(C) An analog video cassette recorder “conforms” to the
automatic gain control copy control technology if it—
(i) detects one or more of the elements of such technology
and does not record the motion picture or transmission
protected by such technology; or
(ii) records a signal that, when played back, exhibits a
meaningfully distorted or degraded display.
(D) The term “professional analog video cassette recorder”
means an analog video cassette recorder that is designed,
manufactured, marketed, and intended for use by a person
who regularly employs such a device for a lawful business or
industrial use, including making, performing, displaying,
distributing, or transmitting copies of motion pictures on a
commercial scale.
(E) The terms “VHS format”, “8mm format”, “Beta format”,
“automatic gain control copy control technology”, “colorstripe
copy control technology”, “four-line version of the colorstripe
copy control technology”, and “NTSC” have the meanings
that are commonly understood in the consumer electronics
and motion picture industries as of the date of the enactment
of this chapter.
184
Data and Documents

(5) Violations. —Any violation of paragraph (1) of this subsection
shall be treated as a violation of subsection (b)(1) of this section.
Any violation of paragraph (2) of this subsection shall be deemed
an “act of circumvention” for the purposes of section 1203(c)(3)(A)
of this chapter.
TRIPs: Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights
TRIPs is the WTO’s intellectual property agreement. Section 1 of TRIPs
addresses copyright. It is not the only copyright treaty, nor is it even the
most important one (that would be the Berne Convention). It is, how-
ever, the only major multilateral treaty to address every aspect of intel-
lectual property law. Also, because it is part of the WTO agreement, it
is more enforceable than some other treaties: Disputes arising under
TRIPs can be brought before the WTO’s dispute resolution body.
Part II: Standards Concerning the
Availability, Scope and Use of Intellectual
Property Rights
Section 1: Copyright and Related Rights
Article 9: Relation to the Berne Convention
1. Members shall comply with Articles 1 through 21 of the Berne
Convention (1971) and the Appendix thereto. However, Members shall
not have rights or obligations under this Agreement in respect of the
rights conferred under Article 6bis of that Convention or of the rights
derived therefrom.
2. Copyright protection shall extend to expressions and not to ideas,
procedures, methods of operation or mathematical concepts as such.
Article 10: Computer Programs and Compilations of Data
1. Computer programs, whether in source or object code, shall be
protected as literary works under the Berne Convention (1971).
2. Compilations of data or other material, whether in machine readable
or other form, which by reason of the selection or arrangement of their
contents constitute intellectual creations shall be protected as such.
Such protection, which shall not extend to the data or material itself,
shall be without prejudice to any copyright subsisting in the data or
material itself.
Copyright
185

Article 11: Rental Rights
In respect of at least computer programs and cinematographic works, a
Member shall provide authors and their successors in title the right to
authorize or to prohibit the commercial rental to the public of originals
or copies of their copyright works. A Member shall be excepted from
this obligation in respect of cinematographic works unless such rental
has led to widespread copying of such works which is materially
impairing the exclusive right of reproduction conferred in that Member
on authors and their successors in title. In respect of computer
programs, this obligation does not apply to rentals where the program
itself is not the essential object of the rental.
Article 12: Term of Protection
Whenever the term of protection of a work, other than a photographic
work or a work of applied art, is calculated on a basis other than the
life of a natural person, such term shall be no less than 50 years from
the end of the calendar year of authorized publication, or, failing such
authorized publication within 50 years from the making of the work, 50
years from the end of the calendar year of making.
Article 13: Limitations and Exceptions
Members shall confine limitations or exceptions to exclusive rights to
certain special cases which do not conflict with a normal exploitation of
the work and do not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of
the right holder. 
Article 14: Protection of Performers, Producers of Phonograms 
(Sound Recordings) and Broadcasting Organizations [omitted]
***
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Inc. v.
Grokster, Ltd., 125 S.Ct. 2764 (2005)
The recent case of MGM v. Grokster spelled the end of a winning streak
for P2P (peer-to-peer) file-sharing networks and an expansion of the
reach of third-party liability for copyright infringement. The defendants
in Grokster were P2P networks, some of whose users had committed
copyright infringement by sharing copyrighted files over the networks.
Two courts—first a trial court and then the federal Ninth Circuit Court
of Appeals—had found the defendants not liable for the infringements
by their users. The U.S. Supreme Court reversed the Ninth Circuit’s
186
Data and Documents

decision, setting a precedent that is binding on all federal trial and ap-
pellate courts in the United States. Exactly what the precedent means,
however, is a bit confusing. While all of the justices seemed to agree that
the defendants in this particular case were liable, they were less able to
agree on why. Three justices wrote opinions, each representing them-
selves and two colleagues; none of the opinions represented a majority of
the Court. The text of Justice Souter’s opinion below has been slightly
edited, removing long citations and other material that interferes with
readability; some footnotes have been retained. The other opinions have
been omitted.
Justice Souter delivered the opinion of the Court.
The question is under what circumstances the distributor of
a product capable of both lawful and unlawful use is liable for
acts of copyright infringement by third parties using the product.
We hold that one who distributes a device with the object of pro-
moting its use to infringe copyright, as shown by clear expression
or other affirmative steps taken to foster infringement, is liable for
the resulting acts of infringement by third parties.
I
A
Respondents, Grokster, Ltd., and StreamCast Networks, Inc.,
defendants in the trial court, distribute free software products that
allow computer users to share electronic files through peer-to-peer
networks, so called because users’ computers communicate directly
with each other, not through central servers. The advantage of peer-to-
peer networks over information networks of other types shows up in
their substantial and growing popularity. Because they need no central
computer server to mediate the exchange of information or files among
users, the high-bandwidth communications capacity for a server may
be dispensed with, and the need for costly server storage space is
eliminated. Since copies of a file (particularly a popular one) are
available on many users’ computers, file requests and retrievals may be
faster than on other types of networks, and since file exchanges do not
travel through a server, communications can take place between any
computers that remain connected to the network without risk that a
glitch in the server will disable the network in its entirety. Given these
benefits in security, cost, and efficiency, peer-to-peer networks are
employed to store and distribute electronic files by universities,
government agencies, corporations, and libraries, among others.1
Other users of peer-to-peer networks include individual recipients
of Grokster’s and StreamCast’s software, and although the networks
Copyright
187

that they enjoy through using the software can be used to share any
type of digital file, they have prominently employed those networks in
sharing copyrighted music and video files without authorization. A
group of copyright holders (MGM for short, but including motion
picture studios, recording companies, songwriters, and music
publishers) sued Grokster and StreamCast for their users’ copyright
infringements, alleging that they knowingly and intentionally
distributed their software to enable users to reproduce and distribute
the copyrighted works in violation of the Copyright Act, 17 U.S.C. § 101
et seq. (2000 ed. and Supp. II).2 MGM sought damages and an
injunction.
Discovery during the litigation revealed the way the software
worked, the business aims of each defendant company, and the
predilections of the users. Grokster’s eponymous software employs
what is known as FastTrack technology, a protocol developed by others
and licensed to Grokster. StreamCast distributes a very similar product
except that its software, called Morpheus, relies on what is known as
Gnutella technology.3 A user who downloads and installs either
software possesses the protocol to send requests for files directly to the
computers of others using software compatible with FastTrack or
Gnutella. On the FastTrack network opened by the Grokster software,
the user’s request goes to a computer given an indexing capacity by the
software and designated a supernode, or to some other computer with
comparable power and capacity to collect temporary indexes of the files
available on the computers of users connected to it. The supernode (or
indexing computer) searches its own index and may communicate the
search request to other supernodes. If the file is found, the supernode
discloses its location to the computer requesting it, and the requesting
user can download the file directly from the computer located. The
copied file is placed in a designated sharing folder on the requesting
user’s computer, where it is available for other users to download in
turn, along with any other file in that folder.
In the Gnutella network made available by Morpheus, the process
is mostly the same, except that in some versions of the Gnutella
protocol there are no supernodes. In these versions, peer computers
using the protocol communicate directly with each other. When a user
enters a search request into the Morpheus software, it sends the request
to computers connected with it, which in turn pass the request along to
other connected peers. The search results are communicated to the
requesting computer, and the user can download desired files directly
from peers’ computers. As this description indicates, Grokster and
StreamCast use no servers to intercept the content of the search
requests or to mediate the file transfers conducted by users of the
software, there being no central point through which the substance of
the communications passes in either direction.4
188
Data and Documents

Copyright
189
Although Grokster and StreamCast do not therefore know when
particular files are copied, a few searches using their software would
show what is available on the networks the software reaches. MGM
commissioned a statistician to conduct a systematic search, and his
study showed that nearly 90% of the files available for download on
the FastTrack system were copyrighted works.5 Grokster and
StreamCast dispute this figure, raising methodological problems and
arguing that free copying even of copyrighted works may be
authorized by the rightholders. They also argue that potential
noninfringing uses of their software are significant in kind, even if
infrequent in practice. Some musical performers, for example, have
gained new audiences by distributing their copyrighted works for free
across peer-to-peer networks, and some distributors of unprotected
content have used peer-to-peer networks to disseminate files,
Shakespeare being an example. Indeed, StreamCast has given
Morpheus users the opportunity to download the briefs in this very
case, though their popularity has not been quantified.
As for quantification, the parties’ anecdotal and statistical
evidence entered thus far to show the content available on the
FastTrack and Gnutella networks does not say much about which files
are actually downloaded by users, and no one can say how often the
software is used to obtain copies of unprotected material. But MGM’s
evidence gives reason to think that the vast majority of users’
downloads are acts of infringement, and because well over 100 million
copies of the software in question are known to have been
downloaded, and billions of files are shared across the FastTrack and
Gnutella networks each month, the probable scope of copyright
infringement is staggering.
Grokster and StreamCast concede the infringement in most
downloads, ***, and it is uncontested that they are aware that users
employ their software primarily to download copyrighted files, even if
the decentralized FastTrack and Gnutella networks fail to reveal which
files are being copied, and when. From time to time, moreover, the
companies have learned about their users’ infringement directly, as
from users who have sent e-mail to each company with questions about
playing copyrighted movies they had downloaded, to whom the
companies have responded with guidance.6 ***And MGM notified the
companies of 8 million copyrighted files that could be obtained using
their software.
Grokster and StreamCast are not, however, merely passive
recipients of information about infringing use. The record is replete
with evidence that from the moment Grokster and StreamCast began to
distribute their free software, each one clearly voiced the objective that
recipients use it to download copyrighted works, and each took active
steps to encourage infringement.

After the notorious file-sharing service, Napster, was sued by
copyright holders for facilitation of copyright infringement . . .,
StreamCast gave away a software program of a kind known as
OpenNap, designed as compatible with the Napster program and open
to Napster users for downloading files from other Napster and
OpenNap users’ computers. Evidence indicates that “[i]t was always
[StreamCast’s] intent to use [its OpenNap network] to be able to
capture email addresses of [its] initial target market so that [it] could
promote [its] StreamCast Morpheus interface to them,” . . .; indeed, the
OpenNap program was engineered “‘to leverage Napster’s 50 million
user base . . .’” 
StreamCast monitored both the number of users downloading its
OpenNap program and the number of music files they downloaded . . .
It also used the resulting OpenNap network to distribute copies of the
Morpheus software and to encourage users to adopt it . . . Internal
company documents indicate that StreamCast hoped to attract large
numbers of former Napster users if that company was shut down by
court order or otherwise, and that StreamCast planned to be the next
Napster . . . A kit developed by StreamCast to be delivered to
advertisers, for example, contained press articles about StreamCast’s
potential to capture former Napster users . . ., and it introduced itself to
some potential advertisers as a company “which is similar to what
Napster was. . . .” It broadcast banner advertisements to users of other
Napster-compatible software, urging them to adopt its OpenNap. . . .
An internal e-mail from a company executive stated: “‘We have put this
network in place so that when Napster pulls the plug on their free
service . . . or if the Court orders them shut down prior to that . . . we
will be positioned to capture the flood of their 32 million users that will
be actively looking for an alternative. . . .’”
Thus, StreamCast developed promotional materials to market its
service as the best Napster alternative. One proposed advertisement
read: “Napster Inc. has announced that it will soon begin charging you
a fee. That’s if the courts don’t order it shut down first. What will you
do to get around it?” Another proposed ad touted StreamCast’s
software as the “# 1 alternative to Napster” and asked “[w]hen the
lights went off at Napster . . . where did the users go?” . . . (ellipsis in
original).7 StreamCast even planned to flaunt the illegal uses of its
software; when it launched the OpenNap network, the chief technology
officer of the company averred that “[t]he goal is to get in trouble with
the law and get sued. It’s the best way to get in the new[s].”
The evidence that Grokster sought to capture the market of former
Napster users is sparser but revealing, for Grokster launched its own
OpenNap system called Swaptor and inserted digital codes into its
website so that computer users using Web search engines to look for
“Napster” or “[f]ree filesharing” would be directed to the Grokster
190
Data and Documents

website, where they could download the Grokster software. And
Grokster’s name is an apparent derivative of Napster.
StreamCast’s executives monitored the number of songs by certain
commercial artists available on their networks, and an internal
communication indicates they aimed to have a larger number of
copyrighted songs available on their networks than other file-sharing
networks . . . The point, of course, would be to attract users of a mind
to infringe, just as it would be with their promotional materials
developed showing copyrighted songs as examples of the kinds of files
available through Morpheus . . . Morpheus in fact allowed users to
search specifically for “Top 40” songs . . ., which were inevitably
copyrighted. Similarly, Grokster sent users a newsletter promoting its
ability to provide particular, popular copyrighted materials . . .
In addition to this evidence of express promotion, marketing, and
intent to promote further, the business models employed by Grokster
and StreamCast confirm that their principal object was use of their
software to download copyrighted works. Grokster and StreamCast
receive no revenue from users, who obtain the software itself for
nothing. Instead, both companies generate income by selling
advertising space, and they stream the advertising to Grokster and
Morpheus users while they are employing the programs. As the
number of users of each program increases, advertising opportunities
become worth more. . . . While there is doubtless some demand for free
Shakespeare, the evidence shows that substantive volume is a function
of free access to copyrighted work. Users seeking Top 40 songs, for
example, or the latest release by Modest Mouse, are certain to be far
more numerous than those seeking a free Decameron, and Grokster and
StreamCast translated that demand into dollars.
Finally, there is no evidence that either company made an effort to
filter copyrighted material from users’ downloads or otherwise impede
the sharing of copyrighted files. Although Grokster appears to have
sent e-mails warning users about infringing content when it received
threatening notice from the copyright holders, it never blocked anyone
from continuing to use its software to share copyrighted files. . . .
StreamCast not only rejected another company’s offer of help to
monitor infringement . . ., but blocked the Internet Protocol addresses
of entities it believed were trying to engage in such monitoring on its
networks. . . .
B
After discovery, the parties on each side of the case cross-moved
for summary judgment. The District Court limited its consideration to
the asserted liability of Grokster and StreamCast for distributing the
current versions of their software, leaving aside whether either was
liable “for damages arising from past versions of their software, or from
Copyright
191

other past activities.” 259 F.Supp.2d 1029, 1033 (C.D.Cal.2003). The
District Court held that those who used the Grokster and Morpheus
software to download copyrighted media files directly infringed
MGM’s copyrights, a conclusion not contested on appeal, but the court
nonetheless granted summary judgment in favor of Grokster and
StreamCast as to any liability arising from distribution of the then
current versions of their software.
Distributing that software gave rise to no liability in the court’s
view, because its use did not provide the distributors with actual
knowledge of specific acts of infringement.
***
The Court of Appeals affirmed. 380 F.3d 1154 (C.A.9 2004). In the
court’s analysis, a defendant was liable as a contributory infringer
when it had knowledge of direct infringement and materially
contributed to the infringement. But the court read Sony Corp. of
America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 104 S.Ct. 774, 78
L.Ed.2d 574 (1984), as holding that distribution of a commercial product
capable of substantial noninfringing uses could not give rise to
contributory liability for infringement unless the distributor had actual
knowledge of specific instances of infringement and failed to act on
that knowledge. The fact that the software was capable of substantial
noninfringing uses in the Ninth Circuit’s view meant that Grokster and
StreamCast were not liable, because they had no such actual
knowledge, owing to the decentralized architecture of their software.
The court also held that Grokster and StreamCast did not materially
contribute to their users’ infringement because it was the users
themselves who searched for, retrieved, and stored the infringing files,
with no involvement by the defendants beyond providing the software
in the first place.
The Ninth Circuit also considered whether Grokster and
StreamCast could be liable under a theory of vicarious infringement.
The court held against liability because the defendants did not monitor
or control the use of the software, had no agreed-upon right or current
ability to supervise its use, and had no independent duty to police
infringement. ***
II
A
MGM and many of the amici fault the Court of Appeals’s holding
for upsetting a sound balance between the respective values of
supporting creative pursuits through copyright protection and
promoting innovation in new communication technologies by limiting
the incidence of liability for copyright infringement. The more artistic
protection is favored, the more technological innovation may be
192
Data and Documents

discouraged; the administration of copyright law is an exercise in
managing the trade-off. ***
The tension between the two values is the subject of this case, with
its claim that digital distribution of copyrighted material threatens
copyright holders as never before, because every copy is identical to the
original, copying is easy, and many people (especially the young) use
file-sharing software to download copyrighted works. This very
breadth of the software’s use may well draw the public directly into the
debate over copyright policy, Peters, Brace Memorial Lecture:
Copyright Enters the Public Domain, 51 J. Copyright Soc. 701, 705-717
(2004) (address by Register of Copyrights), and the indications are that
the ease of copying songs or movies using software like Grokster’s and
Napster’s is fostering disdain for copyright protection, Wu, When Code
Isn’t Law, 89 Va. L.Rev. 679, 724-726 (2003). As the case has been
presented to us, these fears are said to be offset by the different concern
that imposing liability, not only on infringers but on distributors of
software based on its potential for unlawful use, could limit further
development of beneficial technologies.***8
The argument for imposing indirect liability in this case is,
however, a powerful one, given the number of infringing downloads
that occur every day using StreamCast’s and Grokster’s software.
When a widely shared service or product is used to commit
infringement, it may be impossible to enforce rights in the protected
work effectively against all direct infringers, the only practical
alternative being to go against the distributor of the copying device for
secondary liability on a theory of contributory or vicarious
infringement. . . .
One infringes contributorily by intentionally inducing or
encouraging direct infringement . . ., and infringes vicariously by
profiting from direct infringement while declining to exercise a right to
stop or limit it. . . .9 Although “[t]he Copyright Act does not expressly
render anyone liable for infringement committed by another,” Sony
Corp. v. Universal City Studios, 464 U.S., at 434, 104 S.Ct. 774, these
doctrines of secondary liability emerged from common law principles
and are well established in the law. . . .
B
Despite the currency of these principles of secondary liability, this
Court has dealt with secondary copyright infringement in only one
recent case, and because MGM has tailored its principal claim to our
opinion there, a look at our earlier holding is in order. In Sony Corp. v.
Universal City Studios, supra, this Court addressed a claim that
secondary liability for infringement can arise from the very distribution
of a commercial product. There, the product, novel at the time, was
Copyright
193

what we know today as the videocassette recorder or VCR. Copyright
holders sued Sony as the manufacturer, claiming it was contributorily
liable for infringement that occurred when VCR owners taped
copyrighted programs because it supplied the means used to infringe,
and it had constructive knowledge that infringement would occur. At
the trial on the merits, the evidence showed that the principal use of the
VCR was for “time-shifting,” or taping a program for later viewing at a
more convenient time, which the Court found to be a fair, not an
infringing, use. Id., at 423-424, 104 S.Ct. 774. There was no evidence that
Sony had expressed an object of bringing about taping in violation of
copyright or had taken active steps to increase its profits from unlawful
taping. Id., at 438, 104 S.Ct. 774. Although Sony’s advertisements urged
consumers to buy the VCR to “record favorite shows” or “build a
library” of recorded programs . . ., neither of these uses was necessarily
infringing. . . .
On those facts, with no evidence of stated or indicated intent to
promote infringing uses, the only conceivable basis for imposing
liability was on a theory of contributory infringement arising from its
sale of VCRs to consumers with knowledge that some would use them
to infringe. Id., at 439, 104 S.Ct. 774. But because the VCR was “capable
of commercially significant noninfringing uses,” we held the
manufacturer could not be faulted solely on the basis of its distribution.
Id., at 442, 104 S.Ct. 774.
This analysis reflected patent law’s traditional staple article of
commerce doctrine, now codified, that distribution of a component of a
patented device will not violate the patent if it is suitable for use in
other ways[.] The doctrine was devised to identify instances in which it
may be presumed from distribution of an article in commerce that the
distributor intended the article to be used to infringe another’s patent,
and so may justly be held liable for that infringement. “One who makes
and sells articles which are only adapted to be used in a patented
combination will be presumed to intend the natural consequences of
his acts; he will be presumed to intend that they shall be used in the
combination of the patent.” New York Scaffolding Co. v. Whitney, 224 F.
452, 459 (C.A.8 1915); ***.
In sum, where an article is “good for nothing else” but
infringement . . ., there is no legitimate public interest in its unlicensed
availability, and there is no injustice in presuming or imputing an intent
to infringe[.] Conversely, the doctrine absolves the equivocal conduct of
selling an item with substantial lawful as well as unlawful uses, and
limits liability to instances of more acute fault than the mere
understanding that some of one’s products will be misused. It leaves
breathing room for innovation and a vigorous commerce . . .
The parties and many of the amici in this case think the key to
resolving it is the Sony rule and, in particular, what it means for a
194
Data and Documents

product to be “capable of commercially significant noninfringing uses.”
Sony Corp. v. Universal City Studios, supra, at 442, 104 S.Ct. 774. MGM
advances the argument that granting summary judgment to Grokster
and StreamCast as to their current activities gave too much weight to
the value of innovative technology, and too little to the copyrights
infringed by users of their software, given that 90% of works available
on one of the networks was shown to be copyrighted. Assuming the
remaining 10% to be its noninfringing use, MGM says this should not
qualify as “substantial,” and the Court should quantify Sony to the
extent of holding that a product used “principally” for infringement
does not qualify. . . . As mentioned before, Grokster and StreamCast
reply by citing evidence that their software can be used to reproduce
public domain works, and they point to copyright holders who actually
encourage copying. Even if infringement is the principal practice with
their software today, they argue, the noninfringing uses are significant
and will grow.
We agree with MGM that the Court of Appeals misapplied Sony,
which it read as limiting secondary liability quite beyond the
circumstances to which the case applied. Sony barred secondary
liability based on presuming or imputing intent to cause infringement
solely from the design or distribution of a product capable of
substantial lawful use, which the distributor knows is in fact used for
infringement. The Ninth Circuit has read Sony’s limitation to mean that
whenever a product is capable of substantial lawful use, the producer
can never be held contributorily liable for third parties’ infringing use
of it; it read the rule as being this broad, even when an actual purpose
to cause infringing use is shown by evidence independent of design
and distribution of the product, unless the distributors had “specific
knowledge of infringement at a time at which they contributed to the
infringement, and failed to act upon that information.” 380 F.3d, at 1162
[internal quotation marks and alterations omitted]. Because the Circuit
found the StreamCast and Grokster software capable of substantial
lawful use, it concluded on the basis of its reading of Sony that neither
company could be held liable, since there was no showing that their
software, being without any central server, afforded them knowledge of
specific unlawful uses.
This view of Sony, however, was error, converting the case from
one about liability resting on imputed intent to one about liability on
any theory. Because Sony did not displace other theories of secondary
liability, and because we find below that it was error to grant summary
judgment to the companies on MGM’s inducement claim, we do not
revisit Sony further, as MGM requests, to add a more quantified
description of the point of balance between protection and commerce
when liability rests solely on distribution with knowledge that
unlawful use will occur. It is enough to note that the Ninth Circuit’s
Copyright
195

judgment rested on an erroneous understanding of Sony and to leave
further consideration of the Sony rule for a day when that may be
required.
C
Sony’s rule limits imputing culpable intent as a matter of law from
the characteristics or uses of a distributed product. But nothing in Sony
requires courts to ignore evidence of intent if there is such evidence,
and the case was never meant to foreclose rules of fault-based liability
derived from the common law.10 Sony Corp. v. Universal City Studios, 464
U.S., at 439, 104 S.Ct. 774 (“If vicarious liability is to be imposed on
Sony in this case, it must rest on the fact that it has sold equipment
with constructive knowledge” of the potential for infringement). Thus,
where evidence goes beyond a product’s characteristics or the
knowledge that it may be put to infringing uses, and shows statements
or actions directed to promoting infringement, Sony’s staple-article rule
will not preclude liability.
The classic case of direct evidence of unlawful purpose occurs
when one induces commission of infringement by another, or “entic[es]
or persuad[es] another” to infringe, Black’s Law Dictionary 790 (8th ed.
2004), as by advertising. Thus at common law a copyright or patent
defendant who “not only expected but invoked [infringing use] by
advertisement” was liable for infringement “on principles recognized
in every part of the law.” Kalem Co. v. Harper Brothers, 222 U.S., at 62-63,
32 S.Ct. 20 (copyright infringement). ***
The rule on inducement of infringement as developed in the early
cases is no different today.11 Evidence of “active steps . . . taken to
encourage direct infringement,” Oak Industries, Inc. v. Zenith Electronics
Corp., 697 F.Supp. 988, 992 (N.D.Ill.1988), such as advertising an
infringing use or instructing how to engage in an infringing use, show
an affirmative intent that the product be used to infringe, and a
showing that infringement was encouraged overcomes the law’s
reluctance to find liability when a defendant merely sells a commercial
product suitable for some lawful use, *** 
For the same reasons that Sony took the staple-article doctrine of
patent law as a model for its copyright safe-harbor rule, the
inducement rule, too, is a sensible one for copyright. We adopt it here,
holding that one who distributes a device with the object of promoting
its use to infringe copyright, as shown by clear expression or other
affirmative steps taken to foster infringement, is liable for the resulting
acts of infringement by third parties. We are, of course, mindful of the
need to keep from trenching on regular commerce or discouraging the
development of technologies with lawful and unlawful potential.
Accordingly, just as Sony did not find intentional inducement despite
the knowledge of the VCR manufacturer that its device could be used
196
Data and Documents

to infringe . . ., mere knowledge of infringing potential or of actual
infringing uses would not be enough here to subject a distributor to
liability. Nor would ordinary acts incident to product distribution, such
as offering customers technical support or product updates, support
liability in themselves. The inducement rule, instead, premises liability
on purposeful, culpable expression and conduct, and thus does nothing
to compromise legitimate commerce or discourage innovation having a
lawful promise.
III
A [omitted]
*** 
B
In addition to intent to bring about infringement and distribution
of a device suitable for infringing use, the inducement theory of course
requires evidence of actual infringement by recipients of the device, the
software in this case. As the account of the facts indicates, there is
evidence of infringement on a gigantic scale, and there is no serious
issue of the adequacy of MGM’s showing on this point in order to
survive the companies’ summary judgment requests. Although an exact
calculation of infringing use, as a basis for a claim of damages, is
subject to dispute, there is no question that the summary judgment
evidence is at least adequate to entitle MGM to go forward with claims
for damages and equitable relief.
***
In sum, this case is significantly different from Sony and reliance
on that case to rule in favor of StreamCast and Grokster was error. Sony
dealt with a claim of liability based solely on distributing a product
with alternative lawful and unlawful uses, with knowledge that some
users would follow the unlawful course. The case struck a balance
between the interests of protection and innovation by holding that the
product’s capability of substantial lawful employment should bar the
imputation of fault and consequent secondary liability for the unlawful
acts of others.
MGM’s evidence in this case most obviously addresses a different
basis of liability for distributing a product open to alternative uses.
Here, evidence of the distributors’ words and deeds going beyond
distribution as such shows a purpose to cause and profit from third-
party acts of copyright infringement. If liability for inducing
infringement is ultimately found, it will not be on the basis of
presuming or imputing fault, but from inferring a patently illegal
objective from statements and actions showing what that objective was.
There is substantial evidence in MGM’s favor on all elements of
inducement, and summary judgment in favor of Grokster and
Copyright
197

StreamCast was error. On remand, reconsideration of MGM’s motion
for summary judgment will be in order.
The judgment of the Court of Appeals is vacated, and the case is
remanded for further proceedings consistent with this opinion.
It is so ordered.
Justice Ginsburg, with whom the Chief Justice and Justice Kennedy
join, concurring [omitted]
***
Justice Breyer, with whom Justice Stevens and Justice O’Connor
join, concurring [omitted]
***
Trademark
Trademark, unlike copyright and patent, is governed by state and federal
law. Section 1125 sets out the federal rules for infringement, dilution,
and cybersquatting, discussed in Chapter 2.
15 U.S.C. § 1125. False designations of
origin, false descriptions, and dilution
forbidden
(a) Civil action 
(1) Any person who, on or in connection with any goods or
services, or any container for goods, uses in commerce any word,
term, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof, or any
false designation of origin, false or misleading description of fact,
or false or misleading representation of fact, which—
(A) is likely to cause confusion, or to cause mistake, or to
deceive as to the affiliation, connection, or association of such
person with another person, or as to the origin, sponsorship,
or approval of his or her goods, services, or commercial
activities by another person, or 
(B) in commercial advertising or promotion, misrepresents the
nature, characteristics, qualities, or geographic origin of his or
her or another person’s goods, services, or commercial
activities, 
shall be liable in a civil action by any person who believes that
he or she is or is likely to be damaged by such act. 
(2) As used in this subsection, the term “any person” includes any
State, instrumentality of a State or employee of a State or
instrumentality of a State acting in his or her official capacity. Any
198
Data and Documents

State, and any such instrumentality, officer, or employee, shall be
subject to the provisions of this chapter in the same manner and to
the same extent as any nongovernmental entity. 
(3) In a civil action for trade dress infringement under this chapter
for trade dress not registered on the principal register, the person
who asserts trade dress protection has the burden of proving that
the matter sought to be protected is not functional. 
(b) Importation 
Any goods marked or labeled in contravention of the provisions of this
section shall not be imported into the United States or admitted to
entry at any customhouse of the United States. The owner, importer, or
consignee of goods refused entry at any customhouse under this
section may have any recourse by protest or appeal that is given under
the customs revenue laws or may have the remedy given by this
chapter in cases involving goods refused entry or seized. 
(c) Remedies for dilution of famous marks 
(1) The owner of a famous mark shall be entitled, subject to the
principles of equity and upon such terms as the court deems
reasonable, to an injunction against another person’s commercial
use in commerce of a mark or trade name, if such use begins after
the mark has become famous and causes dilution of the distinctive
quality of the mark, and to obtain such other relief as is provided
in this subsection. In determining whether a mark is distinctive
and famous, a court may consider factors such as, but not limited
to—
(A) the degree of inherent or acquired distinctiveness of the
mark; 
(B) the duration and extent of use of the mark in connection
with the goods or services with which the mark is used; 
(C) the duration and extent of advertising and publicity of the
mark; 
(D) the geographical extent of the trading area in which the
mark is used; 
(E) the channels of trade for the goods or services with which
the mark is used; 
(F) the degree of recognition of the mark in the trading areas
and channels of trade used by the mark’s owner and the
person against whom the injunction is sought; 
(G) the nature and extent of use of the same or similar marks
by third parties; and 
(H) whether the mark was registered under the Act of March
3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905, or on the principal
register. 
Trademark
199

(2) In an action brought under this subsection, the owner of the
famous mark shall be entitled only to injunctive relief as set forth
in section 1116 of this title unless the person against whom the
injunction is sought willfully intended to trade on the owner’s
reputation or to cause dilution of the famous mark. If such willful
intent is proven, the owner of the famous mark shall also be
entitled to the remedies set forth in sections 1117 (a) and 1118 of
this title, subject to the discretion of the court and the principles of
equity. 
(3) The ownership by a person of a valid registration under the Act
of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905, or on the
principal register shall be a complete bar to an action against that
person, with respect to that mark, that is brought by another
person under the common law or a statute of a State and that seeks
to prevent dilution of the distinctiveness of a mark, label, or form
of advertisement. 
(4) The following shall not be actionable under this section: 
(A) Fair use of a famous mark by another person in
comparative commercial advertising or promotion to identify
the competing goods or services of the owner of the famous
mark. 
(B) Noncommercial use of a mark. 
(C) All forms of news reporting and news commentary. 
(d) Cyberpiracy prevention 
(1) 
(A) A person shall be liable in a civil action by the owner of a
mark, including a personal name which is protected as a mark
under this section, if, without regard to the goods or services
of the parties, that person—
(i) has a bad faith intent to profit from that mark,
including a personal name which is protected as a mark
under this section; and 
(ii) registers, traffics in, or uses a domain name that—
(I) in the case of a mark that is distinctive at the time
of registration of the domain name, is identical or
confusingly similar to that mark; 
(II) in the case of a famous mark that is famous at the
time of registration of the domain name, is identical
or confusingly similar to or dilutive of that mark; or 
(III) is a trademark, word, or name protected by
reason of section 706 of title 18 or section 220506 of
title 36. 
200
Data and Documents

(B) 
(i) In determining whether a person has a bad faith intent
described under subparagraph (A), a court may consider
factors such as, but not limited to—
(I) the trademark or other intellectual property rights
of the person, if any, in the domain name; 
(II) the extent to which the domain name consists of
the legal name of the person or a name that is
otherwise commonly used to identify that person; 
(III) the person’s prior use, if any, of the domain
name in connection with the bona fide offering of any
goods or services; 
(IV) the person’s bona fide noncommercial or fair use
of the mark in a site accessible under the domain
name; 
(V) the person’s intent to divert consumers from the
mark owner’s online location to a site accessible
under the domain name that could harm the
goodwill represented by the mark, either for
commercial gain or with the intent to tarnish or
disparage the mark, by creating a likelihood of
confusion as to the source, sponsorship, affiliation, or
endorsement of the site; 
(VI) the person’s offer to transfer, sell, or otherwise
assign the domain name to the mark owner or any
third party for financial gain without having used, or
having an intent to use, the domain name in the bona
fide offering of any goods or services, or the person’s
prior conduct indicating a pattern of such conduct; 
(VII) the person’s provision of material and
misleading false contact information when applying
for the registration of the domain name, the person’s
intentional failure to maintain accurate contact
information, or the person’s prior conduct indicating
a pattern of such conduct; 
(VIII) the person’s registration or acquisition of
multiple domain names which the person knows are
identical or confusingly similar to marks of others
that are distinctive at the time of registration of such
domain names, or dilutive of famous marks of others
that are famous at the time of registration of such
domain names, without regard to the goods or
services of the parties; and 
Trademark
201

(IX) the extent to which the mark incorporated in the
person’s domain name registration is or is not
distinctive and famous within the meaning of
subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(ii) Bad faith intent described under subparagraph (A)
shall not be found in any case in which the court
determines that the person believed and had reasonable
grounds to believe that the use of the domain name was a
fair use or otherwise lawful. 
(C) In any civil action involving the registration, trafficking, or
use of a domain name under this paragraph, a court may
order the forfeiture or cancellation of the domain name or the
transfer of the domain name to the owner of the mark. 
(D) A person shall be liable for using a domain name under
subparagraph (A) only if that person is the domain name
registrant or that registrant’s authorized licensee. 
(E) As used in this paragraph, the term “traffics in” refers to
transactions that include, but are not limited to, sales,
purchases, loans, pledges, licenses, exchanges of currency, and
any other transfer for consideration or receipt in exchange for
consideration. 
(2) 
(A) The owner of a mark may file an in rem civil action
against a domain name in the judicial district in which the
domain name registrar, domain name registry, or other
domain name authority that registered or assigned the domain
name is located if—
(i) the domain name violates any right of the owner of a
mark registered in the Patent and Trademark Office, or
protected under subsection (a) or (c) of this section; and 
(ii) the court finds that the owner—
(I) is not able to obtain in personam jurisdiction over
a person who would have been a defendant in a civil
action under paragraph (1); or 
(II) through due diligence was not able to find a
person who would have been a defendant in a civil
action under paragraph (1) by—
(aa) sending a notice of the alleged violation and
intent to proceed under this paragraph to the
registrant of the domain name at the postal and
e-mail address provided by the registrant to the
registrar; and 
(bb) publishing notice of the action as the court
may direct promptly after filing the action. 
(B) The actions under subparagraph (A)(ii) shall constitute
service of process. 
202
Data and Documents

(C) In an in rem action under this paragraph, a domain name
shall be deemed to have its situs in the judicial district in
which—
(i) the domain name registrar, registry, or other domain
name authority that registered or assigned the domain
name is located; or 
(ii) documents sufficient to establish control and authority
regarding the disposition of the registration and use of the
domain name are deposited with the court. 
(D) 
(i) The remedies in an in rem action under this paragraph
shall be limited to a court order for the forfeiture or
cancellation of the domain name or the transfer of the
domain name to the owner of the mark. Upon receipt of
written notification of a filed, stamped copy of a
complaint filed by the owner of a mark in a United States
district court under this paragraph, the domain name
registrar, domain name registry, or other domain name
authority shall—
(I) expeditiously deposit with the court documents
sufficient to establish the court’s control and
authority regarding the disposition of the
registration and use of the domain name to the court;
and 
(II) not transfer, suspend, or otherwise modify the
domain name during the pendency of the action,
except upon order of the court. 
(ii) The domain name registrar or registry or other
domain name authority shall not be liable for injunctive
or monetary relief under this paragraph except in the case
of bad faith or reckless disregard, which includes a willful
failure to comply with any such court order. 
(3) The civil action established under paragraph (1) and the in rem
action established under paragraph (2), and any remedy available
under either such action, shall be in addition to any other civil
action or remedy otherwise applicable. 
(4) The in rem jurisdiction established under paragraph (2) shall be
in addition to any other jurisdiction that otherwise exists, whether
in rem or in personam.
Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006
The law of trademark dilution was revisited and dramatically revised by
Congress in 2006. The Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006
Trademark
203

appears below in the form in which it was approved by Congress and
sent to the president for signature; President Bush signed the act into
law on 6 October 2006.
Trademark Dilution Revision Act of 2006
(Enrolled as Agreed to or Passed by Both
House and Senate), H.R.683, One Hundred
Ninth Congress of the United States of
America
SECTION 1. SHORT TITLE.
(a) Short Title- This Act may be cited as the ‘Trademark Dilution
Revision Act of 2006’.
(b) References- Any reference in this Act to the Trademark Act of
1946 shall be a reference to the Act entitled ‘An Act to provide for
the registration and protection of trademarks used in commerce, to
carry out the provisions of certain international conventions, and
for other purposes’, approved July 5, 1946 (15 U.S.C. 1051 et seq.).
SECTION 2. DILUTION BY BLURRING; DILUTION BY TARNISHMENT.
Section 43 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 U.S.C. 1125) is amended—
(1) by striking subsection (c) and inserting the following:
(c) Dilution by Blurring; Dilution by Tarnishment-
(1) INJUNCTIVE RELIEF- Subject to the principles of equity,
the owner of a famous mark that is distinctive, inherently or
through acquired distinctiveness, shall be entitled to an
injunction against another person who, at any time after the
owner’s mark has become famous, commences use of a mark
or trade name in commerce that is likely to cause dilution by
blurring or dilution by tarnishment of the famous mark,
regardless of the presence or absence of actual or likely
confusion, of competition, or of actual economic injury.
(2) DEFINITIONS- 
(A) For purposes of paragraph (1), a mark is famous if it
is widely recognized by the general consuming public of
the United States as a designation of source of the goods
or services of the mark’s owner. In determining whether a
mark possesses the requisite degree of recognition, the
court may consider all relevant factors, including the
following:
204
Data and Documents

(i) The duration, extent, and geographic reach of
advertising and publicity of the mark, whether
advertised or publicized by the owner or third
parties.
(ii) The amount, volume, and geographic extent of
sales of goods or services offered under the mark.
(iii) The extent of actual recognition of the mark.
(iv) Whether the mark was registered under the Act
of March 3, 1881, or the Act of February 20, 1905, or
on the principal register.
(B) For purposes of paragraph (1), ‘dilution by blurring’ is
association arising from the similarity between a mark or
trade name and a famous mark that impairs the
distinctiveness of the famous mark. In determining
whether a mark or trade name is likely to cause dilution
by blurring, the court may consider all relevant factors,
including the following:
(i) The degree of similarity between the mark or trade
name and the famous mark.
(ii) The degree of inherent or acquired distinctiveness
of the famous mark.
(iii) The extent to which the owner of the famous
mark is engaging in substantially exclusive use of the
mark.
(iv) The degree of recognition of the famous mark.
(v) Whether the user of the mark or trade name
intended to create an association with the famous
mark.
(vi) Any actual association between the mark or trade
name and the famous mark.
(C) For purposes of paragraph (1), ‘dilution by
tarnishment’ is association arising from the similarity
between a mark or trade name and a famous mark that
harms the reputation of the famous mark.
(3) EXCLUSIONS- The following shall not be actionable as
dilution by blurring or dilution by tarnishment under this
subsection:
(A) Any fair use, including a nominative or descriptive
fair use, or facilitation of such fair use, of a famous mark
by another person other than as a designation of source
for the person’s own goods or services, including use in
connection with—
(i) advertising or promotion that permits consumers
to compare goods or services; or
Trademark
205

(ii) identifying and parodying, criticizing, or
commenting upon the famous mark owner or the
goods or services of the famous mark owner.
(B) All forms of news reporting and news commentary.
(C) Any noncommercial use of a mark.
(4) BURDEN OF PROOF- In a civil action for trade dress
dilution under this Act for trade dress not registered on the
principal register, the person who asserts trade dress
protection has the burden of proving that—
(A) the claimed trade dress, taken as a whole, is not
functional and is famous; and
(B) if the claimed trade dress includes any mark or marks
registered on the principal register, the unregistered
matter, taken as a whole, is famous separate and apart
from any fame of such registered marks.
(5) ADDITIONAL REMEDIES- In an action brought under this
subsection, the owner of the famous mark shall be entitled to
injunctive relief as set forth in section 34. The owner of the
famous mark shall also be entitled to the remedies set forth in
sections 35(a) and 36, subject to the discretion of the court and
the principles of equity if—
(A) the mark or trade name that is likely to cause dilution
by blurring or dilution by tarnishment was first used in
commerce by the person against whom the injunction is
sought after the date of enactment of the Trademark
Dilution Revision Act of 2006; and
(B) in a claim arising under this subsection—
(i) by reason of dilution by blurring, the person
against whom the injunction is sought willfully
intended to trade on the recognition of the famous
mark; or
(ii) by reason of dilution by tarnishment, the person
against whom the injunction is sought willfully
intended to harm the reputation of the famous mark.
(6) OWNERSHIP OF VALID REGISTRATION A COMPLETE
BAR TO ACTION- The ownership by a person of a valid
registration under the Act of March 3, 1881, or the Act of
February 20, 1905, or on the principal register under this Act
shall be a complete bar to an action against that person, with
respect to that mark, that—
(A)
(i) is brought by another person under the common
law or a statute of a State; and
(ii) seeks to prevent dilution by blurring or dilution
by tarnishment; or
206
Data and Documents

(B) asserts any claim of actual or likely damage or harm to
the distinctiveness or reputation of a mark, label, or form
of advertisement.
(7) SAVINGS CLAUSE- Nothing in this subsection shall be
construed to impair, modify, or supersede the applicability of
the patent laws of the United States.’; and
(2) in subsection (d)(1)(B)(i)(IX), by striking ‘(c)(1) of section
43’ and inserting ‘(c)’.
SECTION 3. CONFORMING AMENDMENTS.
(a) Marks Registrable on the Principal Register- Section 2(f) of the
Trademark Act of 1946 (15 U.S.C. 1052(f)) is amended—
(1) by striking the last two sentences; and
(2) by adding at the end the following: ‘A mark which would
be likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution by
tarnishment under section 43(c), may be refused registration
only pursuant to a proceeding brought under section 13. A
registration for a mark which would be likely to cause dilution
by blurring or dilution by tarnishment under section 43(c),
may be canceled pursuant to a proceeding brought under
either section 14 or section 24.’.
(b) Opposition- Section 13(a) of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15
U.S.C. 1063(a)) is amended in the first sentence by striking ‘as a
result of dilution’ and inserting ‘the registration of any mark which
would be likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution by
tarnishment’.
(c) Cancellation- Section 14 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 U.S.C.
1064) is amended, in the matter preceding paragraph (1) by
striking ‘, including as a result of dilution under section 43(c),’ and
inserting ‘, including as a result of a likelihood of dilution by
blurring or dilution by tarnishment under section 43(c),’.
(d) Marks for the Supplemental Register- The second sentence of
section 24 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 U.S.C. 1092) is
amended to read as follows:
Whenever any person believes that such person is or will be
damaged by the registration of a mark on the supplemental
register—
(1) for which the effective filing date is after the date on
which such person’s mark became famous and which
would be likely to cause dilution by blurring or dilution
by tarnishment under section 43(c); or
(2) on grounds other than dilution by blurring or dilution
by tarnishment, such person may at any time, upon
payment of the prescribed fee and the filing of a petition
Trademark
207

stating the ground therefor, apply to the Director to cancel
such registration.
(e) Definitions- Section 45 of the Trademark Act of 1946 (15 U.S.C.
1127) is amended by striking the definition relating to the term
‘dilution’.
TRIPs: Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights
Section 2 of Part II of TRIPs deals with trademarks. A comparison be-
tween the statute already presented and the treaty sections that follow
should reveal whether the United States is in compliance (at least at the
legislative level) with its international obligations under TRIPs.
Part II: Standards Concerning the
Availability, Scope and Use of Intellectual
Property Rights
Section 2: Trademarks
Article 15: Protectable Subject Matter
1. Any sign, or any combination of signs, capable of distinguishing the
goods or services of one undertaking from those of other undertakings,
shall be capable of constituting a trademark. Such signs, in particular
words including personal names, letters, numerals, figurative elements
and combinations of colours as well as any combination of such signs,
shall be eligible for registration as trademarks. Where signs are not
inherently capable of distinguishing the relevant goods or services,
Members may make registrability depend on distinctiveness acquired
through use. Members may require, as a condition of registration, that
signs be visually perceptible.
2. Paragraph 1 shall not be understood to prevent a Member from
denying registration of a trademark on other grounds, provided that
they do not derogate from the provisions of the Paris Convention
(1967). 
3. Members may make registrability depend on use. However, actual
use of a trademark shall not be a condition for filing an application for
registration. An application shall not be refused solely on the ground
that intended use has not taken place before the expiry of a period of
three years from the date of application.
208
Data and Documents

4. The nature of the goods or services to which a trademark is to be
applied shall in no case form an obstacle to registration of the
trademark.
5. Members shall publish each trademark either before it is registered or
promptly after it is registered and shall afford a reasonable opportunity
for petitions to cancel the registration. In addition, Members may afford
an opportunity for the registration of a trademark to be opposed.
Article 16: Rights Conferred
1. The owner of a registered trademark shall have the exclusive right to
prevent all third parties not having the owner’s consent from using in
the course of trade identical or similar signs for goods or services which
are identical or similar to those in respect of which the trademark is
registered where such use would result in a likelihood of confusion. In
case of the use of an identical sign for identical goods or services, a
likelihood of confusion shall be presumed. The rights described above
shall not prejudice any existing prior rights, nor shall they affect the
possibility of Members making rights available on the basis of use.
2. Article 6bis of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to services. In determining whether a trademark is well-
known, Members shall take account of the knowledge of the trademark
in the relevant sector of the public, including knowledge in the Member
concerned which has been obtained as a result of the promotion of the
trademark.
3. Article 6bis of the Paris Convention (1967) shall apply, mutatis
mutandis, to goods or services which are not similar to those in respect
of which a trademark is registered, provided that use of that trademark
in relation to those goods or services would indicate a connection
between those goods or services and the owner of the registered
trademark and provided that the interests of the owner of the
registered trademark are likely to be damaged by such use.
Article 17: Exceptions
Members may provide limited exceptions to the rights conferred by a
trademark, such as fair use of descriptive terms, provided that such
exceptions take account of the legitimate interests of the owner of the
trademark and of third parties.
Article 18: Term of Protection
Initial registration, and each renewal of registration, of a trademark
shall be for a term of no less than seven years. The registration of a
trademark shall be renewable indefinitely.
Trademark
209

Article 19: Requirement of Use
1. If use is required to maintain a registration, the registration may be
cancelled only after an uninterrupted period of at least three years of
non-use, unless valid reasons based on the existence of obstacles to
such use are shown by the trademark owner. Circumstances arising
independently of the will of the owner of the trademark which
constitute an obstacle to the use of the trademark, such as import
restrictions on or other government requirements for goods or services
protected by the trademark, shall be recognized as valid reasons for
non-use.
2. When subject to the control of its owner, use of a trademark by
another person shall be recognized as use of the trademark for the
purpose of maintaining the registration.
Article 20: Other Requirements
The use of a trademark in the course of trade shall not be unjustifiably
encumbered by special requirements, such as use with another
trademark, use in a special form or use in a manner detrimental to its
capability to distinguish the goods or services of one undertaking from
those of other undertakings. This will not preclude a requirement
prescribing the use of the trademark identifying the undertaking
producing the goods or services along with, but without linking it to,
the trademark distinguishing the specific goods or services in question
of that undertaking.
Article 21: Licensing and Assignment [omitted]
***
Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World,
Inc., 537 F.2d 4 (2d Cir. 1976)
In this excerpt, Judge Friendly does a good job of explaining how and
why certain words can become trademarks and others cannot. Along the
way he takes a shot at the revered but often incomprehensible Judge
Learned Hand. Learned Hand (whose full name was Billings Learned
Hand) served on the Second Circuit before Henry Friendly; the former
retired in 1951 while the latter started in 1959. The footnotes are from
Judge Friendly’s decision.
Friendly, Circuit Judge:
***
210
Data and Documents

I. [omitted]
II.
It will be useful at the outset to restate some basic principles of
trademark law, which, although they should be familiar, tend to
become lost in a welter of adjectives.
The cases, and in some instances the Lanham Act, identify four
different categories of terms with respect to trademark protection.
Arrayed in an ascending order which roughly reflects their eligibility to
trademark status and the degree of protection accorded, these classes
are (1) generic, (2) descriptive, (3) suggestive, and (4) arbitrary or
fanciful. The lines of demarcation, however, are not always bright.
Moreover, the difficulties are compounded because a term that is in one
category for a particular product may be in quite a different one for
another,6 because a term may shift from one category to another in light
of differences in usage through time,7 because a term may have one
meaning to one group of users and a different one to others, and
because the same term may be put to different uses with respect to a
single product. In various ways, all of these complications are involved
in the instant case.
A generic term is one that refers, or has come to be understood as
referring, to the genus of which the particular product is a species. At
common law neither those terms which were generic nor those which
were merely descriptive could become valid trademarks, see Delaware
& Hudson Canal Co. v. Clark, 80 U.S. (13 Wall.) 311, 323, 20 L.Ed. 581
(1872) (“Nor can a generic name, or a name merely descriptive of an
article or its qualities, ingredients, or characteristics, be employed as a
trademark and the exclusive use of it be entitled to legal protection”).
The same was true under the Trademark Act of 1905 . . ., except for
marks which had been the subject of exclusive use for ten years prior
to its enactment, 33 Stat. 726. While, as we shall see . . ., the Lanham
Act makes an important exception with respect to those merely
descriptive terms which have acquired secondary meaning . . ., it offers
no such exception for generic marks. The Act provides for the
cancellation of a registered mark if at any time it “becomes the
common descriptive name of an article or substance,” § 14(c). This
means that even proof of secondary meaning, by virtue of which some
“merely descriptive” marks may be registered, cannot transform a
generic term into a subject for trademark. As explained in J. Kohnstam,
Ltd. v. Louis Marx and Company . . . (1960), no matter how much money
and effort the user of a generic term has poured into promoting the
sale of its merchandise and what success it has achieved in securing
public identification, it cannot deprive competing manufacturers of the
product of the right to call an article by its name . . . We have recently
had occasion to apply this doctrine of the impossibility of achieving
Trademark
211

trademark protection for a generic term . . . The pervasiveness of the
principle is illustrated by a series of well known cases holding that
when a suggestive or fanciful term has become generic as a result of a
manufacturer’s own advertising efforts, trademark protection will be
denied save for those markets where the term still has not become
generic and a secondary meaning has been shown to continue. . . . A
term may thus be generic in one market and descriptive or suggestive
or fanciful in another.
The term which is descriptive but not generic stands on a better
basis. Although § 2(e) of the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1052, forbids the
registration of a mark which, when applied to the goods of the
applicant, is “merely descriptive,” § 2(f) removes a considerable part of
the sting by providing that “except as expressly excluded in
paragraphs (a)-(d) of this section, nothing in this chapter shall prevent
the registration of a mark used by the applicant which has become
distinctive of the applicant’s goods in commerce” and that the
Commissioner may accept, as prima facie evidence that the mark has
become distinctive, proof of substantially exclusive and continuous use
of the mark applied to the applicant’s goods for five years preceding
the application. As indicated in the cases cited in the discussion of the
unregistrability of generic terms, “common descriptive name,” as used
in §§ 14(c) and 15(4), refers to generic terms applied to products and
not to terms that are “merely descriptive.” In the former case any
claim to an exclusive right must be denied since this in effect would
confer a monopoly not only of the mark but of the product by
rendering a competitor unable effectively to name what it was
endeavoring to sell. In the latter case the law strikes the balance, with
respect to registration, between the hardships to a competitor in
hampering the use of an appropriate word and those to the owner
who, having invested money and energy to endow a word with the
good will adhering to his enterprise, would be deprived of the fruits of
his efforts.
The category of “suggestive” marks was spawned by the felt need
to accord protection to marks that were neither exactly descriptive on
the one hand nor truly fanciful on the other a need that was
particularly acute because of the bar in the Trademark Act of 1905 . . .,
(with an exceedingly limited exception noted above) on the registration
of merely descriptive marks regardless of proof of secondary
meaning . . . Having created the category the courts have had great
difficulty in defining it. Judge Learned Hand made the not very helpful
statement:
It is quite impossible to get any rule out of the cases beyond
this: That the validity of the mark ends where suggestion ends
and description begins.
212
Data and Documents

Franklin Knitting Mills, Inc. v. Fashionit Sweater Mills, Inc., 297 F. 247, 248
(2 Cir. 1923), aff’d per curiam, 4 F.2d 1018 (2 Cir. 1925) . . . Another court
has observed, somewhat more usefully, that:
A term is suggestive if it requires imagination, thought and
perception to reach a conclusion as to the nature of goods. A
term is descriptive if it forthwith conveys an immediate idea
of the ingredients, qualities or characteristics of the goods.
Stix Products, Inc. v. United Merchants & Manufacturers Inc., 295 F.Supp.
479, 488 (S.D.N.Y.1968) . . . Also useful is the approach taken by this
court in Aluminum Fabricating Co. of Pittsburgh v. Season-All Window
Corp., 259 F.2d 314 (2 Cir. 1958), that the reason for restricting the
protection accorded descriptive terms, namely the undesirability of
preventing an entrant from using a descriptive term for his product, is
much less forceful when the trademark is a suggestive word since, as
Judge Lumbard wrote, 259 F.2d at 317:
The English language has a wealth of synonyms and related
words with which to describe the qualities which
manufacturers may wish to claim for their products and the
ingenuity of the public relations profession supplies new
words and slogans as they are needed.
If a term is suggestive, it is entitled to registration without proof of
secondary meaning. Moreover, as held in the Season-All case, the
decision of the Patent Office to register a mark without requiring proof
of secondary meaning affords a rebuttable presumption that the mark
is suggestive or arbitrary or fanciful rather than merely descriptive.
It need hardly be added that fanciful or arbitrary terms12 enjoy all
the rights accorded to suggestive terms as marks without the need of
debating whether the term is “merely descriptive” and with ease of
establishing infringement.
*** 
Patent
To be patentable, an invention must be useful, novel, and nonobvious.
Each of the first three sections of Chapter 10 of the Patent Code sets out
one of these elements—or tries to. Congress here manages to be con-
siderably less verbose than, for example, in its imposition of the afore-
mentioned Macrovision copy-protection technology, but could these
requirements have been set out more concisely?
Patent
213

Patent Act, 35 U.S.C. § 101. Inventions
patentable
Whoever invents or discovers any new and useful process, machine,
manufacture, or composition of matter, or any new and useful
improvement thereof, may obtain a patent therefor, subject to the
conditions and requirements of this title.
Patent Act, 35 U.S.C. § 102. Conditions for
patentability; novelty and loss of right to
patent
A person shall be entitled to a patent unless—
(a) the invention was known or used by others in this country, or
patented or described in a printed publication in this or a foreign
country, before the invention thereof by the applicant for patent, or
(b) the invention was patented or described in a printed
publication in this or a foreign country or in public use or on sale
in this country, more than one year prior to the date of the
application for patent in the United States, or
(c) he has abandoned the invention, or
(d) the invention was first patented or caused to be patented, or
was the subject of an inventor’s certificate, by the applicant or his
legal representatives or assigns in a foreign country prior to the
date of the application for patent in this country on an application
for patent or inventor’s certificate filed more than twelve months
before the filing of the application in the United States, or
(e) the invention was described in (1) an application for patent,
published under section 122(b), by another filed in the United
States before the invention by the applicant for patent or (2) a
patent granted on an application for patent by another filed in the
United States before the invention by the applicant for patent,
except that an international application filed under the treaty
defined in section 351(a) shall have the effects for the purposes of
this subsection of an application filed in the United States only if
the international application designated the United States and was
published under Article 21(2) of such treaty in the English
language; or
(f) he did not himself invent the subject matter sought to be
patented, or
(g)
(1) during the course of an interference conducted under
section 135 or section 291, another inventor involved therein
214
Data and Documents

establishes, to the extent permitted in section 104, that before
such person’s invention thereof the invention was made by
such other inventor and not abandoned, suppressed, or
concealed, or 
(2) before such person’s invention thereof, the invention was
made in this country by another inventor who had not
abandoned, suppressed, or concealed it. In determining
priority of invention under this subsection, there shall be
considered not only the respective dates of conception and
reduction to practice of the invention, but also the reasonable
diligence of one who was first to conceive and last to reduce to
practice, from a time prior to conception by the other.
Patent Act, 35 U.S.C. § 103. Conditions for
patentability; non-obvious subject matter
(a) A patent may not be obtained though the invention is not
identically disclosed or described as set forth in section 102 of this
title, if the differences between the subject matter sought to be
patented and the prior art are such that the subject matter as a
whole would have been obvious at the time the invention was
made to a person having ordinary skill in the art to which said
subject matter pertains. Patentability shall not be negatived by the
manner in which the invention was made.
(b)
(1) Notwithstanding subsection (a), and upon timely election
by the applicant for patent to proceed under this subsection, a
biotechnological process using or resulting in a composition of
matter that is novel under section 102 and nonobvious under
subsection (a) of this section shall be considered nonobvious
if—
(A) claims to the process and the composition of matter
are contained in either the same application for patent or
in separate applications having the same effective filing
date; and
(B) the composition of matter, and the process at the time
it was invented, were owned by the same person or
subject to an obligation of assignment to the same person.
(2) A patent issued on a process under paragraph (1)—
(A) shall also contain the claims to the composition of
matter used in or made by that process, or
(B) shall, if such composition of matter is claimed in
another patent, be set to expire on the same date as such
other patent, notwithstanding section 154.
Patent
215

(3) For purposes of paragraph (1), the term “biotechnological
process” means—
(A) a process of genetically altering or otherwise inducing
a single- or multi-celled organism to—
(i) express an exogenous nucleotide sequence,
(ii) inhibit, eliminate, augment, or alter expression of
an endogenous nucleotide sequence, or
(iii) express a specific physiological characteristic not
naturally associated with said organism;
(B) cell fusion procedures yielding a cell line that
expresses a specific protein, such as a monoclonal
antibody; and
(C) a method of using a product produced by a process
defined by subparagraph (A) or (B), or a combination of
subparagraphs (A) and (B).
(c) Subject matter developed by another person, which qualifies as
prior art only under one or more of subsections (e), (f), and (g) of
section 102 of this title, shall not preclude patentability under this
section where the subject matter and the claimed invention were,
at the time the invention was made, owned by the same person or
subject to an obligation of assignment to the same person.
TRIPs: Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects
of Intellectual Property Rights
Section 5 of Part II of TRIPs deals with patent protection. Again, it may
be interesting to compare the TRIPs requirements that follow with the
aforementioned statute. Can you see how TRIPs was interpreted as re-
quiring the United States (and other countries) to grant business
method patents?
Part II: Standards Concerning the
Availability, Scope and Use of Intellectual
Property Rights
Section 5: Patents
Article 27: Patentable Subject Matter
1. Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3, patents shall be
available for any inventions, whether products or processes, in all fields
of technology, provided that they are new, involve an inventive step
216
Data and Documents

and are capable of industrial application. Subject to paragraph 4 of
Article 65, paragraph 8 of Article 70 and paragraph 3 of this Article,
patents shall be available and patent rights enjoyable without
discrimination as to the place of invention, the field of technology and
whether products are imported or locally produced.
2. Members may exclude from patentability inventions, the prevention
within their territory of the commercial exploitation of which is
necessary to protect ordre public or morality, including to protect
human, animal or plant life or health or to avoid serious prejudice to
the environment, provided that such exclusion is not made merely
because the exploitation is prohibited by their law.
3. Members may also exclude from patentability:
(a) diagnostic, therapeutic and surgical methods for the treatment
of humans or animals;
(b) plants and animals other than micro-organisms, and essentially
biological processes for the production of plants or animals other
than non-biological and microbiological processes. However,
Members shall provide for the protection of plant varieties either
by patents or by an effective sui generis system or by any
combination thereof. The provisions of this subparagraph shall be
reviewed four years after the date of entry into force of the WTO
Agreement.
Article 28: Rights Conferred
1. A patent shall confer on its owner the following exclusive rights:
(a) where the subject matter of a patent is a product, to prevent
third parties not having the owner’s consent from the acts of:
making, using, offering for sale, selling, or importing for these
purposes that product;
(b) where the subject matter of a patent is a process, to prevent
third parties not having the owner’s consent from the act of using
the process, and from the acts of: using, offering for sale, selling, or
importing for these purposes at least the product obtained directly
by that process.
2. Patent owners shall also have the right to assign, or transfer by
succession, the patent and to conclude licensing contracts.
Article 29: Conditions on Patent Applicants
1. Members shall require that an applicant for a patent shall disclose the
invention in a manner sufficiently clear and complete for the invention
to be carried out by a person skilled in the art and may require the
applicant to indicate the best mode for carrying out the invention
known to the inventor at the filing date or, where priority is claimed, at
the priority date of the application.
Patent
217

2. Members may require an applicant for a patent to provide
information concerning the applicant’s corresponding foreign
applications and grants.
Article 30: Exceptions to Rights Conferred
Members may provide limited exceptions to the exclusive rights
conferred by a patent, provided that such exceptions do not
unreasonably conflict with a normal exploitation of the patent and do
not unreasonably prejudice the legitimate interests of the patent owner,
taking account of the legitimate interests of third parties.
Article 31: Other Use Without Authorization of the Right Holder
[omitted]
***
Article 32: Revocation/Forfeiture
An opportunity for judicial review of any decision to revoke or forfeit a
patent shall be available.
Article 33: Term of Protection
The term of protection available shall not end before the expiration of a
period of twenty years counted from the filing date. 
Article 34: Process Patents: Burden of Proof [omitted]
***
In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526 (Fed. Cir. 1994)
In In re Alappat, the Federal Circuit (the U.S. court that handles
patent appeals) completed the work of rehabilitating software patents in
the United States, undoing the damage that was done by the U.S.
Supreme Court in Gottschalk v. Benson and partially undone in Dia-
mond v. Diehr (see Chapter 2). To do this, Judge Rich had to manage
the difficult task of ensuring that Gottschalk would not be applied to
software patent cases in the future—without overturning the decision,
which he lacked the authority to do. Do you see how he did this?
Rich, Circuit Judge:
I. JURISDICTION [omitted] 
***
218
Data and Documents

II. THE MERITS
Our conclusion is that the appealed decision should be reversed
because the appealed claims are directed to a “machine” which is one
of the categories named in 35 U.S.C. § 101, as the first panel of the
Board held.
A. Alappat’s Invention
Alappat’s invention relates generally to a means for creating a
smooth waveform display in a digital oscilloscope. The screen of
an oscilloscope is the front of a cathode-ray tube (CRT), which is
like a TV picture tube, whose screen, when in operation, presents
an array (or raster) of pixels arranged at intersections of vertical
columns and horizontal rows, a pixel being a spot on the screen
which may be illuminated by directing an electron beam to that
spot, as in TV. Each column in the array represents a different time
period, and each row represents a different magnitude. An input
signal to the oscilloscope is sampled and digitized to provide a
waveform data sequence (vector list), wherein each successive
element of the sequence represents the magnitude of the waveform
at a successively later time. The waveform data sequence is then
processed to provide a bit map, which is a stored data array
indicating which pixels are to be illuminated. The waveform
ultimately displayed is formed by a group of vectors, wherein each
vector has a straight line trajectory between two points on the
screen at elevations representing the magnitudes of two successive
input signal samples and at horizontal positions representing the
timing of the two samples.
Because a CRT screen contains a finite number of pixels, rapidly
rising and falling portions of a waveform can appear
discontinuous or jagged due to differences in the elevation of
horizontally contiguous pixels included in the waveform. In
addition, the presence of “noise” in an input signal can cause
portions of the waveform to oscillate between contiguous pixel
rows when the magnitude of the input signal lies between values
represented by the elevations of the two rows. Moreover, the
vertical resolution of the display may be limited by the number of
rows of pixels on the screen. The noticeability and appearance of
these effects is known as aliasing.
To overcome these effects, Alappat’s invention employs an anti-
aliasing system wherein each vector making up the waveform is
represented by modulating the illumination intensity of pixels
having center points bounding the trajectory of the vector. The
intensity at which each of the pixels is illuminated depends upon
the distance of the center point of each pixel from the trajectory of
Patent
219

the vector. Pixels lying squarely on the waveform trace receive
maximum illumination, whereas pixels lying along an edge of the
trace receive illumination decreasing in intensity proportional to
the increase in the distance of the center point of the pixel from the
vector trajectory. Employing this anti-aliasing technique eliminates
any apparent discontinuity, jaggedness, or oscillation in the
waveform, thus giving the visual appearance of a smooth
continuous waveform. In short, and in lay terms, the invention is
an improvement in an oscilloscope comparable to a TV having a
clearer picture.
***
D. Analysis [omitted]
*** 
(b)
Given the foregoing, the proper inquiry in dealing with the so
called mathematical subject matter exception to § 101 alleged
herein is to see whether the claimed subject matter as a whole is
a disembodied mathematical concept, whether categorized as
a mathematical formula, mathematical equation, mathematical
algorithm, or the like, which in essence represents nothing
more than a “law of nature,” “natural phenomenon,” or
“abstract idea.” If so, Diehr precludes the patenting of that
subject matter. That is not the case here.
Although many, or arguably even all, of the means elements
recited in claim 15 represent circuitry elements that perform
mathematical calculations, which is essentially true of all
digital electrical circuits, the claimed invention as a whole is
directed to a combination of interrelated elements which
combine to form a machine for converting discrete waveform
data samples into anti-aliased pixel illumination intensity data
to be displayed on a display means. This is not a disembodied
mathematical concept which may be characterized as an
“abstract idea,” but rather a specific machine to produce a
useful, concrete, and tangible result.
The fact that the four claimed means elements function to
transform one set of data to another through what may be
viewed as a series of mathematical calculations does not alone
justify a holding that the claim as a whole is directed to
nonstatutory subject matter . . . Indeed, claim 15 as written is
not “so abstract and sweeping” that it would “wholly pre-
empt” the use of any apparatus employing the combination of
mathematical calculations recited therein. See Benson, 409 U.S.
at 68-72, 93 S.Ct. at 255-58 (1972). Rather, claim 15 is limited to
the use of a particularly claimed combination of elements
performing the particularly claimed combination of
220
Data and Documents

calculations to transform, i.e., rasterize, digitized waveforms
(data) into anti-aliased, pixel illumination data to produce a
smooth waveform.
Furthermore, the claim preamble’s recitation that the subject
matter for which Alappat seeks patent protection is a
rasterizer for creating a smooth waveform is not a mere field-
of-use label having no significance. Indeed, the preamble
specifically recites that the claimed rasterizer converts
waveform data into output illumination data for a display, and
the means elements recited in the body of the claim make
reference not only to the inputted waveform data recited in
the preamble but also to the output illumination data also
recited in the preamble. Claim 15 thus defines a combination
of elements constituting a machine for producing an anti-
aliased waveform.
The reconsideration Board majority also erred in its reasoning
that claim 15 is unpatentable merely because it “reads on a
general purpose digital computer ‘means’ to perform the
various steps under program control.” Alappat, 23 USPQ2d at
1345. The Board majority stated that it would “not presume
that a stored program digital computer is not within the § 112
¶ 6 range of equivalents of the structure disclosed in the
specification.” Alappat, 23 USPQ2d at 1345. Alappat admits
that claim 15 would read on a general purpose computer
programmed to carry out the claimed invention, but argues
that this alone also does not justify holding claim 15
unpatentable as directed to nonstatutory subject matter. We
agree. We have held that such programming creates a new
machine, because a general purpose computer in effect
becomes a special purpose computer once it is programmed to
perform particular functions pursuant to instructions from
program software. . . .
Under the Board majority’s reasoning, a programmed general
purpose computer could never be viewed as patentable
subject matter under § 101. This reasoning is without basis in
the law. The Supreme Court has never held that a
programmed computer may never be entitled to patent
protection. Indeed, the Benson court specifically stated that its
decision therein did not preclude “a patent for any program
servicing a computer.” Benson, 409 U.S. at 71, 93 S.Ct. at 257.
Consequently, a computer operating pursuant to software may
represent patentable subject matter, provided, of course, that
the claimed subject matter meets all of the other requirements
of Title 35. In any case, a computer, like a rasterizer, is
apparatus not mathematics.
Patent
221

CONCLUSION
For the foregoing reasons, the appealed decision of the Board
affirming the examiner’s rejection is REVERSED.
Endnotes
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 125 S.Ct. 2764
(2005)
1. Peer-to-peer networks have disadvantages as well.
Searches on peer-to-peer networks may not reach and
uncover all available files because search requests may
not be transmitted to every computer on the network.
There may be redundant copies of popular files. The
creator of the software has no incentive to minimize
storage or bandwidth consumption, the costs of which
are borne by every user of the network. Most relevant
here, it is more difficult to control the content of files
available for retrieval and the behavior of users.
2. The studios and recording companies and the
songwriters and music publishers filed separate suits
against the defendants that were consolidated by the
District Court.
3. Subsequent versions of Morpheus, released after the
record was made in this case, apparently rely not on
Gnutella but on a technology called Neonet. These
developments are not before us.
4. There is some evidence that both Grokster and
StreamCast previously operated supernodes, which
compiled indexes of files available on all of the nodes
connected to them. This evidence, pertaining to
previous versions of the defendants’ software, is not
before us and would not affect our conclusions in any
event.
5. By comparison, evidence introduced by the plaintiffs in
A & M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004
(C.A.9 2001), showed that 87% of files available on the
Napster filesharing network were copyrighted, id., at
1013.
6. The Grokster founder contends that in answering these
e-mails he often did not read them fully. . . .
222
Data and Documents

7. The record makes clear that StreamCast developed
these promotional materials but not whether it released
them to the public. Even if these advertisements were
not released to the public and do not show
encouragement to infringe, they illuminate
StreamCast’s purposes.
8. The mutual exclusivity of these values should not be
overstated, however. On the one hand technological
innovators, including those writing file-sharing
computer programs, may wish for effective copyright
protections for their work. See, e.g., Wu, When Code
Isn’t Law, 89 Va. L.Rev. 679, 750 (2003). (StreamCast
itself was urged by an associate to “get [its] technology
written down and [its intellectual property] protected.”
App. 866.) On the other hand the widespread
distribution of creative works through improved
technologies may enable the synthesis of new works or
generate audiences for emerging artists. ***
9. We stated in Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City
Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417, 104 S.Ct. 774, 78 L.Ed.2d 574
(1984), that “‘the lines between direct infringement,
contributory infringement and vicarious liability are not
clearly drawn’. . . . [R]easoned analysis of [the Sony
plaintiffs’ contributory infringement claim] necessarily
entails consideration of arguments and case law which
may also be forwarded under the other labels, and
indeed the parties . . . rely upon such arguments and
authority in support of their respective positions on the
issue of contributory infringement,” id., at 435, n. 17,
104 S.Ct. 774 (quoting Universal City Studios, Inc. v.
Sony Corp., 480 F.Supp. 429, 457-458 (C.D.Cal. 1979)). In
the present case MGM has argued a vicarious liability
theory, which allows imposition of liability when the
defendant profits directly from the infringement and
has a right and ability to supervise the direct infringer,
even if the defendant initially lacks knowledge of the
infringement. *** Because we resolve the case based on
an inducement theory, there is no need to analyze
separately MGM’s vicarious liability theory.
10. Nor does the Patent Act’s exemption from liability for
those who distribute a staple article of commerce, 35
Patent
223

U.S.C. ß 271(c), extend to those who induce patent
infringement, ß 271(b).
11. Inducement has been codified in patent law. Ibid.
Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc., 537 F.2d 4 (2d Cir.
1976)
6. To take a familiar example “Ivory” would be generic
when used to describe a product made from the tusks
of elephants but arbitrary as applied to soap.
7. See, e. g., Haughton Elevator Co. v. Seeberger, 85
U.S.P.Q. 80 (1950), in which the coined word ‘Escalator’,
originally fanciful, or at the very least suggestive, was
held to have become generic.
In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526 (Fed. Cir. 1994)
12. As terms of art, the distinctions between suggestive
terms and fanciful or arbitrary terms may seem
needlessly artificial. Of course, a common word may be
used in a fanciful sense; indeed one might say that only
a common word can be so used, since a coined word
cannot first be put to a bizarre use. Nevertheless, the
term “fanciful”, as a classifying concept, is usually
applied to words invented solely for their use as
trademarks. When the same legal consequences attach
to a common word, i.e., when it is applied in an
unfamiliar way, the use is called “arbitrary.”
224
Data and Documents

7
Directory of Organizations
I
ntellectual property is a huge global business, and it often ex-
cites considerable emotion. Far too many organizations are
devoted to intellectual property to list here; this list is represen-
tative rather than comprehensive. It includes nongovernmental
organizations and international organizations; groups focusing
on copyright, groups focusing on patent, and groups focusing on
trademark; groups from several countries and continents; groups
representing content owners’ interests, groups representing con-
sumers’ interests, groups representing legal practitioners’ inter-
ests, a group representing equipment makers’ interests, and
groups that take no side in conflicts between these interests.
Many of these groups provide excellent resources for intel-
lectual property research. The website of the World Intellectual
Property Organization (WIPO) (www.wipo.org) is the best first
stop for research in international intellectual property law. For
U.S. intellectual property law, an excellent place to start is Bitlaw
(www.bitlaw.com).
The websites listed here were functioning as of October 2006.
Many of these groups also provide e-mail addresses or telephone
contact numbers. E-mail is probably a more practical and efficient
means of making contact than telephone, however. The telephone
numbers listed here include area codes in parentheses (for United
States and Canadian telephone numbers) or country codes sepa-
rated from city codes and the remainder of the telephone number
with a hyphen (for overseas telephone numbers). The “011” that
appears at the beginning of each number is the international dial-
ing prefix needed to call most overseas numbers from most U.S.
225

telephones. When calling from outside the United States, omit the
011 and use the appropriate dialing prefix.
African Regional Intellectual Property Organization (ARIPO)
11 Natal Road
Belgravia, Harare
Zimbabwe
Phone: 011-2634-794054
Fax: 011-2634-704072
E-mail: aripo@ecoweb.co.zw; mail@aripo.org
Website: http://www.aripo.org/
The ARIPO was founded as a regional international intellectual
property law organization for anglophone Africa. (See also Or-
ganisation Africaine de la Propriété Intellectuelle.) In addition to
administrative and harmonization efforts, a main concern of
ARIPO has been to combat “dependent intellectual property leg-
islation,” a legacy of colonialism. This dependent legislation,
found in many African countries until quite recently, provided no
process for the grant or registration of an intellectual property
right originating in the former colonies. Such intellectual prop-
erty laws as existed served only to extend intellectual property
rights acquired in another country (typically the United King-
dom) to the former colony’s territory.
The ARIPO provides a single filing process for patent appli-
cations to ARIPO member states. The ARIPO website provides
links to the text of several African regional intellectual property
agreements.
Alliance for Digital Progress (ADP)
Bill Maguire, Executive Director
Phone: (202) 266-2537
E-mail: billm@adpcoalition.org
Website: http://www.alliancefordigitalprogress.org/
The ADP is a group of equipment manufacturers (including
Apple, Cisco, Dell, Hewlett-Packard, IBM, Intel, Microsoft, and
Motorola) and public interest organizations. The ADP was
founded to oppose government-designed or government-man-
dated copyright protection technology. According to the organi-
zation’s mission statement, “ADP believes that the best ways to
meet consumer expectations and fight piracy include market-
driven efforts to educate consumers, create digital distribution
226
Directory of Organizations

strategies, develop innovative technology, and enforce existing
laws. ADP strongly opposes efforts to make the government de-
sign and mandate copy-protection technologies.”
American Bar Association Section of Intellectual Property Law
321 North Clark Street
Chicago, IL 60610-4714
Phone: (312) 988-5598
Fax: (312) 988-6800
E-mail: iplaw@abanet.org
Website: http://www.abanet.org/intelprop/
The American Bar Association Section of Intellectual Property
Law, formed in 1894, claims to be the world’s largest intellectual
property law organization; its members include lawyers, law stu-
dents, and others. Its website includes the Section newsletter and
other publications, although the content of these can be arcane
and are more likely to be of interest to attorneys than to the gen-
eral public. The site also includes an excellent links page that con-
tains links to many other intellectual property organizations and
discussion groups on intellectual property law.
American Intellectual Property Law Association (AIPLA)
241 Eighteenth Street South, Suite 700 
Arlington, VA 22202
Phone: (703) 415-0780
Fax: (703) 415-0786
E-mail: AIPLA@aipla.org
Website: http://www.aipla.org/
The AIPLA, which was founded in 1897, is an association of more
than 16,000 intellectual property lawyers. It publishes The Ameri-
can Intellectual Property Law Association Quarterly Journal, the
AIPLA Bulletin, and the Report of the Economic Survey. The first of
these is likely to be most useful to those who are not intellectual
property lawyers but are interested in the subject. Some addi-
tional publications may be viewed for free on AIPLA’s website
under the heading “Publications Available for Viewing” in the
“Educational Materials” section.
American Society of Composers, Authors and Publishers
(ASCAP)
7920 West Sunset Boulevard, Third Floor
Directory of Organizations
227

Los Angeles, CA 90046
Phone: (323) 883-1000
Fax: (323) 883-1049
8 Cork Street
London W1X1PB
United Kingdom
Phone: 011-44-207-439-0909
Fax: 011-44-207-434-0073
E-mail: info@ascap.com
Website: http://www.ascap.com/
The ASCAP is a copyright clearinghouse with eight membership
offices (in New York, Los Angeles, London, Miami, Nashville,
Chicago, Puerto Rico, and Atlanta). It provides one-stop shop-
ping for music copyright holders—composers, songwriters,
performers, and music publishers—and those wishing to make
lawful use of copyrighted music—bands, radio stations, and oth-
ers. ASCAP members give blanket permission to ASCAP to li-
cense their work. The users pay a fee to ASCAP, which can grant
a license to use the work without having to consult with the con-
tent creator or publisher. This is far simpler than, for example,
having each radio station seek permission from each artist whose
songs it wished to play, as well as those artists’ publishing com-
panies, the composer who wrote the music, the songwriter who
wrote the lyrics, and perhaps others. While many of ASCAP’s
members may be concerned with music piracy (and disagree on
how, or whether, it should be addressed), ASCAP itself is con-
cerned with the day-to-day administration of music licensing; it
is not an advocacy organization. That job is left to the Recording
Industry Association of America (see entry in this chapter).
Anti-DMCA
E-mail: anti-dmca@anti-dmca.org 
Website: http://www.anti-dmca.org/
Anti-DMCA is, as the name says, a consumer advocacy group op-
posed to the Digital Millennium Copyright Act of 1998, especially
the anticircumvention and digital rights management protection
provisions of Sections 1201–1204. Anti-DMCA continues to op-
pose laws that would restrict consumer control over purchased
content; the Anti-DMCA website is passionate and entertaining,
but often slow to load.
228
Directory of Organizations

Arts and Humanities Research Board Shepherd and
Wedderburn Research Centre in Intellectual Property and
Technology (SCRIPT)
School of Law
University of Edinburgh, Old College
Edinburgh EH8 9YL
Scotland
Phone: 011-44-131-650-2014
Fax: 011-44-131-662-0724
E-mail: itandip@ed.ac.uk
Website: http://www.law.ed.ac.uk/ahrb/
SCRIPT is a noteworthy academic center for the study of intellec-
tual property law that addresses a somewhat broader scope of in-
tellectual property concerns than the Berkman Center (see entry
in this chapter). Materials available on its website include the on-
line academic journal SCRIPT-ed.
Association of Corporate Patent Counsel (ACPC)
1255 Twenty-third Street, N.W., Suite 200
Washington, DC 20037
Website:
http://www.ipo.org/content/navigationmenu/acpc_site/acpc
_home_page_4.htm
The ACPC, which was founded in 1966, is an organization of cor-
porate patent lawyers. Its membership includes persons working
as chief intellectual property counsel, or the equivalent office, in
companies operating in the United States.
Association Internationale pour la Protection de la Propriété
Intellectuelle (AIPPI)
AIPPI General Secretariat
Tödistrasse 16
P.O. Box 8027
Zurich
Switzerland
Phone: 011-41-44-280-58-80
Fax: 011-41-44-280-58-85
E-mail: mail@aippi.org
Website: http://www.aippi.org/
Directory of Organizations
229

The AIPPI (International Association for the Protection of Indus-
trial Property), founded in 1897, is a nongovernmental organiza-
tion dedicated to the study, development, and advancement of
international intellectual property law. Although ostensibly neu-
tral in disputes over intellectual property rights, its support for
expanding intellectual property protection tends to favor the in-
terests of content owners. The website provides copies of the
Association’s own materials and links to branches, other non-
governmental organizations, and governmental and international
agencies worldwide.
Association Littéraire et Artistique Internationale (ALAI)
c/o Kimbrough & Associés
82, rue du Faubourg Saint-Honoré
75008 Paris
France
Phone: 011-33-1-53-30-24-24
Fax: 011-33-1-53-30-24-25
E-Mail: yves.gaubiac@kimbroughlaw.com;
paula.dionisio@kimbroughlaw.com
Website: http://www.alai.org/
The ALAI (International Literary and Artistic Association) was
founded in 1878 by Victor Hugo and other writers who were con-
cerned about international copying of their works. The ALAI
grew out of the Société des Gens de Lettres, a writers’ group
founded in 1838 and still in existence (see the entry in this chap-
ter). The ALAI’s initial purpose was to push for an international
copyright treaty, and its moment of triumph came just eight years
after its founding, with the adoption of the Berne Convention.
Today nearly every country in the world is a member of the Berne
Convention, which creates a nearly seamless regime of interna-
tional copyright protection, without formalities or the necessity of
obtaining protection separately in each member country. The
ALAI continues to act as an advocate for the interests of authors
and artists. It has national affiliates in twenty-four countries, in-
cluding the United States.
Berkman Center for Internet & Society
Harvard Law School
23 Everett Street, Second Floor 
Cambridge, MA 02138
230
Directory of Organizations

Phone: (617) 495-7547
Fax: (617) 495-7641
E-mail: cyber@law.harvard.edu 
Website: http://cyber.law.harvard.edu/home/
The Berkman Center is one of the best known of the many
university centers devoted in whole or part to the study of intel-
lectual property law. According to its mission statement, the
Center’s mission is “to explore and understand cyberspace, its
development, dynamics, norms, standards, and need or lack
thereof for laws and sanctions.” This includes intellectual prop-
erty law (especially, but not only, copyright law) relating to the
Internet as well as other areas of law, including First Amendment
and privacy law. The Berkman Center’s website provides a great
many academic articles, podcasts, and other information avail-
able for free download.
Bitlaw
Beck & Tysver, PLLC 
2900 Thomas Avenue South, Suite 100
Minneapolis, MN 55416 
Phone: (612) 915-9633
Fax: (612) 915-9637
E-mail: info@bitlaw.com 
Website: http://www.bitlaw.com/
Bitlaw, an excellent online research resource, is the project of Min-
neapolis intellectual property attorney Daniel A. Tysver. The en-
tire body of U.S. statutory and regulatory law is available on the
site, along with Tysver’s informative explanations and commen-
tary. It’s an essential first stop in any online intellectual property
research project.
Budapest Open Access Initiative
Melissa Hagemann
E-mail: mhagemann@sorosny.org
Website: http://www.soros.org/openaccess/  
For academic authors, copyright protection is often more of a
bane than a boon. The works themselves have little or no mone-
tary value; their value to the authors depends on being widely
read and cited by other scholars. Yet these articles are subject to
the same term and scope of copyright protection as commercial
Directory of Organizations
231

works, and the authors often do not control the copyright. The
copyright holder may be a journal or a university press. Many
small journals keep poor copyright records or stop publishing
without notice and without any formal distribution of assets (in-
cluding intellectual property assets). Thus, locating the copyright
holder may be difficult or sometimes impossible. When the copy-
right holder can be located, it may arbitrarily withhold permis-
sion to reprint an article even though the author wants to grant
the permission.
The Budapest Open Access Initiative, created in 2002, at-
tempts to address this problem through self-archiving (deposit-
ing articles in open-access electronic archives) and open-access
journals. Open-access journals “will no longer invoke copyright
to restrict access to and use of the material they publish. Instead
they will use copyright and other tools to ensure permanent open
access to all the articles they publish. Because price is a barrier to
access, these new journals will not charge subscription or access
fees, and will turn to other methods for covering their expenses”
(Budapest Open Access Initiative 2002, http://www.soros.org/
openaccess/). 
Individual academic authors, to the extent that they are able
to retain or control the copyright in their works, can achieve a
similar result through the use of a license such as those available
from Creative Commons (see entry in this chapter).
Business Software Alliance (BSA)
BSA United States:
1150 18th Street, N.W.
Suite 700
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 872-5500
Fax: (202) 872-5501
BSA Europe:
79 Knightsbridge
London, SW1X 7RB
United Kingdom
Phone: 011-44-207-245-0304 
Fax: 011-44-207-245-0310 
BSA Asia:
300 Beach Road
#25-08 The Concourse
Singapore 199555
232
Directory of Organizations

Phone: 011-65-6292-2072
Fax: 011-65-6292-6369 
Website: http://www.bsa.org/
The BSA is an organization representing the interests of software
publishers. It pursues software patent and copyright violators
and seeks to educate the public about the (possibly exaggerated)
dangers of using pirated software.
Campaign for Digital Rights (CDR)
Martin Keegan 
Phone: 011-0044-07779-296469
E-mail: mk@ukcdr.org
Website: http://ukcdr.org/
The CDR is a British consumers’ rights organization. The scope of
its advocacy and its ideological stance are similar to those of the
Electronic Frontier Foundation (see entry in this chapter). The
CDR opposes expansion of intellectual property protection under
United Kingdom and European Union laws if such expansion
would occur at the expense of the consumer. It also opposes at-
tempts by the content industry to restrict consumers’ use of
legally purchased content. 
Canadian Motion Picture Distributors Association (CMPDA)
P.O. Box 92033
7400 Taschereau Boulevard
Brossard, PQ J4W 3K8
Canada
Phone: (450) 672-1990; (800) 363-9166
Fax: (450) 672-1660
E-mail: gosmond@cmpda.org
Website: http://www.cmpda.org/ 
The CMPDA, like the Motion Picture Association of America (see
entry in this chapter), is a movie industry group representing the
interests of content owners. Its Anti-Piracy Operations depart-
ment tracks down and seeks criminal prosecution of makers and
distributors of illegally copied DVDs, file sharers, and makers
and distributors of illegal descramblers and other devices that
allow free access to pay-per-view, cable, and satellite TV net-
works.
Directory of Organizations
233

Center for Intellectual Property Studies (CIP)
Chalmers University of Technology/Göteborg University 
Vera Sandbergs Allé 8A
412 96 Göteborg 
Sweden
Phone: 011-46-31-772-8247 
Fax: 011-46-31–772-1917 
E-mail: info@cip.chalmers.se
Website: http://www.cip.chalmers.se/
The CIP, like the Centre for International Industrial Property
Studies (see the entry in this chapter), is an academic study pro-
gram in intellectual property. The CIP is a joint project of two
Swedish universities, Chalmers University of Technology and
Göteborg University. Some CIP publications are available on the
website; most are in English.
Centre d’Etudes Internationales de la Propriété Industrielle
(CEIPI)
11, rue du Maréchal Juin
BP 68
67046 Strasbourg Cedex
France
Phone: 011-03-88-14-45-86
Fax: 011-03-88-14-45-94
E-mail : ceipi@urs.u-strasbg.fr
Website: http://www.ceipi.edu/
The CEIPI (Center for International Industrial Property Studies),
which was founded in 1963, is a graduate study program in in-
tellectual property law at the Université Robert Schuman in Stras-
bourg, France. In addition to information about graduate studies,
CEIPI makes the students’ papers available on its website (in
French).
Copyright Clearance Center 
222 Rosewood Drive 
Danvers, MA 01923 
Phone: (978) 750-8400
Fax: (978) 646-8600
E-mail: info@copyright.com
Website: http://www.copyright.com/
234
Directory of Organizations

The Copyright Clearance Center, like ASCAP (see entry in this
chapter), is a copyright clearinghouse. While the latter is a clear-
inghouse for music copyrights, the former is a clearinghouse for
copyrights in text. It is a member of the International Federation
of Reproduction Rights Organizations (see entry in this chapter).
Like other clearinghouses, it provides a single location for content
owners to license their work and for those seeking to make use of
that content.
The Copyright Society of the United States of America
(CSUSA)
352 Seventh Avenue, Suite 739
New York, NY 10001
Phone: (212) 354-6401
E-mail: amy@csusa.org
Website: http://www.csusa.org/
The CSUSA is a nonpartisan organization of copyright lawyers,
academics, and others in the copyright industry. It publishes the
Journal of the Copyright Society of the USA, which can be found in
law libraries. The CSUSA’s website includes a useful links page
under the “Research” button.
Creative Commons
543 Howard Street, 5th Floor
San Francisco, CA 94105-3013
Phone: (415) 946-3070
Fax: (415) 946-3001 (include “Attn: Creative Commons” on cover
sheet)
E-mail: info@creativecommons.org
Website: http://creativecommons.org 
For many authors, the main reason for creating a work is to have
it distributed as widely as possible, rather than to control all
possible uses of the work. The traditional copyright approach,
reserving all of the rights granted to authors under 17 U.S.C. §
106, is designed to protect commercially valuable works. How-
ever, in some cases this may hinder rather than help the distri-
bution of noncommercial works. Even some commercial works,
especially by new entrants to a field (such as aspiring musi-
cians), may benefit more from enhanced distribution than from
enhanced protection.
Directory of Organizations
235

Many of these authors want to preserve some rights in their
work; for an example, an author might want to allow free non-
commercial distribution of an e-novel but retain the right to profit
from that novel if it is ever printed, bound, and sold in hard copy.
Yet few authors know how to create such a license. Creative Com-
mons provides a library of licenses to suit every purpose, along
with tools for selecting the proper license. Its website declares
“We work to offer creators a best-of-both-worlds way to protect
their works while encouraging certain uses of them—to declare
‘some rights reserved.’”
DigitalConsumer.org
Melissa Walia
Phone: (650) 208-4523
E-mail: info@digitalconsumer.org; press@digitalconsumer.org
Website: http://www.digitalconsumer.org/
DigitalConsumer.org is a consumer rights group dedicated to
protecting the traditional fair-use exception to copyright protec-
tion (and related rights, including the right to make backup
copies) against encroachment by the anticircumvention provi-
sions of Section 1201 and related laws. It advocates a six-point
Consumer Technology Bill of Rights:
1.
Users have the right to “time-shift” content that they
have legally acquired.
2.
Users have the right to “space-shift” content that they
have legally acquired.
3.
Users have the right to make backup copies of their
content.
4.
Users have the right to use legally acquired content on
the platform of their choice.
5.
Users have the right to translate legally acquired
content into comparable formats.
6.
Users have the right to use technology in order to
achieve the rights previously mentioned.
The first five of these are already legal for non–copy-protected
content; item 6 would make them legal for copy-protected content
as well.
236
Directory of Organizations

Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
454 Shotwell Street
San Francisco, CA 94110-1914 
Phone: (415) 436-9333
Fax: (415) 436-9993
E-mail: information@eff.org
Website: http://www.eff.org/
The EFF, founded in 1990, is perhaps the best known of the many
consumers’ rights groups dedicated to Internet and electronic in-
tellectual property issues. Its website lists thirty-two topics of
concern, of which seventeen—more than half—are partly or en-
tirely intellectual property concerns. The remaining topics are
mostly related to First Amendment rights, privacy rights, and
other civil rights. On all of these issues EFF’s stance is consistently
in favor of individual rights. EFF seeks to protect individual
rights against infringement by governments and corporations.
The EFF has taken an active role in many intellectual property
lawsuits and debates over pending legislation. The EFF website
includes a great deal of useful information on these.
Eurasian Patent Organization (EAPO)
Staroalexeevskaya ulica 21
Moscow, 129626
Russian Federation
Phone: 011-7-495-411-61-50
Fax: 011-7-495-616-22-53
E-mail: info@eapo.org
Website: http://www.eapo.org/ (the site is in Russian, but there
is a link to an English translation)
The EAPO is a regional patent organization covering nine states
that were formerly part of the Soviet Union. The EAPO created a
single-application patent system for these nine states. Patents
granted by EAPO provide protection in all nine states. The EAPO
website provides legal documents and information about the
patent process in Russian and English.
European Digital Rights (EDRI)
Kandelaarsstraat 23
B1000 Brussels
Directory of Organizations
237

Belgium 
E-mail: press@edri.org
Website: http://www.edri.org/
The EDRI, which was founded in 2002, is a consumers’ rights
group along the lines of the EFF in the United States (and world-
wide) and the Campaign for Digital Rights in the United King-
dom. The EDRI opposes attempts to expand intellectual property
protection when that expansion would infringe on other individ-
ual rights. The “EDRI-grams” on the website include a great deal
of useful information about current issues in European Union in-
tellectual property law.
European Patent Office (EPO) 
80298 Munich
Germany
Phone: 011-49-89-2399-4636
Fax: 011-49-89-2399-4465
Website: http://www.european-patent-office.org
The EPO, an organ of the European Patent Organization, was es-
tablished by the Convention on the Grant of European Patents in
1973. It reviews and grants (or denies) applications for European
patents. These patents protect an invention in the territories of all
of the member states. The EPO’s parent, the European Patent Or-
ganization, has also concluded bilateral patent agreements with
Albania, Croatia, Latvia, Lithuania, and Macedonia, bringing
those countries within the European patent system. The EPO’s
website includes legal documents, patent documents, and de-
scriptive information about European patent law and the patent
process.
Fédération Internationale des Conseils en Propriété
Industrielle (FICPI) 
Holbeinstrasse 36-38
4003 Basel
Switzerland
Phone: 011-33-1-44-20-7776-7302
Fax: 011-33-1-44-20-7726-0055
E-mail: JRCrump@mintz.com
Website: http://www.ficpi.org/
238
Directory of Organizations

The FICPI (International Federation of Intellectual Property At-
torneys), founded in 1906, is an organization of intellectual prop-
erty attorneys in private practice in eighty countries. The FICPI
newsletter and papers are available on the website.
The Institute of Patentees and Inventors
P.O. Box 39296
London SE3 7WH
United Kingdom
Phone: 011-44-0871-226-2091
Fax: 011-44-0208-293-5920
E-mail: ipi@invent.org.uk
Website: http://www.invent.org.uk/
The Institute of Patentees and Inventors is an organization of in-
ventors and patent attorneys in the United Kingdom. It provides
information and advice on United Kingdom patent law and the
patent process, and its website offers links to other useful sites, in-
cluding sites of United Kingdom copyright and trademark
groups.
Institute of Professional Representatives before the European
Patent Office (epi)
Tal 29
80331 Munich
Germany
Phone: 011-49-89-242052-0 
Fax: 011-49-89-242052-20
E-mail: info@patentepi.com
Website: http://www.patentepi.com/
The epi is the European Patent Convention bar. Its members are
attorneys who are eligible to practice before the European Patent
Office (see entry in this chapter). The website provides informa-
tion about examinations and other requirements for admission to
practice before the European Patent Office.
Institute of Trade Mark Attorneys (ITMA) 
Canterbury House
2-6 Sydenham Road
Croydon, Surrey, CRO 9XE
Directory of Organizations
239

United Kingdom
Phone: 011-44-020-8686-2052
Fax: 011-44-020-8680-5723
E-mail: tm@itma.org.uk 
Website: http://www.itma.org.uk/
The ITMA, which was founded in 1934, is a professional organi-
zation for trademark attorneys practicing in the United Kingdom.
Its website includes information on the trademark registration
process in the United Kingdom.
Intellectual Property Owners Association (IPO)
1255 23rd Street NW
Suite 200
Washington, DC  20037
Phone: (202) 466-2396
Website: http://www.IPO.org
The IPO is a content industry group that lobbies state, national,
and international legislative and rule-making bodies for rules
more favorable to intellectual property owners.  Its website pro-
vides analysis of current intellectual property issues and general
background information.  Particularly useful to aspiring intellec-
tual property attorneys is its Corporate IP Career Bank, which
provides job listings and a resume bank.
International Anticounterfeiting Coalition (IACC)
1725 K Street, N.W., Suite 411
Washington, DC 20006
Phone: (202) 223-6667
Fax: (202) 223-6668
E-mail: rwynne@iacc.org 
Website: http://www.iacc.org/
The IACC is an organization representing the interests of copy-
right and trademark owners. It seeks to prevent the manufacture
and sale of counterfeit goods, from Adidas sneakers to Zippo
lighters, in the United States and around the world. It carries out
its work through education and outreach, through lobbying, and
through collecting information about counterfeit goods.
International Association for the Advancement of Teaching
and Research in Intellectual Property (ATRIP)
Professor Dr. Ysolde Gendreau, President 
240
Directory of Organizations

Faculte de droit 
Universite de Montreal 
C.P. 6128 Succursale A. Centre-Ville 
Montreal, Quebec 
Canada H3C 3J7 
Phone: (514) 343-6062 
Fax: (514) 343-2030
E-mail: ysolde.gendreau@umontreal.ca 
Website: http://www.atrip.org/
The ATRIP is an organization of intellectual property law profes-
sors and researchers. The group organizes an annual academic
conference, and some documents from past conferences are avail-
able on the ATRIP website.
International Association of Entertainment Lawyers
Duncan Calow
DLA Piper Rudnick Gray Cary UK LLP
3 Noble Street
London EC2V 7EE
United Kingdom
Phone: 011-44-8700-111-111 
Website: http://www.iael.org/
The International Association of Entertainment Lawyers,
founded in 1977, is, as the name says, an organization of enter-
tainment attorneys. Each year it publishes a book on current
issues in entertainment law; these often include intellectual prop-
erty issues.
International Federation of Inventors’ Associations (IFIA)
IFIA Secretariat
P.O. Box 319
H-1591 Budapest
Hungary
Phone: 011-36-20-945-8078 
Fax: 011-36-1-422-09-36
E-mail: ifia@inventor.hu
Website: http://www.invention-ifia.ch/
The IFIA is an umbrella organization for inventors’ associations
in eighty-two countries. Its member organizations provide a vari-
ety of assistance to inventors, including help in navigating the
patent law system.
Directory of Organizations
241

International Federation of Reproduction Rights
Organizations (IFRRO)
Rue du Prince Royal 87
B-1050 Brussels
Belgium
Phone: 011-32-2-551-08-99
Fax: 011-32-2-551-08-95 
E-mail: secretariat@ifrro.be 
Website: http://www.ifrro.org
The IFRRO represents the interests of copyright holders. Its
mission statement declares “IFRRO works to increase on an in-
ternational basis the lawful use of copyright works and eliminate
unauthorised copying by promoting efficient Collective Management
of rights through RROs” (emphasis in original; “RROs” are repro-
duction rights organizations). Individual copyright holders
usually lack the resources to detect and seek redress for copyright
violations. Persons wishing to make lawful copies of copyrighted
material may be unable to locate individual authors to obtain per-
mission, so RROs seek to solve both problems by locating and
suing copyright violators and by acting as clearinghouses to au-
thorize reproduction of the copyrighted material. The IFRRO is
an umbrella organization uniting and coordinating the activities
of more than 100 RROs and similar organizations. 
International Intellectual Property Alliance (IIPA) 
1747 Pennsylvania Avenue, N.W., Suite 825
Washington, DC 20006-4637
Phone: (202) 833-4198 
Fax: (202) 872-0546 
E-mail: info@iipa.com
Website: http://www.iipa.com/
The IIPA is a content industry coalition whose goal is to expand
the reach of the global copyright regime and combat piracy of
copyrighted content. Despite its name, it focuses solely on copy-
right, rather than on other forms of intellectual property. The
website provides IIPA press releases and other IIPA documents.
International Intellectual Property Institute (IIPI)
1100 H Street, N.W., Suite 1100
Washington, DC 20005
Telephone: (202) 544-6610
242
Directory of Organizations

Fax: (202) 478-1955
Website: http://www.iipi.org/
The IIPI is a Washington, DC, think tank advocating the spread
of intellectual property regimes on the U.S. or developed-world
model to developing countries. Its website provides many of the
Institute’s policy and research papers as well as some legal ma-
terials.
International Law Association (ILA)
Charles Clore House
17 Russell Square
London WC1B 5DR
United Kingdom
Phone: 011-44-20-7323-2978
Fax: 011-44-20-7323-3580
E-mail: info@ila-hq.org
Website: http://www.ila-hq.org
The ILA was founded in 1873 for “the study, clarification and de-
velopment of international law, both public and private, and the
furtherance of international understanding and respect for inter-
national law.” Its International Law on Biotechnology Committee
and International Trade Law Committee deal with concerns re-
lated to international intellectual property law. The ILA website
includes conference reports and resolutions of these committees.
International Trademark Association (INTA)
655 Third Avenue, 10th Floor
New York, NY 10017-5617
Phone: (212) 642-1700
Fax (212) 768-7796
E-mail: info@inta.org
Website: www.inta.org
The INTA, founded in 1878 and has members in more than 180
countries, represents the interests of trademark owners. In addi-
tion to its advocacy efforts on behalf of the owners of trademarks
and other marks, the INTA gathers information to be used by its
members. Most INTA publications are available online only to
members, but the FAQs section of the INTA website provides a
great deal of useful basic information about marks and trademark
law.
Directory of Organizations
243

Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers
(ICANN)
Marina del Rey Office:
4676 Admiralty Way, Suite 330 
Marina del Rey, CA 90292
Phone: (310) 823-9358
Fax: (310) 823-8649 
Brussels Office:
6 Rond Point Schuman, Bt. 5
Brussels B-1040
Belgium
Tel: 011-32-2-234-7870
Fax: 011-32-2-234-7848
E-mail: press@icann.org; info@icann.org
Website: http://www.icann.org/
The ICANN administers the Internet domain name system. It
was created in 1998 as a nonprofit organization under the laws of
California, by agreement between the Internet Assigned Num-
bers Authority and the U.S. Department of Commerce. ICANN
directly administers the top-level domain name system. (Top-
level domains are the parts of a domain name that appear after
the last dot in the URL, such as “.com,” “.edu,” “.cn,” and “.ca.”)
It authorizes national or private registrars, as appropriate, to as-
sign domain names within the top-level domains. The assign-
ment of domain names has trademark implications, and ICANN
also resolves disputes regarding rights to domain names under
its Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy (see Chap-
ter 2).
Japan Intellectual Property Association (JIPA)
Asahi Seimei Otemachi Building 18F 
6-1 Ohtemachi 2-chome
Chiyoda-ku
Tokyo, 100-0004
Japan
Phone: 011-81-03-5205-3321
Fax: 011-81-03-5205-3391
E-mail: info@jipa.or.jp
Website: http://www.jipa.or.jp/ (in Japanese);
http://www.jipa.or.jp/content/english/ (in English)
244
Directory of Organizations

The JIPA, founded in 1938, is an organization of lawyers, aca-
demics, government employees, and other workers in the field of
Japanese intellectual property law. It publishes policy state-
ments, some of which are available online in English, and the
Journal of the Japan Intellectual Property Association. The journal’s
table of contents is available in English, as are some, but not all,
of the articles.
Max-Planck-Institut für Geistiges Eigentum, Wettbewerbs-
und Steuerrecht
Marstallplatz 1 
80539 Munich, Germany 
Phone: 011-49-89-24246-0 
Fax: 011-49-89-24246-501
E-mail: Institut@ip.mpg.de
Website: http://www.ip.mpg.de/ww/en/pub/news.cfm
(in German and English)
The Max-Planck-Institut für Geistiges Eigentum, Wettbewerbs-
und Steuerrecht (Max Planck Institute for Intellectual Property,
Competition and Tax Law) is a research institute within Ger-
many’s famed Max Planck Institute. It does not offer courses or
professional degrees, but exists solely for advanced research in
areas including intellectual property law. Some Institute publica-
tions, many of them in English, are available through the website.
Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA)
Los Angeles Office:
15503 Ventura Boulevard
Encino, CA 91436
Phone: (818) 995-6600
Fax: (818) 382-1795
International Offices:
108 rue du Trône
B-1050 Brussells
Belgium
Phone: 011-32-2-778-2711
Fax: 011-32-2-778-2700
Rua Sergipe 475, 10th Floor
Higienópolis
São Paulo, SP 01243-001
Directory of Organizations
245

Brazil
Phone: 011-5511-3667-2080
Fax: 011-5511-3825-5544
No. 1 Magazine Road
Central Mall #04-07
Singapore 059571
Phone: 011-65-6253-1033
Fax: 011-65-6255-1838
Website: http://www.mpaa.org
The MPAA is one of the two most influential content-industry or-
ganizations in the United States, the other being the Recording In-
dustry Association of America (see entry in this chapter). For
nearly four decades, from 1966 to 2004, the MPAA was headed by
the legendary Jack Valenti (see Chapter 5). The MPAA performs a
wide variety of functions, including administering the movie con-
tent rating system in use in the United States (G, PG, PG-13, R,
NC-17). In recent years, however, the MPAA’s attentions and ef-
forts have been largely focused on video piracy.
Piracy of films does not pose quite the threat to the industry’s
business model that piracy of music poses to the music content
industry’s business model. The amount of money invested in
each film, however, is much greater than the amount invested in
each song. The MPAA tries to combat piracy at every level, from
education and outreach aimed at young Internet users to lawsuits
and criminal prosecutions against copyright infringers and inces-
sant lobbying of Congress, international organizations, the World
Trade Organization (WTO), and foreign governments for greater
intellectual property protection.
Music Publishers’ Association (MPA)
243 5th Avenue, Suite 236
New York, NY 10016 
Phone: (212) 327-4044
E-mail: admin@mpa.org 
Website: http://www.mpa.org/
The MPA, founded in 1895, deals with all aspects of music pub-
lishing but focuses particularly on publishing of printed music.
Its Copyright Resource Center provides copyright search and
clearance services, as well as information about copyright law
and the licensing process.
246
Directory of Organizations

National Association of Patent Practitioners (NAPP)
4680-18-i Monticello Avenue, PMB101
Williamsburg, VA 23188
Phone: (800) 216-9588
Fax: (757) 220-3928
Website: www.napp.org
The NAPP, founded in 1996, focuses on the actual practice of
patent law before the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office, rather
than on broader issues of intellectual property policy. Its website
provides useful links.
Office for Harmonization in the Internal Market (Trade Marks
and Designs) (OHIM)
Avenida de Europa, 4
E-03008 Alicante
Spain
Phone: 011-34-96-513-9100
Fax: 011-34-96-513-1344
Website: http://oami.eu.int/en/default.htm
The OHIM is the European Union’s trademark office. It can grant
trademarks that are valid in all member states of the European
Union. The website provides links to legal documents related to
the trademark process.
Open Society Institute (OSI)
400 West 59th Street
New York, NY 10019
Phone: (212) 548-0600
Website: http://www.soros.org/initiatives/information
The OSI, with the Soros Foundations Network, declares in its
mission statement that its goal is “to shape public policy to pro-
mote democratic governance, human rights, and economic,
legal, and social reform.” In furtherance of these goals, the OSI’s
Information Program has called for a critical reexamination of in-
tellectual property laws. It is a major driving force behind the
Open Access movement and sponsors conferences such as the
2006 Brussels Conference on the Politics and Ideology of Intel-
lectual Property.
Directory of Organizations
247

Organisation Africaine de la Propriété Intellectuelle (OAPI)
BP 887 Yaoundé 
Cameroun 
Phone: 011-237-220-57-00
Fax: 011-237-220-57-27
E-mail: oapi.oa@oapi.oa.wipo.net 
Website: http://www.oapi.wipo.net
The OAPI is the francophone counterpart of the ARIPO (see entry
in this chapter), and it shares many of ARIPO’s concerns and
goals. Its members are fourteen former French colonies, plus
Equatorial Guinea and Guinea-Bissau. Most, although not all, of
the documents on its website are available in English as well as
French.
Patent Office of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States
of the Gulf
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia
Website: http://www.gcc-sg.org/ (in Arabic only; partial
English translation at http://www.gcc-sg.org/index_e.html)
The Patent Office of the Cooperation Council for the Arab States
of the Gulf provides a single-filing, unitary patent process under
which patents may be granted for six Persian Gulf states. Trans-
lations of many legal documents are available from the English-
language version of the website.
Project Gutenberg
809 North 1500 West
Salt Lake City, UT 84116
E-mail: help@pglaf.org
Website: http://www.gutenberg.org
Project Gutenberg is concerned not so much with intellectual
property as with its absence. The oldest and perhaps the largest
public domain literary archive, Project Gutenberg makes elec-
tronic versions of public domain works available to the public,
free of charge. Many of these works are difficult or impossible to
find elsewhere; the duration of copyright is so long that by the
time the copyright expires, the work has often been out of print
for decades.
More than 18,000 e-books are now available through Project
Gutenberg, with more being added constantly. Most are uncopy-
248
Directory of Organizations

righted works, at least under U.S. law; a few are copyrighted
works that the copyright holders have licensed Project Gutenberg
to distribute. Note that works that are in the public domain in the
United States may still be protected by copyright in other coun-
tries; a particularly notorious example is J.M. Barrie’s Peter Pan.
Public Knowledge
1875 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 650
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: (202) 518-0020
Fax: (202) 986-2539
E-mail: pk@publicknowledge.org
Website: http://www.publicknowledge.org/
Public Knowledge is a consumer rights organization that is con-
cerned with intellectual property law, especially copyright law.
Its mission statement sets forth four goals: (1) “Ensuring that
U.S. intellectual property law . . . [provides] an incentive to cre-
ators and innovators while benefiting the public through the free
flow of information and ideas”; (2) “Preserving an Internet that
is built upon open standards and protocols”; (3) “Protecting con-
sumers of digital technology from market practices designed to
erode competition, choice and fairness”; and (4) “Ensuring that
international intellectual property policies are adopted through
democratic processes and with public interest participation.” In
furtherance of these goals, Public Knowledge engages in advo-
cacy and reports on legislation potentially affecting consumers’
rights.
Public Knowledge also engages in special projects. Empow-
ering Creators in the Digital Age is an attempt to determine the
ideal balance between the need of content creators to make use of
prior copyrighted works and the need of those same content
creators for protection for their created content. The Global
Knowledge Initiative strives to represent the interests of the pub-
lic, particularly as consumers, in the ongoing international intel-
lectual property rule-making process. The Open Access Project
promotes open-access publishing of scholarly works (see the Bu-
dapest Open Access Initiative and Open Society Institute entry).
The Wi-Fi Project is not an intellectual property project; it is ded-
icated to bringing wireless Internet access to the National Mall in
Washington, D.C.
Directory of Organizations
249

Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA)
1330 Connecticut Avenue, N.W.
Washington, DC 20036
Fax: (202) 775-7253
Website: http://www.riaa.com
The best known of all content owners’ groups, the RIAA repre-
sents music content industry companies. It has taken an ex-
tremely high-profile, adversarial approach to the threat digital
music piracy poses to its members’ business models. In doing so,
it has made many enemies and has alienated some consumers.
Inasmuch as there is a single target for consumer rage arising
from intellectual property issues, that target is the RIAA.
To judge from its website, the RIAA sees itself as fighting a
battle for its members’ survival. Digital copying and sharing of
compressed music files is easy; there is little or no incentive for
consumers to pay sixteen dollars or more to buy an album on CD
to obtain a single desired song. For years, the RIAA attempted to
preserve the bundling of songs in albums as the primary model
for delivery of music content to the public; it was not until the ad-
vent of iTunes that a means of delivering single songs directly to
consumers gained widespread acceptance.
To protect its business model, and now to protect the paid-
download model against the free alternatives offered by P2P
(peer-to-peer) networks, the RIAA has engaged in incessant liti-
gation and lobbying. It has sued to force Internet service
providers to disclose the names of their allegedly file-sharing
subscribers. It has sued equipment makers for making MP3 play-
ers, file-sharing services as third-party copyright infringers, and
individual consumers as direct infringers. It has lobbied for in-
creased copyright protection, particularly against online file
sharing. 
These often heavy-handed tactics have brought some nega-
tive media attention. The suits against individual Internet users,
particularly when those users are children or the elderly, have
been particularly unpopular. The RIAA is a frequent target of car-
toonists and op-ed columnists. It has shown some tentative signs
of willingness to compromise with file-sharing networks, but it
seems unlikely to change its litigation and lobbying strategies in
the near future. Its website is a valuable resource for intellectual
property researchers, and it contains a wealth of information on
the RIAA’s positions and policies.
250
Directory of Organizations

Société des Gens de Lettres (SGDL)
Hôtel de Massa
38, rue du Faubourg Saint-Jacques
75014 Paris
France
Phone: 011-33-1-53-10-12-13
E-mail: sgdl@sgdl.org 
Website: http://www.sgdl.org
The Société des Gens de Lettres, which was founded in 1838, ad-
vises and represents the interests of writers in a variety of areas,
particularly on intellectual property issues. It gave rise to the As-
sociation Littéraire et Artistique Internationale, which in turn
gave rise to the Berne Convention and the current international
copyright law regime. Its website includes a great deal of practi-
cal information (in French) on French copyright law.
Trade Marks, Patents and Designs Federation (TMPDF)
Fifth Floor, 63-66 Hatton Garden 
London EC1N 8LE
United Kingdom
Phone: 011-44-020-7242-3923
Fax: 011-44-020-7242-3924
E-mail: admin@tmpdf.org.uk
Website: http://www.tmpdf.org.uk/
The TMPDF, founded in 1920, is an industry organization that
provides input representing its members’ interests in the United
Kingdom and international intellectual property rule-making
process.
Tufts Multilaterals Project
Edwin Ginn Library
The Fletcher School
160 Packard Avenue
Medford, MA 02155-7082
Phone: (617) 627-3273
Fax: (617) 627-3736
E-mail: ginnref@tufts.edu
Website: http://fletcher.tufts.edu/multi/trade.html
The Tufts Multilaterals Project is an online treaty database. Under
the heading “Trade and Commercial Relations” it provides the
Directory of Organizations
251

full text of several intellectual property treaties. It also provides
general information on treaty research and links to other online
international law resources.
United States Copyright Office 
Library of Congress
Copyright Office
101 Independence Avenue, S.E.
Washington, DC 20559-6000
Website: http://www.copyright.gov/
The U.S. Copyright Office is an essential resource for anyone in-
terested in intellectual property law. In addition to registering
U.S. copyrights, the Copyright Office provides access to copy-
right registration records, information about the registration
process, and information on copyright licensing. It also provides
the full and updated text of copyright laws, regulations, cases,
treaties, and other materials, as well as detailed information
about these sources. For example, Copyright Office Circular 38a,
which is available on the website, contains complete information
on U.S. copyright relations with other countries. From Circular
38a, it is easy to determine that U.S. copyright relations with, say,
Canada are governed by treaties including a bilateral treaty dated
1 January 1924; the Berne Convention; the Geneva version of the
Universal Copyright Convention; and Trade-Related Aspects of
Intellectual Property (TRIPs). Copyright Office circulars also ad-
dress a wide variety of specific types of content, from cartoons to
recipes. Copyright Office reports and studies provide more de-
tailed examinations of some topics and of the effects of changes in
U.S. copyright laws.
United States Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO)
600 Dulany Street
Alexandria, VA 22314
Phone: (800) 786-9199 or (571) 272-1000
Fax: (571) 273-8300 
E-mail: usptoinfo@uspto.gov (put “Patents” or “Trademarks” in
subject line)
Website: http://www.uspto.gov/
Like the Copyright Office for copyright law, the USPTO is an es-
sential resource for anyone interested in patent or trademark
law. In addition to its primary functions of registering trade-
252
Directory of Organizations

marks and granting (or denying) patents, the USPTO provides a
wealth of information on its website. This includes information
about the various types of intellectual property protection avail-
able and the process for obtaining each. The site provides links to
U.S. and international legal materials. Employees of the USPTO
are eligible for active membership in the Patent and Trademark
Society, which publishes the influential Journal of the Patent and
Trademark Society. (Nonemployees are eligible only for associate
membership.)
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO)
34, chemin des Colombettes
Geneva, Switzerland
Phone: 011-41-22-338-95-47; 011-41-22-338-91-11
Fax: 011-41-22-733-54-28
E-mail: publicinf@wipo.int
Website: http://www.wipo.int
The WIPO is responsible for administering most of the treaties
upon which the international intellectual property law regime is
based. WIPO’s origins can be traced to 1893, when the adminis-
trative organizations of the 1883 Paris Convention and the 1886
Berne Convention united to form the Bureaux Internationaux
Réunis pour la Protection de la Propriété Intellectuelle (BIRPI).
BIRPI grew over the years and in 1967 became WIPO. Among the
most important of the two dozen treaties now administered by
WIPO are the Berne and Paris Conventions, the Madrid Agree-
ment and Protocol (trademark), and the Patent Cooperation
Treaty. Multilateral treaties not administered by WIPO (such as
the Universal Copyright Convention and the Buenos Aires Con-
vention) are relatively unimportant, with one significant excep-
tion—TRIPs, administered by the WTO (see entry in this chapter).
For intellectual property researchers, WIPO’s website is per-
haps the single most valuable site listed in this chapter. It includes
the full text of all of the treaties administered by WIPO, as well as
lists of parties to each treaty and the dates that those countries be-
came parties. It also includes information about the copyright
laws of member states and links to those laws online, where avail-
able; WIPO documents, many with analysis of intellectual prop-
erty treaties and legislation; and links to documents from other
international organizations, including the WTO. 
Directory of Organizations
253

World Trade Organization (WTO)
Centre William Rappard
Rue de Lausanne 154
CH-1211 Geneva 21
Switzerland
Phone: 011-41-22-739-51-11
Fax: 011-41-22-731-42-06
E-mail: enquiries@wto.org
Website: http://www.wto.org/
After decades of negotiations under the General Agreement on
Tariffs and Trade, in 1995 the countries of the world succeeded in
establishing the WTO. In the Uruguay Round of negotiations
(1986–1994) leading up to formation of the WTO, some countries,
including the United States, advocated inclusion of an intellectual
property agreement in the WTO treaty package. Advocates of this
intellectual property agreement were motivated in part by con-
cerns that the existing WIPO regime provided inadequate protec-
tions for pharmaceutical patents; however, the agreement that
was ultimately adopted was the most comprehensive intellectual
property agreement yet created, covering nearly every aspect of
intellectual property. 
This agreement, the Agreement on TRIPs, created a separate
international intellectual property protection system outside the
WIPO regime; the WTO and WIPO harmonized the two systems
with the 1995 Agreement Between the World Intellectual Property
Organization and the World Trade Organization. TRIPs serves
more to bring about uniformity in intellectual property law than
to deal with day-to-day administrative matters such as multina-
tional patent applications, which are handled by WIPO. How-
ever, TRIPs provides a valuable dispute resolution mechanism:
The WTO dispute resolution body can resolve intellectual prop-
erty disputes between WTO members arising under TRIPs.
The WTO website provides the full text of TRIPs and a con-
siderable body of information about the treaty.
254
Directory of Organizations

8
Resources
A
great many works on intellectual property law have been
published and continue to be published daily. The books, ar-
ticles, journals, and other resources in this chapter provide a
sampling of materials for further research, as do the cases. The
listed statutes and treaties provide a fairly comprehensive guide
to the legal regime governing copyright, patent, and trademark
law in the United States and internationally.
Books
Elias, Stephen R., and Richard Stim. 2006. Patent, Copyright
and Trademark: An Intellectual Property Desk Reference. 8th ed.
Berkeley, CA: Nolo Press.
Stim, Richard. 2004. Getting Permission: How to License and
Clear Copyrighted Materials Online and Off. 2nd ed. Berkeley,
CA: Nolo Press. 
These two books, both from Nolo Press, are aimed at nonlawyers.
Nolo Press (www.nolo.com) publishes do-it-yourself legal
guides; Nolo declares that “Our goal is to help people handle
their own everyday legal matters—or learn enough about them to
make working with a lawyer a more satisfying experience.” The
two works listed here, like most Nolo publications, are practical
guides; they are useful in dealing with immediate intellectual
property issues, but provide less theoretical depth, historical
background, or policy analysis than some of the other reference
255

works available. Getting Permission deals specifically with copy-
right, focusing on the use of materials copyrighted by others. An
Intellectual Property Desk Reference provides definitions of intellec-
tual property law terms, in more accessible form but with less de-
tail than McCarthy’s Desk Encyclopedia of Intellectual Property (also
listed in this section). 
Garner, Bryan A., ed. 2006. Black’s Law Dictionary. 8th ed. St.
Paul, MN: West Publishing.
Intellectual property law, like any area of law, involves the use of
fairly specialized terminology. For lawyers as well as nonlawyers,
terms like “constructive knowledge” or “equitable remedy” often
require definition; they do not mean what the everyday English
meaning of the words might suggest. Black’s Law Dictionary is a
standard legal reference used by attorneys, judges, academics,
law students, and others in the legal profession. When planning
to spend any amount of time reading legal materials, it is a good
idea to keep a copy of Black’s (or a similar work) at hand. 
Similar Works
Kohn, Al, and Bob Kohn.  2000. Kohn on Music Licensing. 3rd
ed. New York: Aspen Publishers.
Music copyright involves a web of overlapping and intertwined
copyright interests. Separate persons may hold copyrights to the
melody, the lyrics, and the performance of a single song. Some or
all of these copyright holders may have rights to control the re-
production of the performed work, the reproduction of the lyrics
or sheet music in printed form, the broadcast of the recorded
work, the live performance of the work by other artists, the
recording of a performance of the work by other artists, the li-
censing of the melody to other artists who wish to put different
words to it, and other uses. Figuring out who has the right to con-
trol what often pits composers, songwriters, performers, and
recording companies against each other. Kohn on Music Licensing
is perhaps the best guide to untangling this mess. (The third edi-
tion comes with a helpful e-documents supplement on CD.)
Leaffer, Marshall A. 2005. Understanding Copyright Law. 4th ed.
New York: LexisNexis Matthew Bender. 
256
Resources

Understanding Copyright Law is an entry in the Understanding se-
ries from the Matthew Bender division of LexisNexis. The Un-
derstanding series is similar to the Nutshell series (see Miller and
Davis); like the Nutshell series, it is aimed at legal professionals
and law students. Understanding Copyright Law provides, as the
title suggests, a comprehensive overview of U.S. copyright law,
including historical background, and international law affecting
U.S. copyright law.
Lessig, Lawrence. 2004. Free Culture: How Big Media Uses Tech-
nology and the Law to Lock Down Culture and Control Creativ-
ity. New York: Penguin.
Lessig, Lawrence. 2001. The Future of Ideas: The Fate of the Com-
mons in a Connected World. New York: Random House.
Lessig, Lawrence. 1999. Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace.
New York: Basic Books.
Intellectual property is a field in crisis, largely, but not entirely, as
a result of the advent of home computing and the Internet. A li-
brary could be filled with books written about intellectual prop-
erty and the digital information revolution; Lawrence Lessig is
among the best-known and most influential commentators. In the
three books listed here, Lessig presents his thesis that the expan-
sion of intellectual property protection is stifling innovation,
causing economic and social harm.
His prediction in Code and Other Laws of Cyberspace that “we
will see the Net move to an architecture of control” has proved
accurate. In the intellectual property field, improved digital
rights management technology and loss of online privacy, to-
gether with enhanced legal rights for content owners, have made
online copyright infringement a more difficult and risky busi-
ness, without managing to stop the practice. The Future of Ideas
develops Lessig’s thesis further, warning that control of the In-
ternet by content-owning corporations will stifle creativity. In
Free Culture, Lessig examines the intellectual property battles
over file sharing and his own involvement in the court battle
against the Sonny Bono Copyright Term Extension Act, a battle
that ended in defeat with the Supreme Court’s decision in Eldred
v. Ashcroft.
Books
257

McCarthy, J. Thomas, Roger E. Schechter, and David J.
Franklyn. 2004.  McCarthy’s Desk Encyclopedia of Intellectual
Property. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: Bureau of National Affairs.
Where Black’s and other law dictionaries leave off, McCarthy’s be-
gins. McCarthy’s Desk Encyclopedia of Intellectual Property is a more
specialized reference work with definitions of arcane terms from
all areas of intellectual property. The definitions include detailed
explanations and references to statutes, cases, and other sources.
It covers both U.S. and international intellectual property law.
Miller, Arthur Raphael, and Michael H. Davis. 2000. Intellectual
Property: Patents, Trademarks, and Copyright in a Nutshell. St.
Paul, MN: West Publishing. 
Intellectual Property: Patents, Trademarks, and Copyright in a Nutshell
is an entry in the Nutshell series from West Publishing, one of the
largest and oldest legal publishing companies in the United
States. The Nutshell series is designed with law students in mind,
although Nutshells are often used by practicing attorneys and
other legal professionals as well. This makes Nutshells somewhat
more accessible than works aimed entirely at practicing attorneys
or legal academics, although they are still somewhat more chal-
lenging than works aimed at the general public, such as those
from Nolo Press or the “For Dummies” series. Intellectual Property
in a Nutshell covers the three traditional areas: copyright, patents,
and trademarks.
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. 2004. The Anarchist in the Library: How
the Clash Between Freedom and Control Is Hacking the Real
World and Crashing the System. New York: Basic Books.
Vaidhyanathan, Siva. 2001. Copyrights and Copywrongs: The
Rise of Intellectual Property and How It Threatens Creativity.
New York: New York University Press.
Professor Vaidhyanathan, like Professor Lessig (see earlier list-
ing), is a well-known commentator on intellectual property law
and the Internet. Vaidhyanathan, a former journalist who teaches
communications, approaches the issues from a somewhat differ-
ent perspective, but reaches a similar conclusion: The current ex-
pansion of intellectual property rights is strangling creativity and
has the potential for dire economic and political consequences. In
258
Resources

Copyrights and Copywrongs he warns that the stifling effect of the
current copyright law is unevenly distributed, so that the cultural
expression of minority cultures is disproportionately affected.
(See also Greene 1999.) In The Anarchist in the Library he relates
this problem to a broader political problem, describing the ways
in which attempts to control information and attempts to evade
that control are related to the global problems of totalitarianism
and terrorism, respectively. 
Everybody’s Legal Glossary. http://www.nolo.com/glossary.cfm.
Gifis, Steven, ed. 2003. Law Dictionary. 5th ed. Hauppauge, NY:
Barron’s Educational Series. 
Handler, Jack. 1993. Ballentine’s Law Dictionary: Legal Assistant Edi-
tion. Clifton Park, NY: Thomson Delmar Learning.
Law.com Dictionary. http://dictionary.law.com/. 
Legal Dictionary. http://dictionary.lp.findlaw.com.
Merriam-Webster. 1996. Merriam-Webster’s Dictionary of Law.
Springfield, MA: Merriam-Webster
Other Titles
Biegel, Stuart. 2001. Beyond Our Control? Confronting the Limits of
Our Legal System in the Age of Cyberspace. Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.
Buergenthal, Thomas, and Sean D. Murphy. 2002. Public Interna-
tional Law in a Nutshell. 3rd ed. St. Paul, MN: West Publishing.
Charmasson, Henri. 2004. Patents, Copyrights & Trademarks for
Dummies. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishing.
Chused, Richard, ed. 1998. A Copyright Anthology: The Technology
Frontier. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson Publishing.
D’Amato, Anthony, and Doris Estelle Long, eds. 1996. Interna-
tional Intellectual Property Anthology. Cincinnati, OH: Anderson
Publishing.
Dinwoodie, Graeme B., William O. Hennessey, and Shira Perl-
mutter. 2002. International and Comparative Patent Law. Newark,
NJ: LexisNexis Matthew Bender.
Books
259

Fishman, Stephen. 2001. Copyright Your Software. 3rd ed. Berkeley,
CA: Nolo Press.
Goldstein, Paul. 2001. International Copyright: Principles, Law, and
Practice. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Menn, Joseph. 2003. All the Rave: The Rise and Fall of Shawn Fan-
ning’s Napster. New York: Crown Business.
Nimmer, David. 2004. Copyright: Sacred Text, Technology, and the
DMCA. The Hague: Kluwer Academic/Plenum Publishers.
Pires de Carvalho, Nuno. 2005. The TRIPS Regime of Patent Rights.
2nd ed. The Hague: Kluwer Law International.
Samuels, Edward. 2000. The Illustrated History of Copyright. New
York: St. Martin’s Press.
Schechter, Frank I. 1925. Historical Foundations of the Law Relating
to Trade-marks. New York: Columbia University Press.
Journal, Magazine, and News Website
Articles and Pamphlets
Intellectual property law is a field of controversy and rapid
change. Much of the controversy takes place on, or is reported in,
the pages of academic journals, which are also often among the
first to report and explain changes in the law. A list of recent arti-
cles that have been particularly informative, influential, or both is
provided below, followed by a list of journals specializing in in-
tellectual property law and the closely related fields of technol-
ogy and entertainment law.
Law libraries and some other libraries will have copies of
these journals; the articles are also available through the propri-
etary databases listed at the end of this chapter, and sometimes,
though not always, from the websites of the journals that pub-
lished them; these website addresses, where available, are given
in the “Journals” section.
Austin, Graeme W. 2004. “Trademarks and the Burdened Imagi-
nation.” Brooklyn Law Review 69: 827.
260
Resources

BBC. “EU Software Patent Law Faces Axe.” February 17, 2005.
http://news.bbc.co.uk/1/hi/technology/4274811.stm.
BBC. “Patents: Gone but Not Forgotten.” July 15, 2005. http://
news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/4685731.stm.
Berger, Eric. 2004. “Traffix Devices, Inc. v. Marketing Displays,
Inc.: Intellectual Property in Crisis: Rubbernecking the Aftermath
of the United States Supreme Court’s Traffix Wreck.” Arkansas
Law Review 57: 383.
Byerly, Lisa M. 1998. “Look and Feel Protection of Web Site User
Interfaces: Copyright or Trade Dress?” Santa Clara Computer and
High Technology Law Journal 14: 221.
Choi, Yunjeong. 2003. “Development of Copyright Protection in
Korea: Its History, Inherent Limits, and Suggested Solutions.”
Brooklyn Journal of International Law 28: 643.
Cole, Rodger R. 1995. “Substantial Similarity in the Ninth Circuit:
A ‘Virtually Identical’ ‘Look and Feel’?” Santa Clara Computer and
High Technology Law Journal 11: 417.
Conley, John M. 2003. “The International Law of Business Method
Patents.” U.S. Patent and Trademark Office Economic Review, Octo-
ber. http://ideas.repec.org/a/fip/fedaer/y2003p15-33nv.88no
.4.html.
“Dancing with Google’s Spiders.” 2006. Economist Technology
Quarterly, March 11, 14–15.
“Face Value: The Quiet Iconoclast—With KaZaA, Niklas
Zennstrom Undermined the Music Industry.” 2004. The Econo-
mist, July 3, 54.
Froomkin, A. Michael. 2000. “Wrong Turn in Cyberspace: Using
ICANN to Route Around the APA and the Constitution.” Duke
Law Journal 50: 17.
Gilwit, Dara B. 2003. “The Latest Cybersquatting Trend: Ty-
posquatters, their Changing Tactics, and How to Prevent Public
Deception and Trademark Infringement.” Washington University
Journal of Law and Policy 11: 267.
Ginsburg, Jane C. 1990. “A Tale of Two Copyrights: Literary Prop-
erty in Revolutionary France and America.” Tulane Law Review 64:
991.
Journal, Magazine, and News Website Articles and Pamphlets
261

Greene, Kevin J. 2004. “Abusive Trademark Litigation and the In-
credible Shrinking Confusion Doctrine—Trademark Abuse in the
Context of Entertainment Media and Cyberspace.” Harvard Jour-
nal of Law and Public Policy 27: 609.
Greene, Kevin J. 1999. “Copyright, Culture, and Black Music: A
Legacy of Unequal Protection.” Hastings Communication & Enter-
tainment Law Journal 20: 339.
Hasan, Amar A. 2005. “Sweating in Europe: The European Union
Database Directive.” Computer Law Review and Technology Journal
9: 479.
“I Want My P2P: Record Labels Are Trying to Do Deals with File-
Sharing Networks.” 2004. The Economist, November 20, 65. 
Kellner, Lauren Fisher. 1994. “Trade Dress Protection for Com-
puter User Interface ‘Look and Feel.’” University of Chicago Law
Review 61: 1011.
Leaffer, Marshall. 1990. “International Copyright from an Ameri-
can Perspective.” Arkansas Law Review 43: 373. 
Lee, Ilhyung. 2001. “Culturally-Based Copyright Systems? The
U.S. and Korea in Conflict.” Washington University Law Quarterly
79: 1103.
Likourezos, George. 1995. “Trademark Law in the Computer Age:
Applying Trademark Principles to the ‘Look and Feel’ of Soft-
ware.” Journal of the Patent and Trademark Office Society 77: 451.
McMillan, Robert. 2006. “DHS: Sony Rootkit May Lead to Regu-
lation: U.S. Officials Aim to Avoid Future Security Threats
Caused by Copy Protection.” ComputerWorld, February 16.
http://www.computerworld.com/governmenttopics/govern
ment/policy/story/0,10801,108793,00.html.
Nard, Craig Allen, and Andrew P. Morriss. 2004. Constitutionaliz-
ing Patents: From Venice to Philadelphia. Case Research Paper Series
in Legal Studies, Working Paper 04-12. http://ssrn.com/abstract
=585661.
Nguyen, Xuan-Thao N. 2000. “Should It Be a Free for All? The
Challenge of Extending Trade Dress Protection to the Look and
Feel of Web Sites in the Evolving Internet.” American University
Law Review 49: 1233.
262
Resources

Robert, Daphne. 1996. “Commentary on the Lanham Trade-Mark
Act.” Trademark Reporter 6: 373.
Rosenoer, Jonathan. “Apple Loses.” Cyberlaw. 1994. http://www
.cyberlaw.com/cylw994.html.
Samuelson, Pamela. 1997. “The U.S. Digital Agenda at WIPO.”
Virginia Journal of International Law 37: 369.
Samuelson, Pamela, Randall Davis, Mitchell D. Kapor, and J. H.
Reichman. 1994. “A Manifesto Concerning the Legal Protection of
Computer Programs.” Columbia Law Review 94: 2308. 
Schneider, Mark. 1998. “The European Union Database Direc-
tive.” Berkeley Technology Law Journal 13: 551.
Schortgen, Steven. 1994. “‘Dressing’ up Software Interface Protec-
tion: The Application of Two Pesos to ‘Look and Feel.’” Cornell
Law Review 80: 158.
Smith, Seagrumn. 2003. “From Napster to KaZaA: The Battle
Over Peer-to-Peer Filesharing Goes International.” Duke Law &
Technology Review 2003: 8. 
Sorgen, Rebecca S. 2001. “Trademark Confronts Free Speech on the
Information Superhighway: ‘Cybergripers’ Face a Constitutional
Collision.” Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law Review 22: 115.
Stagnone, Lauren A. 1997. “Copyright Law—Computer Program
Menu Command Hierarchy: An Uncopyrightable Method of Op-
eration? Lotus Development Corporation v. Borland International,
Inc., 49 F.3rd 807 (1995), aff’d, 116 S. Ct. 804 (1996).” Suffolk Uni-
versity Law Review 30: 939.
Sunder, Madhavi. 1996. “Authorship and Autonomy as Rites of
Exclusion: The Intellectual Propertization of Free Speech in Hur-
ley v. Irish-American Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Group of Boston.”
Stanford Law Review 49: 143.
Takenaka, Toshiko. 2003. “The Best Patent Practice or Mere Com-
promise? A Review of the Current Draft of the Substantive Patent
Law Treaty and a Proposal for a First-to-Invent Exception for Do-
mestic Applicants.” Texas Intellectual Property Law Journal 11: 259.
Terry, Nicolas P. 1994. “GUI Wars: The Windows Litigation and
the Continuing Decline of ‘Look and Feel.’” Arkansas Law Review
47: 93.
Journal, Magazine, and News Website Articles and Pamphlets
263

Tiefenbrun, Susan. 1999. “A Hermeneutic Methodology and How
Pirates Misread the Berne Convention.” Wisconsin International
Law Journal 17: 1.
“Unexpected Harmony: The Music and Computer Industries
Make Peace, but Differences Remain.” 2003. The Economist, Janu-
ary 23. 
Wells, Matthew G. 2001. “Internet Business Method Patent Pol-
icy.” Virginia Law Review 87: 729.
Withers, Kay. 2006. “Copyright Sings to a Different Tune.” Febru-
ary 17. http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/technology/4724664.stm.
Woodford, Chad. 2004. “Trusted Computing or Big Brother?
Putting the Rights Back in Digital Rights Management.” Univer-
sity of Colorado Law Review 75: 253.
World Intellectual Property Organization. About WIPO. WIPO
Publication No. 400(E). June 2001. http://www.wipo.int/about-
wipo/en/gib.htm#P9_1980.
“World v Web: America Does Not Want the United Nations to
Run the Internet.” 2004. The Economist, November 20, 65.
Younge, Gary. 2003. “US Music Industry Sues 261 for Online Song
Copying.” The Guardian, September 10. http://www.guardian
.co.uk/online/news/0,12597,1038979,00.html.
Journals
Universities across the United States publish many journals on in-
tellectual property law, as well as journals on topics such as en-
tertainment law and technology law that include many articles on
intellectual property issues. Most of these journals are available in
law libraries and online through Westlaw (www.westlaw.com),
Lexis (www.lexis.com), and HeinOnline (www.heinonline.org).
All of these services charge a fee for access, but some journals
may also be available, often for free, from the journals’ own web-
sites. Where available, website addresses are given below; unless
otherwise noted, these addresses were functional as of October
2006.
264
Resources

Albany Law Journal of Science & Technology
Albany Law School
80 New Scotland Avenue
Albany, NY 12208
Phone: (518) 472-5855
E-mail: lawjournal@mail.als.edu
Website: http://www.albanylawjournal.org/
The American Intellectual Property Law Association
Quarterly Journal
George Washington University Law School
2002 G Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20052
Phone: (202) 994-8620
E-mail: jschaf@law.gwu.edu
Website: http://www.aipla.org/Content/NavigationMenu/
Publications/Quarterly_Journal1/Default800.htm
The Berkeley Technology Law Journal
University of California at Berkeley
Boalt Hall School of Law
587 Simon Hall
Berkeley, CA 94720
Phone: (510) 643-6454
Fax: (510) 643-6816
E-mail: btlj@law.berkeley.edu
Website: http://www.btlj.boalt.org/
Buffalo Intellectual Property Law Journal
University at Buffalo Law School
State University of New York
John Lord O’Brian Hall, North Campus, Box 60110
Buffalo, NY 14260-1100
Phone: (716) 645-2749
Fax: (716) 645-2064
E-mail: buffaloipjournal@gmail.com
Website: http://wings.buffalo.edu/law/biplj/
Cardozo Arts & Entertainment Law Journal
Yeshiva University
Journals
265

Benjamin N. Cardozo School of Law
55 Fifth Avenue
New York, NY 10003
Phone: (212) 790-0292
Fax: (212) 790-0345
E-mail: cardozoaelj@gmail.com 
Website: http://www.cardozo.yu.edu/aelj/
Columbia Journal of Law & the Arts
Columbia Law School
435 West 116th Street
New York, NY 10027
Phone: (212) 854-1607
E-mail: columbiajla@gmail.com 
Website: http://www.columbia.edu/cu/jla/
Computer Law Review and Technology Journal
Southern Methodist University Dedman School of Law
P.O. Box 750116
Dallas, TX 75275-0116
Phone: (214) 768-4391
E-mail: complrev@mail.smu.edu
Website: http://www.smu.edu/csr/
DePaul–LCA Journal of Art & Entertainment Law
DePaul University College of Law
25 East Jackson Boulevard
Room 712
Chicago, IL 60604
Phone: (312) 362-5635
Fax: (312) 362-5448
E-mail: journae@condor.depaul.edu
Website: http://condor.depaul.edu/~journae/entmain.html
Entertainment and Sports Lawyer
425 Market Street, Suite 2200
San Francisco, CA 94105
Phone: (415) 955-2641
Fax: (415) 651-8817
E-mail: bob@rgpimm.com
Website: http://www.abanet.org/forums/entsports/esl.html
266
Resources

Fordham Intellectual Property, Media & Entertainment
Law Journal
Fordham University School of Law
140 West 62nd Street
New York, NY 10023
Phone: (212) 636-6948
Fax: (212) 636-6582
E-mail: iplj@fordham.edu
Website: http://www.fordham.edu/law/student/Journals.htm#1 
Harvard Journal of Law & Technology
Harvard Law School Publications Center
28 Pound Hall
Cambridge, MA 02138
Phone: (617) 495-3606
Fax: (617) 495-8828
E-mail: jolt@law.harvard.edu
Website: http://jolt.law.harvard.edu/
Hastings Communications and Entertainment Law Journal
(COMM/ENT)
University of California, Hastings College of the Law
200 McAllister Street
San Francisco, CA 94102-4978
Phone: (415) 581-8970
Fax: (415) 551-4110
E-mail: comment@uchastings.edu
Website: http://w3.uchastings.edu/comment/
Idea: The Intellectual Property Law Review 
Franklin Pierce Law Center
Two White Street
Concord, NH 03301
Phone: (603) 228-1541
E-mail: idea@piercelaw.edu
Website: http://www.idea.piercelaw.edu/
Intellectual Property Law Journal
University of Baltimore School of Law
1420 North Charles Street
Baltimore, MD 21201-5779
Journals
267

Phone: (410) 837-4372
Fax: (410) 837-4487
E-mail: ubiplj@ubalt.edu
Website: http://law.ubalt.edu/iplj/
The John Marshall Journal of Computer & Information
Law
The John Marshall Law School
315 South Plymouth Court
Chicago, IL 60604
Phone: (312) 987-2354
Fax: (312) 427-8307
E-mail: 5jcil@stu.jmls.edu
Website: http://www.jcil.org/
The Journal of Arts Management, Law, and Society
Helen Dwight Reid Educational Foundation
Heldref Publications
1319 Eighteenth Street, N.W.
Washington, DC 20036-1802
Phone: (202) 296-6267
Fax: (202) 296-5149
Website: http://www.heldref.org/jamls.php
The Journal of BioLaw & Business
P.O. Box 650222
West Newton, MA 02465
Phone: (617) 244-4762
Fax: (617) 964-0971
E-mail: editor@biolawbusiness.com
Website: http://www.biolawbusiness.com/
The Journal of High Technology Law
Suffolk University Law School
Suite 450B, 120 Tremont Street
Boston, MA 02108
Phone: (617) 305-1695
Fax: (617) 305-6288
E-mail: jhtl@suffolk.edu
Website: http://www.jhtl.org/
268
Resources

Journal of Intellectual Property Law
University of Georgia School of Law
Athens, GA 30602-6012
Phone: (706) 542-7288
E-mail: jipl@uga.edu
Website: http://www.law.uga.edu/jipl/
Journal of Law, Technology, and Policy
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign College of Law
504 East Pennsylvania Avenue
Champaign, IL 61820
Phone: (217) 244-6757
E-mail: jltp@law.uiuc.edu
Website: http://www.jltp.uiuc.edu/
Journal of Science & Technology Law
Boston University School of Law
765 Commonwealth Avenue
Boston, MA 02215
Phone: (617) 353-8368
E-mail: jstl@bu.edu
Website: http://www.bu.edu/law/scitech/
Journal of Technology Law & Policy
University of Florida Levin College of Law
141 Bruton-Geer Hall
Gainesville, FL 32611-7637
Phone: (352) 273-0906
Website: http://grove.ufl.edu/~techlaw/
Journal of Technology Law & Policy
University of Pittsburgh School of Law
3900 Forbes Avenue
Pittsburgh, PA 15260
Phone: (412) 648-1400
Website: http://tlp.law.pitt.edu/
Journal of the Copyright Society of the U.S.A.
352 Seventh Avenue, Suite 307
New York, NY 10001
Phone: (212) 354-6401
Journals
269

Fax: (212) 354-2847
E-mail: amy@csusa.org
Website: http://www.csusa.org/html/publications/journal/
journal.htm
Journal of the Patent and Trademark Office Society
P.O. Box 2600
Arlington, VA 22202
Website: http://www.jptos.org/
Journal on Telecommunications and High Technology
University of Colorado 
Campus Box 401
Boulder, CO 80309-0401
Phone: (303) 735-1032
E-mail: jthtl@colorado.edu
Website: http://www.colorado.edu/law/jthtl/
Jurimetrics: The Journal of Law, Science, and Technology
Arizona State University 
Sandra Day O’Connor College of Law
McAllister & Orange Streets
P.O. Box 877906
Tempe, AZ 85287-7906
Phone: (480) 965-6181
Fax: (480) 965-2427
E-mail: jurimetrics@asu.edu
Website: http://www.law.asu.edu/Programs/Jurimetrics
Law/Technology
World Jurist Association
1000 Connecticut Avenue, N.W., Suite 202
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: (202) 466-5428
Fax: (202) 452-8540
E-mail: wja@worldjurist.org
Website: http://www.worldjurist.org/publications.html
(description only)
Loyola of Los Angeles Entertainment Law Review
Loyola Law School
270
Resources

919 South Albany Street
Los Angeles, CA 90015
Phone: (213) 736-1403
Fax: (213) 385-6149
E-mail: elr@lls.edu
Website: http://elr.lls.edu/
Marquette Intellectual Property Law Review
Marquette University Law School
Sensenbrenner Hall, Room 146 
P.O. Box 1881
Milwaukee, WI 53201-1881
Phone: (414) 288-7090
Fax: (414) 288-6403
E-mail: iplawrev@marquette.edu
Website: http://204.11.208.101/cgi-
bin/site.pl?2130&pageID=158
Michigan Telecommunications and Technology Law Review
University of Michigan Law School
625 South State 
Ann Arbor, MI 48109-1215
Phone: (734) 764-4181
Fax: (734) 764-6100
E-mail: mttlr@umich.edu
Website: http://www.mttlr.org/html/home.html
Minnesota Journal of Law, Science & Technology 
University of Minnesota Law School
Walter F. Mondale Hall
229 19th Avenue South
Minneapolis, MN 55455
Phone: (612) 626-0224
E-mail: mipr@umn.edu
Website: http://mipr.umn.edu/common/index.htm
North Carolina Journal of Law & Technology
University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill
School of Law
Van-Hecke Wettach Hall, CB #3380
Journals
271

Chapel Hill, NC 27599-3380
E-mail: info@ncjolt.com
Website: http://www.jolt.unc.edu/
Northwestern Journal of Technology and Intellectual Property
Northwestern University School of Law
357 East Chicago Avenue
Chicago, IL 60611-3069
Website: http://www.law.northwestern.edu/njtip/
Oklahoma Journal of Law & Technology
University of Oklahoma College of Law
300 Timberdell Road
Norman, OK 73019
E-mail: okjolt@ou.edu
Website: http://www.okjolt.org/
Richmond Journal of Law & Technology
T.C. Williams School of Law
University of Richmond
Richmond, VA 23173
Phone: (804) 289-8202
Fax: (804) 289-8968
E-mail: jolt@richmond.edu
Website: http://law.richmond.edu/jolt/index.asp
Rutgers Computer and Technology Law Journal
Rutgers University School of Law–Newark
123 Washington Street, Suite 312 
Newark, NJ 07102
Phone: (973) 353-5549
E-mail: rctlj@pegasus.rutgers.edu
Website: http://pegasus.rutgers.edu/~rctlj/
Santa Clara Computer & High Technology Law Journal
Santa Clara University School of Law
500 El Camino Real
Santa Clara, CA 95053
Phone: (408) 554-4197
E-mail: chtlj@scu.edu
Website: http://www.scu.edu/techlaw/
272
Resources

Seton Hall Journal of Sports and Entertainment Law
Seton Hall University School of Law
One Newark Center
Newark, NJ 07102
Phone: (973) 642-8239
E-mail: sportslaw@shu.edu 
Website: http://law.shu.edu/journals/sportslaw/
Stanford Technology Law Review
Crown Quadrangle
Stanford Law School
Stanford University
Stanford, CA 94305-8610
E-mail: stlr-editors@lists.stanford.edu
Website: http://stlr.stanford.edu/STLR/Core_Page/index.htm
Texas Intellectual Property Law Journal
University of Texas School of Law
727 East 26th Street, Suite 2.130 
Austin, TX 78705-3299
Phone: (512) 232-1399
Fax: (512) 471-6988
E-mail: tiplj@mail.law.utexas.edu
Website: http://www.utexas.edu/law/journals/tiplj/
Texas Review of Entertainment and Sports Law
University of Texas School of Law
The University of Texas at Austin
727 East Dean Keeton Street
Austin, TX 78705-3299
Phone: (512) 232-2816
Fax: (512) 471-6988
E-mail: tresl@mail.law.utexas.edu
Website: http://www.utexas.edu/law/journals/tresl/
The Trademark Reporter
International Trademark Association
655 Third Avenue, 10th Floor
New York, NY 10017
Phone: (212) 768-9887
Fax: (212) 768-7796
E-mail: tmr@inta.org
Journals
273

Website: https://www.inta.org/index.php?option=com_content
&task=view&id=54&Itemid=237&getcontent=4 
(or http://www.inta.org and navigate from there)
Tulane Journal of Technology & Intellectual Property
Tulane University Law School
6329 Freret Street
John Giffen Weinmann Hall
New Orleans, LA 70118-5670
Website: http://www.law.tulane.edu/tuexp/journals/jtip/links
.html
UCLA Entertainment Law Review
UCLA School of Law
P.O. Box 951476
Los Angeles, CA 90095-1476
Phone: (310) 825-3712
E-mail: elr@lawnet.ucla.edu 
Website: http://www.law.ucla.edu/elr/public_html/
University of Miami Business Law Review
University of Miami School of Law, Suite E260
P.O. Box 248087
Coral Gables, FL 33124-8087
Phone: (305) 284-6885
Fax: (305) 284-4765
Vanderbilt Journal of Entertainment and Technology Law
Vanderbilt Law School
131 21st Avenue South
Nashville, TN 37212
Phone: (615) 322-5600
E-mail: jetl@vanderbilt.edu
Website: http://law.vanderbilt.edu/jetl/
Virginia Journal of Law and Technology
University of Virginia School of Law
580 Massie Road
Charlottesville, VA 22903
Phone: (434) 924-7090
E-mail: vjolt@vjolt.net
Website: http://www.vjolt.net/
274
Resources

Wake Forest Intellectual Property Law Journal
Wake Forest University School of Law
P.O. Box 7206, Reynolds Station
Winston-Salem, NC 27109
Phone: (336) 758-5430
Website: http://www.law.wfu.edu/ipjournal.xml
U.S. Materials
In the United States, copyright law and patent law are entirely (or
so close to entirely as to make no practical difference) governed
by federal law. Trademark is governed by both federal and state
law, as are trade secrets.
The U.S. legal system is perhaps the most complex and com-
prehensive set of rules ever created. Congress and fifty state leg-
islatures enact statutes; the president and fifty state governors
issue various proclamations, orders, and decrees, many of which
are later reviewed for possible conflict with the statutes authoriz-
ing them. This reviewing is done by several hundred state and
federal courts; these courts also review statutes for possible con-
flict with the Constitution or, in the case of state statutes, for pos-
sible preemption by federal statutes or treaties. Most of the time,
however, courts are simply deciding disputes between parties,
which often requires them to interpret or explain the language of
statutes, regulations, treaties, and so forth. These courts may
issue reported decisions, which then become part of our common
law. Lawyers spend years in law school learning how all of these
pieces fit together; it would be a mistake to focus on a single
statute, case, or regulation in isolation.
Complexity is only the first aspect of the problem; the second
is mutability. Old statutes are constantly being revised or re-
pealed, while new ones spring into existence whenever the legis-
lature is in session. Regulations and proclamations are similarly
changeable, while reported cases may be overturned, super-
seded, depublished, or otherwise rendered obsolete. Lawyers
keep track of these changes in a number of ways, including cita-
tor services such as Shepard’s Citations and West’s Keycite. Using
these services correctly is itself a skill requiring special training,
however, and it is best to ask a law librarian for assistance.
U.S. Materials
275

Federal Statutes
Statutes enacted by Congress are first organized in chronological
order. Locating one of these statutes is not, by itself, particularly
helpful. The Copyright Act of 1976, for example, as originally en-
acted, would include requirements for copyright protection and
terms of protection quite different from those in force today. A de-
termined legal researcher could, over many years, go through
every statute enacted by Congress during the past two centuries
or more, locate all of the law affecting a particular topic, and de-
termine the current state of law. Fortunately, however, there is no
need to do this: This service is already provided by the United
States Code (U.S.C.).
The U.S.C. divides the statutes enacted by Congress into fifty
“titles,” or subjects, with hundreds or thousands of subdivisions
within each title. Copyright law and related intellectual property
rights occupy all of Title 17 of the U.S.C. Patent law occupies all
of Title 35, and trademark law occupies part of Title 15. Updated
versions of the U.S.C. are available online, in all law libraries, and
in many other libraries. Two privately published versions of the
code, the United States Code Annotated and the United States
Code Service, are even more useful; these versions provide not
only the updated text of the statute itself, but also information
about cases, academic articles, and other materials that interpret,
discuss, or apply the statute.
A list of federal intellectual property statutes, in the order in
which they appear in the U.S.C., follows. (Repealed, relocated, or
otherwise no longer effective sections have been omitted.) Space
does not permit reproducing the entire statute, although some
crucial sections are reproduced in Chapter 6. Any of the individ-
ual statutes listed below can be easily located in a law library or
by typing the citation (e.g., “17 U.S.C. § 102” or simply “17 U.S.C.
102”) into Google or another search engine.
Trademark
Chapter 22: Trademarks
Subchapter I: The Principal Register 
15 U.S.C. § 1051. Application for registration;
verification 
15 U.S.C. § 1052. Trademarks registrable on principal
register; concurrent registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1053. Service marks registrable 
276
Resources

15 U.S.C. § 1054. Collective marks and certification
marks registrable 
15 U.S.C. § 1055. Use by related companies affecting
validity and registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1056. Disclaimer of unregistrable matter 
15 U.S.C. § 1057. Certificates of registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1058. Duration 
15 U.S.C. § 1059. Renewal of registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1060. Assignment 
15 U.S.C. § 1061. Execution of acknowledgments and
verifications 
15 U.S.C. § 1062. Publication 
15 U.S.C. § 1063. Opposition to registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1064. Cancellation of registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1065. Incontestability of right to use mark
under certain conditions 
15 U.S.C. § 1066. Interference; declaration by Director 
15 U.S.C. § 1067. Interference, opposition, and
proceedings for concurrent use registration or for
cancellation; notice; Trademark Trial and Appeal
Board 
15 U.S.C. § 1068. Action of Director in interference,
opposition, and proceedings for concurrent use
registration or for cancellation 
15 U.S.C. § 1069. Application of equitable principles in
inter partes proceedings 
15 U.S.C. § 1070. Appeals to Trademark Trial and
Appeal Board from decisions of examiners 
15 U.S.C. § 1071. Appeal to courts 
15 U.S.C. § 1072. Registration as constructive notice of
claim of ownership 
Subchapter II: The Supplemental Register 
15 U.S.C. § 1091. Supplemental register 
15 U.S.C. § 1092. Publication; not subject to opposition;
cancellation 
15 U.S.C. § 1093. Registration certificates for marks on
principal and supplemental registers to be
different 
15 U.S.C. § 1094. Provisions of chapter applicable to
registrations on supplemental register 
15 U.S.C. § 1095. Registration on principal register not
precluded 
U.S. Materials
277

15 U.S.C. § 1096. Registration on supplemental register
not used to stop importations 
Subchapter III: General Provisions 
15 U.S.C. § 1111. Notice of registration; display with
mark; recovery of profits and damages in
infringement suit 
15 U.S.C. § 1112. Classification of goods and services;
registration in plurality of classes 
15 U.S.C. § 1113. Fees 
15 U.S.C. § 1114. Remedies; infringement; innocent
infringement by printers and publishers 
15 U.S.C. § 1115. Registration on principal register as
evidence of exclusive right to use mark; defenses 
15 U.S.C. § 1116. Injunctive relief 
15 U.S.C. § 1117. Recovery for violation of rights 
15 U.S.C. § 1118. Destruction of infringing articles 
15 U.S.C. § 1119. Power of court over registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1120. Civil liability for false or fraudulent
registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1121. Jurisdiction of Federal courts; State
and local requirements that registered trademarks
be altered or displayed differently; prohibition 
15 U.S.C. § 1122. Liability of United States and States,
and instrumentalities and officials thereof 
15 U.S.C. § 1123. Rules and regulations for conduct of
proceedings in Patent and Trademark Office 
15 U.S.C. § 1124. Importation of goods bearing
infringing marks or names forbidden 
15 U.S.C. § 1125. False designations of origin, false
descriptions, and dilution forbidden 
15 U.S.C. § 1126. International conventions 
15 U.S.C. § 1127. Construction and definitions; intent of
chapter 
15 U.S.C. § 1128. National Intellectual Property Law
Enforcement Coordination Council 
15 U.S.C. § 1129. Cyberpiracy protections for
individuals
Subchapter IV: The Madrid Protocol 
15 U.S.C. § 1141. Definitions 
15 U.S.C. § 1141a. International applications based on
United States applications or registrations 
278
Resources

15 U.S.C. § 1141b. Certification of the international
application 
15 U.S.C. § 1141c. Restriction, abandonment,
cancellation, or expiration of a basic application or
basic registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1141d. Request for extension of protection
subsequent to international registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1141e. Extension of protection of an
international registration to the United States
under the Madrid Protocol 
15 U.S.C. § 1141f. Effect of filing a request for extension
of protection of an international registration to the
United States 
15 U.S.C. § 1141g. Right of priority for request for
extension of protection to the United States 
15 U.S.C. § 1141h. Examination of and opposition to
request for extension of protection; notification of
refusal 
15 U.S.C. § 1141i. Effect of extension of protection 
15 U.S.C. § 1141j. Dependence of extension of
protection to the United States on the underlying
international registration 
15 U.S.C. § 1141k. Affidavits and fees 
15 U.S.C. § 1141l. Assignment of an extension of
protection 
15 U.S.C. § 1141m. Incontestability 
15 U.S.C. § 1141n. Rights of extension of protection
Copyright and Other Rights
(Note that Chapters 9 and 13 protect forms of intellectual prop-
erty that have aspects of copyright and of patent [both] and trade-
mark [Chapter 13].)
Chapter 1: Subject Matter and Scope of Copyright 
17 U.S.C. § 101. Definitions 
17 U.S.C. § 102. Subject matter of copyright: In general 
17 U.S.C. § 103. Subject matter of copyright:
Compilations and derivative works 
17 U.S.C. § 104. Subject matter of copyright: National
origin 
17 U.S.C. § 104A. Copyright in restored works 
U.S. Materials
279

17 U.S.C. § 105. Subject matter of copyright: United
States Government works 
17 U.S.C. § 106. Exclusive rights in copyrighted works 
17 U.S.C. § 106A. Rights of certain authors to
attribution and integrity 
17 U.S.C. § 107. Limitations on exclusive rights: Fair
use 
17 U.S.C. § 108. Limitations on exclusive rights:
Reproduction by libraries and archives 
17 U.S.C. § 109. Limitations on exclusive rights: Effect
of transfer of particular copy or phonorecord 
17 U.S.C. § 110. Limitations on exclusive rights:
Exemption of certain performances and displays 
17 U.S.C. § 111. Limitations on exclusive rights:
Secondary transmissions 
17 U.S.C. § 112. Limitations on exclusive rights:
Ephemeral recordings 
17 U.S.C. § 113. Scope of exclusive rights in pictorial,
graphic, and sculptural works 
17 U.S.C. § 114. Scope of exclusive rights in sound
recordings 
17 U.S.C. § 115. Scope of exclusive rights in
nondramatic musical works: Compulsory license
for making and distributing phonorecords 
17 U.S.C. § 116. Negotiated licenses for public
performances by means of coin-operated
phonorecord players 
17 U.S.C. § 117. Limitations on exclusive rights:
Computer programs 
17 U.S.C. § 118. Scope of exclusive rights: Use of certain
works in connection with noncommercial
broadcasting 
17 U.S.C. § 119. Limitations on exclusive rights:
Secondary transmissions of superstations and
network stations for private home viewing 
17 U.S.C. § 120. Scope of exclusive rights in
architectural works 
17 U.S.C. § 121. Limitations on exclusive rights:
Reproduction for blind or other people with
disabilities 
280
Resources

17 U.S.C. § 122. Limitations on exclusive rights:
Secondary transmissions by satellite carriers
within local markets 
Chapter 2: Copyright Ownership and Transfer 
17 U.S.C. § 201. Ownership of copyright 
17 U.S.C. § 202. Ownership of copyright as distinct
from ownership of material object 
17 U.S.C. § 203. Termination of transfers and licenses
granted by the author 
17 U.S.C. § 204. Execution of transfers of copyright
ownership 
17 U.S.C. § 205. Recordation of transfers and other
documents 
Chapter 3: Duration of Copyright 
17 U.S.C. § 301. Preemption with respect to other laws 
17 U.S.C. § 302. Duration of copyright: Works created
on or after January 1, 1978 
17 U.S.C. § 303. Duration of copyright: Works created
but not published or copyrighted before January 1,
1978 
17 U.S.C. § 304. Duration of copyright: Subsisting
copyrights 
17 U.S.C. § 305. Duration of copyright: Terminal date 
Chapter 4: Copyright Notice, Deposit, and Registration 
17 U.S.C. § 401. Notice of copyright: Visually
perceptible copies 
17 U.S.C. § 402. Notice of copyright: Phonorecords of
sound recordings 
17 U.S.C. § 403. Notice of copyright: Publications
incorporating United States Government works 
17 U.S.C. § 404. Notice of copyright: Contributions to
collective works 
17 U.S.C. § 405. Notice of copyright: Omission of notice
on certain copies and phonorecords 
17 U.S.C. § 406. Notice of copyright: Error in name or
date on certain copies and phonorecords 
17 U.S.C. § 407. Deposit of copies or phonorecords for
Library of Congress 
17 U.S.C. § 408. Copyright registration in general 
17 U.S.C. § 409. Application for copyright registration 
17 U.S.C. § 410. Registration of claim and issuance of
certificate 
U.S. Materials
281

17 U.S.C. § 411. Registration and infringement actions 
17 U.S.C. § 412. Registration as prerequisite to certain
remedies for infringement 
Chapter 5: Copyright Infringement and Remedies 
17 U.S.C. § 501. Infringement of copyright 
17 U.S.C. § 502. Remedies for infringement: Injunctions 
17 U.S.C. § 503. Remedies for infringement:
Impounding and disposition of infringing articles 
17 U.S.C. § 504. Remedies for infringement: Damages
and profits 
17 U.S.C. § 505. Remedies for infringement: Costs and
attorney’s fees 
17 U.S.C. § 506. Criminal offenses 
17 U.S.C. § 507. Limitations on actions 
17 U.S.C. § 508. Notification of filing and determination
of actions 
17 U.S.C. § 509. Seizure and forfeiture 
17 U.S.C. § 510. Remedies for alteration of
programming by cable systems 
17 U.S.C. § 511. Liability of States, instrumentalities of
States, and State officials for infringement of
copyright 
17 U.S.C. § 512. Limitations on liability relating to
material online 
17 U.S.C. § 513. Determination of reasonable license
fees for individual proprietors 
Chapter 6: Manufacturing Requirements and Importation 
17 U.S.C. § 601. Manufacture, importation, and public
distribution of certain copies 
17 U.S.C. § 602. Infringing importation of copies or
phonorecords 
17 U.S.C. § 603. Importation prohibitions: Enforcement
and disposition of excluded articles 
Chapter 7: Copyright Office 
17 U.S.C. § 701. The Copyright Office: General
responsibilities and organization 
17 U.S.C. § 702. Copyright Office regulations 
17 U.S.C. § 703. Effective date of actions in Copyright
Office 
17 U.S.C. § 704. Retention and disposition of articles
deposited in Copyright Office 
282
Resources

17 U.S.C. § 705. Copyright Office records: Preparation,
maintenance, public inspection, and searching 
17 U.S.C. § 706. Copies of Copyright Office records 
17 U.S.C. § 707. Copyright Office forms and
publications 
17 U.S.C. § 708. Copyright Office fees 
17 U.S.C. § 709. Delay in delivery caused by disruption
of postal or other services 
Chapter 8: Copyright Arbitration Royalty Panels 
17 U.S.C. § 801. Copyright arbitration royalty panels:
Establishment and purpose 
17 U.S.C. § 802. Membership and proceedings of
copyright arbitration royalty panels 
17 U.S.C. § 803. Institution and conclusion of
proceedings 
Chapter 9: Protection of Semiconductor Chip Products 
17 U.S.C. § 901. Definitions 
17 U.S.C. § 902. Subject matter of protection 
17 U.S.C. § 903. Ownership, transfer, licensing, and
recordation 
17 U.S.C. § 904. Duration of protection 
17 U.S.C. § 905. Exclusive rights in mask works 
17 U.S.C. § 906. Limitation on exclusive rights: Reverse
engineering; first sale 
17 U.S.C. § 907. Limitation on exclusive rights: Innocent
infringement 
17 U.S.C. § 908. Registration of claims of protection 
17 U.S.C. § 909. Mask work notice 
17 U.S.C. § 910. Enforcement of exclusive rights 
17 U.S.C. § 911. Civil actions 
17 U.S.C. § 912. Relation to other laws 
17 U.S.C. § 913. Transitional provisions 
17 U.S.C. § 914. International transitional provisions 
Chapter 10: Digital Audio Recording Devices and Media
Subchapter A: Definitions 
17 U.S.C. § 1001. Definitions 
Subchapter B: Copying Controls 
17 U.S.C. § 1002. Incorporation of copying controls
Subchapter C: Royalty Payments 
17 U.S.C. § 1003. Obligation to make royalty payments 
17 U.S.C. § 1004. Royalty payments 
U.S. Materials
283

17 U.S.C. § 1005. Deposit of royalty payments and
deduction of expenses 
17 U.S.C. § 1006. Entitlement to royalty payments 
17 U.S.C. § 1007. Procedures for distributing royalty
payments 
Subchapter D: Prohibition on Certain Infringement Actions,
Remedies, and Arbitration 
17 U.S.C. § 1008. Prohibition on certain infringement
actions 
17 U.S.C. § 1009. Civil remedies 
17 U.S.C. § 1010. Arbitration of certain disputes 
Chapter 11: Sound Recordings and Music Videos 
17 U.S.C. § 1101. Unauthorized fixation and trafficking
in sound recordings and music videos 
Chapter 12: Copyright Protection and Management Systems 
17 U.S.C. § 1201. Circumvention of copyright
protection systems 
17 U.S.C. § 1202. Integrity of copyright management
information 
17 U.S.C. § 1203. Civil remedies 
17 U.S.C. § 1204. Criminal offenses and penalties 
17 U.S.C. § 1205. Savings clause 
Chapter 13: Protection of Original Designs 
17 U.S.C. § 1301. Designs protected 
17 U.S.C. § 1302. Designs not subject to protection 
17 U.S.C. § 1303. Revisions, adaptations, and
rearrangements 
17 U.S.C. § 1304. Commencement of protection 
17 U.S.C. § 1305. Term of protection 
17 U.S.C. § 1306. Design notice 
17 U.S.C. § 1307. Effect of omission of notice 
17 U.S.C. § 1308. Exclusive rights 
17 U.S.C. § 1309. Infringement 
17 U.S.C. § 1310. Application for registration 
17 U.S.C. § 1311. Benefit of earlier filing date in foreign
country 
17 U.S.C. § 1312. Oaths and acknowledgments 
17 U.S.C. § 1313. Examination of application and issue
or refusal of registration 
17 U.S.C. § 1314. Certification of registration 
17 U.S.C. § 1315. Publication of announcements and
indexes 
284
Resources

17 U.S.C. § 1316. Fees 
17 U.S.C. § 1317. Regulations 
17 U.S.C. § 1318. Copies of records 
17 U.S.C. § 1319. Correction of errors in certificates 
17 U.S.C. § 1320. Ownership and transfer 
17 U.S.C. § 1321. Remedy for infringement 
17 U.S.C. § 1322. Injunctions 
17 U.S.C. § 1323. Recovery for infringement 
17 U.S.C. § 1324. Power of court over registration 
17 U.S.C. § 1325. Liability for action on registration
fraudulently obtained 
17 U.S.C. § 1326. Penalty for false marking 
17 U.S.C. § 1327. Penalty for false representation 
17 U.S.C. § 1328. Enforcement by Treasury and Postal
Service 
17 U.S.C. § 1329. Relation to design patent law 
17 U.S.C. § 1330. Common law and other rights
unaffected 
17 U.S.C. § 1331. Administrator; Office of the
Administrator 
17 U.S.C. § 1332. No retroactive effect 
Patent
Part I: United States Patent and Trademark Office 
Chapter 1: Establishment, Officers and Employees,
Functions 
35 U.S.C. § 1. Establishment 
35 U.S.C. § 2. Powers and duties 
35 U.S.C. § 3. Officers and employees 
35 U.S.C. § 4. Restrictions on officers and employees as
to interest in patents 
35 U.S.C. § 5. Patent and Trademark Office Public
Advisory Committees 
35 U.S.C. § 6. Board of Patent Appeals and
Interferences 
35 U.S.C. § 7. Library 
35 U.S.C. § 8. Classification of patents 
35 U.S.C. § 9. Certified copies of records 
35 U.S.C. § 10. Publications 
35 U.S.C. § 11. Exchange of copies of patents and
applications with foreign countries 
U.S. Materials
285

35 U.S.C. § 12. Copies of patents and applications for
public libraries 
35 U.S.C. § 13. Annual report to Congress 
Chapter 2: Proceedings in the Patent and Trademark Office 
35 U.S.C. § 21. Filing date and day for taking action 
35 U.S.C. § 22. Printing of papers filed 
35 U.S.C. § 23. Testimony in Patent and Trademark
Office cases 
35 U.S.C. § 24. Subpoenas, witnesses 
35 U.S.C. § 25. Declaration in lieu of oath 
35 U.S.C. § 26. Effect of defective execution 
Chapter 3: Practice Before Patent and Trademark Office 
35 U.S.C. § 32. Suspension or exclusion from practice 
35 U.S.C. § 33. Unauthorized representation as
practitioner 
Chapter 4: Patent Fees; Funding; Search Systems 
35 U.S.C. § 41. Patent fees; patent and trademark search
systems 
35 U.S.C. § 42. Patent and Trademark Office funding 
Part II: Patentability of Inventions and Grant of Patents 
Chapter 10: Patentability of Inventions 
35 U.S.C. § 100. Definitions 
35 U.S.C. § 101. Inventions patentable 
35 U.S.C. § 102. Conditions for patentability; novelty
and loss of right to patent 
35 U.S.C. § 103. Conditions for patentability; non-
obvious subject matter 
35 U.S.C. § 104. Invention made abroad 
35 U.S.C. § 105. Inventions in outer space 
Chapter 11: Application for Patent 
35 U.S.C. § 111. Application 
35 U.S.C. § 112. Specification 
35 U.S.C. § 113. Drawings 
35 U.S.C. § 114. Models, specimens 
35 U.S.C. § 115. Oath of applicant 
35 U.S.C. § 116. Inventors 
35 U.S.C. § 117. Death or incapacity of inventor 
35 U.S.C. § 118. Filing by other than inventor 
35 U.S.C. § 119. Benefit of earlier filing date; right of
priority 
35 U.S.C. § 120. Benefit of earlier filing date in the
United States 
286
Resources

35 U.S.C. § 121. Divisional applications 
35 U.S.C. § 122. Confidential status of applications;
publication of patent applications 
Chapter 12: Examination of Application 
35 U.S.C. § 131. Examination of application 
35 U.S.C. § 132. Notice of rejection; reexamination 
35 U.S.C. § 133. Time for prosecuting application 
35 U.S.C. § 134. Appeal to the Board of Patent Appeals
and Interferences 
35 U.S.C. § 135. Interferences 
Chapter 13: Review of Patent and Trademark Office
Decisions 
35 U.S.C. § 141. Appeal to Court of Appeals for the
Federal Circuit 
35 U.S.C. § 142. Notice of appeal 
35 U.S.C. § 143. Proceedings on appeal 
35 U.S.C. § 144. Decision on appeal 
35 U.S.C. § 145. Civil action to obtain patent 
35 U.S.C. § 146. Civil action in case of interference 
Chapter 14: Issue of Patent 
35 U.S.C. § 151. Issue of patent 
35 U.S.C. § 152. Issue of patent to assignee 
35 U.S.C. § 153. How issued 
35 U.S.C. § 154. Contents and term of patent;
provisional rights 
35 U.S.C. § 155. Patent term extension 
35 U.S.C. § 155A. Patent term restoration 
35 U.S.C. § 156. Extension of patent term 
35 U.S.C. § 157. Statutory invention registration 
Chapter 15: Plant Patents 
35 U.S.C. § 161. Patents for plants 
35 U.S.C. § 162. Description, claim 
35 U.S.C. § 163. Grant 
35 U.S.C. § 164. Assistance of Department of
Agriculture 
Chapter 16: Designs 
35 U.S.C. § 171. Patents for designs 
35 U.S.C. § 172. Right of priority 
35 U.S.C. § 173. Term of design patent 
Chapter 17: Secrecy of Certain Inventions and Filing
Applications in Foreign Country 
U.S. Materials
287

35 U.S.C. § 181. Secrecy of certain inventions and
withholding of patent 
35 U.S.C. § 182. Abandonment of invention for
unauthorized disclosure 
35 U.S.C. § 183. Right to compensation 
35 U.S.C. § 184. Filing of application in foreign country 
35 U.S.C. § 185. Patent barred for filing without license 
35 U.S.C. § 186. Penalty 
35 U.S.C. § 187. Nonapplicability to certain persons 
35 U.S.C. § 188. Rules and regulations, delegation of
power
Chapter 18: Patent Rights in Inventions Made with Federal
Assistance 
35 U.S.C. § 200. Policy and objective 
35 U.S.C. § 201. Definitions 
35 U.S.C. § 202. Disposition of rights 
35 U.S.C. § 203. March-in rights 
35 U.S.C. § 204. Preference for United States industry 
35 U.S.C. § 205. Confidentiality 
35 U.S.C. § 206. Uniform clauses and regulations 
35 U.S.C. § 207. Domestic and foreign protection of
federally owned inventions 
35 U.S.C. § 208. Regulations governing Federal
licensing 
35 U.S.C. § 209. Licensing federally owned inventions 
35 U.S.C. § 210. Precedence of chapter 
35 U.S.C. § 211. Relationship to antitrust laws 
35 U.S.C. § 212. Disposition of rights in educational
awards
Part III: Patents and Protection of Patent Rights 
Chapter 25: Amendment and Correction of Patents 
35 U.S.C. § 251. Reissue of defective patents 
35 U.S.C. § 252. Effect of reissue 
35 U.S.C. § 253. Disclaimer 
35 U.S.C. § 254. Certificate of correction of Patent and
Trademark Office mistake 
35 U.S.C. § 255. Certificate of correction of applicant’s
mistake 
35 U.S.C. § 256. Correction of named inventor 
Chapter 26: Ownership and Assignment 
35 U.S.C. § 261. Ownership; assignment 
35 U.S.C. § 262. Joint owners 
288
Resources

Chapter 27: Government Interests in Patents 
35 U.S.C. § 267. Time for taking action in government
applications 
Chapter 28: Infringement of Patents 
35 U.S.C. § 271. Infringement of patent 
35 U.S.C. § 272. Temporary presence in the United
States 
35 U.S.C. § 273. Defense to infringement based on
earlier inventor 
Chapter 29: Remedies for Infringement of Patent, and Other
Actions 
35 U.S.C. § 281. Remedy for infringement of patent 
35 U.S.C. § 282. Presumption of validity; defenses 
35 U.S.C. § 283. Injunction 
35 U.S.C. § 284. Damages 
35 U.S.C. § 285. Attorney fees 
35 U.S.C. § 286. Time limitation on damages 
35 U.S.C. § 287. Limitation on damages and other
remedies; marking and notice 
35 U.S.C. § 288. Action for infringement of a patent
containing an invalid claim 
35 U.S.C. § 289. Additional remedy for infringement of
design patent 
35 U.S.C. § 290. Notice of patent suits 
35 U.S.C. § 291. Interfering patents 
35 U.S.C. § 292. False marking 
35 U.S.C. § 293. Nonresident patentee; service and
notice 
35 U.S.C. § 294. Voluntary arbitration 
35 U.S.C. § 295. Presumption: Product made by
patented process 
35 U.S.C. § 296. Liability of States, instrumentalities of
States, and State officials for infringement of
patents 
35 U.S.C. § 297. Improper and deceptive invention
promotion 
Chapter 30: Prior Art Citations to Office and Ex Parte
Reexamination of Patents 
35 U.S.C. § 301. Citation of prior art 
35 U.S.C. § 302. Request for reexamination 
35 U.S.C. § 303. Determination of issue by Director 
35 U.S.C. § 304. Reexamination order by Director 
U.S. Materials
289

35 U.S.C. § 305. Conduct of reexamination proceedings 
35 U.S.C. § 306. Appeal 
35 U.S.C. § 307. Certificate of patentability,
unpatentability, and claim cancellation 
Chapter 31: Optional Inter Partes Reexamination
Procedures
35 U.S.C. § 311. Request for inter partes reexamination 
35 U.S.C. § 312. Determination of issue by Director 
35 U.S.C. § 313. Inter partes reexamination order by
Director 
35 U.S.C. § 314. Conduct of inter partes reexamination
proceedings 
35 U.S.C. § 315. Appeal 
35 U.S.C. § 316. Certificate of patentability,
unpatentability, and claim cancellation 
35 U.S.C. § 317. Inter partes reexamination prohibited 
35 U.S.C. § 318. Stay of litigation 
Part IV: Patent Cooperation Treaty 
Chapter 35: Definitions 
35 U.S.C. § 351. Definitions 
Chapter 36: International Stage 
35 U.S.C. § 361. Receiving Office 
35 U.S.C. § 362. International Searching Authority and
International Preliminary Examining Authority 
35 U.S.C. § 363. International application designating
the United States: Effect 
35 U.S.C. § 364. International stage: Procedure 
35 U.S.C. § 365. Right of priority; benefit of the filing
date of a prior application 
35 U.S.C. § 366. Withdrawn international application 
35 U.S.C. § 367. Actions of other authorities: Review 
35 U.S.C. § 368. Secrecy of certain inventions; filing
international applications in foreign countries
Chapter 37: National Stage 
35 U.S.C. § 371. National stage: Commencement 
35 U.S.C. § 372. National stage: Requirements and
procedure 
35 U.S.C. § 373. Improper applicant 
35 U.S.C. § 374. Publication of international application 
35 U.S.C. § 375. Patent issued on international
application: Effect 
35 U.S.C. § 376. Fees
290
Resources

Federal Cases
The United States, like most of the English-speaking countries of
the world, follows the common law legal tradition. In the com-
mon law tradition, opinions issued by judges deciding reported
cases become part of the body of the law; in other words, judges
can make law. Finding this judge-made or common law can be
difficult; lawyers spend many years in law school learning how to
do so. The reported court decisions that make up the common
law, after being issued by courts, are collected in bound volumes
called reporters. Any law library, and many other libraries, will
have a full set of federal case reporters, as well as reporters for the
state in which the library is located. Most law libraries will have
case reporters covering all fifty states. These reporters are com-
monly referred to by abbreviations such as those appearing in the
citations that follow. “U.S.” stands for “United States Reports,” a
reporter of decisions of the U.S. Supreme Court. “S.Ct.” stands for
“Supreme Court Reporter,” another reporter of U.S. Supreme
Court decisions. “F.2d” and “F.3d” stand for “Federal Reporter,
Second Series” and “Federal Reporter, Third Series,” respectively;
these reporters contain decisions from federal appellate (circuit)
courts. “F. Supp.” and “F. Supp.2d” stand for “Federal Supple-
ment” and “Federal Supplement, Second Series,” reporters of
cases from federal trial (district) courts. “U.S.P.Q.” and
“U.S.P.Q.2d” stand for “United States Patent Quarterly” and
“United States Patent Quarterly, Second Series,” reporters of
patent decisions. All of this may seem complicated, and it is, but
any lawyer or law librarian looking at the citation will be familiar
with these abbreviations and will be able to find the case or
statute instantly.
A & M Records, Inc. v. Napster, Inc., 239 F.3d 1004 (9th Cir. 2001), on
remand, 2001. WL 227083 (N.D. Cal. 2001), affirmed, 284 F.3d 1091
(9th Cir. 2002).
Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v. Hunting World, Inc., 537 F.2d 4 (2d Cir.
1976).
Albie’s Foods, Inc. v. Menusaver, Inc., 170 F. Supp.2d 736 (E.D. Mich.
2001).
Amazon.com, Inc. v. Barnesandnoble.com, Inc., 239 F.3d 1343 (Fed.
Cir. 2001).
U.S. Materials
291

America Online, Inc. v. AT&T Corp., 64 F. Supp.2d 549 (E.D. Va.
1999).
AMF Inc. v. Sleekcraft Boats, 599 F.2d 341, 348-49 (9th Cir. 1979).
Apple Computer, Inc. v. Franklin Computer, 714 F.2d 1240 (3d Cir.
1983).
Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 35 F.3d 1435 (9th Cir. 1994).
Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 799 F. Supp. 1006, 1020-21
(N.D. Cal. 1992).
Apple Computer, Inc. v. Microsoft Corp., 779 F. Supp. 133 (N.D. Cal.
1991).
Atari, Inc. v. JS & A Group, Inc., 747 F.2d 1422 (Fed. Cir. 1984).
Baker v. Selden, 101 U.S. 99 (1880).
Bihari v. Gross, 119 F. Supp.2d 309 (S.D. N.Y. 2000).
Building Officials & Code Administration v. Code Technology, Inc., 628
F.2d 730 (1st Cir. 1980).
Campbell v. Acuff-Rose Music, Inc., 510 U.S. 569 (1994).
Coca-Cola Co. v. Gemini Rising, Inc., 346 F. Supp. 1183 (E.D. N.Y.
1972).
Data East USA v. Epyx, 862 F.2d 204 (9th Cir. 1988).
Diamond v. Diehr, 450 U.S. 175 (1981).
Effects Associates v. Cohen, 908 F.2d 555 (9th Cir. 1990).
Eldred v. Ashcroft, 123 S.Ct. 769 (2003).
Feist Publications v. Rural Telephone Service Co., 499 U.S. 340 (1991).
Fonovisa, Inc. v. Cherry Auction, Inc., 76 F.3d 259 (9th Cir. 1996).
Georgia v. The Harrison Co., 548 F. Supp. 110, vacated by agreement
between the parties, 559 F. Supp. 37 (N.D. Ga. 1983).
Gershwin Publishing Corporation v. Columbia Artists Management,
Inc., 443 F.2d 1159 (2d Cir. 1971).
Gold Seal Co. v. Weeks, 129 F. Supp. 928 (D.C. Cir. 1956), affirmed,
230 F.2d 832, certiorari denied, 328 U.S. 829 (1956).
Goodis v. United Artists Television, Inc., 425 F.2d 397 (2d Cir. 1070).
292
Resources

Gottschalk v. Benson, 409 U.S. 63 (1972).
Hoehling v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 618 F.2d 972 (2d Cir. 1980).
Hotel Security Checking Co. v. Lorraine Co., 160 F. 467 (2d Cir. 1908).
In re Aimster Copyright Litigation (Aimster II), 252 F. Supp.2d 634
(N.D. Ill. 2002); affirmed in part, 334 F.3d 643 (7th Cir. 2003); certio-
rari denied sub nom Deep v. Recording Industry Association of Amer-
ica, Inc., 124 S.Ct. 1069 (2004).
In re Alappat, 33 F.3d 1526 (Fed. Cir. 1994).
In re Budge Manufacturing Co., 857 F.2d 773 (Fed. Cir. 1988).
In re Clarke, 17 U.S.P.Q.2d 1238 (T.T.A.B. 1990).
In re Old Glory Condom Corp., 26 U.S.P.Q.2d 1216 (T.T.A.B. 1993).
In re Trade-Mark Cases, 100 U.S. 82 (1879).
Inwood Labs, Inc. v. Ives Labs, Inc., 456 U.S. 844, 853-53 (1982).
Lotus Development Corporation v. Borland International, Inc., 49 F.3d
807 (1st Cir. 1995), affirmed, 516 U.S. 233 (1996).
Lucent Technologies, Inc. v. Lucentsucks.com, 95 F. Supp.2d 528 (E.D.
Va. 2000). 
MAI Systems Corp. v. Peak Computer, 991 F.2d 511 (9th Cir. 1993).
Manville Sales Co. v. Paramount Systems, Inc., 917 F.2d 544 (Fed. Cir.
1990).
Mead Data Central, Inc. v. Toyota Motor Sales, Inc., 875 F.2d 1026 (2d
Cir. 1989).
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios, Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd., 259 F. Supp.2d
1029 (C.D. Cal. 2003); affirmed, 380 F.3d 1154 (9th Cir. 2004); vacated
& remanded, 125 S.Ct. 2764 (2005).
Midway Manufacturing Co. v. Arctic International, 704 F.2d 1009 (7th
Cir. 1982).
NEC v. Intel, 10 U.S.P.Q.2d 1177 (N.D. Cal. 1989).
New Kids on the Block v. News America Publishing, Inc., 971 F.2d 302
(9th Cir. 1992).
Niton Corp. v. Radiation Monitoring Devices, Inc., 27 F. Supp.2d 102
(D. Mass. 1998).
U.S. Materials
293

Oasis Publishing Co. v. West Publishing Co., 924 F. Supp. 918 (D.
Minn. 1996).
Playboy Enterprises, Inc. v. Welles, 279 F.3d 796 (9th Cir. 2002).
Polaroid Corp. v. Polarad Electronics Corp., 287 F.2d 492 (2d Cir. 1961).
ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 86 F.3d 1447 (7th Cir. 1996).
Qualitex Co. v. Jacobson Products Co., 514 U.S. 159 (1995).
Recording Industry Association of America v. Diamond Multimedia
Systems, Inc., 180 F.3d 1072 (9th Cir. 1999).
Recording Industry Association of America, Inc. v. Verizon Internet
Services, 240 F. Supp.2d 24 (D.D.C. 2003); reversed, 351 F.3d 1229
(D.C. Cir. 2003); certiorari denied, 125 S.Ct. 309 and 125 S. Ct. 347
(2004). 
Religious Technology Center v. Netcom On-Line Communication Ser-
vices, Inc., 907 F. Supp. 1361 (N.D. Cal. 1995).
Sega Enterprises v. Accolade, 977 F.2d 1510 (9th Cir. 1992).
Sony Computer Entertainment, Inc. v. Connectix Corp., 203 F.3d 596
(9th Cir. 2000).
Sony Corp. of America v. Universal City Studios, Inc., 464 U.S. 417
(1984).
Sporty’s Farm L.L.C. v. Sportsman’s Market, Inc., 202 F.3d 489 (2nd
Cir. 2000).
State of Ohio v. Perry, 83 Ohio St. 3d 41, 697 N.E.2d 624 (1998).
State Street Bank & Trust v. Signature Financial Group, Inc., 149 F.3d
1368 (Fed. Cir. 1999).
Sunmark, Inc. v. Ocean Spray Cranberries, Inc., 64 F.3d 1055 (7th Cir.
1995).
Two Pesos, Inc. v. Taco Cabana, Inc., 505 U.S. 763 (1992).
UMG Recordings, Inc. v. MP3.com, Inc., 92 F. Supp.2d 349 (S.D. N.Y.
2000).
United States v. LaMacchia, 871 F. Supp. 535 (D. Mass. 1994).
Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Reimerdes, 111 F. Supp.2d 294 (S.D.
N.Y. 2000), affirmed by Universal City Studios, Inc. v. Corley, 273 F.3d
429 (2nd Cir. 2001).
294
Resources

Vault Corporation v. Quaid Software Ltd., 847 F.2d 255 (5th Cir.
1988).
White v. Dunbar, 119 U.S. 47 (1886).
Williams Electronics v. Arctic International, 685 F.2d 870 (3d Cir.
1982). 
State Case
DVD Copy Control Association, Inc. v. Bunner, 113 Cal. Rptr.2d 338
(2001), reversed, 4 Cal. Rptr.3d 69 (2003).
Treaties and Other International
Agreements
The treaties to which the United States is a party have legal effect
within the United States under Article VI, clause 2 of the U.S.
Constitution. Even treaties to which the United States is not a
party may have some domestic and international effect as evi-
dence of customary international law. The treaties are collected in
a variety of print and online sources; however, the easiest way to
find the treaties listed here is online. Most are available in multi-
ple locations; nearly all are available on the website of the World
Intellectual Property Organization (www.wipo.org). 
In the citations that follow, U.N.T.S. stands for United Na-
tions Treaty Series, L.N.T.S. stands for League of Nations Treaty
Series, U.S.T. stands for United States Treaties and Other Interna-
tional Agreements, I.L.M. stands for International Legal Materi-
als, and Y.B.U.N. stands for Yearbook of the United Nations. All
are available in law libraries and from proprietary databases. 
“Agreement between the United Nations and the World Intellec-
tual Property Organization.” December 17, 1974. General Assem-
bly Res. 3346, U.N. GAOR, 29th Sess., U.N. Doc. A/RES/3346
(XXIX).
“Agreement Between the World Intellectual Property Organiza-
tion and the World Trade Organization.” December 22, 1995. 35
I.L.M. 754.
Treaties and Other International Agreements
295

“Agreement on Trade-Related Aspects of Intellectual Property
Rights (TRIPs), Marrakesh Agreement Establishing the World
Trade Organization, Annex 1C.” April 15, 1994. 33 I.L.M. 81.
“Brussels Convention Relating to the Distribution of Programme-
Carrying Signals Transmitted by Satellite.” May 21, 1974. 13
I.L.M. 1444.
“Budapest Treaty on the International Recognition of the Deposit
of Microorganisms for the Purposes of Patent Procedure.” April
28, 1977, as amended on September 26, 1980. 32 U.S.T. 1241, 1861
U.N.T.S. 361.
Buenos Aires Convention. August 20, 1910. 38 Stat. 1785, 155
L.N.T.S. 179.
“Convention Concerning the Creation of an International Union
for the Protection of Literary and Artistic Works (Berne Conven-
tion).” September 9, 1886, as last revised at Paris, July 24, 1971
(amended 1979). 25 U.S.T. 1341, 828 U.N.T.S. 221. 
“Convention Establishing the World Intellectual Property Orga-
nization.” July 14, 1967, as amended on September 28, 1979
(WIPO Convention). 21 U.S.T. 1749, 828 U.N.T.S. 3.
“Convention for the Protection of Producers of Phonograms
Against Unauthorized Duplication of Their Phonograms.” Octo-
ber 29, 1971. 25 U.S.T. 309.
“Convention on the Grant of European Patents.” October 5, 1973.
13 I.L.M. 276. Text as amended through December 10, 1998.
http://www.european-patent-office.org/legal/epc/e/ma1.html.
“Hague Agreement Concerning the International Deposit of In-
dustrial Designs.” November 6, 1925. 74 L.N.T.S. 343, revised at
London, June 2, 1934, 205 L.N.T.S. 179, revised at The Hague, No-
vember 28, 1960; supplemented by the Additional Act of Monaco,
November 18, 1961, the Complementary Act of Stockholm, July
14, 1967, and the Protocol of Geneva, April 10, 1975, 26 U.S.T. 571;
and as amended, September 1979.
“Inter-American Convention for the Protection of Industrial
Property.” August 20, 1910. 39 Stat. 1675; T.S. 626; 1 Bevans 772.
Replaced by General Inter-American Convention for Trademark
and Commercial Protection. February 20, 1929. 46 Stat. 2907, T.S.
833, 2 Bevans 751, 124 L.N.T.S. 357.
296
Resources

“Lisbon Agreement for the Protection of Appellations of Origin
and their International Registration.” October 31, 1958. As revised
at Stockholm on July 14, 1967, and as amended on September 28,
1979. 923 U.N.T.S. 205.
“Locarno Agreement Establishing an International Classification
for Industrial Designs.” October 8, 1968. As amended September
28, 1979, 23 U.S.T. 1389.
“Madrid Agreement Concerning the International Registration of
Marks.” April 14, 1891. As revised at Brussels on December 14,
1900, at Washington on June 2, 1911, at The Hague on November
6, 1925, at London on June 2, 1934, at Nice on June 15, 1957, and
at Stockholm on July 14, 1967, and as amended on September 28,
1979. 828 U.N.T.S. 389.
“Madrid Agreement for the Repression of False or Deceptive In-
dications of Source on Goods.” April 14, 1891, as revised at Wash-
ington on June 2, 1911, at The Hague on Nov. 6, 1925, at London
on June 2, 1934, and at Lisbon on October 31, 1958. Additional
Act, Stockholm. July 14, 1967. 828 U.N.T.S. 389.
“Nairobi Treaty on the Protection of the Olympic Symbol.” Sep-
tember 26, 1981. 1863 U.N.T.S. 367. 
“Nice Agreement Concerning the International Classification of
Goods and Services for the Purposes of the Registration of
Marks.” June 15, 1957. As revised at Stockholm on July 14, 1967,
and at Geneva on May 13, 1977, and amended on September 28,
1979. 23 U.S.T. 1336, 550 U.N.T.S. 45.
“Paris Convention for the Protection of Industrial Property.”
March 20, 1883. As revised at Brussels on December 14, 1900, at
Washington on June 2, 1911, at The Hague on November 6, 1925,
at London on June 2, 1934, at Lisbon on October 31, 1958, and at
Stockholm on July 14, 1967, and as amended on September 28,
1979. 21 U.S.T. 1583, 828 U.N.T.S. 305.
“Patent Cooperation Treaty.” Washington. June 19, 1970. As
amended on September 28, 1979, and as modified on February 3,
1984, and October 3, 2001. 28 U.S.T. 7645, 9 I.L.M. 978.
“Patent Law Treaty.” June 1, 2000. 39 I.L.M. 1047.
“Protocol Relating to the Madrid Agreement Concerning the In-
ternational Registration of Marks.” June 27, 1989. http://www
Treaties and Other International Agreements
297

.wipo.int/madrid/en/legal_texts/.
“Rome Convention for the Protection of Performers, Producers of
Phonograms and Broadcasting Organizations.” October 26, 1961.
496 U.N.T.S. 43.
“Statute of the International Court of Justice.” Art. 38(1), 59 Stat.
1055, 1060 (1945), T.S. No. 993, 3 Bevans 1153, 1976 Y.B.U.N. 1052. 
“Strasbourg Agreement Concerning the International Patent
Classification.” March 24, 1971. As amended on September 28,
1979. 26 U.S.T. 1793.
“Trademark Law Treaty.” October 27, 1994. http://www.wipo
.int/clea/docs/en/wo/wo027en.htm.
“Treaty on the International Registration of Audiovisual Works.”
April 20, 1989. http://www.wipo.int/treaties/en/ip/frt/trt
docs_wo004.html.
“Treaty on Intellectual Property in Respect of Integrated Cir-
cuits.” Washington. May 26, 1989. 28 I.L.M. 1477 (not in force).
“Universal Copyright Convention.” September 6, 1952. 6 U.S.T.
2731. Revised at Paris. July 24, 1971. 25 U.S.T. 1341.
“Vienna Agreement Establishing an International Classification
of the Figurative Elements of Marks.” June 12, 1973. As amended
October 1, 1985. http://www.wipo.int/clea/docs/en/wo/
wo031en.htm.
“WIPO Copyright Treaty.” December 20, 1996. 36 I.L.M. 65 (1997).
“WIPO Performance and Phonograms Treaty.” December 20,
1996. 36 I.L.M. 76 (1997).
Other International and Foreign
Materials
Buma & Stemra v. KaZaA. Amsterdam Court of Appeal (2002). Un-
official English translation. www.eff.org/IP/P2P/BUMA_v
_Kazaa/20020328_kazaa_appeal_judgment.html.
Council Directive 93/98/EEC of 29 October 1993 Harmonizing
298
Resources

the Term of Protection of Copyright and Certain Related Rights,
1993 O.J. (L290) 9.
EU Directive 2001/29/EC on the Harmonisation of Certain As-
pects of Copyright and Related Rights in the Information Society.
2001 O.J. (L167) 10.
International Business Machines Corporation. Technical Board of Ap-
peal of the European Patent Office, Case No. T 0935/97–3.5.1
(1999).
Sunde (for Norway) v. Johansen. Oslo First Instance Trial Court. Jan-
uary 7, 2003. No. 02-507 M/94. English translation by Professor
Jon Bing. http://www.eff.org/IP/Video/Johansen_DeCSS_case/
20030109_johansen_decision.html (visited March 11, 2006). On ap-
peal, Borgarting Appellate Court, December 22, 2003. No. LB-
2003-00731. Unofficial English translation by Professor Jon Bing.
http://www.efn.no/DVD-dom-20031222-en.html.
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers (ICANN) Materials
ICANN, a nonprofit organization created by agreement between
the Internet Assigned Numbers Authority and the U.S. Depart-
ment of Commerce, is perhaps the closest thing to a governing
authority that the Internet has. Its decisions and other documents
exert enormous influence over the Internet, and thus over intel-
lectual property, especially, in the case of domain names, trade-
mark. All of the documents listed here are available online. 
“Articles of Incorporation of Internet Corporation for Assigned
Names and Numbers.” Revised Noveember 21, 1998. http://
www.icann.org/general/articles.htm.
“Bylaws for Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Num-
bers, a California Nonprofit Public-Benefit Corporation.” As
amended effective April 19, 2004. http://www.icann.org/
general/archive-bylaws/bylaws-13oct03.htm.
“ICANN Uniform Domain Name Dispute Resolution Policy.”
August 26, 1999. http://www.icann.org/udrp/udrp-policy-
24oct99.htm.
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers Materials
299

“Internet Domain Name System Structure and Delegation (ccTLD
Administration and Delegation).” May 1999. http://www
.icann.org/icp/icp-1.htm.
“Memorandum of Understanding between the U.S. Department
of Commerce and the Internet Corporation for Assigned Names
and Numbers.” November 1998. http://www.icann.org/general/
icann-mou-25nov98.htm.
Other Web Resources
While most treaties, statutes, and cases can be located in a variety
of locations online, accurate, up-to-date legal research requires a
dedicated database and a staff of legal professionals to maintain
it. Creating and maintaining such a database is expensive, and is
usually done for profit. The websites listed here are commercial
database providers; they store a wide variety of legal materials,
which they make available in the expectation of profit from sub-
scriber fees, advertising, or both. In addition to these sites, the
websites of the organizations listed in Chapter 7 are valuable re-
search tools.
Findlaw (www.findlaw.com) 
Findlaw offers articles and summaries on a wide variety of legal
topics. It is the only one of the databases listed here that can be ac-
cessed without paying a fee.
Hein Online (heinonline.org)
Hein Online is a useful database for academic journals, treaties,
and federal administrative materials. Access requires payment of
a fee.
LexisNexis (www.lexis.com)
Lexis is one of the two leading providers of comprehensive online
legal research databases in the United States and several other
countries. Its chief competitor is Westlaw. Lexis offers databases
covering every area of U.S. law, including specialized intellectual
property databases. Access requires payment of a fee.
300
Resources

Westlaw (www.westlaw.com)
Westlaw is one of the two leading providers of comprehensive
online legal research databases in the United States. Its chief com-
petitor is LexisNexis. Like LexisNexis, Westlaw’s databases cover
every area of U.S. law and include specialized intellectual prop-
erty databases. The coverage and organization of the two services
is similar but not identical, and professional legal researchers
generally prefer the one that best suits their individual research
styles and needs. A fee is charged for access.
Other Web Resources
301


Glossary
adhesion contract:
A contract made between parties with highly un-
equal bargaining power, usually presented as a form prepared by the
party with greater bargaining power. Shrink-wrap and click-wrap agree-
ments are often (or may often contain) adhesion contracts, as the pur-
chaser has no opportunity to negotiate the terms of the contract, but
must accept it as is. Adhesion contracts are sometimes called take-it-or-
leave-it contracts.
affirmative defense:
A defense that must be raised by a defendant and
that, if proved, will enable the defendant to avoid conviction (in a crim-
inal case) or liability (in a civil case) even though the defendant did, in
fact, do all of the acts alleged by the prosecutor or plaintiff. Invalidity of
the underlying patent is an affirmative defense to a patent infringement
suit: Even if the defendant did, in fact, infringe on the patent, he or she
will avoid liability if he or she can prove that the patent should not have
been issued in the first place. In Harper & Row Pub. v. Nation Enterprises,
471 U.S. 539 (1985), the U.S. Supreme Court stated that fair use is an af-
firmative defense to copyright infringement.
alienable:
Able to be sold, given away, devised (left by will), or other-
wise transferred to another person. 
assignment:
A transfer of one or more rights or property interests.
blanket license:
A license allowing the licensee to use all of the works
of the licensor; particularly the ASCAP blanket license, which allows the
licensee to perform any or all of the musical works in the ASCAP cata-
log.
blurring:
One of the two ways in which a famous mark can be diluted;
the mark is blurred by a use that causes it to lose its distinctive quality.
caching:
Local storage of frequently used information for quicker and
easier access.
303

certiorari:
A writ issued by a higher court that directs a lower court to
deliver the record in a particular case for review. Certiorari is the proce-
dural mechanism by which most of the cases reviewed by the U.S.
Supreme Court come before the court.
click-wrap agreement:
A licensing contract for downloaded or in-
stalled software, appearing on the screen, to which the customer may
consent by clicking “I agree” or something similar on the screen. Click-
wrap agreements are rarely read in their entirety by consumers and may
constitute or contain adhesion contracts.
common law:
In the United States, the United Kingdom, and most
other English-speaking countries, the body of law based on reported ju-
dicial opinions.
compulsory license:
A license allowing the licensee to use a protected
intellectual property right (patent, copyright, or trademark) without the
owner’s consent, so long as the licensee pays a specified fee.
cybergriping:
Complaining, usually about a company, using a website
created specifically for that purpose. 
cybersquatting:
Registering another’s trademark as a domain name for
the purpose of obtaining money from the trademark owner.
damages:
Money sought or awarded at law as compensation for an in-
jury; they are paid or to be paid by the person causing the injury.
de minimis:
Minimal; insignificant.
dead letter:
A treaty, law, or practice that has not been abolished, over-
turned, or repealed but is no longer applied.
derivative work:
A work based on a preexisting work but adding some
original element to that work.
design patent:
A patent for an ornamental industrial design.
dilution:
The blurring or tarnishing of a famous mark.
encryption:
A method of arranging the contents of a document in such
a way as to render the document unintelligible until the encryption
process is reversed with the aid of a decryption key.
ephemeral:
Of short duration.
estoppel:
A legal bar to the assertion of a particular claim, right, or ar-
gument.
exclusive license:
A license granted to only one person; the licensor is
prohibited from granting the license to additional licensees.
file sharing:
Sharing files on one computer with other computers to
which the computer is linked through a network.
in personam:
An action in personam is a lawsuit brought against a par-
304
Glossary

ticular person. Jurisdiction in personam is jurisdiction over a particular
person.
in rem:
An action in rem is a lawsuit brought “against” (that is, to de-
termine the ownership and status of) a thing. The thing may be tangible
(a jar of peanut butter) or intangible (a domain name). Jurisdiction in rem
is jurisdiction over a thing. An action brought to determine the rights and
responsibilities of a particular party in relation to a thing is called an ac-
tion quasi in rem.
injunction; injunctive relief:
An order from a court that something be
done or not be done.
metatag:
Text inserted near the top of an HTML document that is in-
visible when the document is viewed as a Web page.
peer-to-peer (P2P):
A form of file-sharing network in which files are ex-
changed directly between users without passing through any central
server.
plant patent:
A patent for a variety of plant; in the United States plant
patents are governed by the 1930 Plant Patent Act and the 1970 Plant Va-
riety Protection Act.
plurality:
The largest share, even if not a majority. If nine people vote
on three options, for example, and four vote for Option A, three for Op-
tion B, and two for Option C, Option A has received a plurality of the
votes cast, even though a majority (five in all) have not voted for Option
A.
prima facie:
On first appearance; sufficient to establish a presumption,
and thus requiring the opposing party to disprove or rebut the pre-
sumption.
public domain:
Inventions and original works unprotected by patent
and copyright, respectively, and thus available for the use of the public.
Inventions may be in the public domain because they were never
patented or because the patent has expired or has otherwise terminated.
Original works may be in the public domain because they are original
U.S. government works or because the copyright has expired.
remanded:
Sent back to the originating court for further action.
rootkit:
Software intended to conceal traces of an intruder on a system;
allowing the intruder undetected root access.
search-engine spamming:
Using unethical or questionable methods to
mislead search engines into giving a website a higher search-result rank-
ing than it would otherwise have.
shareware:
Computer programs distributed free of charge, usually on
condition that after a trial period the user will pay for the program if he
or she chooses to keep using it.
Glossary
305

shrink-wrap agreement:
A software licensing contract to which the
customer consents by opening the shrink-wrap packaging of the disks or
other media containing the software. Like click-wrap agreements,
shrink-wrap agreements are rarely read in their entirety by the con-
sumers and may constitute or contain adhesion contracts.
spamming:
A form of abuse of e-mail, search engines, instant messag-
ing, newsgroups, text messaging, and other forms of communication in
which a very large number of unsolicited messages are sent, or an illu-
sorily high search-engine rank is created, usually for the financial bene-
fit of the spammer or the spammer’s clients.
statutory:
Appearing in or related to an act passed by a legislature (a
statute).
supernode:
A computer connected to a peer-to-peer (P2P) network and
acting as a relayer and proxy server for the network. The supernode com-
puter is not ordinarily under the control of anyone involved in creating
the P2P network or the software enabling it; any connected computer
with sufficient bandwidth can become a supernode, and supernodes can
change frequently.
tarnishment:
One of the two ways in which a famous mark can be di-
luted: The mark is tarnished by a use that decreases the positive mental
associations connected with the mark or creates negative associations.
Association of a mark with illegal drug use or pornography may consti-
tute tarnishment.
trade dress:
Nonfunctional elements of the packaging or presentation
of goods or services that combine to create a visual image that identifies
the goods or services to consumers; trade dress may be protected as a
trademark or service mark. 
utility patent:
The right granted to the inventor of a useful, novel, and
nonobvious invention allowing the inventor to prevent others from mak-
ing, using, or selling the invention.
vacated:
Nullified.
webcasting:
Noninteractive linear transmission of audio or video con-
tent over the World Wide Web.
works for hire:
A work created by an employee within the scope of his
or her employment, or pursuant to a commission or agreement under
which the parties agree to treat the work as a work for hire.
306
Glossary

Index
A&M Records v. Napster,
71–72
Abercrombie & Fitch Co. v.
Hunting World, Inc.,
28–29, 224n.
decision in (text), 210–213
ACPA. See
Anticybersquatting
Consumer Protection
Act of 1999
African Regional Intellectual
Property Organization
(ARIPO), 226
Agreement on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights. See
TRIPs
AHRA. See Audio Home
Recording Act of 1992
Aimster, 72–73
Alliance for Digital Progress
(ADP), 226–227
Amazon.com, Inc. v.
Barnesandnoble.com,
Inc., 60–61
American Bar Association
Section of Intellectual
Property Law, 227
American Intellectual
Property Law
Association (AIPLA),
227
American Society of
Composers, Authors
and Publishers,
227–228
Anti-DMCA, 228
Anticounterfeiting Consumer
Protection Act of 1996,
10, 11
Anticybersquatting
Consumer Protection
Act of 1999, 10, 11,
90–92
Apple Computer, Inc. v.
Microsoft Corp., 53–55
Apple Corporation. See Apple
Computer, Inc. v.
Microsoft Corp.; Lisa
computer; Macintosh
computers and
operating system;
iTunes
ARPANET, 104–105
Arts and Humanities
Research Board
Shepherd and
Wedderburn Research
Centre in Intellectual
Property and
Technology, 229
ASCAP. See American Society
of Composers, Authors
and Publishers
307

Association Internationale
pour la Protection de la
Propriété Intellectuelle
(AIPPI), 229–230
Association Littéraire et
Artistique International
(ALAI), 230
Association of Corporate
Patent Counsel
(ACPC), 229
Atari v. JS & A, 75
ATRIP. See International
Association for the
Advancement of
Teaching and Research
in Intellectual Property
Audio Home Recording Act
of 1992, 67–68
Bakers’ marks, 8–9
Barnes & Noble. See Amazon
.com, Inc. v. Barnesand
noble.com, Inc.
Barton, Clara, 149–151
Berkman Center for Internet
& Society, 230–231
Berne Convention, 5, 8,
107–108
on copyrightable subject
matter, 110–111
and duration of copyright,
111, 112
on exclusive rights, 111
and national treatment, 110
on notice and registration,
17, 18
and U.S., 5–6, 108–109
Berne Convention
Implementation Act of
1988, 18, 24, 109
Berners-Lee, Tim, 105
Bi Sheng, 2
Bitlaw, 225, 231
Borland software. See Lotus
Development v. Borland
Bourget, Ernest, 151–152
Britain
early development of
printing, 3
Stationer’s Company, 3–4
Statute of Anne, 3–4
Brunelleschi, Filippo, 12,
153–155
Budapest Open Access
Initiative, 231–232
Buenos Aires Convention,
108–109
Bunner, Andrew, 86
Business methods, and
patents, 58–62, 93
Business Software Alliance
(BSA), 232–233
Cailliau, Robert, 105
Campaign for Digital Rights
(CDR), 233
Canadian Motion Picture
Distributors
Association (CMPDA),
233
Canterbury Tales, 3
Caxton, William, 3
Center for Intellectual
Property Studies (CIP),
234
Centre d’Etudes
Internationales de la
Propriété Industrielle
(CEIPI), 234
CERN. See European
Organization for
Nuclear Research
Certification marks, 26
Chaucer, Geoffrey, 3
Coca-Cola, 120
Collective marks, 26
308
Index

Computer Maintenance
Competition Assurance
Act, 7
Computer programs
and copyright, 51–58
look-and-feel infringement
(and menu command
hierarchy), 53–58, 93
and patents, 50–51, 52, 93
and shrink-wrap
agreements, 64
and trade dress, 57–58
Computers. See Lisa
computer; Macintosh
computers and operating
system; Semiconductor
manufacturing mask
works
Consumer Empowerment, 74
Content Scramble System, 84,
86
Copy protection, 82, 87, 93
Content Scramble System,
84, 86
and DeCSS, 84–87
and DMCA, 82–83
Macrovision, 83–84
Copying devices, 49, 66–68
See also Digital copying
Copyleft, 24
Copyright, 1, 41
authorship, 15–16
Britain, 3–4
collective works, 24
compulsory licensing, 25–26
of computer programs,
51–58
and copy protection, 82–87
and copying devices, 49,
66–68
duration, 21–23
economic rights, 14–15,
18–19
and electronic databases,
62–66
fair use, 19–20
France, 4–5
international, 106–114. See
also Berne Convention
and Internet, 6–8
joint works, 24
moral rights, 5, 15, 112
notice and registration,
17–18
originality, 15
ownership, 24
and printing, 1–6
and public domain, 23–24
right of first sale, 18–19
scènes a fàire, 16, 17
tangible medium of
expression, 15, 16
transfers of, 25
U.S. acts, 4, 5–8
works for hire, 24
See also Berne Convention;
Buenos Aires
Convention; Copyright
infringement; Digital
Millennium Copyright
Act of 1998; File
sharing; Open-source
licensing; Statute of
Anne; Universal
Copyright Convention
Copyright Act of 1790, 4
Copyright Act of 1909, 5,
108–109, 112
Copyright Act of 1976, 5–6,
109
on exclusive rights (text),
176–177
on fair use (text), 177–178
preemption clause, 63–65
on subject matter of
copyright (text), 176
Index
309

Copyright Clearance Center,
234–235
Copyright infringement
contributory, 21, 70–74, 77
direct, 20, 70
indirect (third-party),
20–21, 70–72
inducing, 21, 70, 76
vicarious, 21, 70–76
Copyright Renewal Act of
1992, 22
The Copyright Society of the
Untied States of
America (CSUSA), 235
Corley, Eric, 84–86
Coster, Laurens, 3, 155–156
Creative Commons, 235–236
CSS. See Content Scramble
System
Cybergriping, 92
Cybersquatting, 49, 90–92, 93
15 U.S.C. Sec. 1125 on,
198–203
See also Anticybersquatting
Consumer Protection
Act of 1999
DAT. See Digital audio tape
DeCSS, 84–87
Dépôt légale, 4, 5
Diamond Rio MP3 player, 68
Diamond Sutra, 2
Diamond v. Diehr, 52
Dickens, Charles, 107
Digital audio tape, 67–68
Digital copying, 6–8, 67–68
See also Copying
devices
Digital Millennium Copyright
Act of 1998, 6, 7–8
on circumvention of
copyright protection
systems, 82–83, 178–185
DigitalConsumer.org, 236
DMCA. See Digital
Millennium Copyright
Act of 1998
Domaine publique, 24
Donaldson v. Beckett, 4
DVD Copy Control
Association, Inc. v.
Bunner, 86
Economic Espionage Act of
1996, 122
EFF. See Electronic Frontier
Foundation
Electronic databases, and
copyright, 62–66
Electronic Frontier
Foundation, 84, 237
Ellsworth, Annie, 156–157
epi. See Institute of
Professional
Representatives before
the European Patent
Office
Eurasian Patent Organization
(EAPO), 237
European Digital Rights
(EDRI), 237–238
European Organization for
Nuclear Research, 105
European Patent Convention
and business methods, 62
and computer programs,
51, 52
European Patent Office
(EPO), 51, 238
European Union
and copyright duration, 8
Database Directive, 66
Fair use, 19, 20
and copyright, 19–20
and parody, 20
310
Index

and reverse engineering,
20
space shifting, 19, 68
as statutory right, 83
time shifting, 19
and trademarks, 33, 88–89
and TRIPs, 113–114
See also File sharing
FastTrack software, 74
Federal Trademark Dilution
Act of 1995, 10, 11,
32–33
Fédération Internationale des
Conseils en Propriété,
238–239
Feist Publications v. Rural
Telephone Service Co.,
15, 62–63
File sharing, 69
and Aimster, 72–73
and books, 80
and dissatisfaction with
music industry’s
business model, 78–79
and equipment
manufacturers, 81
and Grokster, 74–78
and Internet service
providers, 81
and KaZaA, 73–74
and movies, 80–81
and MP3.com, 69–70
and music, 69–78
and Napster, 70–72
First Inventor Defense Act of
1999, 61–62
First4Internet rootkit, 87
Francis I, King of France, 4
Gottschalk v. Benson, 50–51
Grokster, 74–78
Gutenberg, Johannes, 3,
158–159
Henry VI, King of England, 13
Hewlett-Packard, 54
Hoshi Ryokan, 8
Hugo, Victor, 107, 159–160
IANA. See Internet Assigned
Numbers Authority
ICANN. See Internet
Corporation for
Assigned Names and
Numbers
In re Aimster Copyright
Litigation, 72–73
In re Alappat, 52, 224n.
decision in (text), 218–222
In re Trade-Mark Cases, 9–10
Industrial designs, 120
Information technology
and intellectual property
law, 41–42, 49
See also Computer
programs
The Institute of Patentees
and Inventors, 239
Institute of Professional
Representatives before
the European Patent
Office, 239
Institute of Trade Mark
Attorneys (ITMA),
239–240
Intellectual property, 1, 41–42
and international law,
99–104, 119–123
specialized categories,
119–120
See also Copyright; Patents;
Trademarks
Intellectual Property Owners
Association (IPO), 240
Inter-American Convention
for the Protection of
Industrial Property, 10
Index
311

International
Anticounterfeiting
Coalition (IACC), 240
International Association of
Entertainment
Lawyers, 241
International Association for
the Advancement of
Teaching and Research
in Intellectual Property,
240–241
International Court of Justice,
Statue of the, 99–100
International Federation of
Inventors’ Associations
(IFIA), 241
International Federation of
Reproduction Rights
Organizations (IFRRO),
242
International Intellectual
Property Alliance
(IIPA), 242
International Intellectual
Property Institute
(IIPI), 242–243
International Law
Association (ILA), 243
International Trademark
Association (INTA),
243
Internet
development of, 104–105
distinguished from World
Wide Web, 104
and intellectual property
law, 42
metatags, 12, 88
See also Business methods;
Electronic databases;
World Wide Web
Internet Assigned Numbers
Authority, 106
Internet Corporation for
Assigned Names and
Numbers, 92, 106, 244
iTunes, 79
Japan Intellectual Property
Association (JIPA),
244–245
Jenks, Joseph, 173–174
Johansen, Jon Lech, 84,
160–162
Johnson, Lyndon, 50
KaZaA, 73–74
Kazan, Roman, 84–86
Kies, Mary, 162–163
Kongo Gumi, 8
Lanham Trademark Act of
1946, 10
Lefèvre, Raoul, 3
Lisa computer, 54
Lotus Development v. Borland,
55–57
Lotus 1-2-3 software, 56
Lowenbrau, 8
Macintosh computers and
operating system,
53–55
Macrovision, 83–84
Madrid Agreement
Concerning the
International
Registration of Marks,
114
Madrid Union and Protocol,
114–115
MAI Systems v. Peak
Computer, 7
Manufacturing Clause, 108
Marrakesh Agreement on
Trade-Related Aspects
312
Index

of Intellectual Property
Rights. See TRIPs
Max-Planck-Institut für
Geistiges Eigentum,
Wettbewerbs-und
Steuerrecht, 245
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer Studios,
Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.,
74–78, 93, 222n.–224n.
Supreme Court opinion
(text), 186–198
Meucci, Antonio, 163–164
MGM v. Grokster. See Metro-
Goldwyn-Mayer Studios,
Inc. v. Grokster, Ltd.
Microsoft Corporation
Internet Explorer, 105–106
MS-DOS operating system,
53
Windows operating
system, 54–55
See also Apple Computer, Inc.
v. Microsoft Corp.
Mosaic browser, 105
Most favored nation
treatment, 104
Motion Picture Association of
America (MPAA),
245–246
MP3 files, 68
MP3.com, 69–70
Music Publishers’
Association (MPA),
246
Muybridge, Eadweard,
164–167
Napster, 70–72
National Association of
Patent Practitioners
(NAPP), 247
National treatment, 104, 110
Netscape Navigator, 105
Network Solutions, Inc., 106
The New Code of Etiquette, 2
NewWave software, 54
Niton Corporation, 89
No Electronic Theft Act of
1997, 6–7
Office for Harmonization in
the Internal Market
(Trade Marks and
Designs), 247
Ohio v. Perry, 64–65
Online Copyright
Infringement Liability
Limitation Act, 7
Open Society Institute (OSI),
247
Open-source licensing, 24, 26,
51
Organisation Africaine de la
Propriété Intellectuelle
(OAPI), 248
P2P networks. See Peer-to-
peer networks
Paris Convention for the
Protection of Industrial
Property, 14, 114,
116–117
Paris Union, 114, 116–117
Parker, Sean, 71
Patent Act (35 U.S.C. Sec.
101)
on non-obvious subject
matter (text), 215–216
on novelty and loss of right
to patent (text),
214–215
Patent Act of 1836, 14
Patent Act of 1870, 14
Patent Cooperation Treaty,
38, 103, 117–118
Patent Law Treaty, 118
Index
313

Patent Office of the
Cooperation Council
for the Arab States of
the Gulf, 248
Patents, 1, 34, 42
application process, 35–38
of business methods,
58–62, 93
for computer programs,
50–51, 52, 93
drawings, 35
duration, 40–41
England, 13
exclusive rights of holders,
38
fees, 35, 37–38
filing date, 37
first-to-invent rule, 118
induced infringement, 40
infringement, 38–40,
198–203
international agreements,
13–14, 116–119, 123
invention date, 36–37
licensing, 41
“nose of wax rule,” 38
ownership, 41
priority date, 37
and reduction to practice,
61–62
specifications, 35
as territorial grants, 117
and third-party liability,
39–40
transfer, 41
U.S., 13, 14
Venetian statute of 1421,
12–13
what is covered, 34–35
wrapper estoppel
(prosecution history
estoppel), 38–39
Peer-to-peer networks, 70, 78
and Voluntary Collective
License, 80
See also Aimster; Grokster;
KaZaA; Napster
Plant Patent Act of 1930, 14
Playboy Enterprises, Inc. v.
Welles, 88–89
Postel, Jon, 106
President’s Commission on
the Patent System, 50
Printing
early development in
China and Korea, 2
government monopolies, 2,
3, 4
Stationer’s Company, 3–4
ProCD, Inc. v. Zeidenberg, 65
Project Gutenberg, 248–249
Public domain, 23–24
Public Knowledge, 249
Quattro Pro software, 56
Radiation Monitoring
Devices, Inc., 89
Recording Industry
Association of
America, 78, 79, 250
Recording Industry Association
of America v. Verizon
internet services, 81
The Recuyell of the Historyes of
Troye, 3
Reimerdes, Shawn, 84–86
RIAA. See Recording
Industry Association of
America
Scènes a fàire, 16, 17, 55
SCMS. See Serial Copy
Management System
SCRIPT. See Arts and
Humanities Research
314
Index

Board Shepherd and
Wedderburn Research
Centre in Intellectual
Property and
Technology
Search-engine spamming, 12,
49, 87–89
Semiconductor
manufacturing mask
works, 119–120
Serial Copy Management
System, 67
Service marks, 8, 26, 30
Sharman Networks, 74
Signature Financial Group.
See State Street Bank &
Trust v. Signature
Financial Group
Sklyarov, Dmitri, 167–168
Société des Gens de Lettres
(SGDL), 251
Software. See Computer
programs
Sonny Bono Copyright Term
Extension Act of 1998,
6, 8, 21
Sony, 87
Sony Corp. of America v.
Universal City Studios,
Inc., 66, 68, 93
Southern v. How, 9
Spam. See Search-engine
spamming
State Street Bank & Trust Co. v.
Signature Financial
Group, 14, 59
Stationer’s Company, 3–4
Statute of Anne, 3–4, 109
Statue of the International
Court of Justice, 99–100
Statute of Monopolies of 1623
(England), 13
Stella Artois, 8
Stowe, Harriet Beecher, 107
Sunde (for Norway) v.
Johansen, 84
TESS. See Trademark Electronic
Search System
TLT. See Trademark Law
Treaty
Trade dress, 57–58, 93
Trade Marks, Patents and
Designs Federation
(TMPDF), 251
Trade secrets, 120–123
Trademark Act of 1870, 9
Trademark Dilution Revision
Act of 2006, 10, 11
text, 203–208
Trademark Electronic Search
System, 30
Trademark Law Revision Act
of 1988, 10
Trademark Law Treaty, 115
Trademark Law Treaty Act of
1998, 115
Trademarks, 1, 8, 26–27, 42
blurring, 30, 32
defined, 26
dilution, 11, 30, 31–33,
198–203
duration, 33–34
England, 8–9
fair use, 33, 88–89
15 U.S.C. Sec. 1125 (text),
198–203
infringement, 30–31
international agreements,
10–11, 114–116, 123
items covered and not
covered, 27–29
and metatags, 12, 88
notice, 30
registration, 29–30, 34
and state law, 10, 29
Index
315

Trademarks (cont.)
and third-party liability, 33
tarnishment, 30, 32–33
transfer of, 33
U.S., 9–10
See also Certification
marks; Collective
marks;
Cybersquatting;
Federal Trademark
Dilution Act of 1995;
Search-engine
spamming; Service
marks; Trade dress;
Trademark Dilution
Revision Act of 2006
Treaty on Trade-Related
Aspects of Intellectual
Property Rights. See
TRIPs
TRIPs, 14, 59, 101, 103, 123
and Berne Convention, 112
as comprehensive treaty on
intellectual property,
104
on copyright (text),
185–186
on database protection,
112–113
and fair use, 113–114
and most favored nation
treatment, 104, 112
and national treatment,
104, 112
and patent law, 117
on patents (text), 216–218
on performance and
recording rights, 113
on software and movie
rentals, 113
and trade secrets, 122
and trademark law,
115–116
on trademarks (text),
208–210
See also World Intellectual
Property Organization;
World Trade
Organization
Trollope, Anthony, 107
Tufts Multilaterals Project,
251–252
UMG Recordings v. MP3.com,
69–70
Uncle Tom’s Cabin, 107
Uniform Domain Name
Dispute Resolution
Policy, 92
Uniform Trade Secrets Act
(U.S. states), 121–122
Universal City Studios, Inc. v.
Corley, 7, 86
Universal City Studios, Inc. v.
Reimerdes, 86
Universal Copyright
Convention, 5, 108
U.S. Constitution
and international law, 100
Patent and Copyright
Clause, 4, 13
U.S. Copyright Office, 252
U.S. Patent Office (before
1975), 14
U.S. Patent and Trademark
Office (since 1975), 14,
30, 34, 252–253
USPTO. See U.S. Patent and
Trademark Office
UTSA. See Uniform Trade
Secrets Act
Utynam, John of, 13
Valenti, Jack, 169–171
Vault Corporation v. Quaid
Software, 64
316
Index

Verizon, 81
Vessel Hull Design Protection
Act, 120
Virtual private networks, 72
Voluntary Collective License,
80
VPNs. See Virtual private
networks
Wang Jie, 2
WCT. See WIPO Copyright
Treaty
Weihenstephan, 8
Welles, Terri, 88, 171–173
Windows operating system,
54–55
Winslow, Samuel, 173–174
WIPO. See World Intellectual
Property Organization
WIPO Copyright and
Performances and
Phonograms Treaties
Implementation Act, 7
WIPO Copyright Treaty, 111
WIPO Performance and
Phonograms Treaty,
111–112
World Intellectual Property
Organization, 6, 7, 66,
100–101, 123, 253
treaties administered,
101–103
voting structure, 103
website as best first stop
for research, 225
See also TRIPs; entries
beginning with WIPO
World Trade Organization, 6,
100–101, 254
and patents, 118–119
and trade secrets, 122–123
trademark enforcement,
115–116
World Wide Web
browsers, 105–106
development of, 105–106
distinguished from
Internet, 104
See also Internet
WPPT. See WIPO
Performance and
Phonograms Treaty
WTO. See World Trade
Organization
Yi Gyu-bo, 2
Index
317

About the Author
Aaron Schwabach is a professor of law at Thomas Jefferson
School of Law in San Diego, California, where he teaches com-
puter and Internet law. He is the author of ABC-CLIO’s Internet
and the Law: Technology, Society, and Compromises.
318

