
1.  Chapter 1, “Thinking About IR Theory,” 
includes a new reading by Thomas Walker 
on the dangers of becoming wedded to a 
single paradigm or image of world politics. 
2.  Chapter 2, “Realism: The State and Balance 
of Power,” now has an expanded discussion 
of Thucydides and new sections on defensive 
and offensive realists, nonsystemic realist 
explanations, and dynamic differential theory 
of great power war.
3.  Chapter 3, “Liberalism: Interdependence 
and Global Governance,” expands the 
discussion on both the impact of global-
ization on IR theory and the literature on 
deliberative global governance and has a new 
article by Robert Keohane on Elinor Ostrom’s 
Governing the  Commons.
4.  Chapter 4, “Economic Structuralism: 
Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism,” 
provides more in-depth coverage of Antonio 
Gramsci, Robert Cox, and the postcolonialism 
literature. It also  includes a new reading 
by Barbara Bush on the role of culture in 
imperial  relations.
5.  Each reading features an expanded 
headnote and critical-thinking questions 
that provides more context for the selection 
and teases out its conceptual or theoretical 
import.
If you’re wondering why you should buy 
this new edition of International Relations 
Theory, here are ﬁ ve good reasons!

International
Relations Theory 
Fifth Edition 
PAUL R. VIOTTI
 University of Denver 
MARK V. KAUPPI
 Georgetown University 
  Longman 
 Boston  Columbus  Indianapolis  New York  San Francisco  Upper Saddle River 
Amsterdam  Cape Town  Dubai  London  Madrid  Milan  Munich  Paris  Montreal  Toronto
Delhi  Mexico City  São Paulo  Sydney  Hong Kong  Seoul  Singapore  Taipei  Tokyo 

 Senior Acquisitions Editor: Vikram Mukhija 
Editorial Assistant: Beverly Fong
 Senior Marketing Manager: Lindsey Prudhomme 
 Production Manager: Stacy Kulig 
 Project Coordination, Text Design, and Electronic Page Makeup: S4Carlisle Publishing Services 
 Cover Designer: John Callahan 
 Cover Image: PhotoAlto/Corbis  
 Senior Manufacturing Buyer: Dennis Para 
 Printer and Binder: R.R. Donnelley and Sons 
 Cover Printer: R.R. Donnelley and Sons 
 For permission to use copyrighted material, grateful acknowledgment is made to the copyright holders, which are hereby 
made part of this copyright page. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
 Viotti, Paul R. 
  International relations theory / Paul R. Viotti, Mark V. Kauppi.—5th ed. 
    p. cm. 
  Includes bibliographical references and index. 
  ISBN-13: 978-0-205-08293-3 (alk. paper) 
  ISBN-10: 0-205-08293-9 (alk. paper) 
 1. International relations.  I. Kauppi, Mark V.  II. Title. 
  JZ1305.V56 2012 
  327.101—dc22 
2010048600 
Copyright © 2012, 2010, 1999 by Pearson Education, Inc. 
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form 
or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording, or otherwise, without the prior written permission of the 
publisher. Printed in the United States. To obtain permission to use material from this work, please submit a written request 
to Pearson Education, Inc., Permissions Department, 1900 E. Lake Ave., Glenview, IL 60025 or fax to (847) 486-3938 or 
e-mail  glenview.permissions@pearsoned.com . For information regarding permissions, call (847) 486-2635.
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10—DOC—14 13 12 11  
 ISBN-13: 978-0-205-08293-3 
 ISBN-10:        0-205-08293-9  

B RI EF CONTENTS 
Detailed Contents  iv
Preface  viii
CHAPTER 1 
Thinking About IR Theory 1
PART I  Images of International Relations 37
CHAPTER 2 
Realism: The State and Balance of Power 39
CHAPTER 3 
Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance 129
CHAPTER 4 
Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism 189
CHAPTER 5 
The English School: International Society and Grotian Rationalism 239
PART II  Interpretive Understandings 275
CHAPTER 6 
Constructivist Understandings 277
CHAPTER 7 
Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings 322
CHAPTER 8 
Feminist Understandings in IR Theory 360
PART III  Normative Considerations 389
CHAPTER 9 
Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality 391
Glossary
441
Index
471
iii

D ETA I LED CONTENT S 
Brief Contents  iii
Preface
viii
CHAPTER 1 
Thinking About IR Theory 1
The IR Field in an Age of Globalization 1
Epistemology, Methodology, and Ontology 2
What Is Theory? 4
 Explanation and Prediction   5
 Abstraction and Application   8
 Levels of Analysis   8
Images
12
Interpretive Understandings 14
Normative Theory 16
A Look Ahead 17
Selected Readings 
Thinking Theory Thoroughly / 
James Rosenau  19
The Perils of Paradigm Mentalities: 
Revisiting Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper / 
Thomas C. Walker  27
Suggestions for Further Reading 34
PART I  Images of International 
Relations
37
CHAPTER 2 
Realism: The State and Balance 
of Power 39
Major Actors and Assumptions 39
Intellectual Precursors and Influences 42
 Thucydides   42
 Machiavelli   45
 Hobbes   47
 Grotius   48
 Clausewitz   49
 Carr   50
 Morgenthau   51
Power
52
 Definitions   52
 Measurement   53
System
54
 Game Theory and Anarchy   55
 Distribution of Capabilities and the Balance of Power   58  
Change
68
 Power Transition   68
 Long Cycles   69
Globalization and Interdependence 71
 Globalization   71
 Interdependence and Vulnerability   71
Realists and International Cooperation 72
Realists and Their Critics 74
 Realism: The Term Itself   74
 The System and Determinism   75
 Realists and the State   76
 Realists and the Balance of Power   77
 Realism and Change   78
 Realism: The Entire Enterprise   79
Selected Readings 
The Melian Dialogue / Thucydides
83
On Princes and the Security of Their States / 
Niccolò Machiavelli  88
Of the Natural Condition of Mankind / 
Thomas Hobbes  90
The State of War: Confederation as 
Means to Peace in Europe / Jean-Jacques
Rousseau  93
iv

Detailed Contents 
v
Explaining War: The Levels of Analysis /
Kenneth N. Waltz  96
Hard and Soft Power in American Foreign 
Policy / Joseph S. Nye, Jr.  109
Suggestions for Further Reading 117
CHAPTER 3 
Liberalism: Interdependence 
and Global Governance 129
Major Actors and Assumptions 129
Intellectual Precursors and Influences 131
 Stoicism   132
 Liberalism—Classical and Social Variants   132
 Immanuel Kant   134
 Richard Cobden   135
 Joseph Schumpeter   135
 Interest-Group Liberalism   135
Integration
137
Transnationalism
142
Interdependence
144
International Regimes 144
Neoliberal Institutionalism 147
Global Governance 149
 Green Politics and the Environment   150
Economic Interdependence and Peace 152
The Democratic Peace 154
Decision Making 156
Change and Globalization 160
Liberals and Their Critics 161
 Anarchy   161
 Theory Building   162
 The Democratic Peace   163
 Voluntarism   163
Selected Readings 
Producing Security / Stephen G. Brooks  167
Beyond the Tragedy of the Commons/ 
Robert O. Keohane  176
Suggestions for Further Reading 180
CHAPTER 4 
Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism 
and Postcolonialism 189
Major Actors and Assumptions 189
Intellectual Precursors and Influences 193
 Karl Marx   193
 Hobson and Imperialism   195
 Lenin   196
 Luxemburg and Revolution vs. Reform   197
 Antonio Gramsci   198
Dependency Theorists 199
 ECLA and UNCTAD Arguments   199
 Radical Critiques   200
 Domestic Forces   202
The Capitalist World-System 203
 System   204
 Political, Economic, and Social Factors   206
Change and Globalization 207
Postcolonialism
209
Economic Structuralists and Their Critics 213
 The Question of Causality   213
 Reliance on Economics   213
 System Dominance   213
 Theoretical Rigidity   214
 Accounting for Anomalies   214
 Defining Alternatives and Science as Ideology   215
 Responses   215
Selected Readings 
The Economic Taproot of Imperialism / 
J. A. Hobson  219
Culture and Imperialism / 
Barbara Bush  222
The Modern World-System as a Capitalist 
World-Economy / Immanuel Wallerstein  227
Suggestions for Further Reading 233
CHAPTER 5 
The English School: International Society 
and Grotian Rationalism 239
Major Actors and Assumptions 239

vi
Detailed Contents
Intellectual Precursors and Influences 241
 Grotius   241
 Kant   242
 Carr   242
The Divergence of British and American 
Scholarship
243
The Genesis of the English School 244
Levels of Analysis and Theory 246
Change
246
 From System to International Society   246
 From International Society to World Society   247
The English School, Liberals, and Social 
Constructivists
249
The English School and Its Critics 250
 Methodological Muddle   250
 Historical Knowledge   250
 Political Economy, the Environment, and Gender   250
 Conceptual and Philosophical Eclecticism   251
Selected Readings 
The Law of Nations on War, Peace and 
Freedom of the Seas / Hugo Grotius  254
Inventing International Society / 
Tim Dunne  260 
Does Order Exist in World Politics? / 
Hedley Bull  267
Suggestions for Further Reading 270
PART II  Interpretive
Understandings
275
CHAPTER 6 
Constructivist Understandings 277
Major Actors and Assumptions 278
Intellectual Precursors and Influences 279
 Kant   279
 Locke   280
 Durkheim   281
 Weber   281
Intersubjectivity
281
Structure, Rules, and Norms 284
 Rules   285
 Norms   286
Agents
287
Identity
287
Logic of Appropriateness 289
Interests
290
The Diversity of Social Constructivist Thought 291 
 Schools of Thought   291
 Levels of Analysis   292
Wendt’s “Naturalist” Constructivism 293
Constructivist Affinities in the 
Broader IR Field 297
Constructivists and Their Critics 297
 Liberal and Realist Critiques   297
 Debates within Constructivism and Postmodern 
Challenges   298
Selected Readings 
Constructing International Politics / 
Alexander Wendt  302
Constructing Norms of Humanitarian 
Intervention / Martha Finnemore
309
Suggestions for Further Reading 316
CHAPTER 7 
Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern 
Understandings
322
Positivism
323
Intellectual Precursors: Phenomenology 
and Hermeneutics 328
Critical Theory: Major Assumptions 331
Postmodernism: Major Assumptions 333
Critical Theorists, Postmodernists, 
and Their Critics 335
Summation
337
Selected Readings 
Critical Explorations and the Highway 
of Critical Security Theory / Ken Booth  339
Writing Security / David Campbell  348
Suggestions for Further Reading 355

Detailed Contents 
vii
CHAPTER 8 
Feminist Understandings in IR Theory 360
Intellectual Precursors and Influences 360
Major Assumptions 362
Strands of Feminism in IR 364
Gender, War, and Security Studies 365
Gender and International Organizations 367
Gendered Understandings and IR Theory 368
Feminists and Their Critics 369
 What Critics?   369
 Research Program and Cumulative Knowledge   369
Selected Readings 
The Logic of Masculinist Protection: 
Reflections on the Current Security State / 
Iris Marion Young  371
Why Women Can’t Rule the World: 
International Politics According to Francis 
Fukuyama / J. Ann Tickner  380
Suggestions for Further Reading 386
PART III  Normative
Considerations
389
CHAPTER 9 
Normative IR Theory: Ethics 
and Morality 391
Norms, Ethics, and Morality 391
Normative Theory: Alternative Perspectives 392
 The Levels of Analysis   392
 Moral Relativism   393
 Secular Bases for Moral or Ethical Choice   393
Justice and War 397
 Applying Just War Theory in the Twenty-First 
Century    399
 Morality and Weaponry   400
Justice and Human Rights 402
 The Enlightenment   402
 Current Application   403
 Humanitarian Treatment and the 
Sovereign State   403
Armed Intervention and State 
Sovereignty
405
 Intervention and Civil Wars   406
 Criteria for Humanitarian Intervention   407
Alternative Images and Foreign Policy 
Choice
410
Rationality and Foreign Policy Choice 411
Values, Choices, and Theory 412
Selected Readings 
Morality, Politics, and Perpetual Peace / 
Immanuel Kant  415
The Nature of Politics / E. H. Carr  421
The Law of Peoples / John Rawls  425
On War and Peace—The Nobel Peace 
Prize Speech / Barack Obama  430
Suggestions for Further Reading 436
Glossary
441
Index
471

P RE FACE 
 T
 he idea for  International Relations Theory resulted from a conversation 
between the authors in 1982 as they strolled through the grounds of  Schloss 
Solitud , located just outside Stuttgart, Germany. The topic of discussion was 
the perennial problem of presenting in a relatively coherent manner a significant 
portion of the vast literature that comprises the field of international relations 
theory. After several years of classroom experimentation and numerous other con-
versations, the result was the first edition of this volume, published in 1987; with 
subsequent editions in 1993 and 1999; and, after a decade-long intermission, the 
fourth edition in 2010. Informed by feedback from former students, colleagues, and 
reviewers in North America, Europe, East Asia, and elsewhere, this fifth edition 
continues to take account of changes in the world and major developments within 
the field that have occurred over the past quarter century. 
 International relations theorists try to make the world and human interactions 
within it more intelligible. They try to unpack the complexities that surround our 
subjective and intersubjective understandings of global politics. And they disagree 
substantially in these efforts. It is a field so torn by controversies that the casual ob-
server may wonder if these IR theorists are writing about the same world. At times, 
IR theorists sound collectively like a cacophony of voices, discordant and anything 
but harmonious. On the other hand, we reflect that this out-of-tune sound is also a 
mark of a field in ferment, decidedly not moribund and potentially very productive 
of theories and understandings that may improve our grasp of how the world works. 
 Theorists have observed the end of the Cold War, increasing globalization, the 
prevalence of state and non-state conflict, and global economic crises. As in the previ-
ous editions, we’ve taken the time needed to reflect on and assess both the impact of 
these substantial developments as well as the increased diversity in thought within the 
images and interpretive understandings we identify. 
NEW TO THIS EDITION 
 In this edition, we have added the following: 
 j  A new reading in  Chapter 1  by Thomas Walker on the dangers of students in 
IR becoming wedded to a single paradigm or image of world politics. We also 
update and expand coverage in  Chapter 1  to set the stage for subsequent chap-
ters on all the diverse perspectives—the theoretical approaches now prevalent in 
the IR field—realism, liberalism, economic structuralism, English School, con-
structivism, postmodernism, critical theory, feminism, and normative theory.  
 j  In  Chapter 2 an expanded discussion of Thucydides and new sections 
on defensive and offensive realists, nonsystemic realist explanations, and 
dynamic differential theory of great power war.  
viii

Preface
ix
 j  Expanded discussion in  Chapter 3  on both the impact of globalization on IR 
theory and the literature on deliberative global governance—adding as well a 
new article by Robert Keohane on Elinor Ostrom’s  Governing the Commons. 
 j  Broader coverage in  Chapter 4  on economic structuralism with an expanded dis-
cussion on Antonio Gramsci, Robert Cox, and the postcolonialism literature. We 
also add a new reading by Barbara Bush on the role of culture in imperial relations.  
 j  Identification, beginning with constructivism in  Chapter 6  , of interpretive 
under standings (constructivism, postmodernism, critical theory, feminism) as 
another overarching conceptual category that gives meaning to the approaches 
and theories they contain.  
 j  Updated coverage of normative theory in  Chapter 9  as a value-oriented category 
of theoretical inquiry not only on warfare, human rights, and other ethical chal-
lenges facing policymakers, but also on how values relate to the images and inter-
pretive understandings that influence scholarly work by theorists in the IR field.  
 j  Greater detail in the newly revised précis—the expanded headnotes before 
each selected reading in this edition that couple an overview with critical 
thinking questions of conceptual or theoretical import to think about while 
reading each article.  
FEATURES
 This volume (1) discusses and illustrates what is meant by  theory and why theoriz-
ing about IR is important; (2) analyzes and assesses the underlying assumptions 
and orientations that influence scholarly work in the IR field—images that we label 
 realism, liberalism, economic structuralism, and the  English School and interpretive 
understandings found in  social constructivism, critical theory, postmodernism, and 
 feminism ; (3) provides an overview of  normative theory —what  ought to be done, 
how actors  should conduct themselves; (4) offers in the chapters and readings rep-
resentative samples of theoretical works; (5) introduces the reader to key concepts 
used in the IR field (some indicated in boldface type)—hence, an extensive glossary; 
(6) encourages the reader to assess both historical and contemporary conceptual 
and theoretical works in the IR field; and (7) raises questions that lead us to scru-
tinize critically diverse theoretical claims made in these works. 
 Indeed, if we are better equipped to analyze everyday events from a conceptual 
or theoretical perspective; to ask the right questions; to recognize underlying assump-
tions in written works or public pronouncements by academics, government officials, 
journalists, and other commentators, this would transcend any supposed achieve-
ment made simply by memorizing which author is associated with what theory. 
Keys to Navigating the IR Field 
 When dealing with the four images and four interpretive understandings we have 
identified, we hasten to underscore that these are not airtight, mutually exclusive 
categories of thought. As we maintained in earlier editions of this book, they are best 
understood more as pure or ideal types—general ways of thinking about IR that can 
serve as benchmarks that delineate major currents in the IR field. Indeed, the works 

x
Preface
of particular scholars (and the scholars themselves) oftentimes blend or cross from 
one image or interpretive understanding to another. Nevertheless, these categories 
of thought presented in this volume do help us organize and thus make better sense 
of what remains a deeply divided field of inquiry—one made even more difficult to 
navigate by the “laundry” lists of “isms” found in many IR theory books.  
Images
 Images that attempt a comprehensive, overarching view of the field are the subject 
matter in Part One, with separate chapters on (1)  realism (with new developments in 
structural or neorealism) in  Chapter 2  , (2)  liberalism (adding global governance found 
in rational or neoliberal institutionalism) in  Chapter 3  , (3)  economic structuralism 
(with postcolonialism integrated with earlier discussions of world-system theory and 
dependency) in  Chapter 4  , and (4) the  English School (with discussion of the Grotian 
roots of international society and prospects for a Kantian world society) in  Chapter 5  . 
Interpretive Understandings 
 The other “isms” that now dominate the field do not pretend to provide so over-
arching, comprehensive a view of international relations or world politics as these 
four images do. Instead, their focus is on the interpretive or subjective and inter-
subjective understandings we and others as human beings hold about the world in 
which we are immersed.  Social constructivists in  Chapter 6  and  critical theorists 
and  postmodernists in  Chapter 7 pose a substantial challenge to positivists wedded 
to scientific modes of inquiry. So do some  feminists discussed in  Chapter 8 . 
 In  Chapter 7  we also examine how the first three of the four interpretive under-
standings (constructivism, critical theory, and postmodernism) owe so much to the 
work of Max Weber on  Verstehen or interpretive understanding and, more broadly, 
to phenomenology—a philosophical inquiry into human consciousness or the work-
ings of the mind that affect our interpretations of the phenomena we observe. For its 
part, feminism, and its focus on gender as an interpretive lens, has a longer, also very 
rich history influenced by, but separate (for the most part) from, these philosophical 
or phenomenological currents. Nevertheless, we group these four modes of think-
ing into one broad category in Part Two—interpretive understandings—precisely 
because each is sensitive to the importance of interpretation, the subjective and 
intersubjective dimensions in and among human beings, the actions they take, and 
interactions among them that our theorizing takes into account.  
Normative Considerations 
 The final part of this volume takes up in  Chapter 9  the philosophical underpinnings 
of the IR field found in political theory. Normative theory connects moral or ethical 
obligation to the challenges that confront policymakers. Conceptual understand-
ings and values in political theory also underlie both the images and interpretive 
understandings we identify. On images, we see values or norms in the exercise of 
power and the search for order in realism, the multilateral or institutional remedies 
for global problems in liberalism, the exploitative class or interstate relations in 

Preface
xi
economic structuralism, and the search for “Grotian” rules and “Kantian” norms 
in international or world society in the English School. 
 Political theory also informs the interpretive understandings scholars take to 
IR whether (1) they identify international norms as ideational structures, as social 
constructivists are prone to do; (2) frame the critique offered by critical theorists 
looking for underlying power or other motives in ideologies masquerading as if 
they were scientifically grounded theories; (3) point us to the value-laden mean-
ings in the concepts and theoretical claims IR scholars make when we deconstruct 
their work, as postmodernists do; or (4) find, as feminists are prone to identify, the 
gender-related values present not only in everyday life, but also in IR theories that 
frequently purport to be value neutral. 
 Though deeply divided, when viewed as a whole, the IR field is intellectually 
very vibrant. Journals and recently published books have been filled with important 
new theoretical work as well as challenges to already established understandings 
and responses from their defenders. Given understandable constraints on the length 
of this volume, it is impossible to cover every topic as extensively as we might like, 
much less reprint every article suggested by colleagues, students, and reviewers. 
Nevertheless, we hope that this book remains a useful starting point and reference 
in helping readers not only to understand current trends in a still very dynamic field, 
but also to gain an appreciation for the extent to which current theoretical work 
and debates rest so heavily upon the rich conceptual foundation of earlier years and 
across the millennia.  
SUPPLEMENTS
 Longman is pleased to offer several resources to qualified adopters of  International 
Relations Theory and their students that will make teaching and learning from this 
book even more effective and enjoyable. 
 PASSPORT FOR INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS   With Passport, choose the resources you want 
from MyPoliSciKit and put links to them into your course management system. If 
there is assessment associated with those resources, it also can be uploaded, allowing 
the results to feed directly into your course management system’s gradebook. With 
over 150 MyPoliSciKit assets like video case studies, mapping exercises, comparative 
exercises, simulations, podcasts,  Financial Times newsfeeds, current events quizzes, 
politics blog, and much more, Passport is available for any Pearson introductory or 
upper-level political science book. Use ISBN 0-205-09523-2 to order Passport with 
this book. To learn more, please contact your Pearson representative.  
MYSEARCHLAB
 Need help with a paper? MySearchLab saves time and improves 
results by offering start-to-finish guidance on the research/writing process and full-
text access to academic journals and periodicals. Use ISBN 0-205-11220-X to order 
MySearchLab with this book. To learn more, please visit  www.mysearchlab.com  
or contact your Pearson representative.  
THE ECONOMIST
 Every week,  The Economist analyzes the important happenings 
around the globe. From business to politics, to the arts and science, its coverage 
connects seemingly unrelated events in unexpected ways. Use ISBN 0-205-07460-X 

xii
Preface
to order a 15-week subscription with this book for a small additional charge. To 
learn more, please contact your Pearson representative.  
THE FINANCIAL TIMES   Featuring international news and analysis from journalists 
in more than 50 countries,  The Financial Times provides insights and perspectives 
on political and economic developments around the world. Use 0-205-11041-X to 
order a 15-week subscription with this book for a small additional charge. To learn 
more, please contact your Pearson representative.  
LONGMAN ATLAS OF WORLD ISSUES (0-205-78020-2)  From population and political 
systems to energy use and women’s rights, the  Longman Atlas of World Issues fea-
tures full-color thematic maps that examine the forces shaping the world.  Featuring 
maps from the latest edition of  The Penguin State of the World Atlas , this excerpt 
includes critical-thinking exercises to promote a deeper understanding of how geog-
raphy affects many global issues. Available at no additional charge when packaged 
with this book.  
GOODE’S WORLD ATLAS (0-321-65200-2)  First published by Rand McNally in 1923, 
 Goode’s World Atlas has set the standard for college reference atlases. It features 
hundreds of physical, political, and thematic maps as well as graphs, tables, and a 
pronouncing index. Available at a discount when packaged with this book.  
THE PENGUIN DICTIONARY OF INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (0-140-51397-3)  This indis-
pensable reference by Graham Evans and Jeffrey Newnham includes hundreds 
of cross-referenced entries on the enduring and emerging theories, concepts, and 
events that are shaping the academic discipline of international relations and 
 today’s world politics. Available at a discount when packaged with this book.  
RESEARCH AND WRITING IN INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS (0-205-06065-X)  With current 
and detailed coverage on how to start research in the discipline’s major subfields, 
this brief and affordable guide offers the step-by-step guidance and the essential re-
sources needed to compose political science papers that go beyond description and 
into systematic and sophisticated inquiry. This text focuses on areas where students 
often need help—finding a topic, developing a question, reviewing the literature, 
designing research, and finally, writing the paper. Available at a discount when 
packaged with this book. 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 We gratefully acknowledge the review and critique of earlier drafts of the manu-
script for this edition by Carina Solmirano, University of Denver, who also combed 
the literature extensively to find representative titles we have included in the lists 
of Suggested Readings that append each chapter. Paul R. Viotti, Jr., then at the 
University of California, Santa Cruz, and now at California State University, Chico, 
contributed to our discussion of interpretive understandings and recommended 
readings. As always, we thank both Emily and Natalie Kauppi for their willingness 
to contribute valuable time and skills to improve the quality of the final manuscript. 
Reviewers who went through the manuscript line by line and offered most helpful 
suggestions on this and the fourth edition include Andrew Cortell, Lewis and Clark 

Preface
xiii
College; Zaryab Iqbal, Penn State University; Lee Metcalf, Florida State University; 
and Celine Jaquemin, St. Mary’s University. Finally, we are grateful for substantial 
discussions with our editors at Pearson Longman—Vikram Mukhija and, earlier, 
Eric Stano. We also appreciate early inputs from Jack Donnelly, University of 
 Denver, and Joyce Kaufman, Whittier College. 
 Paul R. Viotti, 
 University of Denver, Josef Korbel School of International Studies  
 Mark V. Kauppi, 
 Georgetown University  

This page intentionally left blank 

1
CHAPTER
Thinking About 
IR Theory 
 
 W
 hy do wars occur? Is nationalism the primary cause? Or ideology? Or 
the lack of world government? Or misperception? Or are people innately 
aggressive? How can stability (if not peace) be achieved? Why is there 
such tremendous social and economic inequality among the different regions of the 
world? Is international order incompatible with justice? These are the sorts of ques-
tions that have preoccupied scholars and statesmen at various times over the millen-
nia, whether the political entity in question was an ancient city-state or a modern 
nation-state, a centralized empire or a decentralized feudal system, a socialist or a 
liberal democratic society. Nor are these questions the private preserve of intellectu-
als, diplomatic practitioners, and assorted political pundits and commentators. At 
one time or another, most citizens reflect on one or more of these important queries. 
THE IR FIELD IN AN AGE OF GLOBALIZATION 
 International relations (IR) as a field of inquiry addresses such questions. Despite 
the adjective  international , the field is concerned with much more than relations 
between or among states. Other actors, such as international organizations, mul-
tinational corporations, environmental organizations, and terrorist groups, are all 
part of what could more correctly be termed  world or  global politics . Studies have 
also focused on factors internal to a state, such as its institutions, bureaucratic 
governmental coalitions, interest groups, decision-making processes, as well as the 
ideological and perceptual predispositions of individual leaders. 
 Beyond actors, the study of international relations also includes, for example, 
balance of power politics among states, the influence of economic structures at the 
global level, and international law, norms, and ethics. Such topics maintain their 
resonance in the current era, which has been popularly characterized as one of 
 globalization . This shrinkage of distance on a world scale is a result of an intensifi-
cation of connections across borders in not only economic but also social, political, 
cultural, and environmental realms as well. Globalization has its roots in world-
wide commerce in earlier centuries, but interdependence and interconnectedness 
1

2
CHAPTER 1
Thinking About IR Theory
accelerated toward the end of the nineteenth century, slowing during the twenty 
years between World War I (1914–1918) and World War I (1939–1945) that were 
marked by significant contraction in trade volume that resulted from imposition of 
high tariffs on  imports and competitive devaluations of currencies designed to pro-
mote exports at the  expense of other countries. In the decades that followed World 
War II, however, the pace of globalization increased substantially with both posi-
tive and negative  effects. In  addition to gains from trade and investment as well as 
increasing connections across national borders due to enhanced transportation and 
telecommunications, we also have witnessed spikes in the spread of weapons and 
associated technologies, environmental degradation, labor exploitation, financial 
crises, and worldwide terrorist threats—the negative byproducts of globalization. 
It is not surprising, then, that scholars of international relations have attempted to 
understand better the dynamics and manifestations of globalization. 
 Given the tremendous diversity and complexity of  what is studied, there is 
a multiplicity of views concerning  how one studies international relations. The 
possible avenues go well beyond the realms of history and political science. They 
include economics, psychology, social psychology, sociology, and anthropology 
in the behavioral sciences as well as philosophy and law. All this—the need to be 
familiar with or draw from multiple disciplines—may seem rather intimidating not 
just to the student, but also to those well established in the IR field. 
 Different perspectives on international relations naturally generate debates. 
Beginning in the period between the two world wars and continuing after World 
War II into the 1950s,  realists and  idealists argued over the nature of international 
politics and the possibility of peaceful change. In the 1960s the so-called second 
great debate between  traditionalists and  behavioralists dealt with the question of 
appropriate  methodology. Traditionalists emphasized the relative utility of history, 
law, philosophy, and other traditional, non-quantitative modes of inquiry to under-
standing government and other governmental or political institutions. Behavioral-
ists argued in favor of social science conceptualization, quantification of variables 
when possible, formal hypothesis testing, and causal model building in the study of 
political processes or patterns of behavior. 
 The earlier debates have been overtaken by new challenges to the dominance in 
the social sciences of scientific or “positivist” methods borrowed from the natural 
sciences. Following the German scholar Max Weber (1864–1920), we probe what 
Weber meant by the term  Verstehen —the interpretive understandings that also un-
derlie much of the theoretical work in the IR field. Approaches drawing on history 
and Marxist insights have been the subject of much discussion in certain journals 
in the field, contributing as well to the growing literature on postcolonialism. Such 
work continues to raise the issue of not just what is studied, but how it is studied.  
EPISTEMOLOGY, METHODOLOGY, AND ONTOLOGY 
 Before one attempts to define  theory , it is important to consider three pre-theoretical 
or “how” issues that directly influence the approach one takes to international 
relations. Often unacknowledged by theorists are the issues of  epistemology and 
 ontology. If one is to be theoretically self-conscious, one needs to engage in some 

Epistemology, Methodology, and Ontology 
3
reflection on what these terms mean.  Epistemology involves the ways and means 
by which we come to know something (or at least what we think we know) about 
the world. For example, a popular epistemology is  empiricism —the view that 
the only grounds for making truth claims is through direct observation of the 
world using our senses. Alternative epistemologies to empiricism exist as reflected 
in  constructivism, critical theory, postmodernist, and feminist approaches to IR 
theory (interpretive understandings discussed in subsequent chapters). 
 Positivism, which, depending on the scholar, has been categorized variously as 
an epistemology, methodology, or combination of the two, dominates IR theoriz-
ing and is reflected in the images chapters of this book. Positivism consists of four 
underlying implicit assumptions or beliefs: 
 1.  the unity of the natural and social sciences—we can study society as we study 
the natural world;  
 2.  we can draw a distinction analytically between facts and values;  
 3.  regularities exist and can be identified in the social as well as the natural 
world; and  
 4.  empirical validation or falsification is the hallmark of “real” inquiry.  
 Positivism specifically endorses the use of formal  hypothesis testing or causal mod-
eling as  methodologies —modes of research and analysis or a set of rules for the 
actual practice of investigating IR. This may involve quantitative (use of statistics 
and mathematical equations) or nonquantitative, so-called qualitative, methods 
(such as employing in-depth case and comparative case studies) to test empirically 
the hypotheses we generate. Very often when one hears the term  scientific method, 
the reference is to positivism with the focus on that which is observable, empirical, 
and measurable. This is a convention we will adopt in this book. 
 Ontology refers to how each of us views the world—how we see or understand 
the essence of things around us. Are there, for example, actual structures out there 
that influence the behavior of actors? If so, is it a material structure consisting of 
capabilities such as weapons, troops, and economic resources? Or can we also 
conceive of structure as consisting of internationally shared ideas, beliefs, and 
norms? Is what we observe caused, facilitated, or impeded by these material or 
ideational structures (for example, distribution of power or cultures) external to 
the actors or within which they are immersed? What is the ontology or our view of 
these actors? If they are states, do we see them acting as if they were like rational 
individuals? Do we assume these actors are more important in explaining IR than 
the structures? 
 Do we see events or outcomes as effects having discoverable causes? Or can we, 
by contrast, see events as largely random occurrences? Do we see (or come to see) 
 human beings important as individuals, or do we instead look to larger groups or 
aggregations of people to find social meaning? Does the individual have a distinct 
identity, or is the concept of “self” a function of relationships with others and the 
environment within which one is immersed? Do human beings have the capacity to 
think and act freely, or are their actions and even their thoughts externally influ-
enced or even determined? Do we see things in good-and-evil terms and thus have 
a propensity to draw moral distinctions? Or do we see what we observe if not from 
a morally neutral, then a more or less morally indifferent position? 

4
CHAPTER 1
Thinking About IR Theory
 The answers to such questions have profound consequences on one’s scholar-
ship and even the way we lead our lives. For example, one liberal IR theorist, the 
late Ernst Haas, described how his work was influenced by an ontological orien-
tation that “avoided fixed dogmas and unchanging universal values” and “high-
lighted human agency over other causal forces.”  1  Another liberal theorist, James 
Rosenau, sees some of us as ontologically more prone to engage in theorizing than 
others. In his article appended to this chapter, Rosenau states that one’s being “able 
to assume that human affairs are founded on an underlying order”—an ontological 
predisposition—is essential to thinking theoretically. 
 For their part, the ontologies Kenneth Waltz and many other realists bring to 
the IR field provide a darker view of the reality they are prone to see, a dimmer 
view of human beings and their potential than liberals typically hold. It is a tradi-
tion steeped in the thought of Thucydides, Machiavelli, Hobbes, and even James 
Madison and Alexander Hamilton—the latter two agreeing in the  Federalist Papers 
on the term  depravity to describe the human condition or the natural state in which 
human beings find themselves. Given such underlying ontologies, the realist image 
not surprisingly is of a world of competition among self-oriented states as principal 
actors with different interests and different capabilities or power they bring to bear 
in the pursuit of these interests. 
 Waltz describes liberals, by contrast, as (mis)informed by taking the ontologi-
cal position that “harmony is the natural condition” for human beings, dismiss-
ing dissension and strife as supposedly arising from “mistaken belief, inadequate 
knowledge, and defective governance.”  2  Economic structuralists share with realists 
a dim view of present reality, but one in which exploitation and victimization are 
the operative words to describe the human condition.  Dialectical materialism is an 
example of a theoretical idea drawn from a Marxist, materialist ontology. Eco-
nomic structuralists vary in their assessments of the future course and effects on the 
human condition of this historical mechanism. The future may be different from the 
present and the past. This guarded level of optimism is also evident in the English 
School where scholars who combine both realist and liberal (Grotian or Kantian) 
influences write of an international (or even world) society still under construction. 
 The ontologies we bring to the IR field influence the imagery we construct. 
 Images are general perspectives on international relations and world politics that 
consist of certain assumptions about key actors and processes that influence our 
theorizing. There is a fine line between how we understand the essence of things 
(for example, the condition or nature of human beings and the degree to which 
human beings as agents matter) and the images we have of international or world 
politics. To say ontologies and images are related, however, is not to say they are 
the same things.  
WHAT IS THEORY? 
 The word  theory also means different things to different people. It may even mean 
different things to the same person. In common parlance, for example, something 
may be true “in theory” but not in fact or in a particular case or set of circumstances. 
In this rather loose usage, “in theory” equates to “in principle” or “in the abstract.” 

What Is Theory? 
5
Explanation and Prediction 
 Another meaning, more consistent with usage in this volume, views theory as 
simply a way of making the world or some part of it more intelligible or better 
understood. Theories dealing with international relations aspire to achieve this 
goal. Making things more intelligible may, of course, amount to nothing more 
than better or more precise description of the things we observe. Although accurate 
description is essential, theory is something more. 
 For many people with a scientific or positivist bent, theory involves explanation. 
One goes beyond mere description of phenomena observed and engages in causal 
explanation based on certain prior occurrences or conditions. To assume this is pos-
sible is an ontological assumption about reality or “the world out there.” Explanation 
from the positivist perspective involves establishing the phenomenon it explains as 
something that was to be expected in the circumstances in which it occurred. This is 
what Carl Hempel terms the “requirement of explanatory relevance.” Information is 
explanatory only if it “affords good grounds for believing that the phenomenon to be 
explained does, or did, indeed occur. This condition must be met if we are to be en-
titled to say ‘that explains it—the phenomenon in question was indeed to be expected 
under the circumstances.’” This information will include one or more laws, as without 
a knowledge of regularities or patterns in IR, we couldn’t expect certain happenings 
at particular times.  3  
 How do we identify these laws? The preferred positivist method is through 
the development of  hypotheses —a proposition relating two or more  variables. 
Thus, whenever  A is present, then  B can be expected to follow. “If  A , then  B ” as 
hypothesis may be subject to empirical test—that is, tested against real-world or 
factual data to determine its law-like quality. “If states engage in arms races, then 
the likelihood of war increases” is an example of such an hypothesis. Alternatively 
hypotheses can be stated in a “most likely” and “least likely” format. For example, 
“the stronger the leading sea power’s relative capability position, the less likely it 
is that other great powers will balance against it.”  4  Indeed, formal statement and 
testing of hypotheses through the use of a statistical methodology is seen by many 
positivists as central to the theory-building process. Resultant laws or law-like 
statements, therefore, allow IR theorists to make at least tentative predictions about 
possible outcomes in IR: “Given these circumstances as validated by our tested 
hypotheses, we can expect X, Y, or Z.” 
 The primary research strategy that entails invoking laws in a scientific expla-
nation can be called a generalizing or  covering-law approach. Many realists and 
liberals are rooted in this tradition, seeking covering laws of such phenomena as 
war, deterrence, cooperation, and economic integration. The event to be explained 
is an instance of a certain type of event that follows regularly from the conditions 
specified. Jack Snyder, for example, has addressed the important question of why 
the Cold War ended peacefully. His explanation involved establishing the laws and 
initial conditions that would lead one to believe that given these circumstances, the 
peaceful collapse of the Soviet empire was to be expected. He posits that expan-
sionist myths coupled with, among other factors, the timing of industrialization 
provide a framework for understanding the type of collapse experienced by the 
Soviet Union.  5  Such factors could be applied to other cases. 

6
CHAPTER 1
Thinking About IR Theory
 Another example of positivist social science at work is the ambitious effort of 
Kenneth Waltz to offer a more formal theory of international politics to explain 
general tendencies and patterns of behavior among states. To Waltz, “theories 
explain laws.” Waltz identifies a power-based structure of the international system 
that purportedly explains the behavior of states as the system’s principal actors. 
Having stated “the theory being tested,” one proceeds to 
 infer hypotheses from it; subject the hypotheses to experimental or observational 
tests; . . . use the definitions of terms found in the theory being tested; eliminate or 
control perturbing variables not included in the theory under test; devise a number 
of distinct and demanding tests; if a test is not passed, ask whether the theory flunks 
completely, needs repair and restatement, or requires a narrowing of the scope of 
its explanatory claims.  6  
 The commitment to positivism is clear in the last comment that underscores the 
importance of falsifiability in the testing of theories. 
 While the covering-law strategy is the most popular for those operating within 
the positivist framework, there is also a  reconstructive positivist strategy. In this 
case, no attempt is made to place the phenomenon under investigation into a larger 
class. Rather, the event is explained as the expected endpoint of a concrete histori-
cal  sequence, not as an instance of category A, B, or C. Reconstructive explanations 
also rely on laws, but these are not covering laws but rather component laws—each 
pertains only to a part of the pathway that led to the event or phenomenon being ex-
plained. For example, like Snyder, William Wohlforth attempts to explain the peaceful 
collapse of the Soviet empire. He does not, however, attempt to “cover” Soviet behavior 
by showing how we would expect it to be such given the circumstances. Instead he 
details the sequence of events leading up to the collapse of the Soviet empire. The 
behavior to be explained emerges from this analysis and historical reconstruction.  7  
 In terms of methodology and methods, therefore, some IR scholars prefer a 
research strategy that relies on the formal construction of hypotheses and theories. 
These may be tested, for example, through the application of statistical methods. 
Others prefer to rely on nonquantitative indicators or case and comparative case 
studies, historical methods, and reasoned argument—the so-called traditional or 
qualitative approaches to theory building.  8  
 Whatever differences international relations scholars might have among them-
selves, those with a positivist or scientific commitment tend to agree on one thing: 
Theory is necessary and unavoidable when it comes to explaining and attempting to 
foresee or predict future outcomes. Because as human beings we are subjective crea-
tures who see and make sense of the world around us from different points of view, 
even such scientifically oriented scholars approach their subject matter with diverse 
perspectives, paradigms,  research programs,  9  theoretical constructs, or images. It 
is the theory and hypotheses or propositions we are holding (or challenging) that 
tell us what to focus on and what to ignore in making sense of the world around 
us. Without theory, we would be overwhelmed and immobilized by an avalanche 
of mere facts or occurrences around us. In short, the sense we make of what we 
observe is informed by both the perspectives and theories we hold. 
 In this admittedly positivist understanding, a  theory is an intellectual construct 
composed of a set of interrelated propositions that help one to identify or select 

What Is Theory? 
7
facts and interpret them, thus facilitating explanation and prediction concerning the 
regularities and recurrences or repetitions of observed phenomena. One certainly 
can think theoretically when it comes to explaining foreign policy processes in 
general or the foreign policy of a particular state. International relations theorists, 
however, tend as well to be interested in patterns of behavior  among diverse state 
and non-state actors acting internationally or globally. In identifying patterns, the 
stage is set for making modest predictions about the possible nature and direction 
of change. To think theoretically, however, is not to engage in point predictions—
“ A will attack  B the first week of the year”—however much foreign policy, national 
security, and intelligence analysts may aspire to such precision. 
 To think theoretically, therefore, is to be interested in central tendencies. As 
James Rosenau notes in his article appended to this chapter, the theorist views each 
event as an instance of a more encompassing class or pattern of phenomena. Fitting 
pieces into a larger whole makes theory building analogous to puzzle solving. In 
fact, for many theorists, the goal is not merely explanation of patterns of behavior, 
but explanations of patterns that at first glance seem counterintuitive or different 
from what one might expect. 
 War poses a most important puzzle for IR theorists. Why does the phenom-
enon persist even though wars are extremely costly in terms of lives and treasure 
lost? Quincy Wright’s  A Study of War and Lewis Richardson’s  Statistics of Deadly 
Quarrels were pioneering efforts at trying to solve this puzzle through the use of sta-
tistical methods or causal modeling. Bruce Bueno de Mesquita’s  The War Trap and 
John Vasquez’s  The War Puzzle are also examples of work in this genre. Examples 
of continuing efforts to build better theory by using reasoned argument, histori-
cal and comparative cases, or other non-quantitative, qualitative methods include 
Kenneth Waltz’s classic  Man, the State and War , Michael Howard’s  The Causes 
of Wars , Stephen Walt’s  Revolution and War , Michael Doyle’s  Ways of War and 
Peace , and Stephen Van Evera’s  Causes of War . 
 Theory in a formal, positivist sense specifies relations among variables and ide-
ally would weigh them with the precision one finds in an algebraic equation. Such 
fully developed theory is less common in the social sciences and certainly not in IR; 
even positivists wedded to scientific modes of inquiry confess to be operating at a 
lesser level of theoretical development than are the natural sciences. 
 General theories that strive to provide a complete account of the causes of war 
or other phenomena are less common than partial, or middle-range, theories that 
are more modest in the scope of what is to be explained or predicted. Part of the war 
puzzle addressed by such middle-range theorists, for example, involves crises and de-
cision making in crises. Are partial theories like building blocks that can at some future 
date be assembled into a fully developed, general theory of war? Some theorists would 
say yes and that the most productive enterprise for the present is the development of 
better middle-range theories. 
 Not everyone would agree. Partial or middle-range theories have tended to 
be essentially non-additive—they are merely islands of theory without bridges to 
connect them into a coherent whole. Even if such connections might be made, the 
result would probably undercut the social science goal of developing theories that 
are parsimonious—explaining a great deal of behavior through the use of relatively 
few concepts. Theories that lack parsimony by definition contain too many factors 

8
CHAPTER 1
Thinking About IR Theory
or variables—quickly becoming as complex as or more complex than the reality 
they purport to explain. If practically everything is portrayed as a cause, then has 
anything really been found to explain or predict what we observe?  
Abstraction and Application 
 The world of theory is an abstract one. Theories may actually exist apart from 
facts. Mathematical theorists, for example, deal entirely in the realm of abstraction, 
whether or not their work has direct relevance to problems of the world in which 
we live. Practical application for the work of mathematical theorists is sometimes 
found years later, if ever. From the positivist perspective, however, empirically based 
theories in the social or natural sciences, by contrast, relate to facts and provide 
explanation or prediction for observed phenomena. Hypotheses associated with 
these theories are subject to test against real-world data. The theorist need not have 
any purpose in developing such empirical theories other than satisfying his or her 
intellectual curiosity, although many will seek to make their work “policy relevant.” 
 Policy-relevant theories may have explicit purposes that stem from the value 
preferences of the theorist, such as reducing the likelihood of war or curbing the 
arms race. Acting on such theories, of course, is the domain of the policymaker, a 
task separate from that of the empirical theorist. Theorists who become policymak-
ers may well make choices informed by what theories say will be the likely out-
comes of implementing one or another alternative. Their choices may be informed 
by empirical theory or understandings of world events, but the decisions they make 
are still heavily based on value preferences. 
 As noted at the outset of this section, a common dismissive attitude toward theory 
is that while something may be true “in theory,” it doesn’t apply to the real world. For 
reasons discussed above, this is a very short-sighted view. Theory is actually a way 
to become engaged in an increasingly globalized world that goes beyond today’s 
headlines. Theory can help us cut through the blizzard of information we are all faced 
with on a daily basis. Reflecting on his life’s work theorizing in the international rela-
tions field, Kenneth Waltz speaks for many theorists with a positivist orientation to IR, 
confidently telling us that “from theory all else follows.” He adds that “theory explains 
and may at times anticipate or predict outcomes.” In this regard, “a political theory, if it 
is any good, not only explains international outcomes, but also provides clues to situ-
ations and actions that may produce more of the desired and fewer of the undesired 
ones.”  10  Put another way, there is nothing so practical as a good theory.  
Levels of Analysis 
 Let us assume one is interested in theorizing about the causes of war. Where should 
one focus one’s initial efforts? Does one deal with individual decisionmakers or 
small groups of individuals engaged in the policy process? How important, for 
example, are such factors as the correctness of individual perceptions or bargain-
ing skill in determining the decision to go to war? On the other hand, if one looks 
outside the individual or small decision-making group to the entire state apparatus, 
society as a whole, or the international political system of states, one is acknowledg-
ing the importance of external or environmental factors as well. 

What Is Theory? 
9
 The  levels of analysis constitute a framework designed to organize and assist in 
systematic thinking about IR. We differentiate the term  levels of analysis (individual 
or group, state and society, and “system” as a whole) from  units of analysis, the 
latter referring to states, organizations, individuals or groups, classes, and other en-
tities. What one is trying to explain or study (such as the outbreak of war) is known 
as the  dependent variable. Factors at different levels of analysis we suspect as being 
causally related to what we are trying to explain typically are termed  independent 
variables. Thus, we can look both “inside” the state as principal unit of analysis 
in a search for explanatory factors at individual or group and societal levels and 
“outside” the state to take account of factors that causally affect its actions and 
interactions with other states at an international “system” level. Work by Kenneth 
N. Waltz in the 1950s on the causes of war represented a path-breaking effort due 
to his identification of distinct levels of analysis and his attempt to specify the rela-
tions among these levels. Was the cause of war (the dependent variable) to be found 
in the nature of individuals? (Are humans innately aggressive?) Or in the nature of 
states and societies? (Are some types of states more aggressive than others?) Or in 
the nature of the international system of states? (Is anarchy a “permissive” cause 
of war, there being no obstacle to the use of force by sovereign states in a world 
without central governance?) 
 Each answer reflects a different level of analysis—individual (or group of indi-
viduals), state and society, or international (see  Figure   1.1  ). In 1961, the importance 
of the question of levels of analysis to the study of international relations was further 
discussed in detail in a then often-cited article by J. David Singer. Singer argued that 
one’s choice of a particular level of analysis determines what one will and will not 
see. Different levels tend to emphasize different actors, structures, and processes.  11  
 For example, it is quite common in IR for the levels of analysis to include 
(1) the international system (distribution of power among states, geography, technol-
ogy, and other factors), the capitalist world system (economic structuralists) or an 
 international or world society composed of rules, norms, state and non-state actors 
(the  English School); (2) the state (often treated as a unified actor) and domestic 
or  national society (democratic, authoritarian, etc.); (3) groups as in bureaucratic 
politics and group dynamics—the domain of social psychology; and (4) individuals 
as in psychology, perception, and belief systems. It is also quite typical for these vari-
ous levels to be used to explain the foreign policy behavior of states—the dependent 
variable. The state, in other words, is often the unit of analysis, and explaining its 
behavior could entail taking into account factors at all of these levels of analysis. 
 But  which level of analysis, one may ask, is most important? To take a spe-
cific example, let us assume that the foreign policies of most states exhibit relative 
constancy, or slowness to change. How is this constancy to be explained? Some 
scholars point to external or exogenous factors such as the distribution or balance 
of power among states that is relatively slow to change in any major way. Still 
others instead look internally within the state to the interpretive understandings of 
decisionmakers that may exhibit constancy due to shared world views they hold or 
approaches they take—incremental or small changes being the rule. 
 Another example: How are arms races explained? Some scholars point to interna-
tional factors such as the military expenditures and hostility of other states as well as 
competition between alliances that lead to an increase in the production of weapons. 

S
t
a
t
e
/
S
o
c
i
e
t
y
I
n
t
e
r
n
a
ti
o
n
a
l/
G
l
o
b
a
l
Individuals/ 
Group
Individual Level (domain of psychology)
 
Human nature and psychology
 
Leaders and beliefs systems
 
Personality of leaders
 
Cognition and perception or misperception
Group Level (domain of social psychology)
Government bureaucracies
 
Policymaking groups
 
Interest groups
 
Other non-governmental organizations
State and Societal (or National) Level
 
Governmental 
 
 
Structure and nature of political system
 
 
Policymaking process
 
Societal (domain of sociology)
 
 
Structure of economic system
 
 
Public opinion
 
 
Nationalism and ethnicity
 
 
Political culture
 
 
Ideology
International—World (or Global) Level   
 
Anarchic quality of international or world politics
 
Number of major powers or poles
 
Distribution of power/capabilities among states
 
Economic patterns
 
Level and diffusion of technology
 
Patterns of military alliances
 
Patterns of international trade and finance
 
International organizations and regimes
 
Transnational organizations and networks
 
Global norms and international law
FIGURE 1.1 
Levels of Analysis: A More Detailed Look 
10

What Is Theory? 
11
Other researchers emphasize the importance of domestic factors such as bureaucratic 
competition between branches of the military services and budgetary processes that 
encourage a steady increase in expenditures. 
 The easy answer to the question of which level of analysis should be emphasized 
is that all levels of analysis should be considered. Such a response is not particularly 
useful, however, because it suggests that we have to study everything under the 
sun. Few scholars would even attempt such a task, and the resulting theory, if any, 
would hardly be parsimonious. Hence, a great deal of the literature on international 
relations is constantly posing the questions of  what should be examined  within each 
level of analysis, and  how actors, structures, and other factors or variables relate to 
one another across levels of analysis and over time. 
 This issue of levels of analysis also subtly pervades the images and interpretive 
understandings we identify. Neo- or structural realists, for example, note how the 
overall structure or distribution of power in the international system influences the 
behavior of states or the perceptions of decisionmakers. Hence, neorealist analysis 
emphasizes the systems level at which states act and interact in relation to each other. 
Similarly, members of the English School look to international or world society as the 
principal level of analysis, even as they are quite comfortable crossing the different 
levels of analysis in seeking explanations. Moreover, certain economic structuralists 
examine how the historical development of the capitalist world economy generates 
state actors. 
 Some constructivists argue that international structure can be conceived of 
ideationally in shared meanings, rules, and norms that facilitate or constrain the 
actions decisionmakers consider. Despite their differences, many of these scholars 
tend to start at the systems (or international, world, or global society) level of analy-
sis. Those authors associated with the liberal image examine bureaucracies, interest 
groups, and individuals—a tendency to emphasize the state-societal and individual 
levels of analysis. Some liberals and neoliberals, however, are also interested in how 
the development and spread of international norms influence state behavior—a 
global system- or world society-level focus. 
 There is a final important issue that should be mentioned in conjunction with 
the levels of analysis but that goes well beyond the latter as it raises ontological 
questions concerning the so-called  agent–structure problem. As summarized by 
one author, the problem emerges from two uncontentious claims about social life: 
first, that human agency is the only moving force behind the actions, events, and 
outcomes of the social world; and second, that human agency can be realized only 
in concrete historical circumstances that condition the possibilities for action and 
influence its course. “People make history,” observed Marx in an often-quoted 
aphorism, “but not in conditions of their own choosing.” These claims impose two 
demands on our scientific explanations: first, that they acknowledge and account 
for the power of agents; and second, that they recognize the causal relevance of 
exogenous or “structural factors”—that is, the conditions of action as decision-
makers understand them. The “agent–structure problem” refers to the difficulties 
of developing theory that successfully meets both demands.  12  
 This problem is usually viewed as a matter of ontology, the branch of meta-
physics concerned, as noted earlier, with the nature of being. In this case, the 
ontological issue deals with the nature of both agents (very often viewed as the 

12
CHAPTER 1
Thinking About IR Theory
state or other organizational unit, but also including groups or individuals acting 
in their personal capacities) and structures (as in international politics), and rela-
tions between agents and structures. As we will see in the following chapters, a 
constant theme is how authors deal with the relative importance of human agents 
and “structural factors,” and the extent to which one influences the very nature of 
the other. Put another way, we ask not only how much  voluntarism (or freedom 
of action agents have) or  determinism (the extent to which they are constrained or 
driven by structures) there actually is in the world of which we are so integral a part, 
but also in the theories we construct that purport to explain or predict phenomena 
in that world. Very often unstated, one’s position on this issue—the voluntarism 
inherent in agency and the determinism that comes from structures—heavily influ-
ences how one goes about explaining international politics as well as assessing the 
possibilities and means of peaceful change.  
IMAGES
 In Part One of this volume we identify four broad alternative images or perspectives 
(we use the terms interchangeably) of international relations: 
 1.  realism   is a term that refers to both classical and neorealism (or structural 
realism). For the realist, states are the principal or most important actors on the 
international political stage and represent the key unit of analysis. States are viewed 
as unitary actors that behave in a generally rational manner. National security is-
sues typically dominate the hierarchy of the international agenda.  
 2.  liberalism (and neoliberal institutionalism)   present a pluralist view of 
the world composed not just of states and their institutions, but also of multiple 
non-state actors to include international and nongovernmental organizations, in-
dividuals, and groups. The state is disaggregated into its component parts and is 
continually subjected to outside influences. Political-economic issues are a primary 
research focus, and hence the hierarchy of world issues is not always dominated by 
matters of military security.  
 3.  economic structuralism   identifies economic classes and other material 
structures as well as the broader emphasis on multiple mechanisms of postcolonial 
domination that maintain the Third World in a subordinate status. For the eco-
nomic structuralist, all actors must be viewed within the context of an overarch-
ing global structure. The defining characteristic of this structure is its capitalist 
nature; it must be viewed in an historical context. The more recent postcolonial 
literature provides greater understanding of the way capitalism operates now and 
in the past.  
 4.  the English School   tends to see politics occurring in an international soci-
ety in which one finds operative not only realist, material understandings of power 
and balance of power, but also the “rational” component of rules (or norms) and 
institutions. To greater and lesser degrees, all have been influenced by both empiri-
cism and positivism, yet constructivist understandings have informed more recent 
work. Drawing from both realist and liberal traditions, the English School explores 
politics, power relations, international law, rules, and institutions in an anarchic 
international society.  

Images
13
 We will examine these images and associated assumptions and concepts in 
greater detail in subsequent chapters. The image one has of international relations is 
of critical importance. Images are not theories, but they do inform substantially the 
way we see the world, thus influencing the formulation of the theories we construct 
to make better sense of the world around us. Thus, a balance-of-power theory may 
be informed by the assumptions or premises of a realist image of international rela-
tions, but the image itself does not have the standing of a theory. 
 These images, informed as they are by different ontologies or worldviews, lead 
one to ask certain questions, seek certain types of answers, and use certain method-
ological tools in the construction of theories and testing of hypotheses. The advantage 
is that such images bring order to the analytical effort and make it more manageable. 
We are the first, however, to admit that this fourfold classification scheme also has its 
limitations. Accordingly, we offer several qualifications and clarifications. 
 First, we concede that the images of IR we identify could be viewed as forms of 
(or bases for) interpretive understandings. Realism, liberalism, economic structuralism, 
and the English School are nothing more than constructs that have developed within 
the IR field, itself a construct that emerged within political science, yet another con-
struct. We need to be humble about claims relating to constructs within constructs! 
 These constructs that scholars have put together do not have an independent 
existence and, as such, are always subject to challenge. They are merely categories of 
inquiry or the bases of research programs, their value resting on the degree to which 
they make the world around us more intelligible, perhaps allowing us to explain or pre-
dict more accurately the phenomena we observe. Although the four images are heav-
ily positivist in orientation, subsequent theories that are developed may evince, to 
varying degrees, aspects of interpretive understandings we discuss in the next section. 
 Second, the images should be viewed as  ideal or  pure types in that each empha-
sizes what a number of seemingly diverse theoretical approaches have in common. 
For example, there are substantial differences in the works of Hans J. Morgenthau, 
John Mearsheimer, and Stephen Walt, to mention just a few. But these and other 
scholars nevertheless draw from the same realist traditions. What unites them as 
international relations theorists is more important for our purposes than what 
divides them. 
 Third, the overview of key assumptions of each of the four perspectives might give 
the erroneous impression that these images are mutually exclusive in all respects. This 
is not the case. Neorealists and neoliberal institutionalists, for example, both utilize 
rational actor assumptions and tend to treat the identity and interests of their constitu-
ent actors as being givens. 
 Fourth, we acknowledge a certain amount of conceptual eclecticism by scholars in 
the study of international relations, perhaps reflecting the absence of a single, domi-
nant perspective, much less a single paradigm or set of research programs. For some, 
conceptual diversity is to be applauded; for others, it is a source of despair. Be that as 
it may, our focus is primarily on ideas, trends, and both generalized images and inter-
pretive understandings of international relations and only secondarily on the work of 
particular authors. 
 Fifth, the images tend to focus more on what is studied than on  how to con-
duct such studies. Quantitative and nonquantitative methodologies transcend the 
images we have identified. Statistical methods, formal hypothesis testing, and 

14
CHAPTER 1
Thinking About IR Theory
causal modeling find their adherents within each of the perspectives, as do the 
more traditional, nonquantitative, historical, philosophical, legal, case study, and 
comparative case study methods. Our point remains that these are methods, not 
images of international relations or world politics. Images may influence the choice 
of methodology or methods employed, but they are not one and the same. 
 An image of international or world politics influences the selection of units or 
processes examined and variables identified and operationalized. Thus, for realists, 
states and state interactions are of key importance; for liberals, institutions as well as 
transnational interactions to include communications flows across national borders 
may well be the central focus; for the English School, the ways and means by which 
order is sustained and security provided in an anarchic international or world society 
are essential tasks; and for economic structuralists, patterns of class or North–South 
relations of dominance or dependence are perhaps most important. 
 Similarly, methods associated with the literature on decision making, game the-
ory, and public- or rational-choice theory—economic or rational models applied to 
political decision making—transcend the four images we identify. Assumptions made 
about actors and processes are informed by realist, liberal, English School, and eco-
nomic structuralist images and color the use a particular method is given. Thus, collec-
tive goods theory, game theory, econometrics, and other approaches identified with 
the interdisciplinary field of political economy find their adherents among scholars 
holding diverse images or other interpretive understandings and thus are not the 
exclusive preserve of realists, liberals, the English School, or economic structuralists. 
 Finally, we wish to reiterate a point made earlier—that the four images we identify 
are not theories of international relations. Rather, they represent general perspectives 
on international relations out of which particular theories may develop. Assumptions 
of an image may become part of a theory (such as the realist assumptions of a unified, 
rational, state-as-actor in some structural-realist works), but more often than not they 
simply help to orient a scholar’s research by highlighting certain units of analysis for 
investigation in the construction of a theory as well as helping to determine what con-
stitutes evidence in the testing of hypotheses.  
INTERPRETIVE UNDERSTANDINGS 
 What we term  interpretive understandings —constructivist, critical, postmodern, 
and feminist thought—share one thing in common: All have taken issue with one 
or more of the epistemological, methodological, and ontological assumptions that 
drive positivist theorizing in realism and liberalism in particular. This approach 
to knowledge assumes that what we know is based on an interpretation of what 
we think we see, alerting us to the subjective character of all human beings, the 
institutions or units they construct, and the processes in which they engage. Try as 
we might to reduce bias, we remain subjective creatures. Pursuit of objectivity and 
value-free scholarship are at best elusive goals. 
 Although, as we will see, a number of scholars have contributed to the interpretive 
understanding approach to IR, the German scholar Max Weber (1864–1920) deserves 
pride of place. Weber argued that “all knowledge of cultural reality is always knowl-
edge from particular points of view.” How research is conducted will be “determined 

Interpretive Understandings 
15
by the evaluative ideas that dominate the investigator and his age.”  13  In other words, 
each individual’s work will be influenced by a particular doctrine, image of the world, 
ideology, paradigm, theory, understanding, or perspective. 
 As a practical matter we try to identify as best we can how this subjective, human 
dimension affects our scholarship—an attempt to reduce substantially any bias that 
can adversely affect our theoretical work. Beyond that, the usual remedy is the scrutiny 
others give our work in what is inherently an inter-subjective process. As he sought to 
establish the role of ideational factors in explanation by social scientific means, Weber 
was an important early influence on interpretive understandings—particularly the 
later development of constructivism. 
 In the three chapters in Part Two, we build upon this subjective, Weberian 
tradition of  Verstehen or interpretive understanding. In  Chapter  6 we examine 
constructivism. The rise of constructivism in IR theory has been remarkably fast 
over the past twenty years, passing economic structuralism, influencing the English 
School, and challenging realism and liberalism in terms of influence on the IR field. 
Constructivism is not a theory of IR. Nor is it an image that purports to present a 
view of international relations or world politics as a whole as realism, liberalism, 
economic structuralism, and the English School all do. It is instead best character-
ized as a theoretically informed,  interpretive understanding related to the study 
of IR. As such, one can find constructivists theorizing with this “understanding” 
within any of the four images we identify. 
 While within this constructivist approach there are those who could be character-
ized as positivists who embrace empirical methods, the type of explanation they seek 
is typically not that of the deductive covering law “out there” driving the behavior of 
states or non-state actors, but rather causality that takes full account of subjective and 
inter-subjective understandings “in here” within human beings. Constructivists see 
states and non-state actors not as mere products of world politics, the international 
system, or an international or world society, but rather as actually playing a decisive 
role in shaping it. 
 These actors or agents influence (and are influenced by) the international norms 
and institutions they construct—activities that sustain or create new interests, values, 
and the ordering of foreign policy preferences. They take account of the relation be-
tween human beings and the organizations they construct as agents and the material 
and ideational structures that constitute actors and facilitate or constrain their actions. 
Most constructivists do not reject science or scientific methods associated with positiv-
ism, but caution greater humility and care in dealing with concepts that, after all, are 
of human construction. They can be viewed as occupying the middle ground between 
positivists seeking causal explanatory theory and those postmodernists or others who 
might be prone to reject any such possibility. 
 Chapter   7 takes up the ongoing debate between those committed to positivist 
science and their principal critics, the latter who draw heavily from  phenomenology 
that describes the phenomena we experience and the subjectivity that defines the 
essence of human beings. Although critical theorists tend not to reject positivism, 
they are prone to look under the cover stories governments, organizations, lead-
ers, policymakers, and even theorists use to justify their conduct—an effort to find 
the underlying power or other realities masked by these narratives. For their part, 

16
CHAPTER 1
Thinking About IR Theory
postmodernists do not focus on some “objective” reality to be discovered “out 
there,” but rather explore the ways human beings “in here” both construct or give 
meanings to objects, actions, or behaviors and employ narratives or stories that 
convey these meanings in what is essentially a subjective approach to understand-
ing. Observers cannot be fully autonomous from the objects of their study, and 
relationships cannot be divided merely into the positivist categories of “causes” 
and “effects.” 
 We take up feminism in  Chapter   8 as an interpretive understanding that 
brings us to the often overlooked or understated importance and payoffs of apply-
ing the concept of gender to IR theorizing. Feminists highlight the dominance or 
exclusivity of masculinist understandings of the world around us that, they claim, 
profoundly influence much theoretical work in the IR field. Feminist understand-
ings rest on a centuries-old body of literary and scholarly work that preceded and 
has been decidedly less-influenced by phenomenology  per se . Although critical 
theorists and postmodernists may be found among feminist scholars, some adopt 
positivist, scientific approaches albeit often informed by constructivist understand-
ings of gender, sexual identity, and related concepts. Put another way, feminist 
scholarship is inherently interpretive as it challenges theories that either ignore 
(or marginalize) gender as a variable or, conversely, misuse gender to mask other 
purposes. 
 We conclude with a word of caution on how one approaches the material in 
this book. One should be wary of sweeping criticisms concerning an entire image 
or interpretive understanding. It is not particularly difficult to find fault with the 
work of individual theorists, compile a list of their shortcomings, and then present 
the results as criticisms of the image or interpretive understanding as a whole. Such 
selectivity can be distorting and misleading. That is why it is imperative for the 
serious student of the international relations literature to go to the original sources, 
evaluate the validity of such criticisms, and assess the value of each approach as the 
basis for a mode of thinking about international relations.  
NORMATIVE THEORY 
 Part Three of this volume ( Chapter  9 ) addresses normative theory as a separate line 
of inquiry in IR that brings us to moral or ethical values rooted in human under-
standings developed over more than two millennia. Normative IR theory has impli-
cations for both interpretive understandings and the images we use to capture the 
IR field, but it also remains a domain of inquiry in its own right that deals precisely 
with values and value preferences that inform human judgment. As with empiri-
cal theories, we can scrutinize normative theories on logical grounds, looking for 
flaws in reasoning used to sustain the argument. Unlike empirical theory, however, 
propositions in normative theory are not subject to empirical tests as a means of 
establishing their truth or falsehood. 
 Normative theory deals not so much with what  is —the domain of empirical 
theory and the images and interpretive understandings associated with it—but 
rather with what  should or  ought to be . How should the world be ordered, and 
what value choices should decisionmakers take? Although the bulk of the effort in 

A Look Ahead 
17
this volume is allocated to images and interpretive understandings of IR, we con-
sider normative theory to be an important and policy-relevant, if often neglected, 
enterprise. In dealing with normative theories relevant to international relations and 
foreign policy choices, we identify normative preferences typically associated with 
the four images and interpretive understandings of international relations theory. 
 In sum, this initial chapter has provided some basic tools to help the reader 
engage the vast academic literature on international relations theory. Whether read-
ing a book or journal article, there are a number of questions to keep in mind in 
order to sort through, categorize, and compare various works. First, does the book 
or article reflect one of the underlying images or interpretive understandings? Does 
it fall within a positivist or post-positivist perspective? Can you discern, if it is not 
made explicit, the ontology, epistemology, and methodology of the authors? If a 
positivist approach, does it emphasize quantification, covering law, or an histori-
cal reconstructive strategy? What role may normative concerns play in the study? 
Such questions encourage critical thinking as opposed to simply memorizing what 
author is associated with what theory or approach.  
A LOOK AHEAD 
 We organize this volume on IR theory thematically in three parts—(1) images of 
the IR field found in realism, liberalism, the English School, and economic struc-
turalism; (2) contending interpretive understandings we identify in constructivism, 
critical theory, postmodernism, and feminism; and (3) normative theory that pre-
scribes how state and non-state actors and their agents ought to behave or conduct 
themselves, bringing attention to value-oriented, philosophical considerations that 
also inform our interpretive understandings of IR. 
 Claims to objectivity in science have been under assault by interpretive under-
standings that see the acquisition of knowledge as an essentially subjective process. 
Certain versions of constructivism adopt positivist standards for inquiry, but empha-
size subjective and inter-subjective forms of explanation. Critical, postmodern, and 
feminist critiques question various epistemological, methodological, and ontological 
aspects of all four of the images we identify. 
 A case could be made that  images (particularly realism and liberalism) can be 
represented as  interpretive understandings in their own right, as they provide con-
cepts and underlying epistemological and ontological assumptions about how the 
world works and ways to understand it. But we prefer to reserve the latter term for 
constructivist, critical theory, postmodern, and feminist understandings. This “im-
age” versus “interpretive understanding” distinction is our way of attempting to 
bring some taxonomic order to a field replete with “isms” of one kind or another. 
 Yet we must caution that such a division in particular threatens to make positivist 
approaches somewhat of a caricature. If we define positivist science as a value-free 
quest for truth, we have built a straw man relatively easy to demolish. On the other 
hand, if we add prudent caveats to positivism that make us sensitive to its subjective 
dimension, we open the door to interpretive and inter-subjective understandings of 
what we think we know. A more humble approach to “scientific” claims allows posi-
tivists to continue practicing their craft even as they must deal with critiques coming 
from other quarters.  

18
CHAPTER 1
Thinking About IR Theory
NOTES
 1.  Ernst B. Haas,  Nationalism, Liberalism and Progress , vol. 2 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 2000), 419.  
 2.  Kenneth N. Waltz, “Kant, Liberalism, and War” in Waltz,  Realism and International 
Politics (London and New York: Routledge, 2008), 3.  
 3.  What is to be explained—the explanandum—is preceded by certain explanatory sen-
tences—an explanans that “consists of general laws” and “other statements” concerning 
particular facts. Hempel applied this formalized deductive approach in the formulation 
of both universal and probabilistic lawlike statements. Carl G. Hempel,  Philosophy of 
Natural Science (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1966), 48, 51.  
 4.  Jack S. Levy and William R. Thompson, “Balancing on Land and Sea: Do States Ally 
against the Leading Global Power?  International Security 35, 1 (Summer 2010): 21. 
For examples of other hypotheses, see Michael P. Colaresi, Karen Rasler, and  William  
R. Thompson,  Strategic Rivalries in World Politics: Position, Space and Conflict Escala-
tion (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007), especially  Chapter  6 .  
 5.  Jack Snyder, “Myths, Modernization, and the Post-Gorbachev World,” in Richard Ned 
Lebow and Thomas Risse-Kappen, eds.,  International Relations Theory and the End of 
the Cold War (New York: Columbia University Press, 1995), 109–26.  
 6.  Kenneth N. Waltz,  Theory of International Politics (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
1979), 6, 13.  
 7.  The Snyder and Wohlforth examples are from David Dessler, “Constructivism Within a 
Positivist Social Science,”  Review of International Studies 25, 1 (January 1999): 129–30.  
 8.  For an overview of methods, see Stephen Van Evera,  Guide to Methods for Students of 
Political Science (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1997).  
 9.  Imre Lakatos observed that competitive “research programmes” exist in various fields of 
scholarly inquiry. See his article in  The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes: 
Philosophical Papers Vol. I, John Worrall and Gregory Currie, eds. (Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 1978), 8–10, 47–52, 70–72 and 85–93.  
 10.  Kenneth N. Waltz,  Realism and International Politics (New York and London: Rout-
ledge, 2008), vii.  
 11.  Kenneth N. Waltz,  Man, the State and War (New York: Columbia University Press, 
1959); J. David Singer, “The Level-of-Analysis Problem in International Relations,” in 
 International Politics and Foreign Policy , James N. Rosenau, ed. (New York: Free Press, 
1969), 20–29.  
 12.  David Dessler, “What’s at Stake in the Agent-Structure Debate?”  International Organi-
zation 43, 3 (Summer 1989).  
 13.  Max Weber,  Methodology of the Social Sciences , trans. and ed. E. A. Shils and H. A. Finch 
(New York: Free Press, 1949), 90–93. Cf. Max Weber,  Basic Concepts in Sociology , 
trans. H. P. Secher (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1962, 1969), 52–55.  

19
SE LECTED READI N GS 
Thinking Theory Thoroughly 
JAMES ROSENAU
OVERVIEW
 James Rosenau addresses creative theorizing and develops nine principles to 
guide those who would engage in this enterprise. Indeed, not everyone is prone 
automatically to think theoretically. Those who are (or develop this orientation 
to deal comfortably with the abstract) are genuinely puzzled by international 
phenomena, distrustful of absolutes, and tend to have a high tolerance for 
ambiguity. Constantly ready to be proven wrong, the theorist typically takes 
“a playful approach” that facilitates thinking outside the box of conventional 
understandings. Rosenau’s positivism (attempting to separate facts from values) 
is clear when he cautions us not to confuse empirical and normative or value-
oriented theorizing that exist in quite separate domains of inquiry. Further mark-
ing his positivist ontological orientation, Rosenau notes an implicit assumption 
that underlies work by theorists such as himself—that human affairs are founded 
on an underlying order.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   Can one be taught to “think theoretically”?  
 2.  According to Rosenau, some students fear that the normative values and policy goals they 
want to promote will be undermined if they focus on empirical, observable phenomena. What 
is his reponse to this concern and what is your assessment of his reply?  
 3.  How important is it to have a concise and specific definition of theory, something we have 
attempted to achieve in this chapter?  
 4.  How would scholars working from an interpretive understanding perspective critique 
Rosenau’s argument?  
 It rarely happens, but now and again in academic 
life one is jolted into returning to fundamentals, into 
ascertaining whether one has unknowingly strayed 
from one’s organizing premises. This happened 
to me recently when a graduate student inquired 
whether she should take an “independent reading” 
course under my direction. Noting that my compe-
tence was limited, I responded by asking what topics 
James N. Rosenau,  The Scientific Study of Foreign Policy, rev. ed. London: Frances Pinter, 1980, 19–31. Reprinted 
by permission.

20
JAMES ROSENAU
or problems she planned to investigate. Her answer 
startled me, perhaps partly because it was ungram-
matical but mainly because I found it pedagogically 
challenging. Her answer was simple: “I would like 
you to teach me to think theory!” I agreed to take 
on the role of advisor. 
 At this writing, some eleven weeks, many con-
versations and much reflection later, I still find the 
assignment challenging, though now I am begin-
ning to wonder whether the capacity to think theo-
retically, the inclination to perceive and assess the 
course of events as suggestive or expressive of larger 
forces, is a talent that can be taught. It may be, in-
stead, a cast of mind, a personality trait, or a philo-
sophical perspective that some acquire early in life 
and others do not. 
 If this is so, there is not much that a profes-
sor can do to teach students how to think theo-
retically. They can be introduced to the nature of 
theories, taught the various purposes theories can 
serve,  exposed to the controversies over the rela-
tive worth of different theories, and instructed on 
the steps required for the construction of viable 
theories. And, to solidify the learning of these les-
sons, they can then be given assignments in which 
they have to formulate concrete hypotheses and tie 
them together into an actual theoretical framework. 
The learning of these skills underlying the design of 
theories is not, however, the equivalent of learning 
how to think theoretically. Or, more accurately, it is 
not the equivalent of what I understood my student 
as wanting me to teach her. In fact, she may only 
have been asking instruction on the dos and don’ts 
of theoretical design. But because of the way she 
worded her request I interpreted her as seeking more 
than an introduction to the procedures and tech-
niques essential to creative theorizing. It seemed to 
me she was looking to acquire not a set of skills, but 
rather a set of predispositions, a cluster of habits, 
a way of thinking, a mental lifestyle—or whatever 
may be the appropriate label for that level of intel-
lectual existence that governs the use of skills and 
the application of values—that she did not possess 
and that she thought she valued enough to want to 
make part of her orientation toward international 
phenomena. It is this more fundamental dimension 
of the life of the mind that I now suspect may not be 
teachable or learnable, a caveat that needs emphasis 
at the outset because the ensuing analysis amounts 
to nothing less than a pronouncement on how to 
think theoretically. 
Nine Pre-Conditions 
for Creative Theorizing 
 It follows that the task of disciplining ourselves 
and our students to think theoretically consists, 
first, of identifying the cognitive inclinations and 
perceptual impulses from which creative theory 
springs and, second, of then forming intellectual 
habits which assure the prevalence of these incli-
nations and impulses whenever we turn to theory-
building endeavors. The central question examined 
in this paper follows: what are the mental qualities 
that best enable one to “think theory” and how 
can their acquisition be best assured? Nine such 
qualities strike me as especially conducive to the 
development of good theorists. Each of the nine 
seems equally important and there is some overlap 
among them. Accordingly, the sequence of their 
elaboration here should not be interpreted as im-
plying a rank ordering. 
 To think theoretically one has to avoid treating the 
task as that of formulating an appropriate defini-
tion of theory.  
 So as to clarify what is involved in thinking theo-
retically, let me start with the proposition that the 
task is not one of developing a clear-cut definition of 
theory. On balance, it is probably preferable to have a 
precise conception of the nature of theory rather than 
a vague one, but definitional exactness is not the only 
criterion of thinking theoretically and it may not even 
be a necessary requirement for such thought. I can 
readily imagine a young student thinking theoreti-
cally about international phenomena well before his 
or her first course on the subject turns to the ques-
tion of what constitutes theory and the various uses 
to which it can be put. Indeed, I have had the good 
fortune of encountering a few students who were, 
so to speak, born theoreticians. From their very first 
comments in class as freshmen it was clear that they 
thought theoretically even though they have never 
had any methodological training or any exposure to 
the history of international relations. 
 Most of us are not so lucky. Most of us have to 
be trained to think theoretically and then we have 
to engage in the activity continuously in order to 
achieve and sustain a genuinely theoretical perspec-
tive. Hence, the fact that a few among us can main-
tain such a perspective without training and practice 
is a useful reminder that definitional clarity is not a 
prerequisite to creative theorizing. 

Thinking Theory Thoroughly 
21
 The reminder is important because many of us 
tend to exaggerate the importance of exact defini-
tions. To be clear about the nature of theory is not 
to guarantee the formulation of meaningful theory. 
Such clarity can be misleading. It can provide a false 
sense of security, a misguided confidence that one 
needs only to organize one’s empirical materials 
in the proper way if one is equipped with a clear-
cut definition of theory. It is my impression that 
much of the writing in our field derives from this 
premise that good definitions automatically yield 
good theories, as if the definitions somehow relieve 
the observer of the need to apply imagination and 
maintain philosophical discipline. 
 To be sure, much of the writing also suffers 
from loose and ambiguous conceptions of theory 
or from a confusion between theory and method. 
Such research would, obviously, be more valuable 
if it proceeded from a tighter and clearer notion of 
what the theoretical enterprise entails. So, to repeat, 
I am not arguing against definitional clarity. On the 
contrary, I believe it is highly appropriate to help 
students achieve such clarity by introducing them to 
the vast array of articles and books now available 
on the dynamics, boundaries, uses, and abuses of 
theory in the international field. But I am arguing 
for more than definitional clarity. I am arguing for 
caution and restraint in the use of definitions: in di-
gesting the literature on theory and building a more 
elaborate conception of what it involves, one has to 
be careful not to lean too heavily on definitions and 
guidance. Also needed is a cast of mind, a mental 
set that focuses application of the definitions and 
facilitates creative theorizing. 
 To think theoretically one has to be clear as to 
whether one aspires to empirical theory or value 
theory. 
 Progress in the study of international affairs 
depends on advances in both empirical and value 
theory. But the two are not the same. They may 
overlap; they can focus on the same problem; and 
values always underlie the selection of the problems 
to which empirical theories are addressed. Yet they 
differ in one overriding way: empirical theory deals 
essentially with the “is” of international phenomena, 
with things as they are if and when they are subjected 
to observation, while value theory deals essentially 
with the “ought” of international phenomena, with 
things as they should be if and when they could be 
subjected to manipulation. This distinction underlies, 
in turn, entirely different modes of reasoning, a differ-
ent rhetoric, and different types of evidence. 
 The habit of making the necessary analytic, 
rhetorical, and evidential distinctions between em-
pirical and value theory can be difficult for young 
students to develop. Indeed, it can be weak and 
elusive for any of us who have strong value commit-
ments and a deep concern for certain moral ques-
tions. The more intensive are our values, the more 
are we tempted to allow our empirical inquiries to 
be guided by our  beliefs rather than by our concern 
for observation. For this reason I have found that 
helping students become habituated to the is-ought 
distinction is among the most difficult pedagogical 
tasks. They can understand the distinction intellec-
tually and they can even explain and defend it when 
pressed; but practicing it is another matter and often 
their empirical analyses slip into moral judgments 
without their being aware of it. It is as if they some-
how fear that their values and the policy goals they 
want to promote will be undermined if they  allow 
themselves to focus on observable phenomena. Such, 
of course, is not the case. On the contrary, moral 
values and policy goals can be well served, even 
best served, by putting them aside and proceeding 
detachedly long enough to enlarge empirical under-
standing of the obstacles that hinder realization of 
the values and progress toward the goals. 
 This is the one line of reasoning on behalf of 
thinking theoretically that my most value-committed 
students find persuasive. If empirical theory is pos-
ited as a tool of moral theory, they can approach it 
instrumentally and see virtue in habituating them-
selves to distinguishing between the two. It takes 
a while, however, before the perceived virtues of 
habituation are translated into actual habits and, 
in fact, some never manage to make the transition, 
hard as they may try. Impatient with the need for 
change, convinced that time is too scarce to afford 
the slow pace of empirical inquiry, many simply give 
up and dismiss the is-ought distinction as one of 
those picayune obsessions to which some academics 
fall prey. 
 It is my impression that impatience with empiri-
cal theorizing is likely to be especially intense among 
Third World students of international relations. The 
newly developed consciousness of the longstand-
ing injustices built into First World–Third World 
relationships, the lure of dependency theory, and 
perhaps a frustration over the central tendencies of 
social science in the First World have made Third 

22
JAMES ROSENAU
World theorists particularly resistant to detached 
empirical theorizing. Their resistance gives a First 
World scholar pause: is his insistence on habituat-
ing oneself to the is-ought distinction yet another 
instance of false superiority, of projecting onto the 
developing world practices that have worked in in-
dustrial societies? It could be. Of late I have become 
keenly aware of the biases that may underlie my 
intellectual endeavors and thus I am not prepared 
merely to brush aside the idea that the is-ought dis-
tinction maybe inappropriate to theorizing in much 
of the world. In this particular instance, however, I 
cannot even begin to break the habit. The relevance 
of the distinction strikes me as global, as indepen-
dent of any national biases, as necessary to think-
ing theoretically wherever and whenever enlarged 
comprehension is sought. Empirical theory is not 
superior to moral theory; it is simply preferable 
for certain purposes, and one of these is the end of 
deepening our grasp of why international processes 
unfold as they do. 
 Aware that my own expertise, such as it may 
be, lies in the realm of empirical theory, the ensuing 
discussion makes no pretense of being relevant to 
thinking theoretically in the moral context. All the 
precepts that follow are concerned only with those 
mental qualities that may render us more thorough-
going in our empirical theorizing. 
 To think theoretically one must be able to assume 
that human affairs are founded on an underlying 
order.  
 A prime task of empirical theory is to explain 
why international phenomena are structured as they 
are and/or behave as they do. To perform this task 
one must assume that each and every international 
phenomenon is theoretically explicable, that deeper 
understanding of its dynamics could be achieved if 
appropriate instruments for measuring it were avail-
able. To assume that everything is potentially expli-
cable is to presume that nothing happens by chance, 
capriciously, at random, that for every effect there 
must be a cause. That is, there must be an underlying 
order out of which international relations springs. If 
this were not the case, if events could occur for no 
reason, there would be little point in theorizing. If 
some events are inherently inexplicable, efforts to 
build creative theory are bound to fall short to the 
extent that they embrace phenomena that may occur 
at random. Indeed, in the absence of the assumption 
of an underlying order, attempts to fashion theory 
are futile, pointless exercises, a waste of time that 
could be better spent writing poetry, playing tennis, 
or tending the garden. 
 This is  not to say that thought only acquires the 
status of theory when it purports to account for ev-
ery event. As indicated below, theory is also founded 
on the laws of probability. Hence it only purports 
to account for central tendencies, but this claim is 
unwarranted if an assumption of underlying order 
is not made. That is, to think theoretically one must 
presume that there is a cause for every effect even 
though one does not seek to explain every effect. 
 I have found that most students have a dif-
ficult time becoming habituated to the assumption 
of an underlying order. They see it as a denial of 
their own freedom. To presume there is a cause for 
everything, they reason, is to deprive people of free 
will, perhaps even to relieve them of responsibility 
for their actions. The assumption of an underlying 
order does not, of course, have such implications. 
One’s freedom of choice is not lessened by the fact 
that the choices made are not random and, instead, 
derive from some source. Yet, fearful about compro-
mising their own integrity, many students cannot 
accept this subtlety and insist on the premise that 
people have the capacity to cut themselves off from 
all prior experience and to act as they please for no 
reason whatsoever. To support their resistance to 
the assumption of an underlying order, they will 
often cite instances of international history when 
the unexpected occurred or when a highly deviant, 
impetuous, and irrational action was undertaken, as 
if somehow irrationality and impetuosity are capri-
cious and do not stem from any sources. 
 Besides patiently reassuring dubious students 
that there are no insidious threats in the assump-
tion of an underlying order, resistance to the idea 
can be lessened, even broken in some instances, by 
pointing out how the assumption offers hope for 
greater understanding and deeper comprehension. 
To presume that there is a cause of every effect is 
to assume that everything is potentially knowable, 
that inquiry can pay off, that one is not necessarily 
destined to go down an intellectual path that dead 
ends, leads nowhere. The assumption of an under-
lying order, in other words, is pervaded with hope. 
We do not make it to allow ourselves to be hopeful, 
but it has that consequence. It enables us to view 
ourselves as totally in charge of our own investi-
gations, limited only by our imaginations and the 
resources at our disposal. It allows us to  approach 

Thinking Theory Thoroughly 
23
the chaos we perceive in the world around us as 
a challenge, as an orderliness that has yet to be 
identified and traced. It permits us to dare to think 
theory thoroughly because the affairs of people are 
patterned and the patterns are susceptible to being 
uncovered. 
 To think theoretically one must be predisposed to 
ask about every event, every situation, or every ob-
served phenomenon, “Of what is it an instance?”  
 Of all the habits one must develop to think 
theoretically, perhaps none is more central than 
the inclination to ask this question at every oppor-
tunity. It must be a constant refrain, a melody that 
haunts every lurch forward in the process of moving 
from observations to conclusions. For to see every 
event as an instance of a more encompassing class 
of phenomena is to sustain the search for patterns 
and to avoid treating any phenomenon as inherently 
unique. To think theoretically is to be at home with 
abstractions, to generalize, to discern the underlying 
order that links otherwise discrete incidents, and 
such a mode of thinking cannot be achieved and 
maintained unless every observed phenomenon is 
approached as merely one instance of a recurring 
sequence. 
 Again students appear to have a hard time 
building up this habit. They are inclined to probe 
for the special meaning of an event, to explore it 
for what sets it apart from all other events, rather 
than to treat it as an instance of a larger pattern. 
They want to understand the Iranian revolution, 
not revolutions as a social process, and to the ex-
tent this is their preference, to that extent do they 
resist building up the impulse to always reach for 
more general theoretical insights. Indeed, I have 
had many students who simply do not know where 
to begin when asked to indicate of what pattern 
some event they regard as important is an instance. 
Their faces turn blank and their tongues turn  silent. 
They are paralyzed. They do not know what it 
means to treat the event as merely an instance of 
something, as just part of a larger category. And so 
they stumble, mumble, or otherwise resist thinking 
in those elementary terms out of which theorizing 
springs. 
 My response here is twofold. First, I try to 
portray the pleasure, the sheer joy, to be had from 
taking steps up the ladder of abstraction. Fitting 
pieces into larger wholes offers, I believe, a special 
sense of satisfaction, a feeling of accomplishment 
not unlike that which accompanies solving a puzzle 
or resolving a mystery. Indeed, theory building can 
readily be viewed as puzzle solving, as uncovering 
the dynamics embedded deep in the interstices of 
human relationships, and there are few students 
who are not intrigued by the challenge of solving 
puzzles. 
 If appealing thus to the curiosity of students 
does not succeed in getting them to ask habitually 
“Of what is this an instance?” (and often it is not 
a sufficient incentive), I revert to a second line of 
reasoning which, in effect, amounts to an attempt 
to shame them into the habit. This involves pointing 
out the implications of stumbling and mumbling, 
of not being able to discern any larger class of 
phenomena of which the observed phenomenon is 
an instance. The implications are unmistakable: to 
be paralyzed by the question “Of what is this an 
instance?” is not to know what one is interested 
in, to be lacking questions that generate and guide 
one’s inquiry, to be confused by the phenomena one 
claims to be worthy of investigation. Based on the 
presumption of an underlying order, I believe that 
no phenomenon exists in isolation, unique only 
unto itself, and thus I believe that we always have 
an answer to the of-what-is-this-an-instance ques-
tion, whether we know it or not. Accordingly, the 
task is not one of figuring out an answer presently 
unknown to us; it is rather that of explicating an 
answer that we have already acquired but have yet 
to surface. I am arguing, in other words, that we 
do not get interested in an international phenom-
enon for no reason, that our interest in it stems 
from a concern about a more encompassing set of 
phenomena, and that there is therefore no need to 
be paralyzed by the question if we press ourselves 
to move up the ladder of abstraction on which 
our intellectuality is founded. Once shamed into 
acknowledging that their concerns are not confined 
to the lowest rung on the ladder, most students 
are willing to begin to venture forth and approach 
the phenomena they observe as mere instances of 
something else. 
 To think theoretically one must be ready to ap-
preciate and accept the need to sacrifice detailed 
descriptions for broad observations.  
 One cannot begin to mount the rungs of the 
ladder of abstraction if one is unable to forgo the 
detailed account, the elaborated event, the specific 
minutiae. As indicated, the theoretical enterprise 

24
JAMES ROSENAU
is committed to the teasing out of central tenden-
cies, to encompassing ever greater numbers of phe-
nomena, to moving up the ladder of abstraction as 
parsimoniously as possible. Thus theory involves 
generalizing rather than particularizing and, in so 
doing, it requires relinquishing, subordinating, and/
or not demonstrating much of one’s impulse to 
expound everything one knows. It means, in effect, 
that one must discipline one’s self to accept simple 
explanations over complex ones. 
 These are not easy tasks. Most of us find com-
fort in detail. The more details we know, the more 
are we likely to feel we have mastered our subject. 
To forgo much of the detail, on the other hand, is 
to opt for uncertainties, to expose ourselves to the 
criticisms of those who would pick away at our 
generalizations with exceptions. The temptations to 
fall back on details are thus considerable and much 
concentration on the upper rungs of the ladder of 
abstraction is required if the temptations are to be 
resisted. 
 Happily this is less of a problem for beginning 
students than more mature ones who are introduced 
late to the theoretical enterprise. The former have 
yet to acquire extensive familiarity with details and 
they are therefore not likely to feel threatened by the 
loss of their knowledge base. They want to focus 
on the unique, to be sure, but at least it is possible 
to expose them to the case of theorizing before 
they find security in endless minutiae. Exactly how 
more mature scholars accustomed to the comforts of 
detail can be persuaded to be theoretically venture-
some is, I confess, a problem for which I have yet to 
find anything resembling a solution. 
 To think theoretically one must be tolerant of 
ambiguity, concerned about probabilities, and dis-
trustful of absolutes.  
 To be concerned about central tendencies one 
needs to be accepting of exceptions, deviations, 
anomalies, and other phenomena that, taken by 
themselves, run counter to the anticipated or prevail-
ing pattern. Anomalies ought not be ignored and 
often explorations of them can lead to valuable, 
path-breaking insights; but neither can anomalies be 
allowed to undermine one’s focus on central tenden-
cies. Empirical theories deal only with probabilities 
and not with absolutes, with how most phenomena 
are likely to respond to a stimulus and not with how 
each and every phenomenon responds. Theorists sim-
ply do not aspire to account for every phenomenon. 
They know there will be anomalies and exceptions; 
indeed, they are suspicious of those unlikely occa-
sions when no exceptions are manifest. Rather their 
goal is to build theories in which the central tenden-
cies encompass the highest possible degree of prob-
ability, with certainties and absolutes being left for 
ideologues and zealots to expound. 
 Although they engage in it continuously in their 
daily lives, students tend to be resistant to the neces-
sity of thinking probabilistically when they turn 
to theorizing. More accurately, they tend to be re-
luctant to ignore the ambiguity, to be restless with 
anything less than perfect certainty, as if any excep-
tion to the anticipated central tendencies constitutes 
a negation of their reasoning. I have found this low 
tolerance of ambiguity difficult to contest. Many 
students, fearful of uncertainty, seem to get fixated 
on the exception, and it is very hard at that point 
to recapture their interest in central tendencies. 
The very rhetoric of their everyday language—that 
things are “completely” the case or that an observa-
tion is “absolutely” accurate— reinforces their incli-
nations to be intolerant of deviations. In this mood 
they recognize only the “whole truth” as valid and 
regard central tendencies as a partial rather than a 
legitimate form of knowledge. 
 I confess to perplexity over how to handle this 
obstacle to theorizing on the part of students. I have 
tried elaborating on the many ways in which proba-
bilistic thinking underlies their daily lives. I have 
tried making analogies between the physicist and 
the political scientist, pointing out that the former 
does not aspire to account for the behavior of every 
atom any more than the latter aspires to account-
ing for every voter. I have tried sarcasm, stressing 
the noxious values that derive from a concern with 
 absolutes. Neither alone nor in combination, how-
ever, do such techniques seem to have any effect on 
many students. Whatever its sources, their intoler-
ance of ambiguity is apparently too deep-seated to 
yield to reasoning or persuasion. So, reluctantly, 
I  have concluded that students with a low toler-
ance of ambiguity and a high need for certainty are 
unlikely to ever think theory thoroughly and that 
it is probably wasted energy to try to teach them 
to do so. 
 To think theoretically one must be playful about 
international phenomena.  
 At the core of the theorizing process is a cre-
ative imagination. The underlying order of world 

Thinking Theory Thoroughly 
25
affairs is too obscure and too complex to yield 
to pedestrian, constricted, or conventional minds. 
Only deep penetration into a problem, discerning 
relationships that are not self-evident and might 
even be the opposite of what seems readily appar-
ent, can produce incisive and creative theory. Thus 
to think theoretically one must allow one’s mind to 
run freely, to be playful, to toy around with what 
might seem absurd, to posit seemingly unrealistic 
circumstances and speculate what would follow if 
they were ever to come to pass. Stated differently, 
one must develop the habit of playing and enjoy-
ing the game of “as if”—that is, specifying unlikely 
conditions and analyzing them as  if they prevailed. 
 Put in still another way, it has always seemed to 
me that good theory ought never be embarrassed by 
surprises, by unanticipated events that have major con-
sequences for the system on which the theory focuses. 
A Hitler-Stalin pact, a Nixon resignation, or a Sadat 
peace initiative should not catch the creative theorist 
unawares because part of his or her creativity involves 
imagining the unimaginable. One imagines the unimag-
inable by allowing one’s variables to vary across the 
entire range of a continuum even if some of its extreme 
points seem so unlikely as to be absurd. To push one’s 
thinking beyond previously imagined extremes of a 
continuum is to play the game of “as if,” and it involves 
a playfulness of mind that mitigates against surprises as 
well as facilitates incisive theorizing. 
 How one teaches playfulness is, of course, 
another matter. In some important sense it is an 
intellectual quality that cannot be taught. One 
 acquires—or perhaps inherits—creativity early in life 
and no amount of subsequent training can greatly 
enhance the imaginative powers of those with tunnel 
vision and inhibited mentalities. On the other hand, 
encouragement to playfulness can bring out previ-
ously untapped talents in some students. Many have 
become so used to being told what to think that their 
creative impulses have never been legitimated and, 
accordingly, they have never even heard of the exis-
tence of the “as if” game. So no harm can be done 
by pressing our students (not to mention ourselves) 
to be playful and flexible in their thinking, and just 
conceivably such an emphasis may produce some 
unexpected results. 
 To think theoretically one must be genuinely 
 puzzled by international phenomena.  
 Creative use of the imagination requires humil-
ity toward international phenomena. One must be 
as concerned about asking the right questions about 
the order underlying world affairs as finding the 
right answers. To focus only on answers is to be sure 
about the questions one wants to probe and this, in 
turn, is to impose unnecessary limits on one’s capac-
ity to discern and integrate the deeper structures of 
global politics. If, on the other hand, one is genu-
inely puzzled by why events unfold as they do, one 
is committed to always asking why they occur in one 
way rather than another and, in so doing, pressing 
one’s theoretical impulses as far as possible. 
 I do not use the notion of “genuine puzzles” ca-
sually. They are not simply open-ended questions but 
refer, rather, to perplexity over specific and patterned 
outcomes. To be genuinely puzzled about the declin-
ing capacity of governments to govern effectively, for 
example, one does not ask, “Why do governments do 
what they do?” Rather, one asks, say, “Why are most 
governments unable to control inflation?” or “Why 
do they alter their alliance commitments under speci-
fied conditions?” Genuine puzzles, in other words, 
are not idle, ill-framed, or impetuous speculations. 
They encompass specified dependent variables for 
which adequate explanations are lacking. I do not see 
how one can begin to think theoretically if one does 
not discern recurrent outcomes that evoke one’s curi-
osity and puzzlement. Some analysts believe they are 
starting down the road to theory when they start ask-
ing what the outcomes are, but such a line of inquiry 
leads only to dead ends, or worse, to endless mazes, 
because one never knows when one has come upon a 
relevant outcome. Genuine puzzles can lead us down 
creative paths, however, because they discipline us to 
focus on particular patterns. 
 One cannot teach others to be puzzled. Again 
it is very much a matter of whether curiosity has 
been repressed or allowed to flourish at an early 
age. It is possible, however, to keep after students 
and colleagues with the simple question, “What 
genuinely puzzles you about international affairs?” 
Hopefully repetition of the question will prove to be 
sufficiently challenging to facilitate a maximum ex-
pression of whatever may be the curiosity potential 
students may possess. 
 To think theoretically one must be constantly 
ready to be proven wrong.  
 Perhaps nothing inhibits the ability to be intel-
lectually puzzled and playful more than the fear 
of being embarrassed by the inaccuracies of one’s 
theorizing. Many of us have fragile egos that are 

26
JAMES ROSENAU
so sensitive to error as to lead us to prefer sticking 
close to conventional wisdom rather than risking 
speculation that may be erroneous. It is as if our 
stature as students depends upon the soundness of 
our observations. 
 Fragile egos are not readily bolstered and some 
students may never be capable of venturing forth. 
In my experience, however, there is one line of 
reasoning that some students find sufficiently per-
suasive to lessen their fears of appearing ridiculous. 
It involves the thought that our comprehension 
of international phenomena can be substantially 
advanced even if our theories about them prove 
to be woefully wrong. Such progress can occur in 
two ways. One is that falsified theory has the virtue 
of indicating avenues of inquiry which no longer 
need be traversed. Doubtless egos are best served 
by theoretical breakthroughs but if one presumes 
that knowledge is at least partly developed through 
a process of elimination, there is some satisfaction 
to be gained from having narrowed the range of 
inquiry through theory that subsequently proves 
fallacious. 
 Secondly, unsound theory can facilitate progress 
by provoking others into demonstrating its  falsity 
and attempting to show how and why it went astray. 
Indeed, assuming that the erroneous theory focuses 
on significant matters, often the more  outrageous 
the theory is, the more it is likely to  provoke further 
investigation. Thus even if one cannot negotiate a 
theoretical breakthrough on one’s own, one can 
serve one’s ego by the possibility that one’s errors 
may sustain the knowledge-building process. This is 
surely what one astute analyst had in mind when he 
observed, “it is  important to err importantly”  1  
Conclusion: Bringing It All Together 
 Plainly, there is no easy way to evolve the habit 
of thinking theoretically. Indeed, if the foregoing 
nine precepts are well founded, it can be readily 
argued that theorizing is the hardest of intellectual 
tasks. Clearing away the confusion of day-to-day 
events and teasing out their underlying patterns 
is not merely a matter of applying one’s men-
tal skills. Sustained, disciplined, and uninhibited 
work is required, and even then theory can be 
elusive, puzzles difficult to identify, details hard 
to ignore, and probabilities tough to estimate. And 
the lures and practices of non-theoretical thinking 
are always present, tempting us to forgo the inse-
curities and ambiguities of high levels of abstrac-
tion in favor of the comfortable precision available 
at low levels. 
 Yet the payoffs for not yielding to the temptations 
and persisting to think theoretically are considerable. 
There is an exhilaration, an exquisiteness, to be en-
joyed in the theoretical enterprise that virtually defies 
description. Stimulated by the rarified atmosphere, 
energized by the freedom to roam uninhibitedly across 
diverse realms of human experience, one gets giddy at 
high levels of abstraction. It is that special kind of gid-
diness that comes from the feeling that one is employ-
ing all the resources and talents at one’s command, 
moving beyond anything one has done before. And 
if one should be so fortunate as actually to achieve a 
theoretical breakthrough, then the exhilaration, the 
excitement, and the sense of accomplishment can ap-
proach the thrill of discovery that Darwin, Einstein, 
Freud, and the other great  explorers of underlying 
order must have experienced at their moments of 
breakthrough. 
 For all the difficulties it entails, then, think-
ing theoretically is, on balance, worth the effort. 
And so, therefore, is the effort to teach others 
to think thoroughly in this way. The habits of 
theoretical thinking may not always be teach-
able, and they may not even be teachable at all; 
but if our efforts successfully manage to reach 
only a few students, they are worth undertaking. 
And it is even conceivable that in trying to teach 
others to think theoretically, we may refine and 
enlarge our own capacities for comprehending 
the underlying order that sustains and alters the 
human condition.  
Note
 1.   Marion J. Levy, ‘“Does It Matter If He’s Naked?’ 
Bawled the Child,” in Klaus Knorr and James N. Rosenau 
(eds.),  Contending Approaches to International Relations 
(Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1969), 93.  
 

From “The Perils of Paradigm Mentalities: Revisiting Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper,” by Thomas C. Walker from 
 Perspectives on Politics, Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 433–451, © 2010 Cambridge Journals, reproduced by permission.
The Perils of Paradigm Mentalities: 
Revisiting Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper 
THOMAS C. WALKER 
OVERVIEW
 As noted in this chapter, one way to organize the vast literature on international 
relations is by utilizing categories such as images, perspectives, understandings, 
or paradigms. Virtually all textbooks on international relations theory adopt 
this device. There is no doubt that the IR field has been influenced by the work 
of Thomas Kuhn on paradigms and Imre Lakatos on scientific research programs. 
For decades social scientists have paid homage to these scholars and noted their 
relevancy to current research and the organization of various social science 
 disciplines. 
 Thomas C. Walker points out, however, that Kuhn and Lakatos were actually 
highly critical of social scientists expropriating their respective concepts and apply-
ing them outside the natural sciences for which they were originally developed. He 
finds it puzzling that, compared to Kuhn and Lakatos, much less is said about Karl 
Popper’s philosophy of science. According to Walker, Popper’s approach to critical 
problem solving, theoretical pluralism, conjecture, and refutation are equally appli-
cable to both the natural and social sciences. His emphasis that we cannot achieve 
absolute certainty but can still falsify wrong conjectures is especially appropriate 
for the kind of phenomena studied by IR theorists. 
 Walker makes the case that a reliance on Kuhn and Lakatos is inappropriate 
because the study of international relations has not achieved the requisite scientific 
achievements. We find this argument to be of interest and import for two reasons. 
First, it takes on conventional wisdom. Second, it raises the important question of 
whether these various IR paradigms, images, or understandings are incommensu-
rable or whether a synthesis is possible.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   Why, according to Walker, can a reliance on Kuhn and Lakatos unduly limit research?  
 2.  What does Popper mean by a “unity of method”?  
 3.  Would Popper favor a vigorous competition among theories or an emphasis on their combina-
tion into a dominant theoretical framework? Why?  
 4.  Key questions: Do you think a synthesis among various IR images and understandings is pos-
sible, or is a dialogue the best that can be achieved? What would be the advantage in terms 
of scientific inquiry if such a synthesis could be achieved? What would be the drawbacks?  
27
27
27

28
THOMAS C. WALKER
 The clash between Popper and Kuhn is not about 
a mere technical point in epistemology. It concerns 
our central intellectual values . . .  
 Imre Lakatos   1  
 The member of a mature scientific community is, 
like the typical character of Orwell’s 1984, the 
victim of a history rewritten by the powers that be.  
 Thomas Kuhn   2  
 No political power has ever been unchecked, and 
as long as men remain human (as long as the ‘Brave 
New World’ has not materialized), there can be no 
absolute and unrestrained political power.  
 Karl Popper  3  
 While feeding his pet monkeys in Princeton Thomas 
Kuhn remarked how social scientists regularly 
misappropriate his idea of paradigms. Robin Fox 
described Kuhn as “horrified by this particular man-
gling of his theory of paradigms.”  4  In 1962, Kuhn’s 
 The Structure of Scientific Revolutions transformed 
the philosophy of science, and intellectual life more 
generally. Yet Kuhn never intended his ideas for the 
social sciences. In the preface to  Structure, Kuhn had 
indeed emphasized how paradigms set the natural 
sciences apart from the social sciences. Kuhn char-
acterized the social sciences by their fundamental 
“disagreements” over the “nature of legitimate sci-
entific problems and methods.” The natural sci-
ences, by contrast, failed to “evoke the controversies 
over fundamentals.”  5  As a result, Kuhn grew critical 
of social scientists seeking to “improve the status 
of their field by first legislating [paradigms and 
normal science] . . . They are badly misconstruing 
my point.”  6  Imre Lakatos had a similar reaction 
to social scientists applying his notion of scientific 
research programs. He referred to some of these 
efforts as little more than “phony corroborations” 
that yield “pseudo-intellectual garbage.”  7  
 In spite of these caveats, political scientists have 
frequently looked to Kuhn and Lakatos for metathe-
oretical guides to inquiry.  8  In his 1965 American 
Political Science Association (APSA) Presidential 
Address, David Truman welcomed the application 
of Kuhn’s concept of paradigm as a means to help 
“regenerate” the discipline.  9  In the following year’s 
APSA Presidential Address, Gabriel Almond also 
invoked Kuhn—but with some hesitation, admitting 
that social sciences may be different from the natu-
ral sciences: “At any rate, we begin with a dominant 
paradigm, a formation of the subject matter . . . , 
specifying variables, parameters, their relations and 
consequences.”  10  This view of paradigms, drawn 
only loosely from Kuhn’s work, is commonly cited 
in political science. Nelson Polsby, however, saw 
these as “ceremonial footnotes” lacking full appre-
ciation of Kuhn’s model of science.  11  
 References to Kuhn and Lakatos are especially 
common in the subfield of International Relations (IR). 
Several recent works address how Kuhn or Lakatos 
may apply to IR.  12  Other studies have been critical of 
importing paradigms, research programs, and their 
sundry “isms” to the study of IR.  13  Few of these 
works, however, explore how these various models 
of science can shape incentives and norms for accept-
able scholarly behavior. Fewer still have ventured to 
explain why Kuhn, and to a lesser degree Lakatos, 
were so reluctant to lend their ideas to the social 
sciences. 
 Reliance on Kuhn and Lakatos becomes more 
puzzling when we compare it to the less frequent 
discussions of Karl Popper’s philosophy of science. 
The recent marginalization of Popper is surpris-
ing for two reasons. First, Popper was the first 
philosopher of science to be held in high esteem by 
the discipline. The American Political Science Asso-
ciation honored Popper with the Benjamin Lippin-
cott Award for  The Open Society in 1976. Popper 
joined Hannah Arendt and Louis Hartz as the first 
three recipients of the award “for publishing highly 
significant and enduring” works in political science. 
Second, unlike Kuhn and Lakatos, Popper sought 
to apply his ideas directly to the social sciences. Yet 
any cursory view of Ph.D. reading lists or citation 
indices show that Popper’s philosophy of science 
has become overshadowed by those of Kuhn and 
Lakatos. Popper may have been marginalized due 
to a narrow reading of his work. He has frequently 
been mischaracterized as a logical positivist or a 
naïve “falsificationist.”  14  But his model of science 
encompasses much more. Popper’s approach to 
critical problem solving, theoretical pluralism, con-
jecture, and refutation can be applied to both the 
natural and social sciences. His emphasis on inde-
terminacy and fallibilism—the belief that we cannot 
achieve absolute certainty but can still falsify wrong 
conjectures—is particularly fitting for many phe-
nomena studied by political scientists.  15  Students of 

 
The Perils of Paradigm Mentalities: Revisiting Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper 
29
political science would thus benefit from bringing 
Popper back into discussions over models of sci-
ence. While more recent studies in philosophy of 
science provide particular insights for the discipline, 
the works of Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper still pose 
the most fundamental questions about organizing 
scientific community, research practices, and the 
growth of knowledge.  16  When political scientists 
address philosophy of science, they typically refer-
ence Kuhn, Lakatos, and occasionally Popper—or 
sometimes a curious combination of the three. Yet 
an appreciation of differences among the three is 
rarely recognized by students of politics. 
 In this essay I examine these three models 
of science and the ways in which they have been 
applied to the subfield of IR. I show how the 
subfield’s frequent reliance on Kuhn and Lakatos 
is inappropriate since the field has not achieved 
the requisite scientific achievements. Relying on 
Kuhn and Lakatos without these scientific achieve-
ments unduly limits research. The emergence of 
paradigm mentalities, as depicted by Kuhn and 
Lakatos, leads to narrow, rigid, highly special-
ized, and conservative research approaches that 
suppress alternatives. For Kuhn, evidence that 
falls outside the dominant framework is consid-
ered “incommensurate” and can be “ignored.” 
For Lakatos, such evidence can be “shoved aside” 
if the research program is held to be progressing. 
When political scientists are guided by paradigm 
mentalities they hold tightly to both their theory 
and their method while seeking to insulate them-
selves from opposing theory and method. They 
also engage in hostile, zero-sum turf wars when 
challenged by alternatives. Paradigm mentalities 
prompt scholars to break into narrow, highly-
specialized, esoteric research communities. 
 The constricting nature of normal science has 
been contested by many commentators. Popper’s 
critiques were among the first and remain the most 
poignant. Popper argued that paradigm mentalities 
prove detrimental to healthy inquiry by limiting 
scholarly vision, curiosity, and creativity. In Pop-
per’s world, embracing theoretical and methodolog-
ical diversity while engaging anomalous evidence is 
essential to the advancement of knowledge. I thus 
argue that Popper’s commitments to theoretical plu-
ralism, hermeneutics, methodological diversity, and 
fallibilism provide a more appropriate model than 
paradigm mentalities for both IR and political sci-
ence more generally. 
Popper’s Open Society 
and Theoretical Pluralism 
 Unlike the stark distinctions that Kuhn and Lakatos 
draw between natural and social science, Popper em-
phasizes a “unity of method.”  17  His ideas of critical 
problem-solving by trial and error (falsification) as 
well as his emphasis on multiple theories and meth-
ods are equally pertinent to the social and natural 
sciences. Popper’s aspirations for an open society of 
thinkers diverge from the restrictions imposed by par-
adigm mentalities. Key differences rest on the impor-
tance Popper places on theoretical and methodological 
pluralism, vigilant criticism, the embracing rather than 
shunning of anomalies, and fallibilism—the recogni-
tion that even our most corroborated theories may 
be soon and surprisingly overturned. By acknowl-
edging the tentative nature of our theories and our 
knowledge base, scientists will not be so invested in 
defending paradigmatic turf. Instead, they would be 
encouraged to follow up anomalies and would strain 
to falsify existing theories. For Popper, refutations 
rather than the small increments of normal science 
are marks of progress. While Kuhn was initially criti-
cizing Popper’s model of science, Popper responded 
with severe criticisms of Kuhn’s ideas of normal sci-
ence and the incommensurability between opposing 
theories. 
 Popper’s open society calls for competition be-
tween various theories, not the hegemonic reign of 
one paradigm or research program. While Popper 
acknowledged that scientists may sometimes work 
within the confines of one dominant theoretical 
framework, he challenged Kuhn’s claim that normal 
science is the most efficient way to advance knowl-
edge. Popper argued that great science perishes in 
a paradigm.  18  Popper painted a pitiful portrait of 
those laboring within the confines of normal science: 
 [Kuhn’s scientist is one who] accepts the ruling 
dogma of the day; who does not wish to challenge 
it; who accepts a new revolutionary theory only 
if almost everyone else is ready to accept it—if it 
becomes fashionable. . . . In my view the ‘normal’ 
scientist, as Kuhn describes him, is a person one 
ought to be sorry for.  19  
 In an essay addressing the social sciences,  Popper 
 lamented how young scientists short on critical 
thinking and creativity are far too “eager to pick 
up the latest fashion and the latest jargon. These 
‘normal’ scientists want a framework, a routine, a 

30
THOMAS C. WALKER
common and exclusive language of their trade.” Pop-
per concluded that “it is the non-normal scientist, 
the daring scientist, the critical scientist, who breaks 
through the barrier of normality, who opens the win-
dows and lets in fresh air, who does not think about 
the impression he makes, but tries to be well under-
stood.”  20  Keith Webb was one of the few to empha-
size how Popper’s ideal scientist is a free-wheeling, 
independent intellect who will critically explore both 
anomalies and accepted evidence alike in search of 
better answers.  21  Agreement and orthodoxy imposed 
by a paradigm mentality, according to Popper, con-
stitutes “the death of knowledge, since the growth of 
knowledge depends entirely on the existence of dis-
agreement.”  22  Embracing these disagreements over 
fundamentals presupposes theoretical and method-
ological pluralism, if not versatility. 
 Pluralism can be assured through creative spec-
ulations that defy convention. In this light, Pop-
per challenges the view that “metaphysics has no 
value for empirical science.”  23  Popper points out 
that “scientific discovery is impossible without faith 
in ideas which are of a purely speculative kind, and 
sometimes even quite hazy . . . a faith which is com-
pletely unwarranted from the point of view of sci-
ence, and which, to that extent, is ‘metaphysical’.” 
Since “metaphysical ideas are often the forerunners 
of scientific ones,” Popper regards “intuition and 
imagination as immensely important.”  24  Ian Hacking 
notes that in “Popper’s opinion it is not all that bad 
to be pre-scientifically metaphysical, for unfalsifiable 
metaphysics is often the speculative parent of falsifi-
able science.”  25  James Farr draws in part from these 
aspects of the metaphysical to develop the idea of 
“Popper’s hermeneutics.”  26  However, to avoid being 
misled by these intuitions, we must remain critical, 
open to alternatives, and creative when devising ap-
propriate tests. For Popper, theoretical speculations 
are not to be dismissed; just as corroborated theories 
are not to be uncritically accepted. Both speculative 
and established theories remain open to critical ex-
amination. In Popper’s view, no Lakatosian “hard-
core” can be protected from scrutiny and criticism 
and no Kuhnian “concrete scientific achievement” 
should distract from alternatives. 
 In the social sciences, theoretical pluralism is es-
sential because select observations and evidence may 
be derived exclusively from one’s preferred theory 
and then used to further establish the favored theory. 
In his critique of historicism, Popper argues that the 
historicist “firmly believes in his favourite trend, 
and conditions under which it would disappear are 
to him unthinkable. The poverty of historicism, we 
might say, is a poverty of imagination.”  27  The best 
way to encourage creativity and imagination is to 
keep several competing theories on the table. For 
Popper, historians and social scientists must “keep 
the flow of ideas running from all tributaries . . . 
and especially from lay tributaries.”  28  Conversely, 
paradigm mentalities along the lines discussed by 
Kuhn and Lakatos will reduce the flow of ideas to 
one narrow but steady stream. 
 Paradigm mentalities rely on notions of in-
commensurability to limit theoretical pluralism. 
Incommensurability is perpetuated by what Popper 
calls the “myth of the framework,” the idea that 
“a rational and fruitful discussion is impossible 
unless the participants share a common framework 
of basic assumptions or, at least, unless they have 
agreed on such a framework for the purposes of 
discussion.” Popper views this as a “dangerous ex-
aggeration” and counters: 
 A discussion between people who share many 
views is unlikely to be fruitful, even though it may 
be pleasant; while a discussion between vastly dif-
ferent frameworks can be extremely fruitful, even 
though it may sometimes be extremely difficult, 
and perhaps not quite so pleasant (though we may 
learn to enjoy it).  29  
 Contrary to Kuhn and Lakatos, Popper argues that 
single scientific theories rarely, if ever, dominate 
without opposition: “There was, ever since an-
tiquity, constant and fruitful discussion between 
the competing and dominant theories of matter.”  30  
Disagreement between even the most dissimilar 
theoretical frameworks is not only possible but 
essential for important scientific discoveries. This 
myth of a dominant paradigm and incommensura-
bility can justify turning a blind eye to alternative 
explanations. 
 Popper’s dim view of paradigm mentalities re-
flects his two most vital principles for sound inquiry: 
avoiding narrow specialization and maintaining 
a highly critical approach to what is supposedly 
known. Popper repeatedly argues that the scientist 
must “shun the danger of narrow specialization . . . 
[and] help others to understand his field and his 
work.”  31  The esoteric and highly specialized nature 
of paradigms demands a narrow and rigid training 
that can prove detrimental to inquiry. Perhaps the 
most dangerous aspect of normal science lurks in 

 
The Perils of Paradigm Mentalities: Revisiting Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper 
31
its tendency to suppress, if not castigate, critical 
thinking. For Popper, “criticism is the engine of the 
growth of knowledge.”  32  Devotion to one frame-
work dampens the critical spirit on which all sound 
intellectual practices depend. 
 Finally, theoretical and methodological plural-
ism are essential for Popper’s open society, where 
a variety of conjectures are critically examined 
and then tested. The results of these tests are then 
 compared to assess their relative accuracy. Falsifi-
cation allows scientists to relegate those theories 
that appear to be inaccurate and elevate those that 
are better supported by empirical testing. However, 
Popper’s notion of fallibalism reminds us that even 
the most sound and supported theory risks being 
overturned. As a result, humility combined with 
critical awareness of alternatives provides rules 
for all healthy inquiry. Conversely, incommensu-
rability and intense specialization will  discourage 
 criticism. This, in turn, may jeopardize the open 
society that he seeks. When scientists  invest so 
heavily in one framework, they will seek to rein-
force that structure rather than remain critical of 
it. This will lead to bitter paradigm wars and the 
revolutions that Kuhn described. In Popper’s world 
of multiple theories, such wars, if they  occurred at 
all, would be far less hostile and far more intellec-
tually rewarding. 
 This plea for pluralism and dialogue may sug-
gest an academic utopia. However, dialogue between 
different schools in IR will not necessarily lead to 
synthesis and harmony.  33  In Popper’s view, such a 
scientific consensus would indeed be undesirable. 
Popperian science involves unending intellectual 
disagreement. Meaningful pluralism, however, can 
help erode the pretensions nurtured by paradigm 
mentalities, which convert disagreement into in-
comprehension, hostility, and imperiousness. These 
pretensions, I have argued, impoverish inquiry in 
political science. Popper’s model of bold plural-
ism would lead to more lively and engaging study 
of politics. It would put to rest fruitless debates 
over naturalism or intepretivism or postmodern-
ism, where each side seeks to legislate appropri-
ate and exclusive methods of inquiry. In Popper’s 
view,  metaphysical speculation can co-exist and 
even enhance hypothesis testing. But before a 
meaningful theoretical and methodological plural-
ism can emerge, students of politics must abandon 
their faith in what Popper calls “the myth of the 
framework.” 
 As the world grows more complicated and more 
interdependent, questions regarding politics can 
hardly fit a single paradigm or a single method. Pop-
per’s fallibilism points to the hubris of believing that 
one method or one theory is sufficient to address the 
multifarious questions that students of politics must 
address. If we are to better understand the complex-
ity of our subject matter, we might heed the advice 
of Popper to “keep the flow of ideas running from 
all tributaries.”  34  This would require a new appreci-
ation for theoretical and methodological pluralism, 
and a willingness to engage a range of perspectives. 
While such engagement may be challenging and at 
times unpleasant, Popper envisioned such challenges 
as the best way to ensure the growth of knowledge. 
We can ill-afford the narrow, imperious impulses 
that arise from a faith in one dominant theoretical 
framework. Nor can we afford the mistaken belief 
that the models of science depicted by Kuhn and 
Lakatos provide appropriate guides for the study 
of politics.  
Notes
 1.   Lakatos 1970, 93.  
 2.   Kuhn 1970a, 167.  
 3.   Popper 1945, 129.  
 4.   For a short description of these discussions see Fox 
1996, 335; 344, fn 10.  
 5.   Kuhn 1970a, viii.  
 6.   Kuhn 1970b, 245.  
 7.   Lakatos 1970, 176.  
 8.   Elman and Elman 2002.  
 9.   Truman 1965, 865.  
 10.   Almond 1966, 875.  
 11.    Polsby 1998, 200.  
 12.   See Vasquez 2003; DiCicco and Levy 1999; Dessler 
2003; Elman and Elman, 2003; Waltz, 2003; and  Chernoff, 
2004.  
 13.   See Hirschman, 1970; and Bennett, 2003.  
 14.   George and Bennett 2004 (131) and McKeown 2004 
(140) characterize Popper as a positivist, while Lakatos 
1970 frames Popper as a naïve  falsificationist.  
 15.   Almond 1977 is one exception. Almond employed 
Popper’s dichotomy between clocks and clouds to intro-
duce the importance of indeterminacy.  
 16.   Philosophy of social science since Popper and Kuhn 
has developed and diverged in significant ways. Stephen 
Walker 2003 suggested that Laudan’s 1977  Progress and 
Its Problems provides a more fitting guide to IR.  
 17.   See Popper 1957 for the most concise discussion.  
 18.   Popper 1994, 72.  
 19.   Popper 1970, 52.  
 20.   Popper 1994, 71.  

32
THOMAS C. WALKER
 21.   Webb 1995, 89.  
 22.  Popper 1994, 34.  
 23.  Popper 1934, 38.  
 24.  Popper 1974, 80; 1956, xxii.  
 25.  Hacking 1983, 3.  
 26.  Farr 1983.  
 27.   Popper 1957, 129.  
 28.   Popper 1994, 143.  
 29.  Popper 1994, 34–5.  
 30.  Popper 1970, 55.  
 31.  Popper 1994, 109.  
 32.  Popper 1994, 142.  
 33.  On this see Hellmann 2003 and the adjoining 
 responses.  
 34.   Popper 1994, 143.  
References
 Almond, Gabriel. 1966. “Political Theory and Political 
Science.”  American Political Science Review 60 (4): 
869–879. 
 ———. 1977. “Clouds, Clocks and the Study of Politics.” 
 World Politics 29 (4): 489–522. 
 ———. 1990.  A Discipline Divided: Schools and Sects in 
Political Science. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
 Ashley, Richard. 1986. “The Poverty of Neorealism.” In 
 Neorealism and Its Critics, ed. Robert Keohane. New 
York: Columbia University Press. 
 Babst, Dean. 1972. “A Force for Peace.”  Industrial Research 
(April): 55–58. 
 ———. 1996 [1964]. “Elective Governments—A Force 
for Peace.”  The Wisconsin Sociologist 3 (1): 9–14. 
Reprinted in  Classics of International Relations, ed. 
John Vasquez (3 rd  Edition). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 
 Ball, Terrence. 1976. “From Paradigms to Research  Programs: 
Toward a Post-Kuhnian Political Science.”  American 
Journal of Political Science 20 (1): 151–177. 
 Barkin, J. Samuel. 2003. “Realist Constructivism.”  Inter-
national Studies Review 5 (3): 325–342. 
 Bennett, Andrew 2003. “A Lakatosian Reading of 
 Lakatos: What Can We Salvage from the Hardcore.” 
In  Progress and International Relations Theory: 
 Appraising the Field, eds. Colin Elman and Miriam 
Elman.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Bohman, James. 1993.  The New Philosophy of Science: 
Problems in Indeterminacy. Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press. 
 Boulding, Kenneth. 1990 [1978]. “Future Directions in 
Conflict and Peace Studies.” In  Conflict: Readings in 
Management and Resolution, eds. John Burton and 
Frank Dukes. London: Macmillan. 
 Chernoff, Fred. 2004. “The Study of the Democratic Peace 
and Progress in International Relations.”  Interna-
tional Studies Review 6 (1): 49–78. 
 ———. 2005.  The Power of International Theory: Reforg-
ing the link to foreign policy-making through scientific 
enquiry. London: Routledge. 
 D’Amour, Gene. 1976. “Research Programmes, Rational-
ity, and Ethics.” In  Essays in Memory of Imre Lakatos, 
eds. R.S. Cohen, P.K. Feyerabend, and M.W. Wartof-
sky. Boston: D. Reidel. 
 Dessler, David. 2003. “Explanation and Scientific Prog-
ress.” In  Progress and International Relations Theory: 
Appraising the Field, eds. Colin Elman and Miriam 
Elman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 DiCicco, Jonathan, and Jack Levy. 1999. “Power Shifts and 
Problem Shifts: The Evolution of the Power Transition 
Research Program.”  Journal of Conflict Resolution 
43 (6): 673–704. 
 Elman, Colin, and Miriam Fendius Elman. 1995. “History 
vs. Neo-realism: A Second Look.”  International Secu-
rity 20 (1): 182–93. 
 ———. 1997. “Lakatos and Neorealism: A Reply to 
Vasquez.”  American Political Science Review 91 (4): 
923–26. 
 ———. 2002. “How Not to Be Lakatos Intolerant: 
 Appraising Progress in IR Research.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 46 (2): 231–262. 
 ———. 2003.  Progress in International Relations Theory: 
Appraising the Field. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Farr, James. 1983. “Popper’s Hermeneutics.”  Philosophy 
of Social Science 13 (2): 157–176. 
 Feyerabend, Paul. 1988.  Against Method (Revised  Edition). 
London: Verso Books. 
 Fleck, Ludwik. 1979 [1935].  Genesis and Development 
of a Scientific Fact. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press. 
 Fox, Robin. 1996. “State of the Art/Science in Anthropol-
ogy.” In  The Flight from Science and Reason, eds. 
Paul Gross, Norman Levitt, and Martin Lewis. New 
York: The New York Academy of Sciences. 
 George, Alexander. 1993.  Bridging the Gap: Theory and 
Practice in Foreign Policy. Washington: United States 
Institute of Peace Press. 
 George, Alexander, and Andrew Bennett. 2004.  Case Stud-
ies and Theory Development in the Social Sciences. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Gilpin, Robert. 1981.  War and Change in World Politics. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Gunnell, John. 1986.  Between Philosophy and Politics: 
The Alienation of Political Theory. Amherst: The 
University of Massachusetts Press. 
 Hacking, Ian. 1983.  Representing and Intervening: Intro-
ductory Topics in the Philosophy of Natural Science. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Hardin, Russell. 2003.  Indeterminacy and Society. 
 Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
 Hellmann, Gunther, ed. 2003. “Are Dialogue and  Synthesis 
Possible in International Relations?”  International 
Studies Review 5 (1): 123–153. 

 
The Perils of Paradigm Mentalities: Revisiting Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper 
33
 Hirschman, Albert. 1970. “The Search for Paradigms as 
a Hindrance to Understanding.”  World Politics 22 
(3): 329–343. 
 Holsti, Kalevi. 1985.  The Dividing Discipline: Hegemony 
and Diversity in International Theory. London: Allen 
and Unwin. 
 Kahneman, Daniel, and Amos Tversky. 1979. “Prospect 
Theory: An Analysis of Decision Under Risk.”  Econo-
metrica 47 (2): 263–291. 
 Kant, Immanuel. 1991 [1795]. “Perpetual Peace.” In 
 Kant’s Political Writings, ed. Hans Reiss. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Katzenstein, Peter. 1996.  The Culture of National Security: 
Norms and Identity in World Politics. New York: 
Columbia University Press. 
 Katzenstein, Peter, and Rudra Sil. 2008. “Eclectic The-
orizing in the Study and Practice of International 
Relations.” In  The Oxford Handbook of Interna-
tional Relations, ed. Christian Reus-Smit and Duncan 
 Snidal. New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Keohane, Robert. 1986. “Theory of World Politics: Structural 
Realism and Beyond.” In  Neorealism and Its Critics, ed. 
Robert Keohane. New York: Columbia University Press. 
 Kitcher, Philip. 1993.  The Advancement of Science:  Science 
Without Legend, Objectivity Without Illusions. New 
York: Oxford University Press. 
 ———. 2001.  Science, Truth, and Democracy. Oxford: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Kuhn, Thomas. 1970a.  The Structure of Scientific Revolu-
tions (Second Edition, Revised). Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 
 ———. 1970b. “Reflections on My Critics.” In  Criticism 
and the Growth of Knowledge, ed. Imre Lakatos and 
Alan Musgrave. London: Cambridge University Press. 
 ———. 1970c. “Notes on Lakatos.”  Proceedings of the 
Biennial Meeting of the Philosophy of Science Asso-
ciation, Princeton University. 137–146. 
 ———. 1979. “Preface.” In  Genesis and Development of 
a Scientific Fact, eds. Ludwik Fleck, T. Trenn, and R. 
Merton. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
 ———. 1990. “Dubbing and Redubbing: The Vulnerabil-
ity of Rigid Designation.” In  Minnesota Studies in the 
Philosophy of Science, ed. C. Wade Savage, 14: 298–
318. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press. 
 Lakatos, Imre. 1970. “Falsification and the Methodology 
of Scientific Research Programmes.” In  Criticism and 
the Growth of Knowledge, eds. Imre Lakatos and 
Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 ———. 1978a.  The Methodology of Scientific Research 
Programmes: Philosophical Papers, eds. John Worrall 
and Gregory Currie. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 ———. 1978b.  Mathmatics, Science and Epistemology: 
Philosophical Papers, eds. John Worrall and Gregory 
Currie. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Latour, Bruno. 1987.  Science in Action: How to Follow 
Scientists and Engineers through Society. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Laudan, Larry 1977.  Progress and Its Problems: Towards 
a Theory of Scientific Growth. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 
 Levy, Jack. 1988. Domestic Politics and War.  Journal of 
Interdisciplinary History 18 (3): 653–673. 
 ———. 1994. “The Theoretical Foundations of Paul W. 
Schroeder’s International System.”  The International 
History Review 26 (4): 715–744. 
 Lijphart, Arendt. 1974. “The Structure of the Theoretical 
Revolution in International Relations.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 18 (1): 41–74. 
 Masterman, Margaret. 1970. “The Nature of a Para-
digm.” In  Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, 
eds. Imre Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 McKeown, Timothy. 2004. “Case Studies and the Limits 
of the Quantitative Worldview.” In  Rethinking Social 
Inquiry: Diverse Tools, Shared Standards, eds. Henry 
Brady and David Collier. Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield Publishers. 
 Monroe, Kristen. 2005. “Introduction.” In  Perestroika: 
The Raucous Rebellion in Political Science, ed. Kristen 
Renwick Monroe. New Haven: Yale University Press. 
 Morgenthau, Hans. 1948.  Politics Among Nations: The 
Struggle for Power and Peace. New York: Knopf. 
 Polsby, Nelson. 1998. Social Science and Scientific 
Change: A Note on Thomas S. Kuhn’s Contribution. 
 Annual Review of Political Science 1: 199–210. 
 Popper, Karl. 1992 [1934].  The Logic of Scientific Discov-
ery. London: Routledge. 
 ———. 2005 [1945].  The Open Society and Its Enemies. 
London: Routledge. 
 ———. 1988 [1956].  The Open Universe: An Argument 
for Indeterminism. London: Rouledge. 
 ———. 1964 [1957].  The Poverty of Historicism. New 
York: Harper Torch Books. 
 ———. 1970. “Normal Science and Its Dangers.” In 
 Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, eds. Imre 
Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 ———. 1974.  Unended Quest: An Intellectual Biography. 
London: Open Court. 
 ———. 1994.  The Myth of the Framework: In Defence of 
Science and Rationality, ed. M.A. Notturno. London: 
Routledge. 
 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques. 1990 [1756]. “The State of War.” 
In  Reading Rousseau in the Nuclear Age, ed. Grace 
Roosevelt. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
 Schram, Sanford. 2005. “A Return to Politics: Perestroika, 
Phronesis, and Postparadigmatic Political Science.” 
In  Perestroika: The Raucous Rebellion in Political 
Science, ed. Kristen Renwick Monroe. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 

34
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
 Schroeder, Paul. 1994a. Historical Reality vs. Neo-realist 
Theory.  International Security 19 (1): 108–148. 
 ———. 1994b.  The Transformation of European Politics, 
1763–1848. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
 ———. 1995. “Reply to the Elmans.”  International Secu-
rity 20 (1): 193–95. 
 Searle, John. 1964. “How to Derive ‘Ought’ from ‘Is’.” 
 The Philosophical Review 73 (1): 43–58. 
 Sigelman, Lee. 2005. “The APSR in the Perestroika Era.” 
In  Perestroika: The Raucous Rebellion in Political 
Science, ed. Kristen Renwick Monroe. New Haven: 
Yale University Press. 
 Sil, Rudra. 2000. “The Questionable Status of  Boundaries: 
The Need for Integration.” In  Beyond Boundaries? 
Disciplines, Paradigms, and Theoretical Integration 
of International Studies, eds. Rudra Sil and Eileen 
M. Doherty. Albany: State University of New York 
Press. 
 Singer, J. David, Stuart Bremer, and John Stuckey. 1972. 
“Capability Distribution, Uncertainty, and Major 
Power War, 1820–1965.” In  Peace War and Numbers, 
ed. Bruce Russett. Beverly Hills: Sage. 
 Small, Melvin, and J. David Singer. 1976. “The War-
Proneness of Democratic Regimes, 1816–1965.”  The 
Jerusalem Journal of International Relations 1 (1): 
50–69. 
 Truman, David. 1965. “Disillusion and Regeneration: The 
Quest of a Discipline.”  American Political Science 
Review 59 (4): 865–873. 
 Vasquez, John. 1997. “The Realist Paradigm as a Degener-
ating Research Program.”  American Political Science 
Review 91 (4): 899–912. 
 ———. 1998:  The Power of Power Politics: From Neoclas-
sical Realism to Neotraditional. New York: Cambridge 
University Press. 
 ———. 2003. “Kuhn vs. Lakatos? The Case for Multiple 
Frames in Appraising International Relations  Theory.” 
In  Progress in International Relations Theory: 
 Appraising the Field, eds. Colin Elman and Miriam 
Elman. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Walker, Stephen. 2003. “Operational Code Analysis as a 
Scientific Research Program: A Cautionary Tale.” In 
 Progress in International Relations Theory: Apprais-
ing the Field, eds. Colin Elman and Miriam Elman. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Walker, Thomas, and Jeffrey Morton. 2005. “Re-Assess-
ing the ‘Power of Power Politics’ Thesis: Is Realism 
Still Dominant?”  International Studies Review 7 (2): 
341–356. 
 Walker, Thomas. 2008. “Two Faces of Liberalism: Kant, 
Paine, and the Question of Intervention.”  Interna-
tional Studies Quarterly 52 (3): 449–468. 
 Waltz, Kenneth. 1979.  Theory of International Politics.  
Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
 ———. 1990. “The Origins of War in Neorealist The-
ory.” In  The Origins and Prevention of Major Wars, 
eds. Robert Rotberg and Theodore Rabb. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 ———. 1997. “Evaluating Theories.”  American Political 
Science Review 91 (4): 913–917. 
 ———. 1998. “Interview with Ken Waltz.”  Review of 
International Studies 24: 371–386. 
 ———. 2003. “Thoughts about Assaying Theories.” In 
 Progress in International Relations Theory: Apprais-
ing the Field, eds. Colin Elman and Miriam Elman. 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Webb, Keith. 1995.  An Introduction to Problems in the 
Philosophy of Social Sciences. London: Pinter. 
 Wendt, Alexander. 1987. “The Agent-Structure Problem 
in International Relations Theory.”  International 
 Organization 41 (3): 335–370. 
 Wendt, Alexander. 1999.  Social Theory of International 
Politics. New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Wolin, Sheldon. 1969. “Political Theory as a Voca-
tion.”  American Political Science Review 72 (4): 
1062–1082.  
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
j General
 Acharya, Amitav, and Barry Buzan, eds.  Non- Western 
International 
Relations 
Theory. 
New 
York: 
 Routledge, 2010. 
 Albert, Mathias, and Lena Hilkermeier, eds.  Observ-
ing International Relations: Niklas Luhmann and 
World Politics. New York: Routledge, 2007. 
 Albert, Mathias, Lars Erik Cedernan, and Alexander 
Wendt, eds.  New Systems Theories of World Poli-
tics. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Amslutz, Mark R.  The Rules of the Game: A Primer on 
International Relations . Boulder, CO: Paradigm, 2008. 
 Art, Robert J., and Robert Jervis.  International Politics: 
Enduring Concepts and Contemporary Issues. New 
York: HarperCollins, 1992. 
 Behr, Hartmut.  A History of International Politics The-
ory: Ontologies of the International. New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Booth, Ken, and Steve Smith, eds.  International Rela-
tions Theory Today . University Park: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 1995. 

Suggestions for Further Reading
35
 Burchill, Scott, et al.  Theories of International Relations, 
2nd ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. 
 Carlsnaes, Walter, Thomas Risse, and Beth A. Simmons. 
 Handbook of International Relations . London: 
Sage Publications, 2002. 
 Chernoff, Fred.  Theory and Metatheory in Inter-
national Relations: Concepts and Contending 
 Accounts . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
 Cox, Michael, Ken Booth, and Tim Dunne, eds.  The 
Interregnum: Controversies in World Politics 
1989–1999 . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1999. 
 Crane, George T., and Abla Amawi.  The Theoretical 
Evolution of International Political Economy: A 
Reader . New York: Oxford University Press, 1991, 
1997. 
 Dougherty, James E., and Robert L. Pfaltzgraff, Jr. 
 Contending Theories of International Relations, 
4th ed. New York: Longman, 1997. 
 Doyle, Michael W., and G. John Ikenberry. New  Think-
ing in International Relations Theory.  Boulder, CO: 
Westview, 1997. 
 Elman, Colin, and Miriam Fendius Elman, eds.  Prog-
ress in International Relations Theory: Appraising 
the Field. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003. 
 Ferguson, Yale H., and Richard W. Mansbach. “Be-
tween Celebration and Despair: Constructive Sugges-
tions for Future International Theory.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 35, 4 (December 1991): 363–496. 
 ———.  The Elusive Quest: Theory and International 
Politics . Columbia: University of South Carolina 
Press, 1988; and  The Elusive Quest Continues: The-
ory and Global Politics . Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 2003. 
 Griffiths, Martin.  Fifty Key Thinkers in International 
Relations . London: Routledge, 1999. 
 Groom, A. J. R., and Margot Light, eds.  Contempo-
rary International Relations: A Guide to Theory . 
 London: Pinter Publishers, 1994. 
 Hoffmann, Stanley.  Janus and Minerva: Essays in 
the  Theory and Practice of International Politics . 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1987. 
 Hollis, Martin, and Steve Smith.  Explaining and 
 Understanding International Relations . Oxford, 
England: Clarendon Press, 1990. 
 Holsti, K. J.  The Dividing Discipline: Hegemony and 
Diversity in International Theory . Boston: Unwin 
Hyman, 1995. 
 Kegley, Charles W., ed.  Controversies in International 
Relations Theory: Realism and the Neoliberal Chal-
lenge.  New York: St. Martin’s, 1995. 
 Lebow, Richard Ned.  A Cultural Theory of Interna-
tional Relations . New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2009. 
 ———.  Coercion, Cooperation and Ethics in Interna-
tional Relations . New York: Routledge, 2007. 
 Lebow, Richard Ned, and Mark Irving Lichbach, 
eds.  Theory and Evidence in Comparative Politics 
and International Relations . New York: Palgrave 
 Macmillan, 2007. 
 Linklater, Andrew, ed.  International Relations: Criti-
cal Concepts in Political Science, vols. I–V. London: 
Routledge, 2000. 
 Morgan, Patrick M.  Theories and Approaches to Inter-
national Politics. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction 
Books, 1986. 
 Neuman, Stephanie G., ed.  International Relations 
Theory and the Third World. New York: St. Martin’s 
Press, 1998. 
 Neumann, Iver B., and Ole Weaver, eds.  The Future of 
International Relations. London: Routledge, 1997. 
 Olson, William C., and A. J. R. Groom.  International 
Relations Then and Now: Origins and Trends in 
Interpretation. London: HarperCollins, 1991. 
 Reus-Smit, Christian, and Duncan Snidal, eds.  The 
 Oxford Handbook of International Relations. 
 Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 Rothstein, Robert L.  The Evolution of Theory in Inter-
national Relations. Columbia: University of South 
Carolina Press, 1991. 
 Sharp, Paul.  Diplomatic Theory of International Rela-
tions. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 
2009. 
 Smith, Steve, Ken Booth, and Marysia Zalewski, eds. 
 International Theory: Positivism and Beyond. 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 
1996. 
 Sullivan, Michael P.  Theories of International Relations: 
Transition vs. Persistence. New York:  Palgrave, 
2001; and his earlier  Theories of  International Rela-
tions: Theories and Evidence. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1976. 
 Thompson, Kenneth W.  Schools of Thought in Inter-
national Relations. Baton Rouge: Louisiana State 
University Press, 1996. 
 Vasquez, John A.  Classics of International Relations, 2nd 
ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1986, 1990. 
 Walker, Thomas C. “The Perils of Paradigm Mentali-
ties: Revisiting Kuhn, Lakatos, and Popper,”  Per-
spectives on Politics , 8, 2 (June 2010): 433–51. 
 Waltz, Kenneth N.  Realism and International Politics. 
New York and London: Routledge, 2008.  

36
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
j On History, Intellectual History, 
and International Relations
 Behr, Hartmut.  A History of International Politics 
Theory: Ontologies of the International . New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Carr, E. H.  What Is History? Harmondsworth, 
 England: Penguin Books, 1964. 
 Dunne, Michael Cox, and Ken Booth, eds.  The 
Eighty Years’ Crisis: International Relations 
1919–1999. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1998. 
 Howard, Michael.  The Lessons of History. New 
 Haven: Yale University Press, 1991. 
 Kauppi, Mark V., and Paul R. Viotti.  The Global 
Philosophers: World Politics in Western Thought. 
Lanham, MD: Lexington Books/Rowman and 
 Littlefield, 1992. 
 “Symposium: History and Theory.”  International 
 Security 22, 1 (Summer 1997): 5–85.  

Images of International 
Relations
PART
I

This page intentionally left blank 

 CHAPTER
2
Realism: The State 
and Balance of Power 
MAJOR ACTORS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
 R ealism is an image of international relations based on four principal assumptions. 
Scholars or policymakers who identify themselves as realists, of course, do not all 
perfectly match the realism ideal type. We find, however, that the four assumptions 
identified with this perspective are useful as a general statement of the main lines 
of realist thought and the basis on which hypotheses and theories are developed. 
 First, states are the principal or most important actors in an  anarchical world lack-
ing central legitimate governance. States represent the key  units of analysis , whether 
one is dealing with ancient Greek city-states or modern nation-states. The study of 
international relations is the study of relations among these units, particularly major 
powers as they shape world politics (witness the United States and the Soviet Union 
during the Cold War) and engage in the costliest wars (World Wars I and II). Realists 
who use the concept of  system  usually refer to an international system of states. What 
of non-state actors? International organizations such as the United Nations may aspire 
to the status of independent actor, but from the realist perspective, this aspiration has 
not in fact been achieved to any significant degree. Realists tend to see international 
organizations as doing no more than their member states direct. Multinational cor-
porations, terrorist groups, and other transnational and international organizations 
are frequently acknowledged by realists, but the position of these non-state actors is 
always one of lesser importance. States remain the dominant actors. 
 Second, the state is viewed as a unitary actor. For purposes of theory building and 
analysis, realists view the state as being encapsulated by a metaphorical hard shell or 
opaque, black box. We need not look much inside this shell or black box. A country 
faces the outside world as an integrated unit. Indeed, a common assumption associ-
ated with realist thought is that political differences within the state are ultimately 
resolved authoritatively such that the government of the state speaks with one voice 
for the state as a whole. The state is a unitary actor in that it is usually assumed by 
realists to have one policy at any given time on any particular issue. To be sure, ex-
ceptions occur, but to the realists these are exceptions that demonstrate the rule and 
that actually support the general notion of the state as an integrated, unitary actor. 
39

40
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
 Even in those exceptional cases in which, for example, a foreign ministry 
expresses views different from positions taken by the same country’s defense min-
istry, corrective action is taken in an attempt to bring these alternative views to a 
common and authoritative statement of policy. “End running” of state authorities 
by bureaucratic and nongovernmental, domestic, and transnational actors is also 
possible, but it occurs unchecked by state authorities in only those issues in which 
the stakes are low. From the realist perspective, if the issues are important enough, 
higher authorities will intervene to preclude bureaucratic end running or action by 
nongovernmental actors that are contrary to centrally directed policy. 
 Third, given this emphasis on the unitary state-as-actor, realists usually make 
the further assumption for the purpose of theory building that the state is essentially 
a rational (or purposive) actor. A rational foreign policy decision-making process 
would include a statement of objectives, consideration of all feasible alternatives 
in terms of existing capabilities available to the state, the relative likelihood of at-
taining these objectives by the various alternatives under consideration, and the 
benefits or costs associated with each alternative. Following this rational process, 
governmental decisionmakers select the alternative that maximizes utility (maxi-
mizing benefit or minimizing cost associated with attaining the objectives sought) 
or at least achieves an acceptable outcome. The result is a rank ordering of policy 
preferences among viable alternatives. 
 As a practical matter, the realist is aware of the difficulties in viewing the state 
as a rational actor. Governmental decisionmakers may not have all the factual in-
formation or knowledge of cause and effect they need to make value-maximizing 
decisions. The process may well be clouded by considerable uncertainty as decision-
makers grope for the best solution or approach to an issue. They also have to deal 
with the problem of human bias and misperception that may lead them astray. In 
any event, the choice made—if not always the best or value-maximizing choice in 
fact—is at least perceived to be a satisfactory one. It is a  satisficing or suboptimal 
choice—less than a value-maximizing choice, but still good enough in terms of the 
objectives sought. The assumptions of states being both unitary and rational actors 
are particularly important in the application of  game theory and other rational-
choice methods to  deterrence , arms control, balance of power, the use of force, and 
other studies of interest to realists. 
 Fourth, realists assume that within the hierarchy of issues facing the state, 
national or international security usually tops the list. Military and related politi-
cal issues dominate world politics. A realist focuses on actual or potential conflict 
between state actors and the use of force, examining how international stability 
is attained or maintained, how it breaks down, the utility of force as a means to 
resolve disputes, and the prevention of any violation of its territorial integrity. To 
the realist, military security or strategic issues are sometimes referred to as “high 
politics,” whereas economic and social issues typically are viewed as less important 
or “low politics.” Indeed, the former is often understood to dominate or set the 
environment within which the latter occurs. 
 Given the state’s objectives, goals, or purposes in terms of security, it seeks 
and uses  power (commonly understood in material terms as capabilities relative to 
other states), which is a key concept to realists as is the  balance of power among 
states. The structural realist (or neorealist) puts particular emphasis on the security 

Major Actors and Assumptions 
41
implications of the distribution of power (or underlying structure) of the interna-
tional system of states: unipolar (one great power), bipolar (two great powers), or 
multipolar (three or more great powers). States use the power they have to serve 
their interests or achieve their objectives. To most realists, the struggle for (or 
use of) power among states is at the core of international relations. In the words 
of Hans J. Morgenthau: “International politics, like all politics, is a struggle for 
power. Whatever the ultimate aims of international politics, power is always the 
immediate aim or means to an end.”  1  
 Further comment is necessary concerning assumptions two and three. The im-
portant point is that from the standpoint of  methodology , the image of a unified, 
rational state is truly an assumption, not a description of the actual world. Realists 
who embrace positivism use such assumptions to build theories, not describe real-
ity. Assumptions should be viewed not in terms of descriptive accuracy, but rather 
in terms of how fruitful they are in generating insights and valid generalizations 
about international politics. From this point of view, assumptions are neither true 
nor false; they are more or less useful in helping the theorist derive testable proposi-
tions or hypotheses about international relations. Once hypotheses are developed, 
they are tested against the real world. The image of the unified, rational state 
is, therefore, the starting point for realist analysis, not a concluding statement. 
This is true whether one is a  classical realist emphasizing the impact of history, 
international law, and actions taken by political leaders or a present-day  neo- or 
 structural realist who believes the basis for a theory of international relations has 
to have at its core an understanding of the distribution of capabilities across states. 
Morgenthau, a classical realist, explained the utility of the rational, unitary actor 
assumption as follows: 
 We put ourselves in the position of a statesman who must meet a certain problem of 
foreign policy under certain circumstances, and we ask ourselves what the rational 
alternatives are from which a statesman may choose . . . and which of these rational 
alternatives this particular statesman, acting under these circumstances, is likely to 
choose. It is the testing of this rational hypothesis against the actual facts and their 
consequences that gives meaning to the facts of international politics and makes a 
theory of politics possible.  2  
 The point is that neorealist theorizing that focuses primarily on material structure 
(the distribution of power or capabilities) as the principal explanatory variable 
depends on the same rationalist assumptions as classical realists. This is despite the 
fact classical realists are more likely to accept such nonmaterial factors as ideas or 
norms as part of the theories they develop. 
 Game theory is a realist example of the use of such simplifying assumptions 
as an aid to developing hypotheses and theories about the causes of various inter-
national political phenomena. Many works on deterrence and  coercive diplomacy 
(or “compellance”) also use the rational, unitary actor assumptions as do other ex-
planations of international conflict. The rationality assumption is similarly central 
to  expected utility models of international politics. These and similar formulations 
comprise  rational-choice theorizing . Not confined to realism, rational choice is also 
part of theorizing associated with the liberal (particularly neoliberal institutionalist) 
image discussed in  Chapter  3 . 

42
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
 As an image of politics, then, realism focuses on power and power politics 
among states. Neorealists such as Kenneth Waltz, John Mearsheimer, and Christo-
pher Layne emphasize the overall distribution of power among states and are highly 
skeptical of the extent to which international norms and international institutions 
can ameliorate competition among states. Classical realists such as Morgenthau, 
E. H. Carr, and Arnold Wolfers and their present-day followers who could be termed 
 neoclassical realists such as Randall Schweller, however, have had a more inclusive 
approach.  3  While recognizing the importance of balance of power, they also have 
argued for the serious consideration of how factors at the domestic or societal level 
of analysis influence international relations. Possible factors include the impact of 
leaders, whether a state is revisionist or status-quo oriented, as well as the role of 
norms and institutions. Hence, as with other images discussed in this book, an ad-
herence to basic realist assumptions can still result in different interpretations and 
theoretical applications based on these assumptions. 
 Where did these assumptions of current realist thought come from? They obvi-
ously did not appear out of thin air following World War II, the Cold War, or the 
period since the al Qaeda attacks in 2001 on 9/11. Rather, they represent the culmi-
nation of thinking about international relations over the millennia, particularly the 
last five centuries. We now turn to some of the more notable intellectual precursors 
who have had a significant impact on the writings of contemporary realists.  
INTELLECTUAL PRECURSORS AND INFLUENCES 
Thucydides
 Thucydides (471–400  b.c. ) is usually credited with being the first writer in the real-
ist tradition as well as the founding father of the international relations discipline. 
Anyone who has taken a class in political philosophy would probably agree that 
the profound insights of many ancient Greek writers are not easily grasped on first 
reading. One might initially find this less a problem with Thucydides’  History of the 
Peloponnesian War  because this famous work chronicles twenty-one of the twenty-
eight years of war between Athens and Sparta (and their respective allies) in the fifth 
century B.C. Taken simply as history, it is a masterful account of this era, filled with 
tales of heroism and brutality, victory and defeat, brilliance and stupidity, honor and 
deceit. These human traits are certainly exhibited not only in one particular war, 
but also in wars throughout the ages. This is what makes the work such a classic. 
 The task Thucydides set for himself, however, was much more ambitious than 
simply describing what was occurring. Particular events were dealt with in great 
and vivid detail, but his goal was to say something significant not only about the 
events of his own time, but also about the nature of war and why it continually 
recurs. For Thucydides, the past was the guide for the future. He was less interested 
in the immediate causes of the Peloponnesian War than he was in the underlying 
forces at work. Leaders might point to a particular event to justify a policy, but for 
Thucydides this simply obscured more profound factors that operate throughout 
history such as his famous trinity of fear, honor, and interest, a typology that is 
hard to improve upon. At heart, for realists  The History of the Peloponnesian War  
is a study of the struggle for military and political power. 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
43
 Thucydides was younger than Socrates and Sophocles and older than 
 Aristophanes. In 424  b.c. , during the eighth year of the Peloponnesian War, he 
was elected an Athenian general. While stationed in Thrace, he failed to prevent 
the Spartan capture of a city and was punished with twenty years of exile. Athens 
might have lost a general, but the world gained an historian. 
 As a member of one of the more notable Athenian families, Thucydides spent 
the rest of the war observing events, traveling, and interviewing participants. As an 
exile, he was detached from yet obsessed with politics. Although concerned with ac-
curacy, he gave precedence to understanding the motives and policies of the leaders 
on all sides of the conflict and used the technique of liberally reconstructing speeches 
and episodes. His purpose was to draw historical lessons for future statesmen who 
might read his work. By analyzing the particular, he hoped to illuminate the general. 
 Why did war break out between Athens and Sparta? Thucydides states: 
 I propose first to give an account of the causes of complaint which they had against 
each other and of the specific instances where their interests clashed [i.e., the imme-
diate causes of the war]: this is in order that there should be no doubt in anyone’s 
mind about what led to this great war falling upon the Hellenes. But the real reason 
for the war is, in my opinion, most likely to be disguised by such argument. What 
made war inevitable was the growth of Athenian power and the fear which this 
caused in Sparta [i.e., this was the underlying cause of the war].  4  
 Thus, according to Thucydides, the real or underlying cause of the war was  fear 
associated with a shift in the balance of power—a systems-level explanation. Sparta 
was afraid of losing its preeminent role in the Hellenic world and therefore took 
countermeasures to build up its military strength and enlist the support of allies. 
Athens responded in kind. In the ensuing analysis, the situations, events, and poli-
cies Thucydides described lend themselves to comparison with such familiar no-
tions as arms races, deterrence, balance of power, alliances, diplomacy, strategy, 
concern for honor, and perceptions of strengths and weaknesses. 
 Thucydides’ emphasis on fear as a cause of the Peloponnesian War, fear that 
resulted from the increase in Athenian power relative to that of Sparta, is echoed 
throughout history. As statesmen perceive the balance of power to be shifting in 
their disfavor, they make efforts to rectify the situation that in turn causes fear, 
suspicion, and distrust on the part of their rivals. One could quite easily substitute 
for Athens and Sparta other historical examples such as France and Britain in the 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, Napoleonic France and the rest of Europe in 
the early nineteenth century, Germany and Britain after the Franco-Prussian War 
of 1870, and the Soviet Union and the United States in the four decades following 
World War II. In all such historical examples, a good case can be made that fear 
is a dominant characteristic and a motivating factor for arms races and war itself. 
 One reason Thucydides is deemed a scholar of international relations, however, 
is that the cause of fear he identifies is not so much innate or basic human nature as 
it is the nature of interstate politics. Concerning a world in which no superordinate 
or central authority exists to impose order on all states (whether ancient city-states 
or modern states often encompassing large expanses of territory), Thucydides 
relates in a classic statement of   Realpolitik how Athenians emphasized the overrid-
ing importance of power in such a world: “The strong [Athens] do what they have 

44
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
the power to do and the weak [the islanders on Melos] accept what they have to 
accept.”  5  Put even more directly: the strong do what they will; the weak do what 
they must! Although fear may lead to war, power and capabilities relative to that 
of others determine the outcome. 
 Thucydides was too good of an historian, however, to explain the origins of 
the Peloponnesian War by restricting his emphasis to the systems level and the 
shifting balance of power between Athens and Sparta. In fact his work can be 
viewed as an exemplar of the application of the state-societal and individual  levels 
of analysis. With regard to the former, Thucydides deserves more credit than he 
has been given for the impact of what are termed “second image” factors—in 
particular the nature or character of a society. In other words, the emphasis on the 
phrase “What made war inevitable was the growth of Athenian power” should be 
as much on the adjective “Athenian” as it is on the noun “power.” In particular, 
Spartan fear of Athens was a result of the actual and perceived special character 
of Athenian society. As historians of classical Greece have argued, Athens was 
not simply another powerful state on the rise. Athenian democracy and the cru-
cible of the Persian wars helped to mold an Athenian citizen whose daring and 
self-assurance were a driving force behind Athenian imperialism. The nature of 
Athenian society made for an expansionist zeal. Other states recognized this, and 
it was this recognition that contributed to such an intense fear of Athens and hence 
led to the Peloponnesian War. 
 In the very first dialogue of the book the nature of Athenian society and char-
acter is discussed at length. Prior to the full-scale outbreak of the war in 431  b.c. , 
representatives from Corinth were the last delegates to speak at a debate in Sparta 
on the issuing of a declaration of war against Athens. The Corinthians point out 
“the enormous difference between you and the Athenians.” Sparta, they claim, has 
never given any serious thought to “what sort of people these Athenians are against 
whom you will have to fight—how much, indeed how completely different from 
you.” (1.70) The essential danger does not simply derive from the impressive mili-
tary capabilities of Athens and its allies, but rather “the character of the city which 
is opposed to you.” (1.71) The most famous discussions of Athenian character are 
to be found in Pericles’ reply to a Spartan ultimatum and in his funeral oration 
where he extols Athenian wisdom and daring. 
 Thucydides’ discussion of the outbreak of the Peloponnesian War points to 
other factors that go beyond character and capabilities. Shifting power among 
states and domestic-level, political-cultural factors share a common characteristic—
they both tend to change slowly. Yet the propensity for war and peace can change 
quickly. Hence, Thucydides discussed not only the underlying causes of war, but 
also the more immediate causes. While war may have been inevitable—and even this 
is subject to dispute—to explain the timing requires an examination of the manner in 
which decisions were made and the persons involved. As a result, Thucydides spends 
a great deal of time recounting debates within and among states. Domestic factors 
such as political coalitions and elite personalities are important in explaining the 
outbreak of war and its conduct. For example, Thucydides comments unfavorably 
about the leaders of Athens who came after Pericles had died of the plague. Thucy-
dides, therefore, appreciated the importance of various factors at different levels of 
analysis in order to explain the outbreak of war.  

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
45
Machiavelli
 By his own admission, the Italian political philosopher Niccolò Machiavelli 
(1469–1527) drew heavily from his study of ancient, especially Roman, writings. 
In some respects, the situation in fifteenth- and sixteenth-century Italy, divided as 
the peninsula was into separate city-states, was similar to the Hellenic world of 
Thucydides. Machiavelli worked as a civil servant and diplomat until the Republic 
of Florence fell in 1512. Thought to be a republican counterrevolutionary opposed 
to the aristocratic Medici family that had assumed power in Florence (as well as 
in Rome), he was tortured by their interrogators. During his subsequent enforced 
idleness in a small town south of Florence (Santa Andrea in Percossina), he put his 
time to good use by reflecting on the chaos and political instability among the Italian 
city-states influenced as well by French and Spanish interventions. 
 Like Thucydides, Machiavelli wrote of the importance of personality on poli-
tics, power, balance of power, formation of alliances and counteralliances, and 
the causes of conflict between different city-states. His primary focus, however, 
was on what present-day writers refer to as national security. For Machiavelli, 
survival of the state (identified with the ruling prince) was paramount. The prince 
could lose his state by not coping effectively with both internal and external 
threats to his rule. The German term  Realpolitik , so central to realist thought, 
refers to power and power politics among states. Machiavelli’s most famous 
work,  The Prince , is a practical manual on how to gain, maintain, and expand 
power—the stuff of  Realpolitik . It is dedicated to the ruler of Florence at that 
time, Lorenzo de Medici. 
 One of the more controversial parts of Machiavelli’s thesis is the notion that 
the security of the state is so important that it may justify certain acts by the prince 
that would be forbidden to other individuals not burdened by the princely respon-
sibility of assuring that security. The end—security of the state—is understood to 
justify any means necessary to achieve that end. Machiavellianism (or Machiavel-
lism) has been condemned by many who consider such a view to be immoral. In 
fact, Machiavelli never wrote that “the end justifies the means.” What he did write 
was “ si guarda al fine ”—that in decisions and actions the prince should look for or 
anticipate consequences—wise counsel it would seem, but by no means an assertion 
that the end justifies any means as he has customarily been (mis)interpreted. 
 Drawing from Machiavelli, Max Weber and others have argued that the ac-
tions of statesmen do (or should) follow a code of conduct different from that of 
the average citizen. Thus, it has been observed that there are two separate and 
distinct ethics: first, conventional religious morality concerned with such matters 
as individual salvation (the ethics of ultimate ends) and, second, by contrast, the 
moral obligations of rulers who must take actions to provide for national security 
(the ethics of responsibility). 
 Following this interpretation, one can understand Machiavelli’s view that rul-
ers should be good if they can (good or harmless in the conventional sense) but be 
willing to cause harm  if necessary (consistent with their obligations as rulers). In-
deed, princes put soldiers in harm’s way when they go into battle and these soldiers, 
in turn, wreak harm upon their adversaries. Machiavelli expressed such choices as 
invoking  male (pronounced mah-leh)—the Italian word used to describe evil, harm 

46
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
or negative consequences associated in this context with the decisions and actions 
of princes. 
 Although a prince may not wish to be hated, Machiavelli argues “it is much 
safer to be feared than to be loved, if one must choose.” Although the prince may 
be criticized for being harsh, this is acceptable to Machiavelli so long as the prince 
keeps his subjects united and loyal. These are the sorts of arguments that have 
given Machiavellianism a negative connotation, but followers of Machiavelli would 
respond that the ultimate goal meant to justify particular policies is the security of 
the state (and its people), not just the security of an individual ruler. 
 Machiavelli wrote of the world as it  is , not the world as it  should or  ought to 
be. That is one reason modern political theorists refer to him as a realist. Ethics 
or moral norms and the real-world politics he observed are in separate domains. 
His advice to the prince, following this interpretation, was based on an analysis of 
history, and of what actually occurs in the political realm, not on abstract ethical 
principles: 
 Many have imagined republics and principalities that have never been seen or 
known to exist in reality; for how we live is so far removed from how we ought 
to live, that he who abandons what is done for what ought to be done, will rather 
learn to bring about his own ruin than his preservation. A man who wishes to make 
a profession of goodness in everything must necessarily come to grief among so 
many who are not good.  6  
 This is not so much an endorsement of human behavior in politics as it is a state-
ment of what he understands it actually to be. For Machiavelli, in an amoral (if not 
immoral) world, what meaning, after all, does the preaching of conventional moral-
ity have? Indeed, an extreme statement of realist thinking is that considerations of 
power and power politics are the  only relevant factors. Thucydides raised this issue 
in the  Melian Dialogue , appended to this chapter. 
 In the present-day world, a convenient way to discredit an opponent is to ac-
cuse him or her of being Machiavellian. Nevertheless, it must be emphasized that 
Machiavelli did not encourage rulers to engage in harmful activity or use violence 
for its own sake. In numerous passages, he advises the prince not to be needlessly 
cruel because this may eventually undermine his rule. The yardstick one should 
use is how a particular policy contributes to the security and stability of the state. 
Indeed, as reading the last few chapters of  The Prince makes clear, Machiavelli’s 
prescription for Italian security was to be found in unifying the country, thus 
not only avoiding armed conflict among cities and alliances of cities against one 
another, but also dissuading interventions or attacks by outside powers, namely, 
France and Spain. 
 Isn’t it interesting that this was the same prescription for American security 
we find in John Jay’s and Alexander Hamilton’s  Federalist Papers 1 through 9 and 
later in George Washington’s farewell address? The thesis they argued was that 
unity among the thirteen states under the proposed U.S. Constitution was essential 
to avoiding war among them and also to securing themselves against invasion by 
either Britain or Spain. Their concerns proved to have merit: Unity helped repel the 
British in the war of 1812 and failing to keep unity in 1860 and 1861 resulted in 
civil war. 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
47
Hobbes
 The political philosophy of the Englishman Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) was 
developed during the first fifty turbulent years of the seventeenth century. After at-
tending university in Oxford, Hobbes became a tutor to the son of a nobleman, and 
throughout his life he remained associated with the family. Identified as a Royalist in 
a struggle between parliamentarians and the crown, Hobbes left for France in 1641 
at a time when Parliament was asserting its power against the monarchy. For three 
years, he tutored a future monarch, the son of Charles I, the latter executed in 1649 
during the English civil war. Publishing his famous work  Leviathan , Hobbes 
returned to England in 1651, pledging loyalty to the newly established republican or 
parliamentary regime. Indeed, marking the end of divine right of kings,  Leviathan —
the first general theory of politics in English—provided that either a monarch or an 
assembly (i.e., parliament) could be tasked by the people to assure their security as 
the primary responsibility of government. 
 Like Machiavelli and Thucydides, Hobbes had a pessimistic view of human 
nature, which has particularly influenced both the work of classical realists such 
as Hans Morgenthau and structural realists like Kenneth Waltz. Hobbes was 
informed by his own life experiences. As with others, his life and safety were in 
jeopardy in the 1640s during the English civil war. In comments to others, he was 
known frequently to remark: “Fear and I were born twins!” The reference was to 
his whole life beset by the turmoil of English politics, beginning with his premature 
birth in 1588 due to the trauma his mother apparently suffered in fear of a Spanish 
invasion, which was blunted only by English good fortune in its naval battle against 
Spain—sinking the armada of ships that had been assembled off English shores. 
 His primary focus in  Leviathan was domestic politics, and his goal was to make 
the strongest case possible for the necessity of a powerful, centralized political au-
thority to establish and maintain the order essential to human security in society. 
To illustrate his philosophical points, Hobbes posited hypothetically that prior to 
the creation of society, human beings lived in a “state of nature”—a condition of 
war of “every one against every one.” There was in this state of war “a continual 
fear and danger of violent death; and the life of man, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, 
and short.”  7  
 Hobbes did not argue that such a state of nature had ever really existed. To 
him, the state of nature was the result of a thought experiment—imagining what 
the world would be like without governmental authority or any other social struc-
ture. Accordingly, he was interested in showing how people could escape from this 
hypothetical situation—a state of war of everyone against everyone else—by agree-
ing to place all power in the hands of a sovereign or Leviathan (a biblical, beastly 
metaphor used by Hobbes that refers to state authority, or the supreme ruler, either 
a monarch or parliament) that would end the anarchy of the state of nature, using 
power to maintain order so essential to daily life. If governmental authority did 
not already exist, it would have to be created. In his words: “There must be some 
coercive power to compel men equally to the performance of their covenants, by 
the terror of some punishment, greater than the benefit they expect by the breach 
of their covenant.”  8  Without order, he argued, civilization and all its benefits are 
impossible—no economic development, art, knowledge, or anything else of value. 

48
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
 Hobbes’s impact on the realist view of international relations stems from an 
image of states as if they were individuals in a mythical state of nature. Although 
his focus in  Leviathan is on domestic societies, his observations are also considered 
relevant to international politics and have had a major impact on realism, particu-
larly his assessment of why conflict and violence between individuals or states are 
to be expected. In the absence of a sovereign or central, superordinate authority, 
the anarchic world described by Hobbes is a rather dismal one. 
 Because in international politics as in the state of nature there is no Leviathan 
or superordinate authority with power to impose order, we find a condition of 
 anarchy . For survival, states are left to their own devices in a world in which each 
state claims to be  sovereign , each with a right to be independent or autonomous 
with respect to one another. In Hobbes’s words: 
 In all times, kings, and persons of sovereign authority, because of their indepen-
dency, are in continual jealousies, and in the state and posture of gladiators; having 
their weapons pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another; that is, their forts, 
garrisons, and guns upon the frontiers of their kingdoms; and continual spies upon 
their neighbours; which is a posture of war.  9  
 As anarchy prevails in the state of nature, so too is anarchy a dominant characteristic 
of international politics. In such a world states use power to make their way. Power 
politics complete with alliances and counteralliances are the order of the day. Without 
a Leviathan (or, in the language of contemporary international relations literature, a 
leading or  hegemonic power or world state that can maintain order), suspicion, dis-
trust, conflict, and war are seemingly inevitable. There being “no common power”—
the absence of any  social contract among (or authority over) them—states must fend 
for themselves. 
 As with Machiavelli’s understandings, this rather negative image of interna-
tional politics offered by Hobbes is central to realist thought. We also find power 
and balance-of-power politics framed in Machiavellian or Hobbesean terms in 
English School (see  Chapter  5 ) writings as one source of order in international or 
world society. This, however, is complemented by the rules states find or make to 
govern their conduct—a perspective one sees prominently in the writings of Hugo 
Grotius, the “father” of international law.  
Grotius
 Indeed, Hugo Grotius (1583–1645), a Dutch contemporary of Thomas Hobbes, 
offered a different view of international relations from that associated with Hobbes 
and Machiavelli. We also take up Grotian thought in some detail in  Chapter  5 on 
the English School. Grotius dealt with the essential anarchy of international rela-
tions by calling for the establishment (or acknowledging the existence) of laws or 
rules accepted by states as binding. That the relations of states  ought to conform to 
such rules is a central tenet of the Grotian tradition in international relations. To 
Grotians, values or norms, particularly when recognized as international law, are 
important in maintaining order among states. 
 Grotius dealt with the problems of international relations (including commer-
cial transactions) from a very practical point of view. Given the importance of trade 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
49
to his native Holland as a seafaring nation, he addressed this subject in his  Law of 
Prize and Booty (1604–1605) and questions of freedom of navigation and territo-
rial seas in his  Freedom of the Seas (1609). Probably his most important work was 
his  Law of War and Peace (1625), three volumes that dealt with war and questions 
of national security—central themes in much realist writing then and now. Gro-
tius has a place alongside Thucydides, Machiavelli, and Hobbes in classical realist 
thought, although less so in neorealist or structural realist understandings that see 
international law and global norms or rules as secondary to, or informed by, system 
structure or the distribution of power among states. Put another way, their material 
understandings of power and the balance of power lead structural realists to put 
more stock in Hobbes than in Grotius. 
 What are the sources of international law? Grotius looked to the use of reason 
and the “natural law” for general principles. He also looked to customary practice 
and to rules agreed on by governments that would be binding on states. Such treaties 
or formal covenants would be binding (in Latin,  pacta sunt servanda ) in the sense that 
states are obligated to follow them even in the absence of central authority to enforce 
their adherence. Changing circumstances might lead to the alteration of rules, but the 
important point is that to Grotians (and many classical realists) order in international 
relations and matters of war and peace to include commerce involve both power  and 
values. In this regard, this Grotian emphasis on norms and laws leads many liberals and 
neoliberal institutionalists to claim him as one of their own, as do those in the English 
School. For them, the term  rationalist owes much to rule-oriented, Grotian thought.  
Clausewitz
 Carl von Clausewitz (1780–1831), a Prussian officer who rose to the rank of general 
and who served in the Napoleonic wars, thought the military element of a state’s 
power to be extremely important but subordinate always to the political. Consistent 
with the writings of Machiavelli on war, Clausewitz argued in an oft-quoted phrase 
that war is “a continuation of political activity by other means.” War or the use of 
force is thus a  means policymakers may choose rationally to accomplish their state 
objectives; it decidedly is not an  end in itself. This formulation is reflected in realist 
conceptions of power and its use. 
 Much of Clausewitz’s writing took place in the interwar period between the 
defeat of Napoleon in 1815 and Clausewitz’s recall to duty in 1830 for service in 
East Prussia. Clausewitz died in 1831, never having completed his major work,  On 
War. His legacy, nevertheless, remains a central contribution to the realist school, 
thanks to the successful efforts of his wife to publish the manuscript. 
 The use of force in battle aims to destroy or substantially weaken the war-making 
capability of an adversary, which undermines (or precludes) the will to continue 
fighting. Leadership is important, and the commander is crucial in this essentially 
rational enterprise, adapting to changing circumstances and employing such prin-
ciples as surprise, mass, and concentration of forces. Attacks effectively directed to 
an enemy’s “center of gravity” (however this may be defined in operational terms) 
can cause an enemy’s capability to collapse. Because one’s own military forces are 
necessarily finite, one is not wasteful in their use—an economy of force essential to 
sustaining military capabilities against an adversary. 

50
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
 Just as Machiavelli referred to  fortuna and Thucydides to fate as blunting even 
the best-laid plans of the prince, Clausewitz identifies the uncertainty that attends 
decision making in battlefield conditions—the “fog of war.” He was also well 
aware that rationally made plans often run into obstacles or “friction” when actu-
ally implemented. He is cautionary when he warns that one ought not take the first 
step into war without realizing where the last step may lead. These are the kinds of 
observations one readily finds in present-day strategic literature in the realist genre 
that owes much to Clausewitz. As significant as his view that the military is prop-
erly a political means was his exposition of societal (including social and economic) 
dimensions of national capabilities. At the same time, his focus on national security 
problems places him in the mainstream of present-day realist thought.  
Carr
 Many students of international relations consider Edward Hallett Carr’s  The 
Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939 a classic. Although Carr can be viewed as an 
intellectual precursor for realists and, as we note in  Chapter  5 , a forerunner of the 
present-day English School, his work transcends narrow classification in that he has 
also been influential, as has Grotius, on the thinking of certain authors whom we 
would label liberals or neoliberal institutionalists. 
 The writings of Thucydides, Machiavelli, Hobbes, Grotius, and Clausewitz 
illustrate how great works are often written during the most difficult times.  The 
Twenty Years’ Crisis is no exception in that it was completed in the summer of 
1939 with the shadow of war looming over Europe. As with other authors we 
have discussed, Carr was less interested in apportioning blame to particular lead-
ers for the imminent onset of World War II than he was in attempting “to analyse 
the underlying and significant, rather than the immediate and personal, causes of 
the disaster.” Unless this were done, he argued, we would fail to understand how 
war could break out twenty short years after the signing of the Versailles Treaty in 
1919. He dedicated his book “to the makers of the coming peace.” In attempting to 
understand “the more profound causes of the contemporary international crisis,” 
echoes of Thucydides can be discerned. Carr, for example, placed a great deal of 
emphasis on the role of fear in explaining World War I. 
 Throughout  The Twenty Years’ Crisis, Carr refers to the impact of Machiavelli 
and Hobbes on realist thinking. Although his work is best known as a critique of 
 utopian or  idealist thought, which dominated the fledgling discipline of interna-
tional relations after World War I, Carr also challenges the more extreme versions 
of realism that posit the divorce of morality from politics in international relations. 
He argues that sound political thought must be based on elements of both utopia 
(i.e., values) and reality (i.e., power). Where utopianism has become a “hollow 
and intolerable sham,” serving merely as a disguise for the privileged, the realist 
provides a service in exposing it. Pure realism, on the other hand, can offer noth-
ing but “a naked struggle for power which makes any kind of international society 
impossible.” Hence, for Carr, politics is made up of two elements, inextricably 
intertwined: utopia and reality—values and power. 
 Consistent with classical-realist understandings that go beyond just power 
and interest, more than a third of the book is devoted to such Grotian topics as 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
51
the role of morality in international relations, the foundations of law, the sanctity 
of treaties, the judicial settlement of international disputes, peaceful change, and 
the prospects for a new international order. Because Carr critically assessed the 
strengths and weaknesses of utopianism as well as realism, he can be viewed as an 
important influence on many contemporary international relations theorists, both 
realists and nonrealists. Particularly given his insightful critique of proposed liberal 
solutions to the problems of re-creating international order following World War I, 
he remains relevant to the post–Cold War era in which liberal solutions have been 
suggested to deal with globalization.  
Morgenthau
 Hans J. Morgenthau (1904–1980) remains one of the most influential IR theorists. 
In many ways he exemplifies those classical realists who came before him due to his 
emphasis on a holistic approach to IR that encompasses all the levels of analysis to 
include the impact of human nature, the blurring of the distinction between society 
and the international system, and a concern for justice. Born in Germany, he fled 
to the United States when the Nazis came to power. While he was a professor at 
the University of Chicago, his  Politics Among Nations (1948) was published. It has 
been viewed by some as a tutorial for post–World War II American statesmen who 
now led a country of preeminent international power and which could no longer 
seriously contemplate isolationism from the rest of the world. 
 Morgenthau posited six principles of political realism: (1) “politics, like society 
in general, is governed by objective laws that have their roots in human nature”; 
(2) in international politics, “interest [is] defined in terms of power”; (3) interest 
defined as power is not endowed with a meaning that is fixed once and for all: “the 
kind of interest determining political action depends on the political and cultural 
context within which foreign policy is formulated”; (4) there is “tension between 
the moral command and the requirements of successful political action,” but that 
as a practical matter “universal moral principles . . . must be filtered through the 
concrete circumstances of time and place”; (5) “political realism refuses to iden-
tify the moral aspirations of a particular nation [such as the United States] with 
the moral laws that govern the universe”; and (6) “interest defined as power” is 
an understanding that gives international politics a separate standing and thus 
emancipates it from other fields of study.  10  Following from this perspective, some 
scholars give Morgenthau credit, among others, for helping establish the legitimacy 
of international relations as a separate discipline within political science—and not 
just a part of history, international law, or philosophy. Yet he also made the point 
that “the essence of international politics is identical with its domestic counterpart. 
Both domestic and international politics are a struggle for power. . . . The tendency 
to dominate, in particular, is an element of all human associations. . . .”  11  
 Not unlike Thucydides and other ancient Greeks, Morgenthau had essentially 
a tragic view of international relations. While he may have developed the above 
precepts to help guide statesmen through the rocky shoals and dangers of IR, he 
realized all too well that history is replete with examples of individuals and the 
states they represented making a grab for international dominance—alliances and 
balances of power failed to keep the peace. The temptation to overturn existing 

52
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
power arrangements and norms of international conduct strongly pulled at leaders 
whether of ancient Athens, Rome, absolutist France, Imperial Germany, or Hitler’s 
Third Reich. 
 This brief overview of the intellectual precursors of contemporary realism 
 illustrates a distinct realist preoccupation with armed conflict or war. A concern 
with the causes and consequences of conflict helps to explain why the realist per-
spective is held by statesmen throughout the world: Over the centuries leaders have 
engaged in the very battles and struggles described by authors from Thucydides to 
Morgenthau. Realism, from the statesman’s point of view, is indeed realistic as it 
tends to correspond to personal experiences both in diplomacy and in war. 
 Among realists, there are two basic concepts that traditionally have been the 
foci of analysis at the state and international levels:  power and  balance of power 
among states—often referred to as a  system in which states are the principal ac-
tors. In the following pages, we discuss how realists have attempted to define these 
terms. We then give examples of how theorists have used these concepts in generat-
ing insights and explanations of the causes of war. This is followed by a discussion 
of how realists deal with the concepts of change, globalization, and interdepen-
dence. We conclude with a critique of the realist image of international relations.  
POWER
Definitions
 In our discussion of several of the more important intellectual precursors of real-
ism, the concept of  power was mentioned time and again. Any attempt to give the 
reader a more complete understanding of the realist image of international relations 
starts with a discussion of this crucial term. Power is  the core concept for realists. 
 Having said this, it is rather ironic that even among realists, there is no clear 
consensus on how to define the term  power. Some realists understand power to be 
the sum of military, economic, technological, diplomatic, and other capabilities at 
the disposal of the state. Others see power not as some absolute value determined 
for each state as if it were in a vacuum but, rather, as capabilities  relative to the 
capabilities of other states. Thus, the power of the United States is evaluated in 
terms of its capabilities relative to the capabilities of other states such as China. 
 Both of these definitions—whether treating capabilities of a state in isolation 
or relative to the capabilities of other states—are termed a  materialist view. Both 
also assume a static view of power: It is an attribute of the state that is the sum of 
its capabilities whether considered alone or relative to other states. An alternative, 
dynamic definition of power focuses on the interactions of states. A state’s influ-
ence (or capacity to influence or coerce) is not only determined by its capabilities 
(or relative capabilities) but also by (1) its willingness (and perceptions by other 
states of its willingness) to use these capabilities and (2) its control or influence over 
other states. Power can thus be inferred by observing the behavior of states as they 
interact. The relative power of states is most clearly revealed by the outcomes of 
their interactions. 
 Examples of diverse views of power are the following definitions drawn from 
the literature: power as the capacity of an individual, group, or nation “to influence 

Power
53
the behavior of others in accordance with one’s own ends”; power as “man’s con-
trol over the minds and actions of other men”; and power as “the ability to prevail 
in conflict and overcome obstacles.” Joseph Nye differentiates between  hard power 
as in economic or military capabilities and the  soft power that comes, for example, 
from cultural dimensions or the values that define the identity and practices of a 
state to include the diplomatic capacity to influence other states bilaterally or mul-
tilaterally in international organizational contexts. (See his article at the end of this 
chapter.) Others prefer not to dissect it in this fashion, but rather to view power as 
an integral concept that states apply in different ways in the pursuit of their goals 
or objectives in international relations. To Nye, what he calls “smart power” is 
an integral or blend of hard and soft power assets used effectively to advance the 
state’s purposes.  
Measurement
 Given these definitional and conceptual disputes, it follows that attempts to mea-
sure power will also be divergent for those hoping to apply scientific standards to 
their work. First, if one understands power as being equivalent to capabilities, one 
looks for some way to measure military, economic, and other component elements. 
Even if one assumes that it is possible to measure these capabilities adequately 
through such indicators as defense expenditures or gross national product, the 
further problem remains of aggregating or adding up such diverse capabilities into 
a common measure of power. How can one combine different component capa-
bilities that use different measures such as dollars spent on defense expenditures 
as opposed to overall gross national product? Even more challenging is how one 
measures geographic, technological, or diplomatic factors with any degree of preci-
sion. What about the unity and strength of a society? What is the metric? And, if 
capabilities are difficult to measure, are not  relative capabilities between and among 
states even more difficult to specify? 
 Second, some would say that the view of power as a unitary concept calculated 
by aggregating component capabilities or relative capabilities misses the key point, 
which is that the power of a state is dependent on the issue involved. Consider, for 
example, the argument that some states, such as Japan, have substantial economic 
power but are militarily weak. Hence, in a particular area, the Japanese are power-
ful. Conceiving of world politics in terms of separate issue areas or, in the words of 
Stanley Hoffmann, alternative “chessboards,” is one example of awareness among 
realists of the importance to the state of socioeconomic and other nonmilitary 
issues. In some respects, Joseph Nye’s more recent use of  soft and  hard power is 
a corollary or extension of Hoffmann’s observations that use of power by states 
varies by issue area (his metaphor of states acting differently depending on which 
chessboard was engaged).  12  As noted above, Nye, sees “smart power” as the effec-
tive combination in policymaking of the hard and soft components he identifies. 
 Opponents of this disaggregation of power into its component capabilities note 
that persuasive as it may be on the surface, it is misleading because it overlooks the 
relations among the various power components. Thus, the economic capabilities 
of Japan as a global trader are said to be related to its military ties with the United 
States that assure Japan’s freedom to engage in commerce. From this perspective, 

54
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
whether addressing the power of Japan, Europe, or Third World countries, one 
cannot understand economic, military, political, or other component capabilities 
of power as if they were factors independent of one another. Much as military ties 
and divisions among states may define the framework within which economic rela-
tions take place, so military capabilities of states are bolstered (or weakened) by the 
strength or relative strength of their economies.  
SYSTEM
 In the preceding section, we discussed the concept of power and attempts to mea-
sure state power. Using that discussion as a basis, we now move on to a discussion 
of the concept of  system . Not all realists portray relations among states in systemic 
terms, but some (particularly neo- or structural realists) do. When applied to 
 international relations, the term  system has currency within each of the four images 
we have identified—realism, liberalism, economic structuralism, and the English 
School. As one might expect, however, there is considerable diversity among theo-
rists on both the definition of the term and the uses to which it should be put in the 
construction of international relations theory. 
 Scholars who understand system to be the set of interactions among states op-
erate from a positivist behavioral methodology. This approach was dominant in the 
1960s and 1970s as efforts were made to count, track, and code interactions among 
states in the hope of identifying patterns of conflict and cooperation. Journals such 
as  International Studies Quarterly continue to publish research in this tradition, 
emphasizing studies that attempt to draw meaning from aggregate numbers and 
data sets that are amenable to mathematical equations. 
 Over the past thirty years, however, realist scholars identified as neo- or struc-
tural realists have argued that counting interactions has provided limited insights 
on international relations. A more useful starting point, they argue, is the various 
distributions of power or capabilities among states—unipolar, bipolar, multipolar. 
The polarity of the system is measured by the number of major powers, and differ-
ent polarities will have different effects on international relations, including interac-
tions among states (discussed in greater detail later in this chapter). 
 However  system may be defined, the uses to which the concept is put vary 
considerably. Some theorists are content to use systems merely as  taxonomies , 
frameworks for organizing knowledge about international relations. Hence, one 
can speak of the international political system, the international economic system, 
or the international social system. Systems are therefore mental images that may 
help to describe international phenomena. They are, in effect, superimposed on the 
real world by a scholar in order to make the real world more intelligible or some-
what easier to understand. 
 Others are more ambitious and use the system concept to explain and predict 
outcomes of international relations. In the process of theory building, they may 
ascribe to systems such properties as equilibrium, or balance, of their component 
parts (such as among states). Critics, however, find little use in such notions as 
balancing or “equilibrating tendencies” allegedly to be found in a system of states. 
The approach of treating a system as if it were a concrete or tangible entity and 
ascribing properties to it is of questionable validity from this point of view. To do 

System
55
so, according to critics, is to be guilty of the methodological error of  reification —
treating abstractions like systems as if they were real and had a life of their own. 
 A response by some system theorists to this line of criticism is that dealing in 
abstractions is useful in the generation of propositions or hypotheses about inter-
national relations. These, in turn, can be tested empirically to determine whether or 
not they have factual support. To the extent, then, that use of the systems concept 
enables the theorist to describe, explain, or predict international phenomena, to 
them the use of the concept is justified. 
 The reader may or may not wish to visualize international relations or world 
politics as a system that is defined in terms of patterns of interactions, polarity, 
equilibrating tendencies, or some other characteristics. Some may share the English 
School preference for seeing international or global politics as actually occurring in 
a societal (rather than in a seemingly more mechanical, systemic) context. We do 
note, however, that the systems concept as an approximation to the nature of world 
politics is present within the mainstream of contemporary realist thought, even if 
some (particularly classical) realists avoid its use. 
 Speaking of abstractions, we admit this discussion has been rather abstract. 
To lend substance to the concept of system, we next examine the way in which the 
concept of system has been used by some realists: system as anarchy plus the distri-
bution of capabilities. The intention of scholars has been to explain some aspect of 
international relations concerning such matters as instability, conflict, and war. In 
keeping with realist assumptions, the state and state power have been a key focus 
of analysis and investigation as has the analytical assumption of rationality. 
Game Theory and Anarchy 
 Game theory is an approach to determining rational choice or optimum strategy in 
a competitive situation. Each actor tries to maximize gains or minimize losses under 
conditions of uncertainty and incomplete information, which requires each actor 
to rank order preferences, estimate probabilities, and try to discern what the other 
actor is going to do. In a two-person zero-sum game, what one competitor wins, the 
other loses. In a two-person, non-zero-sum or variable-sum game, gains and losses 
are not necessarily equal; it is possible that both sides may gain. This is sometimes 
referred to as a positive-sum game. In some games, both parties can lose, and by 
different amounts or to a different degree. So-called  n -person games include more 
than two actors or sides. Game theory has contributed to the development of mod-
els of deterrence and arms race spirals, but it is also the basis for work concerning 
the question of how collaboration among competitive states can be achieved: The 
central problem is that the rational decision for an individual actor such as a state 
may be to “defect” and go it alone as opposed to taking a chance on collaboration 
with another state actor. 
 For many realist writers, game theory is highly relevant to understanding in-
ternational relations due to the realist emphasis on the conditions of  anarchy and 
the distribution of capabilities or power among states. These so-called system-level, 
structural attributes are viewed as crucial because they act as constraints on deci-
sionmakers. As we will see, the condition of international anarchy is seen by realists 
as contributing to the amount of distrust and conflict among states. Realists have 

56
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
also been concerned whether particular distributions of capabilities involving vari-
ous balances of power make war between states more or less likely. We will first 
take up the concept of anarchy and related terms. 
 The word  anarchy brings forth images of violence, destruction, and chaos. For 
realists, however, anarchy simply refers to the absence of any legitimate authority 
above states. States are sovereign. They claim a right externally to be independent 
or autonomous from other states, and they claim a right internally or domestically 
to exercise complete authority over their own territories. Although states differ in 
terms of the power they possess or are able to exercise, none may claim the  right to 
dominate another sovereign state. 
 Realists distinguish between  authority and  power . When they use the term  an-
archy , they are referring to the absence of any hierarchy of legitimate authority in 
the international system. There  is hierarchy of power in international politics, but 
there is not a hierarchy of authority. Some states are clearly more powerful than 
others, but there is no recognized authority higher than that of any state. 
 Anarchy, so understood, is the defining characteristic of the environment 
within which sovereign states interact. Violence and war may be evident, but so 
too are periods of relative peace and stability. This absence of any superordinate or 
central authority over states (such as a world government with authority to enforce 
rules and to maintain order) is fundamentally different from domestic societies, 
where an authority exists to maintain order and to act as an arbiter of disputes. 
Exceptions would be cases of total government collapse or in civil wars when 
 legitimate authority may be unclear. 
 Realists argue that the absence of a central and overriding authority helps to 
explain why states come to rely on power, seeking to maintain or increase their 
power positions relative to other states. For one thing, the condition of anarchy 
is usually accompanied by a lack of trust among states in this environment. Each 
state faces a  self-help situation in which it is dangerous to place the security of one’s 
own country in the hands of another. What guarantee is there against betrayal, 
however solemn another state’s promises may be to an ally? Consistent with the 
world described by Hobbes, there is really nothing to keep a supposed ally from 
reneging on a security agreement or any other international pact. There is no world 
governmental authority to enforce covenants or agreements among states. In such a 
world, it is logical, rational, and prudent to look out for number one—the security 
of one’s own state. Indeed, this was the same counsel reported by Thucydides when 
he noted Athenian advice to the Melians not to place their hope for survival in the 
hands of the Spartans and their allies. 
 Given international anarchy and the lack of trust in such a situation, states find 
themselves in what has been called a  security dilemma .  13  The more one state arms 
to protect itself from other states, the more threatened these states become and the 
more prone they are to resort to arming themselves to protect their own national 
security interests. The dilemma is that even if a state is sincerely arming only for 
defensive purposes, it is rational in a self-help system to assume the worst in an 
adversary’s intentions and keep pace in any arms buildup. How can one know for 
certain that a rival is arming strictly for defensive purposes? This is the stuff of arms 
races. Isn’t it best to hedge one’s bets by devoting more resources to match a poten-
tial adversary’s arms buildup? Because a state may not have sufficient resources to 

System
57
be completely self-reliant, it may join an alliance in an attempt to deter aggression 
by any would-be adversaries. 
 Given an understanding of the anarchic condition of international politics, one 
can more easily grasp the game-theoretic dynamics of arms races. All sides involved 
may sincerely desire peace, but the anarchical nature of international politics leads 
states to be suspicious of one another and engage in worst-case analyses of one 
another’s intentions. This realist insight, it is argued, is just as applicable to under-
standing the ancient competition between Sparta and Athens as it is to understand-
ing contemporary international relations. It is a system-level explanation in that the 
emphasis is placed on the anarchic structure of international politics as a whole, not 
on the internal nature of a particular state. An example of an explanation that relies 
on internal factors is the claim that a given country keeps building more and more 
weapons because of demands from its own military-industrial complex or because 
of the nature of a national mentality that reflects its regional or global ambitions. 
External factors such as the anarchic structure of the system or the actions and 
reactions of other states if not ignored, are thought less important than domestic 
imperatives. 
 Finally, an anarchical, self-help system obviously makes cooperation among 
states difficult to achieve. How are states to act in such a world? Is it inevitable 
that they will be self-seeking, attempting to maximize their short-term individual 
or self-interests? Or is it possible that states can upgrade their common (perhaps 
enlightened) self-interests over both the short and long term? What is the rational 
thing to do? The informing image for some realists is provided by the allegory of the 
stag hunt, taken from the writings of the Geneva-born, eighteenth-century philoso-
pher Jean-Jacques Rousseau.  14  It is an excellent example of game theory at work. 
 Each of five individuals in the state of nature—a world without government or 
any other form of social structure—has to decide whether (1) to collaborate in the 
hunting of a stag necessary to meet the hunger needs of all five or (2) to defect from 
the group to capture a hare. To choose the latter course of action would be to serve 
one’s own self-interest at the expense of the group (see  Figure   2.1 ). 
 If the individual prefers to serve the common interest (go after the stag), can he 
or she trust the others to do so? And if one can’t trust the others, is it not rational 
Individual interests:
pursue the hare
Group/collective interests:
pursue the stag
May provide basis for
possible future collaboration
Serve immediate
self-interest
Serve long-term
common interest
Long run
Short run
No apparent basis for
collaborative behavior
FIGURE 2.1 
The Stag Hunt Fable: A Dilemma of Rational Choice

58
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
to go for the hare and defect from the group before any of the others do? Or is it 
possible to develop the basis for collaboration by all five? Scholars who deal with 
game theory attempt to answer such questions.  15  
 How one understands Rousseau’s stag hunt fable has a great deal to do with 
how one sees states interacting in world politics. Some tend to see the state as 
serving only narrow self-interest. Pessimists point to the number, duration, and 
intensity of wars. They tend to see international politics as sets of competitive 
games in which decisions or choices may be zero-sum—one side’s gains are losses 
for the other. Those of a more optimistic bent see great potential for collaboration 
among states, noting how in fact many states live in peace and harmony for decades 
and even centuries. In competitive settings, the players can find ways in which all 
parties can gain, albeit to different degrees—so-called positive- or variable-sum 
games. When losses have to be taken, optimists argue they can be distributed so as 
to minimize damage to each party. As such, the payoffs (gains or losses) typically 
are “asymmetric” or uneven, but still the best that can be achieved for all players. 
 For international relations theorists, however, it is not simply a matter of hav-
ing a pessimistic or optimistic nature. Aside from the assumptions that states are 
unitary and rational actors, structural realists also tend to make the analytical as-
sumption that states are largely concerned with  relative rather than just  absolute 
gains . What is the difference? If a state is concerned with individual, absolute gains, 
it is indifferent to the gains of others—“As long as I’m doing better, I don’t care if 
others are also increasing their wealth or military power.” If, however, a state is 
concerned with relative gains, it is not satisfied with simply increasing its power or 
wealth, but is concerned with how much those capabilities have kept pace with, 
increased, or decreased relative to other states.  16  This harkens back to the issue of 
how one defines and measures power. 
 Differing assumptions about a state’s preferences lead to different expectations 
about the prospects for international conflict and cooperation. For structural real-
ists, the relative gains assumption makes international cooperation in an anarchic 
world difficult to attain, particularly among great powers prone to improving their 
relative position or, at least, hold their own in this international competition. Struc-
tural realists do not have to rely, therefore, on such classical realist assumptions as 
found in the works of Machiavelli and Hobbes that man is inherently aggressive. 
More optimistic about the prospects for international cooperation, English School 
scholars, neoliberal institutionalists, and social constructivists are much more likely 
to assume that states may well be satisfied with absolute gains due to the develop-
ment of international norms, collaborative institutions, and the ability to redefine 
national interests.  
Distribution of Capabilities and the Balance of Power 
 Realists see anarchy as continuing to be a defining characteristic of the international 
system unless one state or some kind of superior international authority were con-
structed to provide a new order to the world through its position of dominance. 
Within this anarchical environment various distributions of capabilities or power 
among states emerge in dynamic, competitive relations among states. Indeed, an-
archy plus the distribution of capabilities among states define for many realists 

System
59
the international system at any one time, described by them typically as unipolar, 
bipolar, or multipolar. Balances of power and alliances among states are the means 
realists conceive for sustaining international order. 
 As we have seen, many realists begin with the security dilemma in an anarchic 
world. Where does order come from under such conditions? What keeps states 
from continually attacking one another? One answer offered by realists is that 
states find it expedient to band together and pool their capabilities or power when-
ever one state or group of states appears to be gathering a disproportionate amount 
of power, thus threatening to dominate the world, or even a portion of it. On the 
other hand, influenced perhaps by the thought of Hugo Grotius, many classical 
realists (as well as constructivists and other scholars in the English School) observe 
some degree of order provided by the development and acceptance over time of 
international norms and practices, particularly those that come to be codified in 
international law. 
 The need to maintain a  balance of power to avoid the triumph of a dominant 
power is a realist concern dating back to the works of Thucydides. It is also found 
in a report of the British Foreign Office written before World War I: 
 History shows that the danger threatening the independence of this or that nation 
has generally arisen, at least in part, out of the momentary predominance of a 
neighboring State at once militarily powerful, economically efficient, and ambitious 
to extend its frontiers or spread its influence. . . . The only check on the abuse of 
political predominance derived from such a position has always consisted in the op-
position of an equally formidable rival, or a combination of several countries form-
ing leagues of defense. The equilibrium established by such a grouping of forces is 
technically known as the balance of power, and it has become almost an historical 
truism to identify England’s secular policy with the maintenance of this balance by 
throwing her weight now in this scale and now in that, but ever on the side opposed 
to the political dictatorship of the strongest single State or group at a given time.  17  
 A bipolar balance of power (two states of comparable or relatively equal great 
power) or a multipolar balance of power (three or more states engaging in checks 
and balances) are two realist categorizations of particular distributions of capabili-
ties. Such power configurations have occurred in the aftermath of major European 
wars—the Peace of Westphalia in 1648 following the Thirty Years’ War, the 
Congress of Vienna in 1815 following the defeat of Napoleon, and the settlements 
following both twentieth-century world wars. Although the post–World War I 
arrangements bought only twenty years of peace, the Congress of Vienna was 
more successful in establishing a basis for maintaining a balance of power without 
general or major war for almost a century. Assessing the efforts of the diplomats 
at Vienna and subsequent meetings, Henry Kissinger concluded: “Their goal was 
stability, not perfection, and the balance of power is the classic expression of the 
lesson of history that no order is safe without physical safeguards against aggres-
sion.” In short, according to Kissinger, a “new international order came to be cre-
ated with a sufficient awareness of the connection between power and morality; 
between security and legitimacy.”  18  
 Four questions in this regard are subject to debate among realist scholars: 
(1) Do balances of power automatically occur, or are they created by diplomats or 
statesmen? (2) Which balance of power—bipolar or multipolar—is more likely to 

60
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
maintain international stability and is unipolarity a durable condition? (3) How 
much power should states seek in order to feel secure? (4) How can nonsystemic 
factors (those at individual and state-society levels of analysis) be integrated into 
structural or neorealist accounts to explain the onset of war? 
 Balance of Power: Voluntarism and Determinism  The voluntarism-determinism 
debate is comparable in some ways to theological dispute over determinism and free 
will. As we use the term, however,  voluntarism does not refer only to freedom of 
choice, but rather to the ability of human beings to influence the course of events. 
How free are individuals to determine their own fates? How much effective choice 
do they have? How much are events determined by factors independent of human 
will exercised by statesmen? In the context of international relations, the question 
is whether states or their decisionmakers can affect their environment or whether 
their actions are severely constrained by other states interacting in a system of 
states. How much is free? How much is determined? Put another way, how much 
is the behavior of states and other units driven by the international system or its 
structure and how much is socially constructed by human volition—statesmen and 
diplomats, institutions and groups, and other human actors? As noted in  Chapter   1 , 
this is central in IR to the agent-structure debate. 
 As to the first question, Henry Kissinger (a classical realist) emphasizes 
 voluntarism —the balance of power is a foreign policy creation or construction by 
statesmen; it doesn’t just occur automatically. Makers of foreign policy do not act 
as automatons, prisoners of the balance of power and severely constrained by it. 
Rather, they are its creators and those charged with maintaining it. They are free 
to exercise their judgment and their will as agents for their states in the conduct of 
foreign policy with the expectation that they can have some constructive effect on 
outcomes. 
 In contrast to this voluntarist conception is that of Kenneth Waltz, who sees 
the balance of power as an attribute of the system of states that will occur whether 
it is willed or not. He argues that “the balance of power is not so much imposed 
by statesmen on events as it is imposed by events on statesmen.”  19  For Waltz, the 
statesman has much less freedom to maneuver, much less capability to affect the 
workings of international politics, than Kissinger would allow. 
 How does Waltz reach this conclusion? Given the assumptions that the state 
is a rational and a unitary actor that will use its capabilities to accomplish its ob-
jectives, states inevitably interact and conflict in the competitive environment of 
international politics. States may be motivated to improve their own positions so 
as to dominate others, but such attempts likely will be countered by other states 
similarly motivated. Waltz observes that in international relations, “the freedom 
of choice of any one state is limited by the actions of all the others.”  20  Thus, a bal-
ance of power more often than not occurs as states tend to balance against a rising 
power as opposed to joining its bandwagon. The structure of the international 
system itself—anarchy plus the distribution of capabilities—affects the calculations 
and choices of decisionmakers. Balance-of-power theory so viewed can be used to 
account for arms races, alliances and counteralliances, coalitions and countercoali-
tions, and other forms of competitive behavior among states that transcend any 
particular historical era. 

System
61
 This image of the balance of power, therefore, refers to a recurrent phenom-
enon characteristic of international relations. It seems to matter little whether the 
states are democratic or authoritarian; the systemic tendency toward balance or 
equilibrium is always the same. It is as if states were billiard balls colliding with 
one another. The faster and larger balls (the major powers) knock the smaller 
balls (the lesser powers) out of the way, although their own paths may also be 
deflected slightly by these collisions. These interactions, it is argued, tend toward 
international equilibrium or stability just as billiard balls eventually come to rest, 
at least until the balance is upset once again. But then the same tendency toward 
equilibrium repeats itself, only to be upset again. And so forth. The actors involved 
in this timeless drama remain the same: states. As Ernst Haas—a critic of the de-
terminism he observed among structural realists and many other balance-of-power 
theorists—put it: “[They] see the components [of systems, i.e., states] as relatively 
unchangeable and arrange them in an eternal preprogrammed dance. The rules 
of the dance may be unknown to the actors and are specified by the theorist. The 
recurrent patterns discovered by him constitute a super-logic which predicts the 
future state of the system.”  21  
 Actor combinations involving two or more states can be observed throughout 
history as the mechanical workings of the balance of power: multipolar through 
much of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, prior to World War II (1939–
1945), and bipolar (the United States and the Soviet Union) in the years following 
the war. The post–Cold War world has been described as a unipolar system due 
to the preponderant power of the United States, and this has caused problems for 
realist balance-of-power theorists, a subject we will subsequently discuss. 
 In a sense, then, Kissinger and Waltz represent alternative ends of a spectrum 
of contemporary realists conversant with balance-of-power thinking. Realists such 
as Waltz who emphasize balance of power as a system tendency have been labeled 
“structuralists” or “neorealists” because they have allegedly departed from a 
 realist tradition that granted the statesman or policymaker greater freedom from 
 constraint and thus greater ability to affect international events. 
 Kissinger’s position is closer to the voluntarist pole, but he definitely would not 
argue that foreign policymakers are totally free of external constraints. Indeed, their 
ability to maneuver within these constraints is at least partly a function of their dip-
lomatic skills. Similarly, Waltz would reject the idea that he is in any way a system 
determinist—that the structure of the international system necessarily determines 
state behavior. Indeed, he acknowledges the possibility of a state or “unit-level 
cause negating a structural effect.”  22  Nevertheless, his views are far removed from 
the purely voluntarist pole. The implication of his view of the balance of power is 
that individual decisionmakers and their states have much less freedom or capabil-
ity to affect the course of events than others such as Kissinger would assert. 
 In some respects, the writings of Hans J. Morgenthau were an earlier attempt 
to combine the two perspectives, thus inviting wrath by proponents of both. Mor-
genthau acknowledged the balance of power as a tendency within international 
politics while, at the same time, prescribing what statesmen should do to maintain 
the balance. He argued that “the balance of power and policies aiming at its pres-
ervation are not only inevitable but are an essential stabilizing factor in a society of 
sovereign nations.” Quite apart from the apparent determinism in this statement, 

62
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
Morgenthau assigned to diplomats not just the task of maintaining the balance of 
power; he also charged them to “create the conditions under which it will not be 
impossible from the outset to establish a world state.”  23  
 In short, for Morgenthau, escape from the balance of power and the voluntarist 
creation of a new world order remained possibilities worthy of pursuit. At the same 
time, his detractors have noted that, on the one hand, to argue that the balance of 
power is an inevitable system tendency and, on the other hand, to prescribe what 
should be done to maintain a balance or transform the system itself is to argue in 
contradictory terms. Be that as it may, Morgenthau’s thinking represents a middle 
ground between realists who tend toward voluntarist or determinist poles. The 
present theoretical debate between structural realists and social constructivists is a 
more recent manifestation of this continuing controversy—the latter far more vol-
untarist in its formulations, but also understanding that  both ideational and mate-
rial structures (or understandings of them) may facilitate or constrain state actions.  
 Polarity and System Structure  The second question is a long-standing realist de-
bate: Is a bipolar or a multipolar balance of power more conducive to the stability 
of the international system? Stated another way, is war more likely to occur in a 
bipolar or a multipolar world? 
 The best-known statements on the stability of bipolar and multipolar distribu-
tions are by Kenneth Waltz on the one hand and J. David Singer and Karl Deutsch 
on the other.  24  All three agreed that the amount of uncertainty about the conse-
quences of a particular action taken by a state increases as the number of interna-
tional actors increases. The logic of this assumption is that as the number increases, 
a state’s policymakers have to deal with a greater quantity of information; more 
international actors mean more information is generated that has to be taken into 
account in the formulation of foreign policy. Therefore, all three authors concurred 
that as an international system moves from being bipolar to being multipolar, the 
amount of overall uncertainty in the system increases. So far, so good. 
 Where they part company is on the matter of whether an increase in the number 
of actors (and hence uncertainty) makes war more or less likely. Waltz argued that 
greater uncertainty makes it  more likely that a policymaker will misjudge the inten-
tions and actions of a potential foe. Hence, a multipolar system, given its associa-
tion with higher levels of uncertainty, is less desirable than a bipolar system because 
multipolarity makes uncertainty and thus the probability of war greater. Singer 
and Deutsch, however, made the opposite argument, believing that a multipolar 
system is more conducive to stability because uncertainty breeds caution on the 
part of states. Caution means following tried and true policies of the past, avoiding 
deviations. Furthermore, they argued that “the increase in number of independent 
actors diminishes the share [of attention] that any nation can allocate to any other 
single actor.” This, it is argued, also reduces the probability of war because a state’s 
attention is allocated to a larger number of actors. 
 Both arguments seem logical. But if both cannot be correct, it is still possible 
that neither one is correct. This is a proposition put forth by Bruce Bueno de 
 Mesquita. For example, he challenges the assumption that uncertainty is greater 
in a multipolar world, arguing that “if the system’s structure—be it bipolar or 
 multipolar—does not change, there will be little uncertainty” because “learned 

System
63
patterns from prior behavior will aid decision makers to anticipate the likely con-
sequences of similar behaviors under similar circumstances.” Hence, “the level of 
systemic uncertainty, by itself, neither increases nor decreases the likelihood of war. 
Consequently, neither the number of blocs, nor the magnitude of change in the num-
ber of blocs in the system is expected to be associated with the likelihood of war.”  25  
 This theoretical debate was inconclusive, and there still is no consensus on the 
issue of bipolarity versus multipolarity in terms of international stability. Other re-
alist work since then, however, has built upon the concept of polarity and addressed 
two other dimensions at the systemic level of analysis—disparities in capabilities 
among poles (not simply the number), and the implications if the capability growth 
rates of states are static or dynamic.  26  
 The durability of unipolarity is understandably an important issue of discus-
sion among not only scholars of international relations, but policymakers as well. 
It is fair to say that realist scholars were as surprised as others by the collapse of the 
Soviet Union and the collapse of the bipolar world in the early 1990s. Little, if any, 
thought had gone into the implications of unipolarity. As one would expect, unipo-
larity offers the hegemonic power several logical options: isolationism, enhancing 
the effectiveness of international institutions, and unilateralism in its foreign policy. 
Whatever a hegemonic state may choose, the underlying logic of realist structural 
analysis is that unipolarity is inherently unstable and other states will balance 
against it. There is a consensus among many realists that unipolarity will not last 
and, in time, the world will become increasingly multipolar—great powers includ-
ing, for example, a reconstituted Russian Federation, China, Japan, India, and the 
European Union. Although the United States now holds the predominant position, 
they see a shift taking place in the distribution of capabilities among states. It has 
even been suggested that we might come to miss the Cold War for the stability that 
U.S.-Soviet bipolarity had provided despite the specter of nuclear war.  27  
 How Much Power? Defensive and Offensive Realists   Realists also disagree on the 
implications of anarchy and how much weight it should be accorded as a contribut-
ing factor to power-seeking behavior by states. So-called defensive realists such as 
Kenneth Waltz start by assuming that states minimally aim to survive, pursue other 
objectives, but above all else, seek to maintain their security in a world fraught with 
threats and other challenges. This requires paying close attention to the balance of 
power. Anarchy in particular requires states to engage in competitive behavior as 
opposed to classical realist Hans Morgenthau’s emphasis on human nature and the 
drive for power causing security competition. 
 Waltz and other defensive realists, however, argue that while the international 
system provides incentives for expansion, this is only under certain circumstances. 
While under anarchy the security dilemma causes states to worry about relative 
power and the intentions of other states, efforts to increase power may inadvertently 
generate spirals of hostility. The pursuit of expansionist policies may be generated 
by this fear and the mistaken assumption that aggressive behavior and words are 
the best way to make a state more secure. But while states cannot escape the security 
dilemma, it does not guarantee war. Certain structural factors can have a significant 
impact on whether states go down the road of cooperation or conflict. One factor 
that has generated a great deal of study is the offense-defense balance. The argument 

64
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
is that at any point in time military power can favor the offense or the defense. If 
defense dominates over offense, then conquest is difficult and the major powers 
have little incentive to use force to gain power. Rather, the incentive is to hold on 
to what they have. If, however, offense has the advantage, then the temptation is 
for states to attempt to conquer one another, generating major wars. But as the 
offense-defense balance is usually in favor of the defense, conquest becomes more 
difficult and hence states should be discouraged from pursuing aggressive policies. 
 The policy implication is that states should carefully consider the real possibility 
that moderate strategies may enhance their security, but with the full recognition 
that at times expansionist strategies will end up being the means to achieving this 
goal. Hence, while recognizing the importance of anarchy, defensive realists cau-
tion that analysts should not overstate its importance. They argue that security is 
readily available, particularly if states adopt prudent strategies. The assumption is 
made that the international system provides incentives for cautious and restrained 
behavior on the part of states and that reckless, expansionist behavior is more the 
result of domestic factors, as opposed to systemic conditions that occur under an-
archy.  28  Hence, defensive realists have been charged with a status quo bias. 
 This is certainly not a criticism leveled at offensive realists who hold a very dif-
ferent assumption on the question of how much power states want and the implica-
tions of anarchy, arguing that the latter actually provides strong incentives for the 
expansion of power capabilities relative to other states. States strive for maximum 
power relative to other states as this is the only way to guarantee survival. Offensive 
realists argue that status quo powers are rarely found in international politics as the 
structure of the international system creates strong incentives to gain power relative 
to one’s rivals. Defensive realists, it is claimed, cannot explain at the systemic level 
state expansion because international incentives for such behavior are lacking in 
the defensive-realist formulation. 
 John Mearsheimer exemplifies this perspective. He places emphasis in his struc-
tural realism on offensive or power-maximizing in contrast to the defensive realism 
he finds in Waltz and other realists. Offensive realism is both a descriptive theory 
about how states behave as well as a prescriptive one that states ought to follow as 
the best way to survive in a dangerous world. He is critical of the defensive realist 
focus on states supposedly more interested in maintaining the existing balance of 
power as opposed to increasing their share of it. By contrast, he sees states as try-
ing to maximize their power positions—a state’s ultimate goal in principle is to be 
the hegemon in the system. For Mearsheimer, the “best way for a state to survive 
in anarchy is to take advantage of other states and gain power at their expense.”  29  
The assumption is that anarchy and the distribution of capabilities matter most in 
explaining the big issues of international politics such as war and peace. Little at-
tention is paid to the role of individuals, domestic politics, and ideology. He argues 
that from this theoretical perspective, it doesn’t really matter whether Germany in 
1905 was led by Bismarck, Kaiser Wilhelm, or Hitler, or whether Germany was 
democratic or autocratic. What matters from an offensive realism perspective is 
how much relative power Germany had. Mearsheimer readily acknowledges that in 
those cases where domestic factors actually do play a major role, then offensive re-
alism doesn’t have a lot to say. Such is the cost of simplifying reality and attempting 
to develop parsimonious theories that tell us a few things about important matters. 

System
65
 Echoes of Morgenthau’s earlier conceptualization of power in international 
politics can be heard as Mearsheimer characterizes states as maximizing power, not 
just as “a means to an end (survival) but [also] an end in itself.” But as a structural 
realist Mearsheimer would agree with Waltz that this drive for power is a function 
of the structure of the international system, not human nature. Great powers pur-
suing power as an end may still come to understand the limits of their power, con-
strained by other states pursuing the same ends. In the great game of international 
politics, “the trick for the sophisticated power maximizer is to figure out when to 
raise and when to fold.” 
 Mearsheimer notes that the actual distribution of military might among great 
powers is critical in wartime. If a great power has a marked power advantage over 
its rivals, it is more likely that it will behave aggressively as it has the capability 
and incentive to do so. If, however, it is facing powerful opponents, it is less likely 
to consider offensive action and more likely to focus on defending the existing bal-
ance of power. Mearsheimer thus reflects the basic realist assumptions outlined at 
the beginning of the chapter in terms of states carefully calculating the costs and 
benefits of offensive action, aware of its strengths but also its limitations.  30  
 Finally, is there no place for cooperation among states in the world of offensive 
realists? Great powers certainly do cooperate as exemplified when they form alli-
ances and act against common enemies. But extensive cooperation is limited by two 
concerns—relative gains and the prospect of cheating. As noted earlier, if each side 
is pursuing absolute gains, then there is little concern with what others are gaining 
or losing. But in a world of balance of power, states have to be concerned with rela-
tive gains as those of a rival could upset that balance. Once again, the international 
system is structured in such a way that cooperation—if it takes place—is going to 
be limited. Concerns over cheating in the military realm that hold out the prospect 
of defeat also work against cooperation.  
 Nonsystemic Factors  Classical realists have always blended various units and 
levels of analysis into their accounts of international relations. In his attempt to 
develop a parsimonious systemic theory of international politics, the preeminent 
structural realist, Kenneth Waltz, purposely downplayed domestic factors as has 
John Mearsheimer. Waltz, however, has highlighted in other works the impor-
tance of the state-societal levels of analysis.  31  Other defensive realists influenced 
by Waltz, while agreeing that his work can explain some state behavior, have tried 
to overcome structural realism’s limitations, in particular its inability to explain 
those cases where major power states act in nonstrategic ways. This has required 
delving into the realm of the individual and state-societal or unit levels of analysis 
and examining the role of factors such as human agency—for example, the roles 
human beings play in domestic politics, their cognitive understandings, perceptions 
or misperceptions, and elite belief systems. 
 Stephen Walt, for example, has recast balance-of-power theory (states align 
with or against the most powerful states), arguing that a balance-of-threat theory 
offers more historically correct explanations.  32  Hence, intentions need to be taken 
into account (states balance against states that are not only powerful but also 
threatening). Walt observes that states are attracted to strength and “a decline in a 
state’s relative position will lead its allies to opt for neutrality at best or to defect 

66
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
to the other side at worst.” Threats matter in Walt’s analysis, not just power as 
such. Thus, one finds that “the greater the threat, the greater the probability that 
the vulnerable state will seek an alliance.” 
 In this regard, Walt draws a distinction between  balancing (allying with oth-
ers against the prevailing threat, which is the dominant tendency in international 
politics) and  bandwagoning (the opportunistic option of aligning with the source 
of danger, particularly if it is a strong state). Balancing behavior is more common, 
tending to reflect restraint and, perhaps, an effort to “minimize the threat one poses 
to others.” By contrast, bandwagoning, though less common, typically occurs in a 
much more competitive context. 
 Walt has also used this theoretical adjustment to balance-of-power theory to 
analyze how revolutionary domestic changes can increase the risk of international 
war by intensifying international security competition. Dangers posed by states 
matter, not just their power or relative power positions  per se. So understood, it is 
imbalances of threat that cause alliances against the most threatening state. He con-
cludes, then, that balance-of-threat theory provides a stronger explanatory handle 
than traditional balance-of-power theory offers. 
 Much as Walt deals with threats or perceptions of danger, Stephen Van Evera 
adds the ideational—ideas, perceptions, and misperceptions—to the material un-
derstandings of power and its distribution.  33  Going beyond gross distinctions 
captured by the terms  multipolar ,  bipolar , and  unipolar , Van Evera introduces 
what he labels a “fine-grained structural realism” that takes into account such con-
siderations as the offense-defense balance, the advantage of taking the first move, 
the size and frequency of power fluctuations, and available resources. Perception 
and misperception matter, and war is more likely when states believe that conquest 
is easy (whether, in fact, it is or is not). Other war-causing ideas include windows 
of vulnerability, the hostility of other states, threatening diplomatic tactics (as in 
coercive diplomacy), and when war is considered cheap or even beneficial. 
 Finally, Barry Posen tests two theories—organization theory and balance-of-
power theory—to see which does a better job explaining how military doctrine 
takes shape and influenced the grand strategy decisions of French, British, and 
German officials during the years between World Wars I and II. Not surprisingly, 
Posen finds that the causes of state behavior are found at both the state and inter-
national levels of analysis, with the latter a slightly more powerful tool for the study 
of military doctrine.  34  
 One of the most ambitious efforts to understand the conditions under which 
large-scale war is likely to occur is Dale Copeland’s  The Origins of Major War . In 
the process he integrates a number of issues, concepts, and debates dear to the heart 
of many realists: Is a multipolar or bipolar system more likely to encourage war? 
How important are relative gains and losses to an explanation of war? How can the 
insights from two competing camps of structural realism (offensive and defensive) 
be reconciled? Are rising powers or declining power more likely to initiate war and 
under what conditions? Copeland’s bottom-line argument, based upon the applica-
tion of what he calls his dynamic differentials theory to ten historical case studies, 
is that great powers that anticipate deep and inevitable relative decline are more 
likely to initiate major wars or pursue hard-line policies that substantially increase 
the risk of major war through inadvertent escalation. 

System
67
 The dependent variable in the theory is the variation in the probability of major 
war over time within a bipolar or multipolar system. The key explanatory variable 
is the dynamic differential, defined as “the simultaneous interaction of the differ-
entials or relative military power between great powers and the expected trend of 
those differentials, distinguishing between the effects of power changes in bipolar-
ity versus multipolarity.”  35  In multipolar systems, a declining power must possess 
significant military superiority over each of the other great powers before initiat-
ing war or hard-line policies that risk war. Lacking such superiority, the prospect 
of facing a balancing coalition or fighting several debilitating bilateral contests is 
likely to deter the state from taking on the rest of the system. In a bipolar system, 
however, the declining power need not be militarily superior—in fact, it could even 
be slightly inferior militarily—before initiating war or implementing such policies 
against its major rival. In facing only one major adversary, the chance of costly 
 bilateral wars is minimal. The likelihood of major war therefore derives largely 
from the strategy adopted by the declining power. 
 If leaders of the major power expect the trend to be one of rapid and inevitable 
decline in power (disaggregated into military, economic, and potential indices), 
the more likely they will be tempted to engage in preventive war. Dynamic dif-
ferentials theory attempts to explain not only this likelihood, but also associated 
diplomatic and military strategies that might be pursued by utilizing the rational 
actor assumption of leaders who are risk and cost neutral. He does not, therefore, 
fall back on sub-systemic or unit auxiliary theories such as threat perception, indi-
vidual pathologies, ideology, civilian-military relations, and military doctrine. But 
by utilizing the rational actor assumption, Copeland’s work aspires to be a theory 
of international relations and also a theory of foreign policy. 
 As part of his theory Copeland also takes on the ambitious task of synthesizing 
the competing insights of offensive and defensive realism by specifying the condi-
tions under which they are most likely to apply. Both assume that international 
outcomes resulting from the interaction of states in an anarchic environment will 
essentially match the relative distribution of material capabilities. Anarchy forces 
states to be primarily concerned with maximizing their security, and states are 
largely rational, utilizing power as a critical means to achieve security. As noted 
above, offensive realism argues that it is the mere possibility of war that conditions 
state behavior and encourages hard-line policies to maintain relative power as a 
hedge against future threats. The international system provides the incentive for 
expansion, conflict, and relentless security competition. Defensive realism, how-
ever, argues that what matters is the subjective probability of international conflict 
and how the security dilemma increases the likelihood that hard-line actions will 
lead to an escalation to major war through inadvertent means. Offensive realists, 
it is argued, rely too heavily on power as the sole determinant of security. The 
probability of war as an outcome is lessened by other structural variables such as 
geography, the offense-defense military-technological balance, and the rate of tech-
nological diffusion. Hence, the international system provides expansion incentives 
in only rare circumstances. Although the security dilemma is ever present, it does 
not automatically compel states continually to maximize relative power. 
 As noted, a problem with both offensive and defensive realism is that neither 
specifies the conditions under which states are more likely to respond to either 

68
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
the probability or mere possibility of conflict. Copeland attempts to do this by 
the creative integration of the key concepts in his dynamic differentials theory— 
polarity, power differentials, and anticipated trends. He generates hypotheses that 
specify when states have an incentive to act on the mere possibility of conflict and 
hence desire to maximize their power. These would be cases in which states face a 
trend of deep and inevitable decline in two of three types of power—economic and 
potential. He correspondingly also specifies when major powers will react to the 
subjective probability of conflict. If they anticipate decline in military as opposed to 
economic and potential power, they have a wider range of options to avoid decline. 
In the case of a multipolar system, for example, shortfalls in military power can be 
reduced through alliance formation. 
 By bringing together the two realist perspectives, Copeland seeks to explain 
how rational states weigh the risk of decline by continuing current policies against 
the risks posed by inadvertent war should they choose merely to escalate the power 
competition or to engage in preventive war. This approach thus incorporates a 
state’s need to maintain its power, given fear of the future intentions of other states 
(offensive realism) and recognition that hard-line policies have risks attached to 
them, particularly given the ever-present reality of the security dilemma and the 
possibility of a spiral of fear and arms races.  
CHANGE
 Realists stress the continuity of international relations. Many of the insights of 
Thucydides are deemed to be as relevant today as they were more than two mil-
lennia ago. Looking to modern history, a balance of power involving states has 
existed at least since the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries—whether viewed as a 
policy they have pursued or as a recurrent, expected outcome from the interactions 
of states using power to pursue their own separate interests. Although continuity is 
the watchword for realists, this does not mean that they are uninterested in change. 
For many theorists of international relations, understanding the evolution of the 
international system and predicting its future should be the preeminent research 
goals. The methods for discovering global patterns may vary. Some scholars have 
applied quantitative measures to historical data.  36  Others have approached the 
issue of international political change by attempting to discern cycles of national 
power and their relation to the outbreak of war. To illustrate how realists have 
dealt with the issue of change, we will also briefly discuss the works of Robert 
Gilpin, George Modelski.  
Power Transition 
 As the title of his book suggests, Gilpin is interested in developing a framework 
for thinking about hegemonic or great power war in his  War and Change in 
World Politics. He believes “it is possible to identify recurrent patterns, common 
elements, and general tendencies in the major turning points in international his-
tory.” Reflecting an offensive realism we can see in his perspective, Gilpin argues 
international political change is the result of efforts of political actors to change the 

Change
69
international system in order to advance their own interests, however these  interests 
may be defined (security, economic gain, ideological goals, etc.). Gilpin lists five 
assumptions concerning the behavior of states that will guide his analysis. For 
example, the realist emphasis on the unified, rational-actor state is revealed in the 
second assumption: “A state will attempt to change the international system if the 
expected benefits exceed the expected costs (i.e., if there is an expected net gain).” 
 Various periods of history are marked by equilibrium (such as after the Con-
gress of Vienna in 1815) or disequilibrium (as in the outbreak of world war). As 
long as the system can adjust to the demands of its constituent states, stability is 
maintained. What accounts for change and the undermining of the status quo? The 
key factor, originally identified by Thucydides, “is the tendency in an international 
system for the powers of member states to change at different rates because of po-
litical, economic, and technological developments. In time, the differential growth 
in power of the various states in the system causes a fundamental redistribution of 
power in the system.”  37  A state with ever-increasing power may determine that the 
costs involved in attempting to change the nature of the system are outweighed by 
the benefits if such an endeavor is successful. What has been the principal mecha-
nism of change throughout history? War, because wars determine which states will 
govern the system. The peace settlement after the war codifies the new status quo. 
This equilibrium reflects the new distribution of power in the international system 
until eventually the differential growth in the power of states leads to another 
 attempt to change the system. 
 Like balance-of-power theory, therefore, power-transition theory is a systems-
level theory. Realist adherents to both theories claim that the distribution of power 
among states is the key to understanding international relations. Power-transition 
theorists, however, see the international system as hierarchically ordered, with the 
most powerful state dominating the rest, which are classified as satisfied or dissat-
isfied with the ordering of the system. But while balance-of-power theorists argue 
that the equality of power leads to stability if not peace, power-transition theo-
rists such as Gilpin and others claim that war may be more likely when states are 
relatively equal, particularly when the differential growth in two states’ economies 
brings a challenger close to the reigning hegemon’s power.  
Long Cycles 
 For his part, George Modelski argued that the global political system goes through 
distinct and identifiable historical cycles or recurrent patterns of behavior. The 
global political system dates from about 1500 and, over the years, various world 
powers have helped to shape and maintain the system. According to Modelski, 
since1500, four states have played dominant roles, each one corresponding to a 
“long cycle”: Portugal (1500 to the end of the sixteenth century), the Netherlands 
(the seventeenth century), Great Britain (early eighteenth century to the Napoleonic 
Wars, and a second cycle from 1815 to 1945), and the United States (1945 to the 
present). As in the case of Gilpin’s analysis, war tends to mark the end of one cycle 
and the beginning of another. 
 What produces these cycles? Two conditions are critical: (1) the urge of a 
power to create a global order, and (2) particular properties and weaknesses of 

70
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
the global system. Modelski notes that, as with long-term business cycles, world 
order is also subject to decay. The dominant power is inevitably faced with the 
growth of rival power centers, and attempts to maintain territorial control around 
the globe prove to be a costly task that drains the vitality and energy of the home 
country. Each cycle, therefore, exhibits a particular nation-state in an ascending 
and then a descending phase. As Modelski notes, following a major war, one 
world power 
 emerges from that conflict in an advantageous position and organizes the world 
even as the struggle still goes on and then formalizes its position in the global 
layer in the peace settlement. For the space of another generation, that new power 
maintains basic order and is the mainspring of world institutions, often taking 
transnational forms. But the time comes when the energy that built this order begins 
to run down. . . . The prominent role of world power attracts competitors (other 
great powers) . . . ; the system moves into multipolarity. Rivalries among the major 
powers grow fiercer and assume the characteristics of oligopolistic competition. 
Gradually, as order dissolves, the system moves toward its original point of depar-
ture, that of minimal order and a Babel of conflicting and mutually unintelligible 
voices.  38  
 Modelski and Gilpin present a dynamic view of international politics. Patterns 
of behavior are evident throughout history. Periods of rapid change alternate with 
periods of relative stability. Given the emphasis on the importance of war in chang-
ing the structure of the system, are we currently experiencing a lull before some sort 
of global cataclysm? Perhaps this question is too pessimistic. As Modelski notes, it 
is possible that the international system may be “propelled in a new direction. We 
have no means of predicting what that new direction might be except that it could 
be moved away from the present system that relies too heavily on the steady, if 
long-spaced-out, progression of global wars.”  39  
 Continuing the work of the late A. F. K. Organski on power-transition theory, 
Ronald L. Tammen, Jacek Kugler, and their associates see national power as “a 
function of population, productivity, and relative political capacity.”  40  They warn 
us that periods in which the distribution of power is in transition are more prone to 
war. When one state is in the process of overtaking the power position of another, 
the likelihood of war increases markedly. War is least likely when we find the ways 
and means of satisfying (or, one might add, at least dampening or minimizing 
dissatisfaction among) the challengers and defenders of existing power positions. 
The converse—dissatisfied challengers and defenders—is the condition that makes 
the outbreak of war most likely. How power transitions take place is important, 
affecting the duration, severity, and consequences of war. Rather than adopting a 
laissez-faire approach, the authors call for managing alliances, international orga-
nizations, levels of satisfaction among states vying for power, the distribution of 
nuclear weapons, and crises wherever and whenever they emerge. 
 “Power-transition” work on war has been criticized on historical, empirical, 
and conceptual grounds.  41  Yet this is true of all work that attempts to explain 
important issues of war and peace. Furthermore, given the ongoing shifts in the 
distribution of world power and interest in the implications of such rising powers as 
China, India, and a resurgent Russia, it can be expected that scholars will continue 
to mine such works for theoretical insights.  

Globalization and Interdependence 
71
GLOBALIZATION AND INTERDEPENDENCE 
 To this point, we have discussed some of the intellectual precursors of realism and 
have then examined two concepts important to the realist analysis of world politics: 
power and balance of power or system. In the next section, we discuss the realist 
view on more recent developments within the international relations field involving 
the concepts of globalization and interdependence. 
Globalization
 There is no doubt that the term  globalization has captured the imagination of jour-
nalists, policymakers, the general public, and writers of textbooks on international 
relations. Realists generally do not share this enthusiasm, and one would be hard-
pressed to find a realist who has utilized the term as an integral part of his or her 
conceptual framework. Realist skepticism is due to a number of factors. 
 First, there is the problem of definition. A generally accepted definition of 
globalization does not exist, although it is common to emphasize the continual 
increase in transnational and worldwide economic, social, and cultural interactions 
among societies that transcend the boundaries of states, aided by advances in tech-
nology. Second, the term is descriptive and lacking in theoretical content. Hence, it 
hardly qualifies as a “concept” suitable for use in theory-building. Third, the term 
is trendy, which alone makes realists suspicious. It is rare for academic theoretical 
concepts to gain such widespread public currency. Fourth, and most important, 
the literature on globalization assumes the increase in transactions among societies 
has led to an erosion of sovereignty and the blurring of the boundaries between the 
state and the international system. For realists, anarchy is the distinguishing feature 
in international relations, and anything that questions the separation of domestic 
and international politics threatens the centrality of this key realist concept. Finally, 
globalization has an affinity with another popular concept that came to the fore of 
the international relations field in the 1970s: interdependence. As with the case of 
globalization today, some realist scholars were skeptical of the conceptual utility of 
the concept. How they critiqued and utilized the concept perhaps provides insights 
on why realists have not embraced the globalization process as the centerpiece of 
the international relations theory enterprise.  
Interdependence and Vulnerability 
 For those realists who even utilize the concept,  interdependence is viewed as being 
between or among states. This is not surprising given the underlying assumptions 
of realism. They make several related points. First, the balance of power can be un-
derstood as a kind of interdependence. To be sure, some realists of a more eclectic 
sort acknowledge interdependence involving non-state actors such as multinational 
corporations and try to take them into account. But at the core of realist thought is 
the image of interactions among states. 
 Second, for any one state, interdependence among states is not necessarily 
such a good thing. Rather than being a symmetric relation between coequal par-
ties (which is how many people view the term), interdependence is typically a 

72
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
dominance–dependence relation with the dependent party particularly  vulnerable 
(a key realist concept) to the choices of the dominant party. Indeed, interdepen-
dence as vulnerability is a source of power of one state over another. To reduce 
this vulnerability, realists have argued that it is better for the state to be inde-
pendent or, at least, to minimize its dependency. For example, the state needing 
to import oil is vulnerable to an embargo or price rise engineered by the state or 
states exporting the commodity. To reduce this vulnerability requires efforts to 
reduce reliance on oil imports. 
 Third, and following from above, interdependence does not affect all states 
equally. This applies to the economic as much as the military realms. Although 
the economies of most oil-importing countries are affected by dramatic rises in oil 
prices, they are not all equally vulnerable. Vulnerability is in part a question of 
what alternatives are available. As a matter of policy, the United States has tried to 
increase domestic production, create a strategic oil reserve to be drawn from only 
in emergencies, find other foreign sources of oil, and substitute alternative forms of 
energy whenever feasible—all steps to reduce demand for oil from abroad. 
 Given these measures that many say have not gone far enough, the United 
States has attempted to reduce somewhat its vulnerability to any new oil embargo 
or disruption of supply due to war or other regional instabilities in the Middle East 
or elsewhere. As a practical matter, of course, the United States remains heavily 
dependent on imported oil. 
 In any event, if a state wants to be more powerful, it avoids or minimizes eco-
nomic dependency just as it avoids political or military dependency on other states 
if this were to amount to a reduction in its relative power position. Dependency on 
others is to be minimized, whereas dependency of others on one’s own state may be 
desirable to the extent that it increases one’s leverage over those other states. In short, 
in any given issue area, not all states are equally vulnerable. Therefore, the realist is 
suspicious of such blanket statements as “given increasing globalization, the entire 
world is increasingly interdependent or interconnected”—as if this were a good 
thing—particularly when such claims are supposedly  equally applicable to all states. 
 Finally, realists have made interesting arguments concerning interdependence 
and peace, and it can be inferred they might apply similar observations to the effects 
of globalization. Interdependence, according to realists, may or may not enhance 
prospects for peace. Conflict, not cooperation, could just as easily result. Just as 
in households, sectarian and community conflicts, one way to establish peace is to 
eliminate or minimize contact among opponents or potential adversaries. Separa-
tion from other units, if that were possible, would mean less contact and thus less 
conflict. Hence, realists would be as unlikely to argue that the increase in global-
ization among societies has a pacifying effect any more than they would assume 
interdependence leads to peace.  
REALISTS AND INTERNATIONAL COOPERATION 
 Classical realists perhaps have more faith than structural realists in the ability of 
international organizations to make a substantive contribution to international sta-
bility if not peace; after all, they draw from the same Grotian intellectual wellspring 

Realists and International Cooperation 
73
as do those in the English School. But other realists have made a theoretical contribu-
tion to our understanding of how under conditions of anarchy international coopera-
tion may be enhanced. For some, this involves the application of game theory and its 
 attendant assumptions of unified, rational state actors.  42  For others the starting point 
is the systemic distribution of power and the implications of hegemonic leadership. 
 According to the theory of  hegemonic stability , the hegemon, or dominant 
power, assumes leadership, perhaps for the entire globe, in dealing with a particular 
issue. Thus, Britain was seen as offering leadership in international monetary mat-
ters in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. The gold standard associated 
with the international exchange of money was managed from London by the Bank 
of England. After World War II, the leadership role was finally assumed by the 
United States.  43  
 The absence of hegemony, or leadership, may result in chaos and instability, as 
happened in the 1930s when the United States was unwilling to assume leadership 
of the world economy and Britain, given its weakened position, was unable to do 
so. Competitive depreciation of currencies, erection of trade barriers, and a drastic 
reduction in the volume of trade were the outcome. 
 Although not all realists would subscribe to the view, stability is therefore seen 
by some as enhanced by a concentration of power in international politics; there 
is virtue in inequality among states. The hegemonic state or states benefit, but so 
too do other, less powerful states that find a more stable world advantageous. By 
contrast, the decline of hegemony and the consequent fragmentation of power in 
 international politics is said to produce disorder—a breakdown or unraveling of 
previously constructed international agreements. Leadership provided by hegemonic 
states is understood as facilitating achievement of collaboration among states. 
 Theoretical and empirical controversy in the 1980s and 1990s was mirrored 
by public debate as to whether or not the United States was a hegemon in decline. 
The debate was sparked primarily by the work of the historian Paul Kennedy, 
who examined the rise and fall of great powers over some 500 years. The debate 
influenced (and was influenced by) discussion already underway—mainly among 
structural realists on how the United States might be able to adapt to hegemonic 
decline and how stability in the international economic system could be sustained 
after hegemony. Other writers, including realists, challenged the whole notion of 
U.S. decline in any absolute sense. After all, U.S. “decline” was  relative only to the 
apparent rise of other actors such as Germany and Japan. Notwithstanding all of 
America’s economic problems at the time, this gradual “leveling” of relative stand-
ings still left the United States effectively in first position. Moreover, the breakup of 
the Soviet Union resulted in the United States being the only global superpower—a 
“unipolar” structure.  44  
 Since 2001, work has been done on the implications of nuclear primacy of the 
United States resulting from the decline in the Russian arsenal, the slow modern-
ization of the Chinese arsenal, and the steady growth of U.S. nuclear counterforce 
capabilities. While scholars interested in national security have debated the impli-
cations for crisis stability, force vulnerability, and the meaning of deterrence in 
the current environment, an equally important question is: Does nuclear primacy 
grant the United States real coercive leverage in political disputes? The question 
is applicable to not only U.S. relations with Russia and China, but also with Iran 

74
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
and North Korea. Stated in terms of international relations theory, what can we 
anticipate in terms of international outcomes by relying on the realist assumption 
of the importance of varying distributions of capabilities?  
REALISTS AND THEIR CRITICS 
Realism: The Term Itself 
 What is perhaps most impressive about the realist image of international politics is 
its longevity. Although modifications, clarifications, additions, and methodologi-
cal innovations have been made down through the years, the core elements have 
remained basically intact. 
 If realism represents a “realistic” image of international politics—one repre-
sented as close to the reality of how things  are (not necessarily how things  ought 
to be), what does that say about competing images? Are they by definition “un-
realistic”? In debate and discourse, labels are important. A good example of this 
involves the period between World War I and World War II during which realists 
were challenged by advocates of the League of Nations, world federalism, or peace 
through international law. Many of these individuals came to be known as “ideal-
ists” or “utopians,” the latter term used by E. H. Carr in his  Twenty Years’ Crisis . 
 The very labels attached to these competing images of world order obviously 
put the so-called idealists at a disadvantage. Realists could claim that they were 
dealing with the world as it actually functioned. The idealists, on the other hand, 
were supposedly more concerned with what ought to be. “Yes,” a realist might 
say, “I too wish the world were a more harmonious place, but that unfortunately 
is not the case.” Those persons who were placed in the idealist camp certainly did 
not choose this particular label for themselves. Who did? The realists. By so doing, 
the opposition was stripped of a certain amount of legitimacy. Idealism conjured 
up images of impractical professors, unsophisticated peace advocates, and utopian 
schemes. 
 Realists would respond that realism should be taken at face value; it is an 
 appropriate term precisely because its basic tenets in fact closely approximate the 
world as it is. This is nothing of which to be ashamed. The longevity of the realist 
tradition is not simply a function of the expropriation of a particular label but a 
result of realism’s inherent descriptive, explanatory, and predictive strengths. 
 Another reason for the longevity of realism is that this particular image of 
the world most closely approximates the image held by practitioners of statecraft. 
Realism has always had strong policy-prescriptive components, as we have already 
noted. Machiavelli’s  The Prince , for example, was expressly presented as a guide 
for the ruler. Nor is it mere coincidence that some of the best-known American 
political scientists who have held national security advisor positions in the White 
House—Henry A. Kissinger in the Nixon-Ford years, Brent Scowcroft in the Ford 
and George H.W. Bush administrations, Zbigniew Brzezinski in the Carter years, 
and Condoleeza Rice in the George W. Bush administration—are self-professed 
(or easily classified as) realists. Indeed, the realist as academic speaks much the 
same language as the realist as statesman: power, national interest, diplomacy, 
and force. 

Realists and Their Critics 
75
 Some argue, however, that realist writers help to perpetuate the very world 
they analyze. By describing the world in terms of violence, duplicity, and war, and 
then providing advice to statesmen as to how they should act, such realists are 
justifying one particular conception of international relations. Realism becomes a 
self-fulfilling prophecy. Even efforts to place realism on a stronger theoretical foun-
dation (as in structural realism or neorealism) that favor explanation over policy 
prescription have the same effect. Critics contend that such realists suffer from a 
lack of imagination and an inability to consider seriously alternative conceptions 
of world politics and how these might be achieved. 
 The realist response is that there is nothing inherently wrong with being policy 
relevant and helping leaders navigate through dangerous waters. Advice based on 
wishful thinking and questionable assessments of international forces and trends 
could lead to disastrous policies, particularly if one is the lone “idealist” leader in 
a world of realists. Moreover, most criticism is understood to be based on a selec-
tive reading of realists, ignoring their genuine concern not only with the causes 
of war but also with how peace can be achieved or maintained. Finally, not all 
realists would claim to be particularly interested in providing advice to statesmen. 
They would rather use realist assumptions and insights to develop better theories 
of international politics. Being policy relevant or ingratiating oneself with political 
leaders is not the goal for these realists who merely entertain the scholarly goal of 
explaining how the world functions.  
The System and Determinism 
 As we have seen, the concept of system is critical to many realist writers. Whether 
the rather simple notion of anarchy or the more elaborate formulations devised by 
contemporary realist authors, the system is deemed important for its impact on 
international actors. Some contend, however, that recent realist writers portray 
the system as having a life of its own. The “system” is seemingly independent of 
the wishes and actions of states, even though it is the result of the preferences and 
powers of these constituent states. Statesmen are granted too little autonomy and 
too little room to maneuver, and the decision-making process is seemingly devoid 
of human volition. Human agents are pawns of a bloodless system that looms over 
them, a structure whose functioning they do not understand and the mechanics of 
which they only dimly perceive. Statesmen are faced with an endless array of con-
straints and few opportunities. It is as if they are engaged in a global game, a game 
called power politics, and they are unable to change the rules even if they so desire. 
In sum, critics claim there is a fatalistic, deterministic, and pessimistic undercurrent 
to much of the realist work. 
 Realists differ among themselves as to how much explanatory emphasis one 
ought to give to the international system. There is disagreement as to what extent 
the system functions as an independent variable in influencing state behavior. For 
structural or neorealists, the system is more than the aggregation of state inter-
actions. Rather, it represents a material structure that does indeed influence the 
behavior of states that are part of the system. It is these scholars who have drawn 
the most criticism, but they reject the charge that they are structural determinists 
who ignore actors operating at the unit, or state, level of analysis. One realist who 

76
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
argues that a systemic theory of international politics is composed of “the structure 
of the system and its interacting units,” notes that 
 if structure influences without determining, then one must ask how and to what 
extent the structure of a realm accounts for outcomes and how and to what extent 
the units [i.e., states] account for outcomes. Structure has to be studied in its own 
right as do units.  
 Another realist categorically states that “no neorealist that I have read argues 
that political structure determines all behavior.”  45  As noted earlier, a number of 
 so-called defensive realists have explicitly introduced unit or non-system variables 
to explain instances where states do not seem to be acting in accordance with what 
a purely system-structure perspective would lead one to expect. 
 Consistent with Arnold Wolfers, Hans Morgenthau, Henry Kissinger, and others 
of more recent vintage, traditional or classical realists have often made the distinction 
between imperialist, revolutionary, or revisionist states on the one hand, and status-
quo powers interested in maintaining their own position in a relatively constant 
regional or global order on the other. More recently, “neoclassical realists” such as 
Randall Schweller, while appreciating the insights of neorealism, have attempted to 
incorporate international institutions and explanatory factors at the state-society 
level of analysis. Similarly, still other realists have examined relations among states 
(or the interactions level of analysis) that analytically fall between the level of system 
structure and the level of state and society—arms racing and arms control, and alli-
ance behavior (balancing or bandwagoning). Such factors, some argue, will affect the 
stability of either bipolar or multipolar systems and, consequently, the possibility of 
moving toward a different future, perhaps a more peaceful world.  46  
 As these examples indicate, realists differ on the extent to which statesmen 
impose themselves on events, or vice versa. No realist is completely determinist or 
voluntarist or exclusively emphasizes structure or agent. It is not a matter of either-
or, but rather varying assessments as to how strong are the constraints placed on 
statesmen and how much room leaders have to maneuver.  
Realists and the State 
 The state is the centerpiece of realist work. Few persons would disagree as to the impor-
tance of the state in international affairs. The criticism, however, is that realists are so 
obsessed with the state that they ignore other actors and other issues not directly related 
to the maintenance of state security. Other non-state actors—multinational corpora-
tions, banks, terrorists, and international organizations—are either excluded, down-
played, or trivialized in the realist perspective. Furthermore, given the national security 
prism through which realists view the world, other concerns such as the  socioeconomic 
gap between rich and poor societies, international pollution, and the implications of 
globalization rarely make the realist agenda. At best, such issues are dealt with in a 
derivative manner. A preoccupation with national security and the state by definition 
relegates other issues to secondary importance, if not banning them entirely from any 
serious realist agenda. 
 Realists counter that simply because non-state actors are not dealt with in 
depth does not mean that they are considered irrelevant. Political scientists, one 

Realists and Their Critics 
77
realist notes, should avoid slipping “into thinking that what an author fails to con-
centrate his attention upon, he takes to be inconsequential.” Similarly, another real-
ist has stated that to argue “that the state . . . is the principal actor in international 
relations does not deny the existence of other individual and collective actors.”  47  
 Second, realists contend that theories are constructed to answer certain ques-
tions and to explain certain types of international behavior and outcomes. As a 
result, they purposely limit the types of actors analyzed. A theory concerned with 
explaining state behavior naturally focuses on states, not multinational corpora-
tions or terrorist groups. Similarly, a concern with national security issues by defini-
tion makes it unlikely that global welfare and humanitarian issues will receive the 
same degree of attention. 
 Finally, some justify focusing on the state on normative grounds. Many schol-
ars, for example, are concerned with how unbridled arms races and military 
spending contribute to international tension, devastating regional wars, and socio-
economic deprivation. Because it is almost exclusively states that spend this money 
to buy or produce military hardware, it makes sense to focus on them as the unit 
of analysis. Hence, far from being enamored of states, many realists are critical of 
these political entities that are deemed too important to be ignored.  
Realists and the Balance of Power 
 Given the emphasis on the state and the concern with national security issues, we 
have seen how the concept of balance of power has played a dominant role in 
realist thought and theory. Although balance of power has been a constant theme 
in realist writings down through the centuries, it has also come in for a great deal 
of abuse. Balance of power has been criticized for creating definitional confu-
sion. Hans Morgenthau, a realist himself, discerned at least four definitions: (1) a 
policy aimed at a certain state of affairs; (2) an objective or actual state of affairs; 
(3) an approximately equal distribution of power, as when a balance of power 
exists between the United States and the Soviet Union; and (4) any distribution of 
power including a preponderance of power, as when the balance of power shifts in 
favor of either superpower. Another critic found at least seven meanings of the term 
then in use—(1) distribution of power, (2) equilibrium, (3) hegemony, (4) stability 
and peace, (5) instability and war, (6) power politics generally, and (7) a universal 
law of history.  48  Indeed, one is left with the question that if the balance of power 
means so many different things, can it really mean anything? 
 Balance of power has also been criticized for leading to war as opposed to pre-
venting it, serving as a poor guide for statesmen, and functioning as a propaganda 
tool to justify defense spending and foreign adventures. Despite these constant at-
tacks and continual reformulations of the meaning of the term, balance of power 
remains a crucial concept in the realist vocabulary. 
 At times, it has appeared that the harshest critics of balance of power as a 
concept have been the realists themselves. All of these criticisms have been ac-
knowledged and some deemed valid. Attempts have been made, however, to clear 
up misconceptions and misinterpretations of balance of power, placing it on a 
more solid conceptual footing. One such effort beginning in the 1970s was made 
by Kenneth Waltz.  49  Even his formulation, however, was not without its critics, 

78
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
as Waltz soon replaced the late Hans Morgenthau as lightning rod drawing criti-
cism to the realist and structural-realist projects. In fact, the debate between Waltz 
and his critics has been ongoing for more than three decades—the latest rounds 
involving neoliberal institutionalist, constructivist, critical theory, and postmodern 
challenges. (For further discussion, see the précis to the Waltz article appended to 
this chapter.)  
Realism and Change 
 Given the realist view of the international system, the role of the state, and 
balance-of-power politics, critics suggest that very little possibility is left for the 
fundamental and peaceful transformation of international politics. Realists, claim 
the critics, at best offer analysis aimed at understanding how international stabil-
ity is achieved, but nothing approaching true peace. Realist stability reflects a 
world bristling with weapons, forever on the verge of violent conflict and war. 
Alternative world futures—scenarios representing a real alternative to the dismal 
Hobbesian world—are rarely discussed or taken seriously. The timeless quality 
of international politics, its repetitious nature and cycles of war, and a world in 
which the strong do what they will and the weak do as they must, dominate the 
realist image. We are given little information, let alone any hope, say the critics, 
as to how meaningful and peaceful change can occur and thus help us escape from 
the security dilemma. 
 Critics assert that realists simply assume state interests, but tell us little about 
how states come to define their interests, or the processes by which those interests 
are redefined. Interests are not simply “out there” waiting to be discovered, but are 
constructed through social interaction. Alexander Wendt and other constructiv-
ists discussed in  Chapter   6 claim that international anarchy is what states make 
of it—interests not being exogenous or given to states, but actually constructed 
subjectively by them.  50  
 The issue of change, of course, is intimately connected to that of determinism 
and to what was referred to in  Chapter   1 as the  agent-structure problem. Although 
power politics and the state are central to all realist analyses, this does not mean 
that fundamental change is impossible or that change is limited to war and the 
cyclical rise and fall of states. Robert Gilpin argues that 
 the state is the principal actor in that the nature of the state and the patterns of 
relations among states are the most important determinants of the character of 
international relations at any given moment. This argument does not presume that 
states need always be the principal actors, nor does it presume that the nature of 
the state need always be the same and that the contemporary nation-state is the 
ultimate form of political organization.  
 What separates realists from some other writers on the question of system change, 
however, is a belief that “if the nation-state is to disappear . . . it will do so through 
age-old political processes and not as idealists would wish through a transcendence 
of politics itself.”  51  Hence, realists claim that fundamental change  is possible and 
is taken into consideration in their work. Once again, however, the strength of this 
view varies substantially depending on the author under consideration.  

Realists and Their Critics 
79
Realism: The Entire Enterprise 
 Critics of realism have always felt that they have been faced with a difficult task 
because the image comes close to approaching an impregnable edifice seemingly 
unscathed by years of criticism. Indeed, scholars who at one time in their careers 
struggled to devise alternative approaches based on alternative images of inter-
national politics have in some instances given up the quest, become converts, or 
resigned themselves to modifying existing realist explanatory frameworks. 
 Critics are faced with several problems. First, as noted earlier, given realism’s 
affinity to the real world of policy making, this particular image of the world 
is automatically imbued with a certain degree of attractiveness and legitimacy. 
It represents the world out there, not some ivory tower perspective on human 
events. The realist perspective is the accepted wisdom of many, if not most foreign 
policy establishments—even those outside the northern hemisphere where leaders 
more often than not speak the language of realism as a result of concern over the 
survival of their regimes and states. Within the halls of academe, realism also has 
great  attractiveness; “peace studies” programs sometimes find it advantageous 
to change the title to “security and conflict studies” in order to generate student 
interest. Realism can be as seductive to the academic professional as it can be to 
the student. 
 Second, realism is also seductive in that it has been given an increasingly 
scientific face. Earlier criticisms of the realist literature were very often based on 
the contention that such concepts as balance of power had less to do with theory 
building and more to do with ideology and self-justification of one particular ap-
proach to conducting international relations. Much of the classical realist work 
was, therefore, considered “unscientific”—insight without evidence. But many 
defensive and offensive realists have cast their hunches and insights in the form of 
hypotheses, testable either quantitatively or with nonquantitative indicators. The 
work is better grounded scientifically and placed within the context of the positivist 
view of how we comprehend reality. The positivist approach to knowledge remains 
prominent in the social as in the natural sciences. Indeed, in some circles any image 
of international politics that can be presented in the cloak of positivism is immedi-
ately granted a certain stature above those that do not. 
 What realists see as a virtue—a positivist orientation—is viewed by postmod-
ernists and others as erroneous. The heart of their perspective on realism goes to 
the question of what is this “knowable reality” of international relations that real-
ists claim to be true. This involves serious consideration of the underlying issues of 
ontology (how we see the essence of things as in the nature of the actors and the 
processes in which they engage), epistemology (verification of knowledge claims—
how we know what we think we know), and methodology (modes of research 
and analysis). Is reality simply “out there” waiting to be discovered? Or is reality 
constructed, for example, by discourse and hence realism is best viewed as simply 
another perspective or construction of how the world works? 
 In conclusion, a reminder concerning criticism of any image or interpretive 
understanding: It is not particularly difficult to find fault with the work of indi-
vidual theorists and then blanket an entire approach for the supposed sins of an 
individual author. As this chapter illustrates, although realists may find common 

80
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
ground in terms of basic assumptions and key international actors, there are 
 differences  between classical realists and structural realists, and, in turn, offen-
sive and  defensive realists. Realists of any persuasion may differ in a number of 
important respects, such as methods they use, levels of analysis they choose, and 
what they assume about the ability of decisionmakers to influence international 
outcomes. That is why it is imperative to refer to, and read from, the original 
sources.  
NOTES
  1.  Hans J. Morgenthau,  Politics Among Nations, 4th ed. (New York: Knopf, 1966), 25.  
 2.  Ibid., 5 
 3.  See the suggested readings for specific works by these authors.  
 4.  Thucydides,  History of the Peloponnesian War, trans. Rex Warner (Harmondsworth, 
England, and New York: Penguin Books, 1982), 49.  
 5.  Ibid., 402.  
 6.  Machiavelli,  The Prince, Chapter XV, any edition.  
 7.  Thomas Hobbes,  Leviathan, ed. Michael Oakeshott (New York and London: Collier 
Macmillan, 1974). These classic citations are drawn from Book 1,  Chapter  13 . 
 8.  Ibid., Book 1,  Chapter  15 , 113.  
 9.  Ibid., Book 1,  Chapter  13 , 101.  
 10.  Morgenthau,  Politics Among Nations, pp. 4–11.  
 11.  Ibid., p. 32.  
 12.  Stanley Hoffmann, “Weighing the Balance of Power,”  Foreign Affairs 50, 4 (July 1972): 
618–43.  
 13.  John H. Herz, “Idealist Internationalism and the Security Dilemma,”  World Politics 5, 2 
(January 1950): 157–80.  
 14.  J. J. Rousseau, “A Discussion on the Origins of Inequality,” in  The Social Contract and 
Discourses, trans. G. D. H. Cole (New York: E. P. Dutton and Co., 1950), 235–38. Ken-
neth N. Waltz develops the stag hunt allegory in his  Man, the State and War (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1959), 165–71. For a critique of Waltz’s interpretation of 
Rousseau, see Stanley Hoffmann, “Rousseau on War and Peace,”  American Political 
Science Review 57, 2 (June 1963): 317–33. 
 15.  For a discussion of games such as stag hunt, prisoner’s dilemma, deadlock, and chicken, 
see Robert Axelrod and Robert O. Keohane, “Achieving Cooperation Under Anarchy,” 
 World Politics 38, 1 (October 1985): 226–54.  
 16.  See Robert Powell, “Absolute and Relative Gains in International Relations Theory,” 
 American Political Science Review 85 (1991): 1303–20.  
 17.  Reprinted in Fred A. Sondermann, David S. McClellan, and William C. Olson, eds.,  The 
Theory and Practice of International Relations, 5th ed. (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice 
Hall, 1979), 120.  
 18.  Henry A. Kissinger,  A World Restored: The Politics of Conservatism in a Revolutionary 
Age (New York: Grosset & Dunlap, 1964), 317–18.  
 19.  Waltz,  Man, the State and War, 209 .
 20.  Ibid., 204  .
 21.  Ernst B. Haas, “On Systems and International Regimes,”  World Politics 27, 2 (January 
1975), 151.  
 22.  This is a direct quote from Kenneth Waltz at a roundtable at the Annual Meeting, 
 American Political Science Association, Washington, D.C., August–September 2005.  
 23.  Morgenthau,  Politics Among Nations, 161 and 519, respectively.  

Notes
81
 24.  Kenneth N. Waltz, “The Stability of a Bipolar World,”  Daedalus 93 (Summer 1964): 
881–909; Karl W. Deutsch and J. David Singer, “Multipolar Power Systems and Inter-
national Stability,”  World Politics 16, 3 (April 1964): 390–406.  
 25.  Bruce Bueno de Mesquita, “Systemic Polarization and the Occurrence and Duration of 
War,”  Journal of Conflict Resolution 22, 2 (June 1978): 245, 246. See also Michael D. 
Wallace,  War and Rank Among Nations (Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1973).  
 26.  See, for example, Randall L. Schweller,  Deadly Imbalances: Tripolarity and Hitler’s 
Strategy of World Conquest (New York: Columbia University Press, 1997); Edward 
Mansfield,  Power, Trade, and War (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1994); Dale 
C. Copeland, “Neorealism and the Myth of Bipolar Stability: Toward a New Dynamic 
Realist Theory of Major War,”  Security Studies 5, 3 (Spring 1996): 29–89. Discussion 
and references to power-transition and power cycle theories are later in this chapter.  
 27.  See Kenneth N. Waltz,  Realism and International Politics (London and New York: Rout-
ledge, 2008), x and xiv. Cf. Waltz, “The Emerging Structure of International Politics, 
“ International Security; 18, 2 (Fall 1994): 44–79 and John J. Mearsheimer, “Back to the 
Future: Instability in Europe after the Cold War,”  International Security 15, 1 (Summer 
1990): 5–56. See also Christopher Layne, “The Unipolar Illusion: Why New Powers Will 
Arise,”  International Security 17, 4 (1993): 5–51; Michael Mastanduno, “Preserving the 
Unipolar Moment: Realist Theory and US Grand Strategy After the Cold War,”  Interna-
tional Security 21, 4 (1997): 49–88. For a contrasting view, see William C. Wohlforth, 
“The Stability of a Bipolar World,”  International Security 24, 1 (1999): 5–41.  
 28.  The theoretical foundation of defensive realism is found in Robert Jervis, “Cooperation 
under the Security Dilemma,”  World Politics , 30, 2 (January 1978): 167–214. See also 
Charles Glaser, “Realists as Optimists: Cooperation as Self-Help,”  International  Security 
19, 3 (Winter 1994/95): 50–90; Jack Snyder,  Myth of Empire: Domestic Politics and 
International Ambition (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1991).  
 29.  John J. Mearsheimer,  The Tragedy of Great Power Politics (New York: W.W. Norton & 
Company, 2001).  
 30.   For a recent comparison of the conceptions of balance of power of Morgenthau, Waltz, 
Mearsheimer, and Hedley Bull, see Richard Little,  The Balance of Power in International 
Relations: Metaphors, Myths, and Models (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007).  
 31.  Kenneth N. Waltz,  Foreign Policy and Democratic Politics: The American and British 
Experience (Boston: Little, Brown, 1967).  
 32.  Stephen Walt,  The Origins of Alliances (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1987) and 
his  Revolutions and War (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996). See also Michael N. 
Barnett and Jack S. Levy, “Domestic Sources of Alliances and Alignments: The Case of 
Egypt, 1962–73,”  International Organization 45, 3 (Summer 1991): 369–95; Steven 
R. David, “Explaining Third World Alignment,”  World Politics 43, 2 (January 1991): 
233–55; Thomas J. Christensen and Jack Snyder, “Chain Gangs and Passed Bucks: 
Predicting Alliance Patterns in Multipolarity,”  International Organization 44, 2 (Spring 
1990): 137–68.  
 33.  Stephen Van Evera,  Causes of War: Power and the Roots of Conflict (Ithaca, NY: 
 Cornell University Press, 1999).  
 34.  Barry R. Posen,  The Sources of Military Doctrine (Ithaca, New York: Cornell University 
Press, 1984).  
 35.  Dale Copeland, The Origins of Major War (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press), p. 15.  
 36.  See the works by Singer and Richardson as listed under “On Power, War, and Peace” 
under Suggested Readings.  
 37.  Robert Gilpin,  War and Change in World Politics (New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1981), 3, 10. For other works on power transition, see the works listed under “On 
Power, War, and Peace” under Suggested Readings.  

82
CHAPTER 2
Realism: The State and Balance of Power
 38.  George Modelski, “The Long Cycle of Global Politics and the Nation-State,”  Compara-
tive Studies in Society and History 20, 2 (April 1978): 214–35. The quote is on p. 217. 
Notice that Modelski does not describe the international system as being anarchic. 
Although a central authority is lacking, order and authority do exist. It is Modelski’s 
emphasis on the primacy of political factors that places him within the context of the 
realist as opposed to the economic-structuralist image.  
 39.  Ibid., 235. 
 40.  Ronald L. Tammen, Jacek Kugler, et al.,  Power Transitions (New York and London: 
Chatham House Publishers, 2000).  
 41.  See, for example, Jack S. Levy, “Theories of General War,”  World Politics 37, 3 (April 
1985): 344–74; Nathaniel Beck, “The Illusion of Cycles in International Relations,” and 
Joshua S. Goldstein, “The Possibility of Cycles in International Relations,”  International 
Studies Quarterly 35, 4 (December 1991): 455–80.  
 42.  See the special issue of  World Politics 38, 1 (October 1985), edited by Kenneth 
Oye; R. Harrison Wagner, “The Theory of Games and the Problem of International 
 Cooperation,”  American Political Science Review 70, 2 (June 1983): 330–46; Robert 
Jervis, “Realism, Game Theory, and Cooperation,”  World Politics 40, 3 (April 1988): 
317–49; Robert Axelrod,  The Evolution of Cooperation (New York: Basic Books, 1984).  
 43.  Robert O. Keohane, “The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and Changes in International 
Economic Regimes, 1967–1977,” in Ole R. Holsti, Randolph M. Siverson, and Alex-
ander L. George, eds.,  Change in the International System (Boulder, CO: Westview 
Press, 1980), 131–62. Charles P. Kindleberger,  The World in Depression, 1929–1939 
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1973); Robert Gilpin,  U.S. Power and the 
Multinational Corporation (New York: Basic Books, 1975).  
 44.  Paul Kennedy,  The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers (New York: Random House, 
1987). Cf. the earlier work of the economist Mancur Olson,  The Rise and Decline 
of  Nations (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1982): Henry R. Nau,  The Myth of 
 America’s Decline (New York: Oxford University Press, 1990); Joseph S. Nye, Jr.,  Bound 
to Lead: The Changing Nature of American Power (New York: Basic Books, 1990); and 
Samuel P. Huntington, “The U.S.—Decline or Renewal?”  Foreign Affairs 67, 2 (Winter 
1988/89): 76–96.  
 45.  The first realist we cite is Kenneth N. Waltz, “Letter to the Editor,”  International Orga-
nization 36, 3 (Summer 1982): 680, which cites his  Theory of International Politics, 78 
and the other is Robert G. Gilpin, “The Richness of the Tradition of Political Realism,” 
 International Organization 38, 2 (Spring 1984): 302.  
 46.  Randall L. Schweller and David Priess, “A Tale of Two Realisms: Expanding the Insti-
tutions Debate,”  Mershon International Studies Review 41, supplement 1 (May 1997): 
1–33, Glenn H. Snyder, “Process Variables in Neorealist Theory,” in  Realism: Restate-
ments and Renewal, ed. Benjamin Frankel, special issue of  Security Studies 5, 3 (Spring 
1996): 167–92, 88.  
 47.  Waltz, “Letter to the Editor,” 680; Gilpin, “Richness of Political Realism,” 300.  
 48.  Morgenthau,  Politics Among Nations, 161; Ernst B. Haas, “The Balance of Power: 
Prescription, Concept or Propaganda?”  World Politics 5, no. 2 (July 1953): 442–77.  
 49.  Waltz,  Theory of International Politics. 
 50.  Alexander Wendt,  Social Theory of International Politics (London: Cambridge University 
Press, 1999).  
 51.  Gilpin, “Richness of Political Realism,” 299, 300.  

SE LECTED READI N GS 
The Melian Dialogue 
THUCYDIDES
OVERVIEW
 This classic contains the essential ingredients of the realist perspective described 
by Thucydides albeit in its boldest and most extreme form. The Athenians have 
no interest in whether the demands they make on the Melians are just or moral. 
In the only section of the entire book in which the dialogue is presented as a play, 
Thucydides raises the important question of the role of justice in international rela-
tions. In a classic statement, the Athenians emphasize the overriding importance 
of power: “The strong do what they have the power to do, and the weak accept 
what they have to accept.” From reading Thucydides we learn quite a lot about 
the ancient world he knew— insights  applicable today concerning honor, justice, 
perception, neutrality, self-interest,  alliances, balance of power, capabilities, and 
the uncertainty of power calculations.  
 Thucydides has been criticized as an advocate of harsh and brutal wartime poli-
cies, one who rationalized such events as he described in “The Melian  Dialogue.” 
This is patently not the case. Thucydides favored the democracy of the Golden 
Age of Pericles. In fact, the second half of  The History of the Peloponnesian War 
 is a description of the degeneration of Athenian democracy and the resulting 
 fanaticism that turned the war from a defensive effort to a war of conquest. “The 
Melian  Dialogue” reflects the latter phase of the war and should not be viewed 
as a personal preference on the part of Thucydides. It is also a caution as to how 
the extreme pursuit of a foreign policy lacking in any concern for justice can 
eventually have a corrosive effect on democracy at home. It is not a coincidence 
that immediately following “The Melian Dialogue,” he places his discussion of 
the launching of the Sicilian expedition. The same arrogant attitude and hubris 
exhibited at  Melos is  evident in the decision to try to subdue distant Sicily, which 
ended in a total disaster for the Athenian expeditionary military force. Thucydides 
therefore subtly makes the case that international relations must rest on elements 
of both justice and power, a point made by many twentieth-century realists such as 
Carr and  Morgenthau. If an international system is devoid of any sense of justice, 
international order is  lacking and you end up with a true Hobbesian “war of all 
against all.”  
83
“The Melian Dialogue” from  History of the Peloponnesian War  by Thucydides, translated by Rex Warner, pp. 400–408. 
Copyright 1954 by Penguin Books Ltd. Reprinted by permission of Penguin Books Ltd.

84
THUCYDIDES
Next summer Alcibiades sailed to Argos with twenty 
ships and seized 300 Argive citizens who were still sus-
pected of being pro-Spartan. These were put by the Athe-
nians into the nearby islands under Athenian control. 
 The Athenians also made an expedition against the is-
land of Melos. They had thirty of their own ships, six from 
Chios, and two from Lesbos; 1,200 hoplites, 300 archers, 
and twenty mounted archers, all from Athens; and about 
1,500 hoplites from the allies and the islanders. 
 The Melians are a colony from Sparta. They had 
refused to join the Athenian empire like the other 
islanders, and at first had remained neutral without 
helping either side; but afterwards when the Athenians 
had brought force to bear on them by laying waste 
their land, they had become open enemies of Athens. 
 Now the generals Cleomedes, the son of Lyco-
medes, and Tisias, the son of Tisimachus, encamped 
with the above force in Melian territory and, before 
doing any harm to the land, first of all sent represen-
tatives to negotiate. The Melians did not invite these 
representatives to speak before the people, but asked 
them to make the statement for which they had 
come in front of the governing body and the few. 
The Athenian representatives then spoke as follows: 
 “So we are not to speak before the people, no 
doubt in case the mass of the people should hear 
once and for all and without interruption an argu-
ment from us which is both persuasive and incontro-
vertible, and should so be led astray. This, we realize, 
is your motive in bringing us here to speak before 
the few. Now suppose that you who sit here should 
make assurance doubly sure. Suppose that you, too, 
should refrain from dealing with every point in detail 
in a set speech, and should instead interrupt us when-
ever we say something controversial and deal with 
that before going on to the next point? Tell us first 
whether you approve of this suggestion of ours.” 
 The Council of the Melians replied as follows: 
 “No one can object to each of us putting for-
ward our own views in a calm atmosphere. That 
is perfectly reasonable. What is scarcely consistent 
with such a proposal is the present threat, indeed 
the certainty, of your making war on us. We see 
that you have come prepared to judge the argument 
yourselves, and that the likely end of it all will be 
either war, if we prove that we are in the right, and 
so refuse to surrender, or else slavery.” 
 Athenians:  If you are going to spend the time 
in enumerating your suspicions about the future, or 
if you have met here for any other reason except to 
look the facts in the face and on the basis of these 
facts to consider how you can save your city from 
destruction, there is no point in our going on with 
this discussion. If, however, you will do as we sug-
gest, then we will speak on. 
 Melians:  It is natural and understandable that 
people who are placed as we are should have re-
course to all kinds of arguments and different points 
of view. However, you are right in saying that we 
are met together here to discuss the safety of our 
country and, if you will have it so, the discussion 
shall proceed on the lines that you have laid down. 
 Athenians:  Then we on our side will use no fine 
phrases saying, for example, that we have a right to 
our empire because we defeated the Persians, or that 
we have come against you now because of the inju-
ries you have done us—a great mass of words that 
nobody would believe. And we ask you on your side 
not to imagine that you will influence us by saying 
that you, though a colony of Sparta, have not joined 
Sparta in the war, or that you have never done us any 
harm. Instead we recommend that you should try to 
get what it is possible for you to get, taking into con-
sideration what we both really do think; since you 
know as well as we do that, when these matters are 
discussed by practical people, the standard of justice 
depends on the equality of power to compel and that 
in fact the strong do what they have the power to do 
and the weak accept what they have to accept. 
 Melians:  Then in our view (since you force us to 
leave justice out of account and to confine ourselves 
to self-interest)—in our view it is at any rate useful 
that you should not destroy a principle that is to the 
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   How do the Melians make the case that a concern for justice can actually work in favor of 
the self-interest of the Athenians?  
 2.   How do the Athenians make the case that a Melian reliance on hope for the future and a trust 
in fortune undercuts the self-interests of the Melians?  
 3.   What role does the concept of power play in the dialogue?  

The Melian Dialogue 
85
general good of all men—namely, that in the case of 
all who fall into danger there should be such a thing 
as fair play and just dealing, and that such people 
should be allowed to use and to profit by arguments 
that fall short of a mathematical accuracy. And this 
is a principle which affects you as much as anybody, 
since your own fall would be visited by the most terri-
ble vengeance and would be an example to the world. 
 Athenians:  As for us, even assuming that our 
empire does come to an end, we are not despondent 
about what would happen next. One is not so much 
frightened of being conquered by a power which rules 
over others, as Sparta does (not that we are concerned 
with Sparta now), as of what would happen if a ruling 
power is attacked and defeated by its own subjects. 
So far as this point is concerned, you can leave it to 
us to face the risks involved. What we shall do now is 
to show you that it is for the good of our own empire 
that we are here and that it is for the preservation of 
your city that we shall say what we are going to say. 
We do not want any trouble in bringing you into our 
empire, and we want you to be spared for the good 
both of yourselves and of ourselves. 
 Melians:  And how could it be just as good for us 
to be the slaves as for you to be the masters? 
 Athenians:  You, by giving in, would save your-
selves from disaster; we, by not destroying you, 
would be able to profit from you. 
 Melians:  So you would not agree to our being 
neutral, friends instead of enemies, but allies of nei-
ther side? 
 Athenians:  No, because it is not so much your 
hostility that injures us; it is rather the case that, if 
we were on friendly terms with you, our subjects 
would regard that as a sign of weakness in us, 
whereas your hatred is evidence of our power. 
 Melians:  Is that your subjects’ idea of fair play—
that no distinction should be made between people 
who are quite unconnected with you and people 
who are mostly your own colonists or else rebels 
whom you have conquered? 
 Athenians:  So far as right and wrong are con-
cerned they think that there is no difference between 
the two, that those who still preserve their indepen-
dence do so because they are strong, and that if we 
fail to attack them it is because we are afraid. So that 
by conquering you we shall increase not only the size 
but the security of our empire. We rule the sea and 
you are islanders, and weaker islanders too than the 
others; it is therefore particularly important that you 
should not escape. 
 Melians:  But do you think there is security for 
you in what we suggest? For here again, since you 
will not let us mention justice, but tell us to give in 
to your interests, we, too, must tell you what our in-
terests are and, if yours and ours happen to coincide, 
we must try to persuade you of the fact. Is it not cer-
tain that you will make enemies of all states who are 
at present neutral, when they see what is happening 
here and naturally conclude that in course of time 
you will attack them too? Does not this mean that 
you are strengthening the enemies you have already 
and are forcing others to become your enemies even 
against their intentions and their inclinations? 
 Athenians:  As a matter of fact we are not so much 
frightened of states on the continent. They have their 
liberty, and this means that it will be a long time be-
fore they begin to take precautions against us. We are 
more concerned about islanders like yourselves, who 
are still unsubdued, or subjects who have already be-
come embittered by the constraint which our empire 
imposes on them. These are the people who are most 
likely to act in a reckless manner and to bring them-
selves and us, too, into the most obvious danger. 
 Melians:  Then surely, if such hazards are taken 
by you to keep your empire and by your subjects 
to escape from it, we who are still free would show 
ourselves great cowards and weaklings if we failed 
to face everything that comes rather than submit to 
slavery. 
 Athenians:  No, not if you are sensible. This is no 
fair fight, with honour on one side and shame on the 
other. It is rather a question of saving your lives and 
not resisting those who are far too strong for you. 
 Melians:  Yet we know that in war fortune 
sometimes makes the odds more level than could be 
expected from the difference in numbers of the two 
sides. And if we surrender, then all our hope is lost at 
once, whereas, so long as we remain in action, there 
is still a hope that we may yet stand upright. 
 Athenians:  Hope, that comforter in danger! If 
one already has solid advantages to fall back upon, 
one can indulge in hope. It may do harm, but will 
not destroy one. But hope is by nature an expensive 
commodity, and those who are risking their all on 
one cast find out what it means only when they 
are already ruined; it never fails them in the period 
when such a knowledge would enable them to take 
precautions. Do not let this happen to you, you who 
are weak and whose fate depends on a single move-
ment of the scale. And do not be like those people 
who, as so commonly happens, miss the chance of 

86
THUCYDIDES
saving themselves in a human and practical way, 
and, when every clear and distinct hope has left them 
in their adversity, turn to what is blind and vague, 
to prophecies and oracles and such things which by 
encouraging hope lead men to ruin. 
 Melians:  It is difficult, and you may be sure that 
we know it, for us to oppose your power and fortune, 
unless the terms be equal. Nevertheless we trust that 
the gods will give us fortune as good as yours, be-
cause we are standing for what is right against what 
is wrong; and as for what we lack in power, we trust 
that it will be made up for by our alliance with the 
Spartans, who are bound, if for no other reason, than 
for honour’s sake, and because we are their kinsmen, 
to come to our help. Our confidence, therefore, is not 
so entirely irrational as you think. 
 Athenians:  So far as the favour of the gods is 
concerned, we think we have as much right to that 
as you have. Our aims and our actions are perfectly 
consistent with the beliefs men hold about the gods 
and with the principles which govern their own 
conduct. Our opinion of the gods and our knowl-
edge of men lead us to conclude that it is a general 
and necessary law of nature to rule whatever one 
can. This is not a law that we made ourselves, nor 
were we the first to act upon it when it was made. 
We found it already in existence, and we shall leave 
it to exist forever among those who come after us. 
We are merely acting in accordance with it, and we 
know that you or anybody else with the same power 
as ours would be acting in precisely the same way. 
And therefore, so far as the gods are concerned, we 
see no good reason why we should fear to be at a 
disadvantage. But with regard to your views about 
Sparta and your confidence that she, out of a sense 
of honour, will come to your aid, we must say that 
we congratulate you on your simplicity but do not 
envy you your folly. In matters that concern them-
selves for their own constitution the Spartans are 
quite remarkably good; as for their relations with 
others, that is a long story, but it can be expressed 
shortly and clearly by saying that of all people we 
know the Spartans are most conspicuous for believ-
ing that what they like doing is honourable and what 
suits their interests is just. And this kind of attitude is 
not going to be of much help to you in your absurd 
quest for safety at the moment. 
 Melians:  But this is the very point where we 
can feel most sure. Their own self-interest will make 
them refuse to betray their own colonists, the Me-
lians, for that would mean losing the confidence of 
their friends among the Hellenes and doing good to 
their enemies. 
 Athenians:  You seem to forget that if one fol-
lows one’s self-interest one wants to be safe, whereas 
the path of justice and honour involves one in dan-
ger. And, where danger is concerned, the Spartans 
are not, as a rule, very venturesome. 
 Melians:  But we think that they would even 
endanger themselves for our sake and count the 
risk more worth taking than in the case of others, 
because we are so close to the Peloponnese that they 
could operate more easily, and because they can de-
pend on us more than on others, since we are of the 
same race and share the same feelings. 
 Athenians:  Good will shown by the party that 
is asking for help does not mean security for the 
prospective ally. What is looked for is a positive 
preponderance of power in action. And the Spartans 
pay attention to this point even more than others do. 
Certainly they distrust their own native resources so 
much that when they attack a neighbour they bring 
a great army of allies with them. It is hardly likely 
therefore that, while we are in control of the sea, 
they will cross over to an island. 
 Melians:  But they still might send others. The 
Cretan sea is a wide one, and it is harder for those 
who control it to intercept others than for those who 
want to slip through to do so safely. And even if they 
were to fail in this, they would turn against your own 
land and against those of your allies left unvisited by 
Brasidas. So, instead of troubling about a country 
which has nothing to do with you, you will find 
trouble nearer home, among your allies, and in your 
own country. 
 Athenians:  It is a possibility, something that has 
in fact happened before. It may happen in your case, 
but you are well aware that the Athenians have never 
yet relinquished a single siege operation through fear 
of others. But we are somewhat shocked to find that, 
though you announced your intention of discussing 
how you could preserve yourselves, in all this talk 
you have said absolutely nothing which could justify 
a man in thinking that he could be preserved. Your 
chief points are concerned with what you hope may 
happen in the future, while your actual resources are 
too scanty to give you a chance of survival against 
the forces that are opposed to you at this moment. 
You will therefore be showing an extraordinary lack 
of common sense if, after you have asked us to retire 
from this meeting, you still fail to reach a conclusion 
wiser than anything you have mentioned so far. Do 

The Melian Dialogue 
87
not be led astray by a false sense of honour—a thing 
which often brings men to ruin when they are faced 
with an obvious danger that somehow affects their 
pride. For in many cases men have still been able to 
see the dangers ahead of them, but this thing called 
dishonour, this word, by its own force of seduction, 
has drawn them into a state where they have sur-
rendered to an idea, while in fact they have fallen 
voluntarily into irrevocable disaster, in dishonour 
that is all the more dishonourable because it has 
come to them from their own folly rather than their 
misfortune. You, if you take the right view, will be 
careful to avoid this. You will see that there is nothing 
disgraceful in giving way to the greatest city in Hellas 
when she is offering you such reasonable terms— 
alliance on a tribute-paying basis and liberty to enjoy 
your own property. And, when you are allowed to 
choose between war and safety, you will not be so 
insensitively arrogant as to make the wrong choice. 
This is the safe rule—to stand up to one’s equals, to 
behave with deference towards one’s superiors, and 
to treat one’s inferiors with moderation. Think it over 
again, then, when we have withdrawn from the meet-
ing, and let this be a point that constantly recurs to 
your minds—that you are discussing the fate of your 
country, that you have only one country, and that its 
future for good or ill depends on this one single deci-
sion which you are going to make.  
 The Athenians then withdrew from the discus-
sion. The Melians, left to themselves, reached a 
conclusion which was much the same as they had 
indicated in their previous replies. Their answer was 
as follows: 
 “Our decision, Athenians, is just the same as it 
was at first. We are not prepared to give up in a short 
moment the liberty which our city has enjoyed from its 
foundation for 700 years. We put our trust in the for-
tune that the gods will send and which has saved us up 
to now, and in the help of men—that is, of the Spartans; 
and so we shall try to save ourselves. But we invited you 
to allow us to be friends of yours and enemies to neither 
side, to make a treaty which shall be agreeable to both 
you and us, and so to leave our country.” 
 The Melians made this reply, and the Athenians, 
just as they were breaking off the discussion, said: 
 “Well, at any rate, judging from this decision of 
yours, you seem to us quite unique in your ability to 
consider the future as something more certain than 
what is before your eyes, and to see uncertainties as 
realities, simply because you would like them to be 
so. As you have staked most on and trusted most in 
Spartans, luck, and hopes, so in all these you will 
find yourselves most completely deluded.” 
 The Athenian representatives then went back to 
the army, and the Athenian generals, finding that the 
Melians would not submit, immediately commenced 
hostilities and built a wall completely round the city 
of Melos, dividing the work out among the various 
states. Later they left behind a garrison of some of 
their own and some allied troops to blockade the 
place by land and sea, and with the greater part of 
their army returned home. The force left behind 
stayed on and continued with the siege. 
 About the same time the Argives invaded Phliasia 
and were ambushed by the Phliasians and the exiles 
from Argos, losing about eighty men. 
 Then, too, the Athenians at Pylos captured a 
great quantity of plunder from Spartan territory. 
Not even after this did the Spartans renounce the 
treaty and make war, but they issued a proclama-
tion saying that any of their people who wished to 
do so were free to make raids on the Athenians. The 
 Corinthians also made some attacks on the Athe-
nians because of private quarrels of their own, but 
the rest of the Peloponnesians stayed quiet. 
 Meanwhile the Melians made a night attack and 
captured the part of the Athenian lines opposite the 
market-place. They killed some of the troops, and 
then, after bringing in corn and everything else use-
ful that they could lay their hands on, retired again 
and made no further move, while the Athenians took 
measures to make their blockade more efficient in 
the future. So the summer came to an end. 
 In the following winter the Spartans planned to 
invade the territory of Argos, but when the sacrifices 
for crossing the frontier turned out unfavourably, 
they gave up the expedition. The fact that they had 
intended to invade made the Argives suspect certain 
people in their city, some of whom they arrested, 
though others succeeded in escaping. 
 About this same time the Melians again cap-
tured another part of the Athenian lines where there 
were only a few of the garrison on guard. As a result 
of this, another force came out afterwards from Ath-
ens under the command of Philocrates, the son of 
Demeas. Siege operations were now carried on vig-
orously and, as there was also some treachery from 
inside, the Melians surrendered unconditionally to 
the Athenians, who put to death all the men of mili-
tary age whom they took, and sold the women and 
children as slaves. Melos itself they took over for 
themselves, sending out later a colony of 500 men.  

On Princes and the Security 
of Their States 
NICCOLÒ MACHIAVELLI
OVERVIEW
 In this selection from  The Prince,  Machiavelli makes a number of his famous 
observations on how a prince should rule. Although a prince may not wish to 
be hated, Machiavelli argues: “It is much safer to be feared than to be loved, if 
one must choose.” Although the prince may be criticized for being harsh, this 
is  acceptable to Machiavelli so long as the prince keeps his subjects united and 
loyal. These are the sorts of argument that have given Machiavellianism a negative 
 connotation, but followers of Machiavelli would respond that the ultimate goal 
meant to justify particular policies is the security of the state, not just the security 
of an individual ruler.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   What is Machiavelli’s basic view of human nature? Does this reflect or refute a basic realist 
precept?  
 2.  Why is it safer for a ruler to be feared than to be loved by the citizens?  
 3.  What role does cruelty play for leaders of armies?  
On Things for Which Men, and Particularly 
Princes, Are Praised or Blamed 
 We now have left to consider what should be the 
manners and attitudes of a prince toward his subjects 
and his friends. As I know that many have written on 
this subject I feel that I may be held presumptuous in 
what I have to say, if in my comments I do not fol-
low the lines laid down by others. Since, however, it 
has been my intention to write something which may 
be of use to the understanding reader, it has seemed 
wiser to me to follow the real truth of the matter 
rather than what we imagine it to be. For imagina-
tion has created many principalities and republics 
that have never been seen or known to have any real 
existence, for how we live is so different from how 
we ought to live that he who studies what ought to be 
done rather than what is done will learn the way to 
his downfall rather than to his preservation. A man 
striving in every way to be good will meet his ruin 
among the great number who are not good. Hence 
it is necessary for a prince, if he wishes to remain in 
power, to learn how not to be good and to use his 
knowledge or refrain from using it as he may need. 
 Putting aside then the things imagined as per-
taining to a prince and considering those that really 
do, I will say that all men, and particularly princes 
because of their prominence, when comment is made 
of them, are noted as having some characteristics 
deserving either praise or blame. One is accounted 
liberal, another stingy, to use a Tuscan term—for in 
our speech avaricious ( avaro ) is applied to such as 
From Niccolò Machiavelli,  The Prince,  translated and edited by Thomas G. Bergin. Reprinted by permission.
88

On Princes and the Security of Their States 
89
are desirous of acquiring by rapine whereas stingy 
( misero ) is the term used for those who are reluctant 
to part with their own—one is considered bountiful, 
another rapacious; one cruel, another tenderhearted; 
one false to his word, another trustworthy; one ef-
feminate and pusillanimous, another wild and spir-
ited; one humane, another haughty; one lascivious, 
another chaste; one a man of integrity and another 
sly; one tough and another pliant; one serious and 
another frivolous; one religious and another skepti-
cal, and so on. Everyone will agree, I know, that it 
would be a most praiseworthy thing if all the quali-
ties accounted as good in the above enumeration 
were found in a Prince. But since they cannot be so 
possessed nor observed because of human conditions 
which do not allow of it, what is necessary for the 
prince is to be prudent enough to escape the infamy 
of such vices as would result in the loss of his state; 
as for the others which would not have that effect, 
he must guard himself from them as far as possible 
but if he cannot, he may overlook them as being of 
less importance. Further, he should have no concern 
about incurring the infamy of such vices without 
which the preservation of his state would be diffi-
cult. For, if the matter be well considered, it will be 
seen that some habits which appear virtuous, if ad-
opted would signify ruin, and others that seem vices 
lead to security and the well-being of the prince.  
Cruelty and Clemency and Whether 
It Is Better to Be Loved or Feared 
 Now to continue with the list of characteristics. It 
should be the desire of every prince to be considered 
merciful and not cruel, yet he should take care not to 
make poor use of his clemency. Cesare Borgia was re-
garded as cruel, yet his cruelty reorganized Romagna 
and united it in peace and loyalty. Indeed, if we 
reflect, we shall see that this man was more merciful 
than the Florentines who, to avoid the charge of cru-
elty, allowed Pistoia to be destroyed.  1  A prince should 
care nothing for the accusation of cruelty so long as 
he keeps his subjects united and loyal; by making 
a very few examples he can be more truly merciful 
than those who through too much tender-heartedness 
allow disorders to arise whence come killings and 
rapine. For these offend an entire community, while 
the few executions ordered by the prince affect only 
a few individuals. For a new prince above all it is 
impossible not to earn a reputation for cruelty since 
new states are full of dangers. Virgil indeed has Dido 
apologize for the inhumanity of her rule because it is 
new, in the words: 
 Res dura et regni novitas me talia cogunt Moliri et 
late fines custode tueri.  
 Nevertheless a prince should not be too ready to 
listen to talebearers nor to act on suspicion, nor should 
he allow himself to be easily frightened. He should 
proceed with a mixture of prudence and humanity in 
such a way as not to be made incautious by overconfi-
dence nor yet intolerable by excessive mistrust. 
 Here the question arises; whether it is better to 
be loved than feared or feared than loved. The an-
swer is that it would be desirable to be both but, since 
that is difficult, it is much safer to be feared than to 
be loved, if one must choose. For on men in general 
this observation may be made: they are ungrateful, 
fickle, and deceitful, eager to avoid dangers, and avid 
for gain, and while you are useful to them they are 
all with you, offering you their blood, their property, 
their lives, and their sons so long as danger is remote, 
as we noted above, but when it approaches they turn 
on you. Any prince, trusting only in their words and 
having no other preparations made, will fall to his 
ruin, for friendships that are bought at a price and 
not by greatness and nobility of soul are paid for 
indeed, but they are not owned and cannot be called 
upon in time of need. Men have less hesitation in of-
fending a man who is loved than one who is feared, 
for love is held by a bond of obligation which, as men 
are wicked, is broken whenever personal advantage 
suggests it, but fear is accompanied by the dread of 
punishment which never relaxes. 
 Yet a prince should make himself feared in such a 
way that, if he does not thereby merit love, at least he 
may escape odium, for being feared and not hated may 
well go together. And indeed the prince may attain this 
end if he but respect the property and the women of his 
subjects and citizens. And if it should become necessary 
to seek the death of someone, he should find a proper 
justification and a public cause, and above all he should 
keep his hands off another’s property, for men forget 
more readily the death of their father than the loss of 
their patrimony. Besides, pretexts for seizing property 
are never lacking, and when a prince begins to live by 
means of rapine he will always find some excuse for 
plundering others, and conversely pretexts for execu-
tion are rarer and are more quickly exhausted. 
 A prince at the head of his armies and with a 
vast number of soldiers under his command should 
give not the slightest heed if he is esteemed cruel, for 

90
THOMAS HOBBES
without such a reputation he will not be able to keep 
his army united and ready for action. Among the 
marvelous things told of Hannibal is that, having a 
vast army under his command made up of all kinds 
and races of men and waging war far from his coun-
try, he never allowed any dissension to arise either 
as between the troops and their leaders or among 
the troops themselves, and this both in times of good 
fortune and bad. This could only have come about 
through his most inhuman cruelty which, taken in 
conjunction with his great valor, kept him always an 
object of respect and terror in the eyes of his soldiers. 
And without the cruelty his other characteristics 
would not have achieved this effect. Thoughtless 
writers have admired his actions and at the same 
time deplored the cruelty which was the basis of 
them. As evidence of the truth of our statement that 
his other virtues would have been insufficient let us 
examine the case of Scipio, an extraordinary leader 
not only in his own day but for all recorded history. 
His army in Spain revolted and for no other reason 
than because of his kind-heartedness, which had 
allowed more license to his soldiery than military 
discipline properly permits. His policy was attacked 
in the Senate by Fabius Maximus, who called him 
a corrupter of the Roman arms. When the Locri-
ans had been mishandled by one of his lieutenants, 
his easy-going nature prevented him from avenging 
them or disciplining his officer, and it was à propos 
of this incident that one of the senators remarked, 
wishing to find an excuse for him, that there were 
many men who knew better how to avoid error 
themselves than to correct it in others. This charac-
teristic of Scipio would have clouded his fame and 
glory had he continued in authority, but as he lived 
under the government of the Senate, its harmful as-
pect was hidden and it reflected credit on him. 
 Hence, on the subject of being loved or feared I 
will conclude that since love depends on the subjects, 
but the prince has it in his own hands to create fear, 
a wise prince will rely on what is his own, remem-
bering at the same time that he must avoid arousing 
hatred, as we have said.  
Note
 1.   By unchecked rioting between opposing factions (1502).  
Of the Natural Condition of Mankind 
THOMAS HOBBES
OVERVIEW
 Hobbes analyzes why conflict and violence between individuals or states are to be 
expected. Although his focus in  Leviathan  is on domestic societies, his observations 
are also relevant to international politics and have had a major impact on realism. 
In the absence of a sovereign or central, superordinate authority, the anarchic 
world described by Hobbes is a rather dismal one in which the life of the individual 
is “solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short” and “kings . . . because of their inde-
pendency, are in continual jealousies, and in the state and posture of gladiators.”  
From Thomas Hobbes,  Leviathan , introduction by Richard S. Peters. New York: Macmillan/Collier Books, 1962.

 Men by Nature Equal   Nature hath made men so 
equal, in the faculties of the body, and mind; as 
that though there be found one man sometimes 
manifestly stronger in body, or of quicker mind than 
another; yet when all is reckoned together, the dif-
ference between man, and man, is not so consider-
able, as that one man can thereupon claim to himself 
any benefit, to which another may not pretend, as 
well as he. For as to the strength of body, the weak-
est has strength enough to kill the strongest, either 
by secret machination, or by confederacy with oth-
ers, that are in the same danger with himself. 
 And as to the faculties of the mind, setting 
aside the arts grounded upon words, and especially 
that skill of proceeding upon general, and infallible 
rules, called science; which very few have, and but in 
few things; as being not a native faculty, born with 
us; nor attained, as prudence, while we look after 
somewhat else, I find yet a greater equality amongst 
men, than that of strength. For prudence, is but ex-
perience; which equal time, equally bestows on all 
men, in those things they equally apply themselves 
unto. That which may perhaps make such equal-
ity incredible, is but a vain conceit of one’s own 
wisdom, which almost all men think they have in a 
greater degree, than the vulgar; that is, than all men 
but themselves, and a few others, whom by fame, 
or for concurring with themselves, they approve. 
For such is the nature of men, that howsoever they 
may acknowledge many others to be more witty, 
or more eloquent, or more learned; yet they will 
hardly believe there be many so wise as themselves; 
for they see their own wit at hand, and other men’s 
at a distance. But this proveth rather that men are 
in that point equal, than unequal. For there is not 
ordinarily a greater sign of the equal distribution 
of any thing, than that every man is contented with 
his share.  
From Equality Proceeds Diffidence  From this 
equality of ability, ariseth equality of hope in the 
attaining of our ends. And therefore if any two men 
desire the same thing, which nevertheless they cannot 
both enjoy they become enemies; and in the way to 
their end, which is principally their own conservation, 
and sometimes their delectation only, endeavour to 
destroy, or subdue one another. And from hence it 
comes to pass, that where an invader hath no more 
to fear, than another man’s single power; if one plant, 
sow, build, or possess a convenient seat, others may 
probably be expected to come prepared with forces 
united, to dispossess, and deprive him, not only of 
the fruit of his labour, but also of his life, or liberty. 
And the invader again is in the like danger of another.  
From Diffidence War  And from this diffidence of 
one another, there is no way for any man to secure 
himself, so reasonable, as anticipation; that is, by 
force, or wiles, to master the persons of all men he 
can, so long, till he see no other power great enough 
to endanger him: and this is no more than his own 
conservation requireth, and is generally allowed. 
Also because there be some, that taking pleasure in 
contemplating their own power in the acts of con-
quest, which they pursue farther than their security 
requires; if others, that otherwise would be glad 
to be at ease within modest bounds, should not by 
invasion increase their power, they would not be 
able, long time, by standing only on their defence, 
to subsist. And by consequence, such augmentation 
of dominion over men being necessary to a man’s 
conservation, it ought to be allowed him. 
 Again, men have no pleasure, but on the con-
trary a great deal of grief, in keeping company, 
where there is no power able to overawe them all. 
For every man looketh that his companion should 
value him, at the same rate he sets upon himself: and 
upon all signs of contempt, or undervaluing, natu-
rally endeavours, as far as he dares, (which amongst 
them that have no common power to keep them 
in quiet, is far enough to make them destroy each 
other), to extort a greater value from his contem-
ners, by damage; and from others, by the example. 
 So that in the nature of man, we find three prin-
cipal causes of quarrel. First, competition; secondly, 
diffidence; thirdly, glory. 
Of the Natural Condition of Mankind 
91
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   What are the principal causes of quarrels among human beings? How do they compare with 
the three causes identified by Thucydides (fear, honor, interest)?  
 2.  What role does justice play in the world described by Hobbes?  
 3.  What is the result of people living without a common power [Leviathan] to keep them in awe?

92
THOMAS HOBBES
 The first, maketh men invade for gain; the sec-
ond, for safety; and the third, for reputation. The 
first use violence, to make themselves masters of 
other men’s persons, wives, children, and cattle; the 
second, to defend them; the third, for trifles, as a 
word, a smile, a different opinion, and any other sign 
of undervalue, either direct in their persons, or by 
reflection in their kindred, their friends, their nation, 
their profession, or their name.  
Out of Civil States, There Is Always War of Every 
One against Every One  Hereby it is manifest, that 
during the time men live without a common power 
to keep them all in awe, they are in that condition 
which is called war; and such a war, as is of every 
man, against every man. For WAR, consisteth not 
in battle only, or the act of fighting; but in a tract 
of time, wherein the will to content by battle is suf-
ficiently known: and therefore the notion of  time, 
is to be considered in the nature of war; as it is in 
the nature of weather. For as the nature of foul 
weather, lieth not in a shower or two of rain; but 
in an inclination thereto of many days together: so 
the nature of war, consisteth not in actual fighting; 
but in the known disposition thereto, during all the 
time there is no assurance to the contrary. All other 
time is PEACE.  
The Incommodities of Such a War  Whatsoever 
therefore is consequent to a time of war, where every 
man is enemy to every man; the same is consequent 
to the time, wherein men live without other security, 
than what their own strength, and their own inven-
tion shall furnish them withal. In such condition, there 
is no place for industry; because the fruit thereof is 
uncertain: and consequently no culture of the earth; 
no navigation, nor use of the commodities that may 
be imported by sea; no commodious building; no 
instruments of moving, and removing, such things 
as require much force; no knowledge of the face of 
the earth; no account of time; no arts; no letters; no 
society; and which is worst of all, continual fear, and 
danger of violent death; and the life of man, solitary, 
poor, nasty, brutish, and short. 
 It may seem strange to some man, that has not 
well weighed these things; that nature should thus 
dissociate, and render men apt to invade, and de-
stroy one another; and he may therefore, not trust-
ing to this inference, made from the passions, desire 
perhaps to have the same confirmed by experience. 
Let him therefore consider with himself, when tak-
ing a journey, he arms himself, and seeks to go 
well accompanied; when going to sleep, he locks his 
doors; when even in his house he locks his chests; 
and this when he knows there be laws, and public 
officers, armed, to revenge all injuries shall be done 
him; what opinion he has of his fellow-subjects, 
when he rides armed; of his fellow citizens, when he 
locks his doors; and of his children, and servants, 
when he locks his chests. Does he not there as much 
accuse mankind by his actions, as I do by my words? 
But neither of us accuse man’s nature in it. The de-
sires, and other passions of man, are in themselves 
no sin. No more are the actions, that proceed from 
those passions, till they know a law that forbids 
them: which till laws be made they cannot know: 
nor can any law be made, till they have agreed upon 
the person that shall make it. 
 It may peradventure be thought, there was 
never such a time, nor condition of war as this; 
and I believe it was never generally so, over all the 
world: but there are many places, where they live 
so now. For the savage people in many places of 
America, except the government of small families, 
the concord whereof dependeth on natural lust, have 
no government at all; and live at this day in the brut-
ish manner, as I said before. Howsoever, it may be 
perceived what manner of life there would be, where 
there were no common power to fear, by the manner 
of life, which men that have formerly lived under a 
peaceful government, use to degenerate into, in a 
civil war. 
 But though there had never been any time, 
wherein particular men were in a condition of war 
one against another; yet in all times, kings, and 
persons of sovereign authority, because of their in-
dependency, are in continual jealousies, and in the 
state and posture of gladiators; having their weapons 
pointing, and their eyes fixed on one another; that 
is, their forts, garrisons, and guns upon the frontiers 
of their kingdoms; and continual spies upon their 
neighbours; which is a posture of war. But because 
they uphold thereby, the industry of their subjects; 
there does not follow from it, that misery, which ac-
companies the liberty of particular men.  
 In Such a War Nothing Is Unjust  To this war of 
every man, against every man, this also is conse-
quent; that nothing can be unjust. The notions of 

 
The State of War: Confederation as Means to Peace in Europe 
93
right and wrong, justice and injustice have there 
no place. Where there is no common power, there 
is no law: where no law, no injustice. Force, and 
fraud, are in war the two cardinal virtues. Justice, 
and injustice are none of the faculties neither of 
the body, nor mind. If they were, they might be in 
a man that were alone in the world, as well as his 
senses, and passions. They are qualities, that relate 
to men in society, not in solitude. It is consequent 
also to the same condition, that there be no propri-
ety, no dominion, no  mine and  thine distinct; but 
only that to be every man’s, that he can get: and for 
so long, as he can keep it. And thus much for the ill  
condition, which man by mere nature is actually 
placed in; though with a possibility to come out of 
it, consisting partly in the passions, partly in his 
reason. 
 The Passions That Incline Men to Peace  The 
passions that incline men to peace, are fear of death; 
desire of such things as are necessary to commodious 
living; and a hope by their industry to obtain them. 
And reason suggesteth convenient articles of peace, 
upon which men may be drawn to agreement.   
The State of War: Confederation 
as Means to Peace in Europe 
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU
OVERVIEW
 Rousseau is of importance to students of international relations for a number of 
reasons, including his emphasis on the logic of anarchy and why this makes cooper-
ation among states difficult to achieve. His famous analogy of the stag hunt, which 
illustrates the problem of achieving cooperative behavior, was summarized earlier 
in the text, and Kenneth Waltz provides his analysis in a subsequent reading. In this 
extract it is apparent that Rousseau is not entirely unsympathetic to the proposed 
Project for Perpetual Peace of the Abbé de Saint Pierre even as he sees it more as a 
pipe dream unlikely to be achieved. Rousseau doesn’t fault the logic that interstate 
war is a byproduct of international anarchy, but finds fault in expectations that 
this condition can so easily be altered through such a peace project. In this regard, 
Rousseau sees advantages for each prince, state, and Europe as a whole, but if the 
advantages are so real, why won’t this plan come about? 
Material excerpted from “ Appendix  A : Rousseau’s Unfinished Manuscript on ‘The State of War’ and  Appendix   C  : Rousseau’s 
‘Critique’ of The Abbé de Saint-Pierre’s Project for Perpetual Peace” by Jean-Jacques Rousseau from  Reading Rousseau 
in the Nuclear Age by Grace G. Roosevelt. Used by permission of Temple University Press. © 1990 by Temple University. 
All Rights Reserved

94
JEAN-JACQUES ROUSSEAU
 When I reflect upon the condition of the human 
race, the first thing that I notice is a manifest con-
tradiction in its constitution. As individuals we live 
in a civil state and are subject to laws, but as na-
tions each enjoys the liberty of nature. The result-
ing continual vacillation makes our situation worse 
than if these distinctions were unknown. For living 
simultaneously in the social order and in the state of 
nature, we are subjected to the evils of both without 
gaining the security of either. The perfections of 
the social order consists, it is true, in the conjunc-
tion of force and law. But for this it is necessary 
that law direct force. According to the notion that 
princes must be absolutely independent, however, 
force alone, which appears as law to its own citizens 
and “raison d’ état” to foreigners, deprives the latter 
of the power and the former of the will to resist, so 
that in the end the vain name of justice serves only 
to safeguard violence. 
 As for what is called the law of nations, it is 
clear that without any real sanction these laws are 
only illusions that are more tenuous even than the 
notion of natural law. The latter at least addresses 
itself to the heart of individuals, whereas decisions 
based on the law of nations, having no other guaran-
tee than the utility of the one who submits to them, 
are respected only as long as those decisions confirm 
one’s own self-interest. In the double condition in 
which we find ourselves, by doing too much or too 
little for whichever of the two systems we happen 
to prefer, we in fact have done nothing at all, and 
thereby have put ourselves in the worst possible 
position. This, it seems to me, is the true origin of 
public calamities. 
 For a moment, let us put these ideas in opposi-
tion to the horrible system of Hobbes. We will find, 
contrary to his absurd doctrine, that far from the 
state of war being natural to man, war is born out 
of peace, or at least out of the precautions men have 
taken to assure themselves of peace. . . . 
Critique of the Perpetual Peace Project 
 As the most worthy cause to which a good man 
might devote himself, the  Project for Perpetual Peace 
must also have been, among all the projects of the 
 Rousseau states that one problem is that ministers might have selfish reasons 
for encouraging princes to reject the plan—an individual level of analysis explana-
tion. Most important, however, it is the “condition of absolute independence that 
draws sovereigns away from the rule of law.” In other words, war is a product 
of the social context within which the state finds itself—one in which there is no 
authority higher than the state itself. 
 Note how in the opening paragraph he draws a distinction between a civil state 
where individuals are subject to laws, but “as nations each enjoys the liberty of na-
ture.” Like Hobbes, Rousseau thus recognizes the importance of what has come to 
be termed the underlying anarchy of international politics or the international sys-
tem. At the same time, however, Rousseau emphatically disagrees with the adverse 
description Hobbes uses to describe the nature of human beings. It is the social 
context in which human beings or states as “persons” are immersed that influences 
or constrains their behavior, not their essential nature. Clearly the ontologies of 
Hobbes and Rousseau are at odds.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  What is Rousseau’s view of Hobbes’s assertion that the state of nature is a state of war of every-
one against everyone else?  
 2.  How do the prince’s concerns for “relative power” undercut the possibility of a perpetual 
peace? How does this relate to the structural-realist perspective on international politics?  
 3.   What role does the concept of “self-interest” play in Rousseau’s analysis? How does this relate 
to key realist assumptions?  

 
The State of War: Confederation as Means to Peace in Europe 
95
Abbé de Saint-Pierre, the one that he thought about 
the most and the one that he pursued with the great-
est obstinancy. For how else could one explain the 
missionary zeal with which he clung to this project—
despite the obvious impossibility of its success, the 
ridicule that it brought upon him every day, and the 
hostility that he was made continually to suffer. It 
seems that this humane soul was so single-mindedly 
focused on the public good that he measured the 
 efforts that he gave things solely on the basis of their 
usefulness, without ever letting himself be discour-
aged by obstacles and without ever thinking about 
his own personal self-interest. 
 If ever a moral truth has been demonstrated, it 
seems to me that it is the general and the specific use-
fulness of this project. The advantages that would 
result from its formation both for each prince and 
for each nation, as well as for Europe as a whole, 
are immense, clear, and uncontestable. One cannot 
imagine anything more solid and more precise than 
the arguments with which the author supports his 
case. Indeed, so much would the experience allow 
each individual to gain from the common good, 
that to realize the European Republic for one day 
would be enough to make it last forever. However, 
these same princes who would defend the European 
Republic with all their might once it existed would 
now be opposed even to its being set up, and they 
would invariably prevent it from being established 
with just as much energy as they would prevent it 
from being destroyed. The work of the Abbé de 
Saint-Pierre thus would seem both ineffectual for 
producing peace and superfluous for maintaining 
it. Some impatient reader will say that it is therefore 
nothing but vain speculation. No, it is a solid and 
sensible book, and it is very important that it exists. 
 Let us begin by examining the difficulties of 
those who do not judge arguments with reason but 
only with events and who have nothing to object to 
in this project other than that it has not been tried. In 
effect, they doubtlessly will say, if the advantages are 
so real, why have the sovereigns of Europe not ad-
opted them already? Why do they neglect their own 
self-interest, if this self-interest has now been made 
so clear? Do we see them rejecting all the other ways 
of increasing their revenues and their power? If this 
project were as good for that purpose as is claimed, 
is it plausible that they would be less impressed with 
it than with those which have failed them so many 
times before, or that they would prefer a thousand 
risky chances to one sure gain? 
 Clearly, all this is plausible unless we pretend that 
the wisdom of all these sovereigns is equal to their 
ambition and that the more strongly they desire their 
own advantages the better they can see them. Instead, 
the great penalty for excessive  amour propre is for-
ever to resort to the means that abuse it, and the very 
heat of the passions is what almost always prevents 
them from reaching their goal. We must distinguish, 
then, in politics as well as in morality, real interest 
from apparent interest. The first is to be found in 
perpetual peace—that has been demonstrated in the 
 Project . The second can be found in the condition of 
absolute independence that draws sovereigns away 
from the rule of law in order to submit them to the 
rule of chance—like a mad sailor who, to show off his 
knowledge and intimidate his crew, would prefer to 
drift dangerously among the reefs during a storm than 
to secure his ship with an anchor. . . . 
 We must add, in considering the great com-
mercial advantages that would result from a general 
and perpetual peace, that while they are obviously 
in themselves certain and incontestable, being com-
mon to all they would not be relative advantages to 
anyone. Since advantage is usually only sensed by 
virtue of difference, to add to one’s relative power 
one must seek out only exclusive gains. 
 Ceaselessly deceived by the appearance of 
things, princes will therefore reject this peace when 
judging it by their own self-interest. Just think, then, 
what will happen when they leave such judgments to 
their ministers, whose interests are always opposed 
to those of the people and almost always opposed 
to those of the prince. Ministers need war to make 
themselves necessary, to precipitate the prince into 
crises that he cannot get out of without them, and 
to cause the loss of the state, if it is necessary, rather 
than the loss of their jobs. They need war to harass 
the people in the guise of public safety, to find work 
for their protégés, to make money on the markets, 
and to form a thousand corrupt monopolies in secret. 
They need it to satisfy their passions and to push 
each other out of office. They need it to preoccupy 
the prince and remove him from the court while dan-
gerous intrigues arise among them. Such resources 
would all be lost to them if there were a perpetual 
peace. And the public keeps on demanding why, if 
the project is possible, it has not been adopted! They 
fail to see that there is nothing impossible about 
the project except its adoption. And what will the 
ministers do to oppose it? What they have always 
done—they will turn it to ridicule. 

96
KENNETH N. WALTZ
 Nor is it possible to believe along with the Abbé 
de Saint-Pierre that, even with the good will which 
neither princes nor ministers will ever have, it would 
be easy to find a favorable moment to set this system 
in motion. For that it would be necessary that the 
sum of individual interests would not outweigh the 
common interest, and that each one would believe 
that he had found in the good of all the greatest good 
that he could hope for for himself. Now this would 
require a convergence of wisdom among so many 
different minds and a convergence of aims among so 
many different interests that one could hardly hope 
to get the happy agreement of all these necessary cir-
cumstances simply by chance. The only way to make 
up for the failure of this agreement to come about 
by chance would be to make it come about by force. 
Then it would no longer be a question of persuading 
but of compelling, and then what would be needed 
is not to write books but to levy troops. 
 Thus, although the project was very wise, the 
means of putting it into effect reflect the naiveté of the 
author. He innocently imagined that all you would 
need to do is to assemble a committee, propose his ar-
ticles, have everyone sign them, and that would be it. 
We must conclude that, as with all the projects of this 
good man, he could envision quite well the effect of 
things after they had been established, but he judged 
with too little sophistication the methods for getting 
them established in the first place. . . . 
 We may not say, therefore, that if his system 
has not been adopted, it is because it was not good; 
on the contrary, we must say that it was too good to 
be adopted. For evil and abuse, which so many men 
profit from, happen by themselves, but whatever is 
useful to the public must be brought by force—seeing 
as special interests are almost always opposed to it. 
Doubtless perpetual peace is at present a project that 
seems absurd. . . . 
 We will not see federative leagues establishing 
themselves except by revolution, and, on this prin-
ciple, who would dare to say whether this European 
league is to be desired or to be feared? It would per-
haps cause more harm in one moment than it could 
prevent for centuries to come.   
Explaining War: The Levels of Analysis 
KENNETH N. WALTZ
OVERVIEW
 Kenneth Waltz remains one of the most influential IR theorists. As noted, he is best 
known for his  Theory of International Politics  (1979) and his attempt to develop a 
truly systemic theory of IR. No other work has generated so much commentary—
positive and negative—over the last three decades. It has stimulated numerous 
efforts utilizing the basic structural-realist assumptions and in the process has 
been elaborated upon and modified. The work has been praised for its attempt to 
provide scientific rigor to IR theorizing, and also condemned for leading the field 
further into a positivist orientation.  
 Waltz, however, was first best known for  Man, the State and War  (1959)—a 
 refinement of his doctoral dissertation at Columbia that, given its focus on how 
 political philosophers over the millennia have conceived of the causes of war, 
From “Explaining War” in Man, the State and War by Kenneth N. Waltz, copyright 2001, Columbia University Press, 
New York. Reprinted with permission of the publisher..

Explaining War: The Levels of Analysis 
97
 Introduction
 Asking who won a given war, someone has said, is 
like asking who won the San Francisco earthquake. 
That in wars there is no victory but only varying 
degrees of defeat is a proposition that has gained 
increasing acceptance in the twentieth century. But 
are wars also akin to earthquakes in being natural 
occurrences whose control or elimination is beyond 
the wit of man? Few would admit that they are, yet 
attempts to eliminate war, however nobly inspired 
and assiduously pursued, have brought little more 
than fleeting moments of peace among states. There 
is an apparent disproportion between effort and 
product, between desire and result. The peace wish, 
we are told, runs strong and deep among the Russian 
people; and we are convinced that the same can be 
said of Americans. From these statements there is 
some comfort to be derived, but in the light of his-
tory and of current events as well it is difficult to be-
lieve that the wish will father the condition desired. 
 Social scientists, realizing from their studies how 
firmly the present is tied to the past and how inti-
mately the parts of a system depend upon each other, 
are inclined to be conservative in estimating the pos-
sibilities of achieving a radically better world. If one 
asks whether we can now have peace where in the 
past there has been war, the answers are most often 
pessimistic. Perhaps this is the wrong question. And 
indeed the answers will be somewhat less discouraging 
 actually falls more into the classical realist tradition. It also was an early formula-
tion of what came to be known as the levels of analysis—were the causes of war 
to be found at the individual, state-societal, or interstate system levels of analysis?  
 In Man, the State, and War,  Waltz makes the point that to explain how peace 
can be better achieved, one must first improve one’s understanding of the causes 
of war. Some argue that human nature is the basic cause of war. Others argue it is 
the internal organization of states that is the key to understanding war and peace, 
while still others focus on the impact of the structure of the inter-state system. In 
terms of the latter, pay attention to Waltz’s references particularly to Rousseau, but 
also Thucydides, the importance of “relative power position,” and his assessment 
of the impact of anarchy on conflict among states. It is here one can see more than a 
glimmer of his key arguments twenty years later in  Theory of International Politics 
 where he develops his structural theory. The observation that those who act for the 
state [its agents] do not so much impose themselves on events [the system] as events 
[produced by the system] are imposed on them anticipates his development of his 
thesis in Theory of International Politics. 
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  Does the view of human nature as described in the first image parallel or refute the views of 
classical realists such as Thucydides, Machiavelli, Hobbes, and Morgenthau?  
 2.  What are the limitations of the remedies proposed by those who rely on human nature as an 
explanation for war?  
 3.  What are the limitations of the remedies proposed by those who rely on the internal defects 
or type of state to explain war?  
 4.  According to Waltz, what is the third-image logic  behind Rousseau’s statement that states 
“must inevitably fall into quarrels and dissensions”?  
 5.  In which image(s) do the permissive as opposed to immediate causes of war lie?  
 6.  According to Waltz, which image or level of analysis best reflects the founding fathers’ of the 
United States explanation for interstate war? Would you consider the Federalist writers—
Madison, Hamilton, and Jay (see in particular the first nine Federalist papers)—and other 
Constitutional framers to include Washington (see his Farewell Address apparently drafted 
by Madison and Hamilton) what we now label as realists?

98
KENNETH N. WALTZ
if instead the following questions are put: Are there 
ways of decreasing the incidence of war, of increasing 
the chances of peace? Can we have peace more often 
in the future than in the past? 
 Peace is one among a number of ends simultane-
ously entertained. The means by which peace can be 
sought are many. The end is pursued and the means 
are applied under varying conditions. Even though 
one may find it hard to believe that there are ways 
to peace not yet tried by statesmen or advocated by 
publicists, the very complexity of the problem sug-
gests the possibility of combining activities in differ-
ent ways in the hope that some combination will lead 
us closer to the goal. Is one then led to conclude that 
the wisdom of the statesman lies in trying first one 
policy and then another, in doing what the moment 
seems to require? An affirmative reply would suggest 
that the hope for improvement lies in policy divorced 
from analysis, in action removed from thought. Yet 
each attempt to alleviate a condition implies some 
idea of its causes: to explain how peace can be more 
readily achieved requires an understanding of the 
causes of war. It is such an understanding that we 
shall seek in the following pages.  
The First Image: International 
Conflict and Human Behavior 
 There is deceit and cunning and from these wars arise. 
 Confucius 
 According to the first image of international 
relations, the focus of the important causes of war 
is found in the nature and behavior of man. Wars 
result from selfishness, from misdirected aggressive 
impulses, from stupidity. Other causes are second-
ary and have to be interpreted in the light of these 
factors. If these are the primary causes of war, then 
the elimination of war must come through uplift-
ing and enlightening men or securing their psychic-
social readjustment. This estimate of causes and 
cures has been dominant in the writings of many 
serious students of human affairs from Confucius 
to present-day pacifists. It is the leitmotif of many 
modern behavioral scientists as well. 
 Prescriptions associated with first-image analy-
ses need not be identical in content, as a few ex-
amples will indicate. Henry Wadsworth Longfellow, 
moved to poetic expression by a visit to the arsenal 
at Springfield, set down the following thoughts: 
 Were half the power that fills the world with 
terror,  
 Were half the wealth bestowed on camps 
and courts,  
 Given to redeem the human mind from error, 
There were no need of arsenals or forts.  
 Implicit in these lines is the idea that the people will 
insist that the right policies be adopted if only they 
know what the right policies are. Their instincts are 
good, though their present gullibility may prompt 
them to follow false leaders. By attributing present 
difficulties to a defect in knowledge, education be-
comes the remedy of war. The idea is widespread. 
Beverly Nichols, a pacifist writing in the 1930s, 
thought that if Norman Angell “could be made edu-
cational dictator of the world, war would vanish like 
the morning mist, in a single generation.”  1  In 1920, 
a conference of Friends, unwilling to rely upon intel-
lectual development alone, called upon the people 
of the world to replace self-seeking with the spirit of 
sacrifice, cooperation, and trust.  2  Bertrand Russell, at 
about the same time and in much the same vein, saw 
a decline in the possessive instincts as a prerequisite 
to peace.  3  By others, increasing the chances of peace 
has been said to require not so much a change in “in-
stincts” as a channeling of energies that are presently 
expended in the destructive folly of war. If there were 
something that men would rather do than fight, they 
would cease to fight altogether. Aristophanes saw the 
point. If the women of Athens would deny themselves 
to husbands and lovers, their men would have to 
choose between the pleasures of the couch and the ex-
hilarating experiences of the battlefield. Aristophanes 
thought he knew the men, and women, of Athens well 
enough to make the outcome a foregone conclusion. 
William James was in the same tradition. War, in 
his view, is rooted in man’s bellicose nature, which 
is the product of centuries-old tradition. His nature 
cannot be changed or his drives suppressed, but they 
can be diverted. As alternatives to military service, 
James suggests drafting the youth of the world to 
mine coal and man ships, to build skyscrapers and 
roads, to wash dishes and clothes. While his estimate 
of what diversions would be sufficient is at once less 
realistic and more seriously intended than that of 
Aristophanes, his remedy is clearly the same in type.  4  
 The prescriptions vary, but common to them all 
is the thought that in order to achieve a more peace-
ful world men must be changed, whether in their 
moral-intellectual outlook or in their psychic-social 

Explaining War: The Levels of Analysis 
99
behavior. One may, however, agree with the first-
image analysis of causes without admitting the pos-
sibility of practicable prescriptions for their removal. 
Among those who accept a first-image explanation 
of war there are both optimists and pessimists, those 
who think the possibilities of progress so great that 
wars will end before the next generation is dead and 
those who think that wars will continue to occur 
though by them we may all die.  
The Second Image: International Conflict 
and the Internal Structure of States 
 However conceived in an image of the world, 
foreign policy is a phase of domestic policy, an 
inescapable phase. 
 Charles Beard,  A Foreign Policy for America 
 The first image did not exclude the influence of 
the state, but the role of the state was introduced 
as a consideration less important than, and to be 
 explained in terms of, human behavior. According 
to the first image, to say that the state acts is to speak 
metonymically. We say that the state acts when we 
mean that the people in it act, just as we say that the 
pot boils when we mean that the water in it boils. 
The preceding [section] concentrated on the con-
tents rather than the container; the present [section] 
alters the balance of emphasis in favor of the lat-
ter. To continue the figure: Water running out of a 
 faucet is chemically the same as water in a container, 
but once the water is in a container, it can be made 
to “behave” in different ways. It can be turned into 
steam and used to power an engine, or, if the water 
is sealed in and heated to extreme temperatures, it 
can become the instrument of a destructive explo-
sion. Wars would not exist were human nature not 
what it is, but neither would Sunday schools and 
brothels, philanthropic organizations and criminal 
gangs. Since everything is related to human nature, 
to  explain anything one must consider more than 
human nature. The events to be explained are so 
many and so varied that human nature cannot pos-
sibly be the single determinant. 
 The attempt to explain everything by psychology 
meant, in the end, that psychology succeeded in ex-
plaining nothing. And adding sociology to the analy-
sis simply substitutes the error of sociologism for the 
error of psychologism. Where Spinoza, for example, 
erred by leaving out of his personal estimate of cause 
all reference to the causal role of  social structures, 
sociologists have, in approaching the problem of war 
and peace, often erred in omitting all reference to 
the political framework within which individual and 
social actions occur. The conclusion is obvious: to 
understand war and peace political analysis must be 
used to supplement and order the findings of psychol-
ogy and sociology. What kind of political analysis is 
needed? For possible explanations of the occurrence 
or nonoccurrence of war, one can look to interna-
tional politics (since it is in the name of the state that 
the fighting is actually done). The former approach is 
postponed [until the next section]; according to the 
second image, the internal organization of states is the 
key to understanding war and peace. 
 One explanation of the second-image type is il-
lustrated as follows. War most often promotes the in-
ternal unity of each state involved. The state plagued 
by internal strife may then, instead of waiting for the 
accidental attack, seek the war that will bring internal 
peace. Bodin saw this clearly, for he concludes that 
“the best way of preserving a state, and guaranteeing 
it against sedition, rebellion, and civil war is to keep 
the subjects in amity one with another, and to this 
end, to find an enemy against whom they can make 
common cause.” And he saw historical evidence that 
the principle had been  applied, especially by the Ro-
mans, who “could find no better antidote to civil war, 
nor one more certain in its effects, than to oppose an 
enemy to the citizens.”  5  Secretary of State William 
Henry Seward followed this reasoning when, in order 
to promote unity within the country, he urged upon 
Lincoln a vigorous foreign policy, which included the 
possibility of declaring war on Spain and France.  6  
Mikhail Skobelev, an influential Russian military of-
ficer of the third quarter of the nineteenth century, 
varied the theme but slightly when he argued that 
the Russian monarchy was doomed unless it could 
produce major military successes abroad.  7  
 The use of internal defects to explain those ex-
ternal acts of the state that bring war can take many 
forms. Such explanation may be related to a type of 
government that is thought to be generically bad. 
For example, it is often thought that the deprivations 
imposed by despots upon their subjects produce ten-
sions that may find expressions in foreign adventure. 
Or the explanation may be given in terms of defects 
in a government not itself considered bad. Thus it 
has been argued that the restrictions placed upon a 
government in order to protect the prescribed rights 
of its citizens act as impediments to the making and 

100
KENNETH N. WALTZ
executing of foreign policy. These restrictions, laud-
able in original purpose, may have the unfortunate 
effect of making difficult or impossible the effective 
action of that government for the maintenance of 
peace in the world.  8  And, as a final example, expla-
nation may be made in terms of geographic or eco-
nomic deprivation or in terms of deprivations too 
vaguely defined to be labeled at all. Thus a nation 
may argue that it has not attained its “natural” fron-
tiers, that such frontiers are necessary to its security, 
that war to extend the state to its deserved compass 
is justified or even necessary.  9  The possible varia-
tions on this theme have been made familiar by the 
“have-not” arguments so popular in this century. 
Such arguments have been used both to explain why 
“deprived” countries undertake war and to urge 
the satiated to make the compensatory adjustments 
thought necessary if peace is to be perpetuated.  10  
 The examples just given illustrate in abundant 
variety one part of the second image, the idea that 
defects in states cause wars among them. But in just 
what ways should the structure of states be changed? 
What definition of the “good” state is to serve as 
a standard? Among those who have taken this ap-
proach to international relations there is a great 
variety of definitions. Karl Marx defines “good” 
in terms of ownership of the means of production; 
Immanuel Kant in terms of abstract principles of 
right; Woodrow Wilson in terms of national self- 
determination and modern democratic organization. 
Though each definition singles out different items as 
crucial, all are united in asserting that if, and only 
if, substantially all states reform will world peace re-
sult. That is, the reform prescribed is considered the 
sufficient basis for world peace. This, of course, does 
not exhaust the subject. Marx, for example, believed 
that states would disappear shortly after they be-
came socialist. The problem of war, if war is defined 
as violent conflict among states, would then no lon-
ger exist. Kant believed that republican states would 
voluntarily agree to be governed in their dealings 
by a code of law drawn up by the states themselves. 
Wilson urged a variety of requisites to peace, such 
as improved international understanding, collective 
security and disarmament, a world confederation of 
states. But history proved to Wilson that one cannot 
expect the steadfast cooperation of undemocratic 
states in any such program for peace. 
 For each of these men, the reform of states in the 
ways prescribed is taken to be the  sine qua non  of 
world peace. The examples given could be multiplied. 
Classical economists as well as socialists, aristocrats 
and monarchists as well as democrats, empiricists and 
realists as well as transcendental idealists—all can fur-
nish examples of men who have believed that peace 
can be had only if a given pattern of internal organiza-
tion becomes widespread. Is it that democracies spell 
peace, but we have had wars because there have never 
been enough democracies of the right kind? Or that 
the socialist form of government contains within it the 
guarantee of peace, but so far there have never been 
any true socialist governments?  11  If either question 
were answered in the affirmative, then one would have 
to assess the merits of different prescriptions and try to 
decide just which one, or which combination, contains 
the elusive secret formula for peace. The import of our 
criticism, however, is that no prescription for interna-
tional relations written entirely in terms of the second 
image can be valid, that the approach itself is faulty. 
Our criticisms of the liberals apply to all theories that 
would rely on the generalization of one pattern of state 
and society to bring peace to the world. 
 Bad states lead to war. As previously said, there is 
a large and important sense in which this is true. The 
obverse of this statement, that good states mean peace 
in the world, is an extremely doubtful proposition. 
The difficulty, endemic with the second image of inter-
national relations, is the same in kind as the difficulty 
encountered in the first image. There the statement 
that men make the societies, including the interna-
tional society, in which they live was criticized not 
simply as being wrong but as being incomplete. One 
must add that the societies they live in make men. And 
it is the same in international relations. The actions of 
states, or, more accurately, of men acting for states, 
make up the substance of international relations. But 
the international political environment has much to 
do with the ways in which states behave. The influ-
ence to be assigned to the internal structure of states in 
 attempting to solve the war–peace equation cannot be 
determined until the significance of the international 
environment has been reconsidered.  
The Third Image: International 
Conflict and International Anarchy 
 For what can be done against force without force? 
 Cicero,  The Letters to His Friends 
 With many sovereign states, with no system of law 
enforceable among them, with each state judging its 

Explaining War: The Levels of Analysis 
101
grievances and ambitions according to the dictates of 
its own reason or desire—conflict, sometimes lead-
ing to war, is bound to occur. To achieve a favorable 
outcome from such conflict a state has to rely on its 
own devices, the relative efficiency of which must be 
its constant concern. This, the idea of the third image, 
is to be examined [here]. It is not an esoteric idea; 
it is not a new idea. Thucydides implied it when he 
wrote that it was “the growth of the Athenian power, 
which terrified the Lacedaemonians and forced them 
into war.”  12  John Adams implied it when he wrote to 
the citizens of Petersburg, Virginia, that “a war with 
France, if just and necessary, might wean us from 
fond and blind affections, which no Nation ought 
ever to feel towards another, as our experience in 
more than one instance abundantly testifies.”  13  There 
is an obvious relation between the concern over rela-
tive power position expressed by Thucydides and the 
admonition of John Adams that love affairs between 
states are inappropriate and dangerous. This relation 
is made explicit in Frederick Dunn’s statement that 
“so long as the notion of self-help persists, the aim 
of maintaining the power position of the nation is 
paramount to all other considerations.”  14  
 In anarchy there is no automatic harmony. The 
three preceding statements reflect this fact. A state 
will use force to attain its goals if, after assessing the 
prospects for success, it values those goals more than 
it values the pleasures of peace. Because each state 
is the final judge of its own cause, any state may at 
any time use force to implement its policies. Because 
any state may at any time use force, all states must 
constantly be ready either to counter force with 
force or to pay the cost of weakness. The require-
ments of state action are, in this view, imposed by 
the circumstances in which all states exist. 
 In a manner of speaking, all three images are a 
part of nature. So fundamental are man, the state, 
and the state system in any attempt to understand 
international relations that seldom does an analyst, 
however wedded to one image, entirely overlook the 
other two. Still, emphasis on one image may distort 
one’s interpretation of the others. It is, for example, 
not uncommon to find those inclined to see the world 
in terms of either the first or the second image coun-
tering the oft-made argument that arms breed not 
war but security, and possibly even peace, by point-
ing out that the argument is a compound of dishonest 
myth, to cover the interests of politicians, armament 
makers, and others, and honest illusion entertained 
by patriots sincerely interested in the safety of their 
states. To dispel the illusion, Cobden, to recall one 
of the many who have argued this way, once pointed 
out that doubling armaments, if everyone does it, 
makes no state more secure and, similarly, that none 
would be endangered if all military establishments 
were simultaneously reduced by, say, 50 percent.  15  
Putting aside the thought that the arithmetic is not 
necessarily an accurate reflection of what the situa-
tion would be, this argument illustrates a supposedly 
practical application of the first and second images. 
Whether by educating citizens and leaders of the 
separate states or by improving the organizations of 
each of them, a condition is sought in which the les-
son here adumbrated becomes the basis for the poli-
cies of states. The result?—disarmament, and thus 
economy, together with peace, and thus security, for 
all states. If some states display a willingness to pare 
down their military establishments, other states will 
be able to pursue similar policies. In emphasizing the 
interdependence of the policies of all states, the argu-
ment pays heed to the third image. The optimism is, 
however, the result of ignoring some inherent diffi-
culties. [Here Waltz takes up Rousseau’s view of man 
in the early state of nature.— Ed. ] 
 In the early state of nature, men were sufficiently 
dispersed to make any patterns of cooperation un-
necessary. But finally the combination of increased 
numbers and the usual natural hazards posed, in a 
variety of situations, the proposition: cooperate or 
die. Rousseau illustrates the line of reasoning with the 
simplest example. The example is worth reproducing, 
for it is the point of departure for the establishment 
of government and contains the basis for his explana-
tion of conflict in international relations as well. As-
sume that five men who have acquired a rudimentary 
ability to speak and to understand each other happen 
to come together at a time when all of them suffer 
from hunger. The hunger of each will be satisfied by 
the fifth part of a stag, so they “agree” to cooperate 
in a project to trap one. But also the hunger of any 
one of them will be satisfied by a hare, so, as a hare 
comes within reach, one of them grabs it. The defec-
tor obtains the means of satisfying his hunger but in 
doing so permits the stag to escape. His immediate 
interest prevails over consideration for his fellows.  16  
 The story is simple; the implications are tremen-
dous. In cooperative action, even where all agree on 
the goal and have an equal interest in the project, 
one cannot rely on others. Spinoza linked conflict 
causally to man’s imperfect reason. Montesquieu 
and Rousseau counter Spinoza’s analysis with the 

102
KENNETH N. WALTZ
proposition that the sources of conflict are not so 
much in the minds of men as they are in the nature 
of social activity. The difficulty is to some extent 
verbal. Rousseau grants that if we knew how to 
receive the true justice that comes from God, “we 
should need neither government nor laws.”  17  This 
corresponds to Spinoza’s proposition that “men in 
so far as they live in obedience to reason, necessarily 
live always in harmony one with another.”  18  The 
idea is a truism. If men were perfect, their perfection 
would be reflected in all of their calculations and 
actions. Each could rely on the behavior of others, 
and all decisions would be made on principles that 
would preserve a true harmony of interests. Spinoza 
emphasizes not the difficulties inherent in mediating 
conflicting interests but the defectiveness of man’s 
reason that prevents their consistently making deci-
sions that would be in the interest of each and for 
the good of all. Rousseau faces the same problem. 
He imagines how men must have behaved as they 
began to depend on one another to meet their daily 
needs. As long as each provided for his own wants, 
there could be no conflict; whenever the combina-
tion of natural obstacles and growth in population 
made cooperation necessary, conflict arose. Thus 
in the stag-hunt example the tension between one 
man’s immediate interest and the general interest of 
the group is resolved by the unilateral action of the 
one man. To the extent that he was motivated by 
a feeling of hunger, his act is one of passion. Rea-
son would have told him that his long-run interest 
depends on establishing, through experience, the 
conviction that cooperative action will benefit all of 
the participants. But reason also tells him that if he 
forgoes the hare, the man next to him might leave 
his post to chase it, leaving the first man with noth-
ing but food for thought on the folly of being loyal. 
 The problem is now posed in more significant 
terms. If harmony is to exist in anarchy, not only 
must I be perfectly rational but I must be able to 
assume that everyone else is too. Otherwise there 
is no basis for rational calculation. To allow in my 
calculation for the irrational acts of others can lead 
to no determinate solutions, but to attempts to act 
on a rational calculation without making such an 
allowance may lead to my own undoing. The latter 
argument is reflected in Rousseau’s comments on 
the proposition that “a people of true Christians 
would form the most perfect society imaginable.” 
In the first place he points out that such a society 
“would not be a society of men.” Moreover, he says, 
“For the state to be peaceable and for harmony to 
be maintained, all the citizens without exception 
would have to be [equally] good Christians; if by ill 
hap there should be a single self-seeker or hypocrite 
. . . He would certainly get the better of his pious 
compatriots.”  19  
 If we define cooperative action as rational and 
any deviation from it irrational, we must agree with 
Spinoza that conflict results from the irrationality of 
men. But if we examine the requirements of rational 
action, we find that even in an example as simple 
as the stag hunt we have to assume that the reason 
of each leads to an identical definition of interest, 
that each will draw the same conclusion as to the 
methods appropriate to meet the original situation, 
that all will agree instantly on the action required 
by any chance incidents that raise the question of 
altering the original plan, and that each can rely 
completely on the steadfastness of purpose of all 
the others. Perfectly rational action requires not 
only the perception that our welfare is tied up with 
the welfare of others but also a perfect appraisal 
of details so that we can answer the question: Just 
how in each situation is it tied up with everyone 
else’s? Rousseau agrees with Spinoza in refusing 
to label the act of the rabbit-snatcher either good 
or bad; unlike Spinoza, he also refuses to label it 
either rational or irrational. He has noticed that the 
difficulty is not only in the actors but also in the 
situations they face. While by no means ignoring 
the part that avarice and ambition play in the birth 
and growth of conflict,  20  Rousseau’s analysis makes 
clear the extent to which conflict appears inevitably 
in the social affairs of men. 
 In short, the proposition that irrationality is the 
cause of all the world’s troubles, in the sense that a 
world of perfectly rational men would know no dis-
agreements and no conflicts, is, as Rousseau implies, 
as true as it is irrelevant. Since the world cannot be 
defined in terms of perfection, the very real problem 
of how to achieve an approximation to harmony in 
cooperative and competitive activity is always with 
us and, lacking the possibility of perfection, it is a 
problem that cannot be solved simply by changing 
men. Rousseau’s conclusion, which is also the heart 
of his theory of international relations, is accurately 
though somewhat abstractly summarized in the fol-
lowing statement: That among particularities ac-
cidents will occur is not accidental but necessary.  21  
And this, in turn, is simply another way of saying 
that in anarchy there is no automatic harmony. 

Explaining War: The Levels of Analysis 
103
 If anarchy is the problem, then there are only 
two possible solutions: (1) to impose an effective 
control on the separate and imperfect states; (2) to 
remove states from the sphere of the accidental, that 
is, to define the good state as so perfect that it will 
no longer be particular. Kant tried to compromise by 
making states good enough to obey a set of laws to 
which they have volunteered their assent. Rousseau, 
whom on this point Kant failed to follow, emphasizes 
the particular nature of even the good state and, in 
so doing, makes apparent the futility of the solution 
Kant suggests.  22  He also makes possible a theory of 
international relations that in general terms explains 
the behavior of all states, whether good or bad.  23  
 In the stag-hunt example, the will of the rabbit-
snatcher was rational and predictable from his own 
point of view. From the point of view of the rest of 
the group, it was arbitrary and capricious. So of any 
individual state, a will perfectly good for itself may 
provoke the violent resistance of other states.  24  The 
application of Rousseau’s theory to international 
politics is stated with eloquence and clarity in his 
commentaries on Saint-Pierre and in a short work 
entitled  The State of War . His application bears 
out the preceding analysis. The states of Europe, he 
writes, “touch each other at so many points that no 
one of them can move without giving a jar to all the 
rest; their variances are all the more deadly, as their 
ties are more closely woven.” They “must inevitably 
fall into quarrels and dissensions at the first changes 
that come about.” And if we ask why they must 
“inevitably” clash, Rousseau answers: Because their 
union is “formed and maintained by nothing better 
than chance.” The nations of Europe are willful 
units in close juxtaposition with rules neither clear 
nor enforceable to guide them. The public law of 
Europe is but “a mass of contradictory rules which 
nothing but the right of the stronger can reduce 
to order: so that in the absence of any sure clue to 
guide her, reason is bound, in every case of doubt, 
to obey the promptings of self-interest—which in 
itself would make war inevitable, even if all parties 
desired to be just.” In this condition, it is foolhardy 
to expect automatic harmony of interest and auto-
matic agreement and acquiescence in rights and du-
ties. In a real sense there is a “union of the nations of 
Europe,” but “the imperfections of this association 
make the state of those who belong to it worse than 
it would be if they formed no community at all.”  25  
 The argument is clear. For individuals the 
bloodiest stage of history was the period just prior 
to the establishment of society. At that point they 
had lost the virtues of the savage without having ac-
quired those of the citizen. The late stage of the state 
of nature is necessarily a state of war. The nations of 
Europe are precisely in that stage.  26  
 What then is cause: the capricious acts of the 
separate states or the system within which they ex-
ist? Rousseau emphasizes the latter: 
 Every one can see that what unites any form of 
society is community of interests, and what disin-
tegrates [it] is their conflict; that either tendency 
may be changed or modified by a thousand ac-
cidents; and therefore that, as soon as a society is 
founded, some coercive power must be provided to 
co-ordinate the actions of its members and give to 
their common interests and mutual obligations that 
firmness and consistency which they could never 
acquire of themselves.  27  
 But to emphasize the importance of political 
structure is not to say that the acts that bring about 
conflict and lead to the use of force are of no impor-
tance. It is the specific acts that are the immediate 
causes of war,  28  the general structure that permits 
them to exist and wreak their disasters. To eliminate 
every vestige of selfishness, perversity, and stupidity 
in nations would serve to establish perpetual peace, 
but to try directly to eliminate all the immediate 
causes of war without altering the structure of the 
“union of Europe” is utopian. 
 What alteration of structure is required? The 
idea that a voluntary federation, such as Kant later 
proposed, could keep peace among states, Rousseau 
rejects emphatically. Instead, he says, the remedy 
for war among states “is to be found only in such a 
form of federal Government as shall unite nations by 
bonds similar to those which already unite their in-
dividual members, and place the one no less than the 
other under the authority of the Law.”  29  Kant made 
similar statements only to amend them out of exis-
tence once he came to consider the reality of such a 
federation. Rousseau does not modify his principle, 
as is made clear in the following quotation, every 
point of which is a contradiction of Kant’s program 
for the pacific federation: 
 The Federation [that is to replace the “free and vol-
untary association which now unites the States of 
Europe”] must embrace all the important Powers 
in its membership; it must have a Legislative Body, 
with powers to pass laws and ordinances binding 

104
KENNETH N. WALTZ
upon all its members; it must have a coercive force 
capable of compelling every State to obey its com-
mon resolves whether in the way of command or 
of prohibition; finally, it must be strong and firm 
enough to make it impossible for any member to 
withdraw at his own pleasure the moment he con-
ceives his private interest to clash with that of the 
whole body.  30  
 It is easy to poke holes in the solution offered 
by Rousseau. The most vulnerable point is revealed 
by the questions: How could the federation enforce 
its law on the states that comprise it without wag-
ing war against them? and How likely is it that 
the effective force will always be on the side of the 
federation? To answer these questions Rousseau ar-
gues that the states of Europe are in a condition of 
balance sufficiently fine to prevent any one state or 
combination of states from prevailing over the oth-
ers. For this reason, the necessary margin of force 
will always rest with the federation itself. The best 
critical consideration of the inherent weakness of 
a federation of states in which the law of the fed-
eration has to be enforced on the states who are its 
members is contained in the  Federalist Papers . The 
arguments are convincing, but they need not be re-
viewed here. The practical weakness of Rousseau’s 
recommended solution does not obscure the merit of 
his theoretical analysis of war as a consequence of 
international anarchy.  
Conclusion
 The third image, like the first two, leads directly 
to a utopian prescription. In each image a cause is 
identified in terms of which all others are to be un-
derstood. The force of the logical relation between 
the third image and the world-government prescrip-
tion is great enough to cause some to argue not only 
the merits of world government but also the ease 
with which it can be realized.  31  It is of course true 
that with world government there would no longer 
be international wars, though with an ineffective 
world government there would no doubt be civil 
wars. It is likewise true, reverting to the first two 
images, that without the imperfections of the sepa-
rate states there would not be wars, just as it is true 
that a society of perfectly rational beings, or of per-
fect Christians, would never know violent conflict. 
These statements are, unfortunately, as trivial as 
they are true. They have the unchallengeable quality 
of airtight tautologies: perfectly good states or men 
will not do bad things; within an effective organiza-
tion highly damaging deviant behavior is not permit-
ted. The near perfection required by concentration 
upon a single cause accounts for a number of other-
wise puzzling facts: the pessimism of St. Augustine, 
the failure of the behavioral scientists as prescribers 
for peace, the reliance of many liberals on the forces 
of history to produce a result not conceivably to be 
produced by the consciously directed efforts of men, 
the tendency of socialists to identify a corrupting 
element every time harmony in socialist action fails 
to appear. It also helps to explain the often rapid 
alternation of hope and despair among those who 
most fully adopt a single-cause approach to this or 
to almost any other problem. The belief that to make 
the world better requires changing the factors that 
operate within a precisely defined realm leads to 
despair whenever it becomes apparent that changes 
there, if possible at all, will come slowly and with 
insufficient force. One is constantly defeated by the 
double problem of demonstrating how the “neces-
sary changes” can be produced and of substantiating 
the assertion that the changes described as necessary 
would be sufficient to accomplish the object in view. 
 The contrary assertion, that all causes may be 
interrelated, is an argument against assuming that 
there is a single cause that can be isolated by analysis 
and eliminated or controlled by wisely constructed 
policy. It is also an argument against working with 
one or several hypotheses without bearing in mind 
the interrelation of all causes. The prescriptions di-
rectly derived from a single image are incomplete 
because they are based upon partial analyses. The 
partial quality of each image sets up a tension that 
drives one toward inclusion of the others. With 
the first image the direction of change, representing 
Locke’s perspective as against Plato’s, is from men 
to societies and states. The second image catches up 
both elements. Men make states,  and states make 
men; but this is still a limited view. One is led to a 
search for the more inclusive nexus of causes, for 
states are shaped by the international environments. 
Most of those whom we have considered in preced-
ing [sections] have not written entirely in terms of 
one image. That we have thus far been dealing with 
the consequences arising from differing degrees of 
emphasis accounts for the complexity of preceding 
[sections] but now makes somewhat easier the task 
of suggesting how the images can be interrelated 
without distorting any one of them.  

Explaining War: The Levels of Analysis 
105
The First and Second Images 
in Relation to the Third 
 It may be true that the Soviet Union poses the greatest 
threat of war at the present time. It is not true that 
were the Soviet Union to disappear the remaining 
states could easily live at peace. We have known wars 
for centuries; the Soviet Union has existed only for 
decades. But some states, and perhaps some forms 
of the state, are more peacefully inclined than others. 
Would not the multiplication of peacefully inclined 
states at least warrant the hope that the period be-
tween major wars might be extended? By emphasiz-
ing the relevance of the framework of action, the third 
image makes clear the misleading quality of such 
partial analyses and of the hopes that are often based 
upon them. The act that by individual moral stan-
dards would be applauded may, when performed by 
a state, be an invitation to the war we seek to avoid. 
The third image, taken not as a theory of world gov-
ernment but as a theory of the conditioning effects of 
the state system itself, alerts us to the fact that so far 
as increasing the chances of peace is concerned there 
is no such thing as an act good in itself. The pacifica-
tion of the Hukbalahaps was a clear and direct contri-
bution to the peace and order of the Philippine state. 
In international politics a partial “solution,” such as 
one major country becoming pacifistic, might be a 
real contribution to world peace; but it might as easily 
hasten the coming of another major war. 
 The third image, as reflected in the writings 
of Rousseau, is based on an analysis of the conse-
quences arising from the framework of state action. 
Rousseau’s explanation of the origin of war among 
states is, in broad outline, the final one so long as 
we operate within a nation–state system. It is a final 
explanation because it does not hinge on accidental 
causes—irrationalities in men, defects in states—but 
upon his theory of the framework within which  any 
accident can bring about a war. That state A wants 
certain things that it can get only by war does not 
explain war. Such a desire may or may not lead to 
war. My wanting a million dollars does not cause me 
to rob a bank, but if it were easier to rob banks, such 
desires would lead to much more bank robbing. This 
does not alter the fact that some people will and some 
will not attempt to rob banks no matter what the 
law enforcement situation is. We still have to look to 
motivation and circumstance in order to explain indi-
vidual acts. Nevertheless one can predict that, other 
things being equal, a weakening of law enforcement 
agencies will lead to an increase in crime. From this 
point of view it is social structure—institutionalized 
restraints and institutionalized methods of altering 
and adjusting interests—that counts. And it counts 
in a way different from the ways usually associated 
with the word “cause.” What causes a man to rob 
a bank are such things as the desire for money, a 
disrespect for social proprieties, a certain boldness. 
But if  obstacles to the operation of these causes are 
built sufficiently high, nine out of ten would-be bank 
robbers will live their lives peacefully plying their 
 legitimate trades. If the framework is to be called 
cause at all, it had best be specified that it is a permis-
sive or underlying cause of war. 
 Applied to international politics this becomes, 
in words previously used to summarize Rousseau, 
the proposition that wars occur because there is 
nothing to prevent them. Rousseau’s analysis ex-
plains the recurrence of war without explaining any 
given war. He tells us that war may at any moment 
occur, and he tells us why this is so. But the structure 
of the state system does not directly cause state A 
to attack state B. Whether or not that attack occurs 
will depend on a number of special circumstances— 
location, size, power, interest, type of government, 
past history and tradition—each of which will influ-
ence the actions of both states. If they fight against 
each other it will be for reasons especially defined 
for the occasion by each of them. These special rea-
sons become the immediate, or efficient, causes of 
war. These immediate causes of war are contained 
in the first and second images. States are motivated 
to attack each other and to defend themselves by 
the reason and/or passion of the comparatively few 
who make policies for states and of the many more 
who influence the few. Some states, by virtue of their 
internal conditions, are both more proficient in war 
and more inclined to put their proficiency to the test. 
Variations in the factors included in the first and 
second images are important, indeed crucial, in the 
making and breaking of periods of peace—the im-
mediate causes of every war must be either the acts 
of individuals or the acts of states. 
 If every war is preceded by acts that we can 
identify (or at least try to identify) as cause, then why 
can we not eliminate wars by modifying individual 
or state behavior? This is the line of thinking fol-
lowed by those who say: To end war, improve men; 
or: To end war, improve states. But in such prescrip-
tions the role of the international environment is 
easily distorted. How can some of the  acting units 

106
KENNETH N. WALTZ
improve while others continue to follow their old 
and often predatory ways? The simplistic assump-
tion of many liberals, that history moves relentlessly 
toward the millennium, is refuted if the international 
environment makes it difficult almost to the point of 
impossibility for states to behave in ways that are 
progressively more moral. Two points are omitted 
from the prescriptions we considered under the first 
and second images: (1) If an effect is produced by 
two or more causes, the effect is not permanently 
eliminated by removing one of them. If wars occur 
because men are less than perfectly rational and 
because states are less than perfectly formed, to 
improve only states may do little to decrease the 
number and intensity of wars. The error here is in 
identifying one cause where two or more may oper-
ate. (2) An endeavor launched against one cause to 
the neglect of others may make the situation worse 
instead of better. Thus, as the Western democra-
cies became more inclined to peace, Hitler became 
more belligerent. The increased propensity to peace 
of some participants in international politics may 
increase, rather than decrease, the likelihood of war. 
This illustrates the role of the permissive cause, the 
international environment. If there were but two 
loci of cause involved, men and states, we could be 
sure that the appearance of more peacefully inclined 
states would, at worst, not damage the cause of 
world peace. Whether or not a remedy proposed 
is truly a remedy or actually worse than none at 
all depends, however, on the content and timing of 
the acts of all states. This is made clear in the third 
image. 
 War may result because state A has something 
that state B wants. The efficient cause of the war is the 
desire of state B; the permissive cause is the fact that 
there is nothing to prevent state B from undertak-
ing the risks of war. In a different circumstance, the 
 interrelation of efficient and permissive causes be-
comes still closer. State A may fear that if it does not 
cut state B down a peg now, it may be unable to do so 
ten years from now. State A becomes the aggressor in 
the present because it fears what state B may be able 
to do in the future. The efficient cause of such a war 
is derived from the cause that we have labeled per-
missive. In the first case, conflicts arise from disputes 
born of specific issues. In an age of hydrogen bombs, 
no single issue may be worth the risk of full-scale 
war. Settlement, even on bad grounds, is preferable 
to self-destruction. The use of reason would seem to 
require the adoption of a doctrine of “non-recourse 
to force.” One whose reason leads him down this 
path is following the trail blazed by Cobden when 
in 1849 he pointed out “that it is almost impossible, 
on looking back for the last hundred years, to tell 
precisely what any war was about,” and thus implied 
that Englishmen should never have become involved 
in them.  32  He is falling into the trap that ensnared A. 
A. Milne when he explained the First World War as 
a war in which ten million men died because Austria-
Hungary sought, unsuccessfully, to avenge the death 
of one archduke.  33  He is succumbing to the illusion 
of Sir Edward Grey, who, in the memoirs he wrote 
some thirty years ago, hoped that the horrors of the 
First World War would make it possible for nations 
“to find at least one common ground on which they 
should come together in confident understanding: 
an agreement that, in the disputes between them, 
war must be ruled out as a means of settlement that 
entails ruin.”  34  
 It is true that the immediate causes of many 
wars are trivial. If we focus upon them, the failure 
to agree to settlement without force appears to be 
the ultimate folly. But it is not often true that the 
immediate causes provide sufficient explanation for 
the wars that have occurred. And if it is not simply 
particular disputes that produce wars, rational settle-
ment of them cannot eliminate war. For, as Winston 
Churchill has written, “small matters are only the 
symptoms of the dangerous disease, and are only im-
portant for that reason. Behind them lie the interests, 
the passions and the destiny of mighty races of men; 
and long antagonisms express themselves in trifles.”  35  
Nevertheless Churchill may be justified in hoping 
that the fear induced by a “balance of terror” will 
produce a temporary truce. Advancing technology 
makes war more horrible and presumably increases 
the desire for peace; the very rapidity of the advance 
makes for uncertainty in everyone’s military planning 
and destroys the possibility of an accurate estimate of 
the likely opposing forces. Fear and permanent peace 
are more difficult to equate. Each major advance in 
the technology of war has found its prophet ready to 
proclaim that war is no longer possible. Alfred Nobel 
and dynamite, for example, or Benjamin Franklin 
and the lighter-than-air balloon. There may well have 
been a prophet to proclaim the end of tribal warfare 
when the spear was invented and another to make a 
similar prediction when poison was first added to its 
tip. Unfortunately, these prophets have all been false. 
The development of atomic and hydrogen weapons 
may nurture the peace wish of some, the war sentiment 

Explaining War: The Levels of Analysis 
107
of others. In the United States and elsewhere after the 
Second World War, a muted them of foreign-policy 
debate was the necessity of preventive war—drop the 
bomb quickly before the likely opponent in a future 
war has time to make one of his own. Even with 
two or more states equipped with similar weapon 
systems, a momentary shift in the balance of terror, 
giving a decisive military advantage temporarily to 
one state, may tempt it to seize the moment in order 
to escape from fear. And the temptation would be 
proportionate to the fear itself. Finally, mutual fear 
of big weapons may produce, instead of peace, a 
spate of smaller wars. 
 The fear of modern weapons, of the danger of 
destroying the civilizations of the world, is not suffi-
cient to establish the conditions of peace identified in 
our discussions of the three images of international 
relations. One can equate fear with world peace only 
if the peace wish exists in all states and is uniformly 
expressed in their policies. But peace is the primary 
goal of few men or states. If it were the primary goal 
of even a single state, that state could have peace 
at any time—simply by surrendering. But, as John 
Foster Dulles so often warned, “Peace can be a cover 
whereby evil men perpetrate diabolical wrongs.”  36  
The issue in a given dispute may not be: Who shall 
gain from it? It may instead be: Who shall dominate 
the world? In such circumstances, the best course of 
even reasonable men is difficult to define; their abil-
ity always to contrive solutions without force, im-
possible to assume. If solutions in terms of none of 
the three images is presently—if ever—possible, then 
reason can work only within the framework that is 
suggested by viewing the first and second images in 
the perspective of the third, a perspective well and 
simply set forth in the  Federalist Papers, especially 
in those written by Hamilton and Jay. 
 What would happen, Jay asks, if the thirteen 
states, instead of combining as one state, should form 
themselves into several confederations? He answers: 
 Instead of their being “joined in affection” and 
free from all apprehension of different “interests,” 
envy and jealousy would soon extinguish confi-
dence and affection, and the partial interests of 
each confederation, instead of the general interests 
of all America, would be the only objects of their 
policy and pursuits. Hence, like most  bordering 
nations, they would always be either involved in 
disputes and war, or live in the constant apprehen-
sion of them.  37  
 International anarchy, Jay is here saying, is the expla-
nation for international war. But not international 
anarchy alone. Hamilton adds that to presume a 
lack of hostile motives among states is to forget that 
men are “ambitious, vindictive, and rapacious.” A 
monarchical state may go to war because the vanity 
of its king leads him to seek glory in military victory; 
a republic may go to war because of the folly of 
its assembly or because of its commercial interests. 
That the king may be vain, the assembly foolish, 
or the commercial interests irreconcilable: none of 
these is inevitable. However, so many and so varied 
are the causes of war among states that “to look for 
a continuation of harmony between a number of 
independent, unconnected sovereigns in the same 
neighborhood, would be to disregard the uniform 
course of human events, and to set at defiance the 
accumulated experience of the ages.”  38  
 Jay and Hamilton found in the history of the 
Western state system confirmation for the conclu-
sion that among separate sovereign states there is 
constant possibility of war. The third image gives a 
theoretical basis for the same conclusion. It reveals 
why, in the absence of tremendous changes in the 
factors included in the first and second images, war 
will be perpetually associated with the existence of 
separate sovereign states. The obvious conclusion 
of a third-image analysis is that world government 
is the remedy for world war. The remedy, though 
it may be unassailable in logic, is unattainable in 
practice. The third image may provide a utopian 
approach to world politics. It may also provide a re-
alistic approach, and one that avoids the tendency of 
some realists to attribute the necessary amorality, or 
even immorality, of world politics to the inherently 
bad character of man. If everyone’s strategy depends 
upon everyone else’s, then the Hitlers determine in 
part the action, or better, reaction, of those whose 
ends are worthy and whose means are fastidious. 
No matter how good their intentions, policy mak-
ers must bear in mind the implications of the third 
image, which can be stated in summary form as fol-
lows: Each state pursues its own interests, however 
defined, in ways it judges best. Force is a means of 
achieving the external ends of states because there 
exists no consistent, reliable process of reconciling 
the conflicts of interest that inevitably arise among 
similar units in a condition of anarchy. A foreign 
policy based on this image of international relations 
is neither moral nor immoral, but embodies merely 
a reasoned response to the world about us. The third 

108
KENNETH N. WALTZ
image describes the framework of world politics, but 
without the first and second images there can be no 
knowledge of the forces that determine policy; the 
first and second images describe the forces in world 
politics, but without the third image it is imposible 
to assess their importance or predict their results.  
Notes
 1.   Beverly Nichols,  Cry Havoc! (New York: Doubleday, 
Doran & Co., 1933), 164.  
 2.   Margaret E. Hirst,  The Quakers in Peace and War 
(London: Swarthmore Press, 1923), 521–25.  
 3.   Bertrand Russell,  Political Ideals (New York: Century 
Co., 1917), p. 42. In one way or another the thought recurs 
in Lord Russell’s many writings on international relations.  
 4.   William James, “The Moral Equivalent of War,” in 
 Memories and Studies (New York: Longmans, Green and 
Co., 1912), 262–72, 290.  
 5.   Jean Bodin,  Six Books of the Commonwealth, abridged 
and trans. M. J. Tooley (Oxford: Basil Blackwell, n.d.), 168.  
 6.   “Some Thoughts for the President’s Consideration,” 
Apr. 1, 1861, in  Documents of American History, ed. Henry 
Steele Commager, 3d ed. (New York: F. S. Crofts & Co., 
1946), 392.  
 7.   Hans Herzfeld, “Bismarck und die Skobelewespi-
sode,”  Historische Zeitschrift 142 (1930): 279–302.  
 8.   Cf. Robert E. Sherwood,  Roosevelt and Hopkins 
(New York: Harper and Brothers, 1948), 67–68, 102, 
126, 133–36, 272, and esp. 931; and Secretary of State 
Hay’s statement in Henry Adams,  The Education of Henry 
Adams (New York: Book League of America, 1928), 374. 
Note that in this case the fault is one that is thought to 
decrease the ability of a country to implement a peaceful 
policy. In the other examples, the defect is thought to in-
crease the propensity of a country to go to war.  
 9.   Cf. Bertrand Russell, who in 1917 wrote: “There can 
be no good international system until the boundaries of 
states coincide as nearly as possible with the boundaries of 
nations” ( Political Ideals, 146).  
 10.   Frank H. Simonds and Brooks Emery,  The Great 
Powers in World Politics (New York: American Book Co., 
1939), passim; W. S. Thompson,  Danger Spots in World 
Population (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1930), esp. the 
Preface and chaps. 1 and 13.  
 11.   Cf. Vladimir Dedijer, “Albania, Soviet Pawn,”  Foreign 
Affairs 30 (1961): 104: Socialism, but not Soviet Union 
state capitalism, means peace.  
 12.   Thucydides,  History of the Peloponnesian War, trans. 
B. Jowett, 2d ed. (London: Oxford University Press, 1900), 
bk. 1, par. 23. 
 13.  John Adams to the citizens of the town of Petersburg, 
Virginia, June 6, 1798, reprinted in the program for the 
visit of William Howard Taft, Petersburg, May 19, 1909.  
 14.   Frederick S. Dunn,  Peaceful Change (New York: 
Council on Foreign Relations, 1937), 13.  
 15.   Richard Cobden, esp.  Speeches on Peace, Financial 
Reform, Colonial Reform and Other Subjects Delivered 
during 1849 (London: James Gilbert, n.d.), 135.  
 16.   Jean Jacques Rousseau,  The Social Contract and Dis-
courses, trans. G.D.H. Cole, Everyman’s Library Edition 
(New York: E. P. Dutton and Co., 1950); see esp.  Inequality, 
234 ff.  
 17.   Ibid., 34.  
 18.   Benedict de Spinoza,  The Chief Works of Benedict de 
Spinoza, trans. R.H.M. Elwes, 2 vols. (New York: Dover 
Publications, 1951),  Ethics, pt. 4, prop. 35, proof.  
 19.   Rousseau,  The Social Contract and Discourses, 135–
36 (bk. 4 and chap. 8), italics added. The word “equally” 
is necessary for and accurate rendering of the French text 
but does not appear in the translation cited.  
 20.   Jean-Jacques Rousseau,  A Lasting Peace through the 
Federation of Europe and the State of War, trans. C. E. 
Vaughan (London: Constable and Co., 1917), 72.  
 21.   This parallels Hegel’s formulation: “It is to what is 
by nature accidental that accidents happen, and the fate 
whereby they happen is thus a necessity” [G.W.F.] Hegel, 
 Philosophy of Right, trans. T. M. Knox (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1942), sec. 324.  
 22.   Kant is more willing to admit the force of this criti-
cism than is generally realized.  
 23.   This is not, of course, to say that no differences in 
state behavior follow from the different constitutions and 
situations of states. This point raises the question of the 
relation of the third image to the second, which will be 
discussed below.  
 24.   Rousseau,  The Social Contract and Discourses, 290–91.  
  25.   Rousseau,  A Lasting Peace, 46–48, 58–59.  
 26.   Ibid., 38, 46–47. On p. 121, Rousseau distinguishes 
between the “state of war,” which always exists among 
states, and war proper, which manifests itself in the settled 
intention to destroy the enemy state.  
 27.   Ibid., 49.  
 28.   In ibid., 69, Rousseau presents his exhaustive list of 
such causes.  
 29.   Ibid., 38–39.  
 30.   Ibid., 59–60.  
 31.   Cf. Karl Popper,  The Open Society and Its Enemies 
(Princeton: Princeton University Press, 1950), 158–59; and 
William Esslinger,  Politics and Science (New York: Philo-
sophical Library, 1955), passim.  
 32.   Richard Cobden,  Speeches on Questions of Public 
Policy, 2 vols., ed. John Bright and James E. Thorold Rog-
ers (London: Macmillan & Co., 1870), 2: 165.  
 33.   A. A. Milne,  Peace and War (New York: E. P. Dutton 
& Co., 1934), 11.  
 34.   Edward Grey,  Twenty-Five Years, 2 vols. (New York: 
Frederick A. Stokes Co., 1925), 2: 285.  

 
Hard and Soft Power in American Foreign Policy 
109
 35.  Winston Churchill,  The World Crisis, 1911–1914, 
4 vols. (New York: Charles Scribner’s Sons, 1923–29), 
1: 52.  
 36.   “Excerpts from Dulles Address on Peace,” Washington, 
D. C., Apr. 11, 1955, in  New York Times, Apr. 12, 1955, 6.  
 37.   Alexander Hamilton, John Jay, and James Madison. 
 The Federalist (New York: Modern Library, 1941), 23–24 
(no. 5).  
 38.   Ibid., 27–28 (no. 6); cf. 18 (no. 4, Jay) and 34–40 (no. 
7, Hamilton).  
Hard and Soft Power 
in American Foreign Policy 
JOSEPH S. NYE, JR.
OVERVIEW
 As noted in the text, power is a key concept for IR theorists, particularly realists. 
It is utilized, for example, in balance-of-power, power-transition, and hegemonic- 
power theorizing .  Using the United States as his principal case, the author sees the 
power of a state as including both  hard  and soft  components—the former tradi-
tional economic and military and the latter composed of cultural dimensions or 
the values that define the identity and practices of a state. Soft power involves at-
tracting others to your agenda in world politics and not just relying on carrots and 
sticks. Soft power entails getting others to want what you want. Combining hard 
and soft power assets effectively—“smart” power as Nye now calls it—is essential 
to attaining national objectives and affecting the behavior of others. Soft power 
becomes manifest in international institutions (listening to others) and in foreign 
policy (promoting peace and human rights). An advocate of multilateralism, the 
author—a policy-oriented classical realist—sees sustaining American power as de-
pendent upon “strategic restraint, reassuring partners and facilitating cooperation,” 
not just “because of unmatched American hard power.” Consistent with classical 
realism as well as theorists working within the liberal image of international rela-
tions, we find in this article an argument that addresses the ideational, not just the 
material, dimensions of power. Nye also addresses the limits of balance-of-power 
and hegemonic-power theories as applied to the United States.  
“Hard and Soft Power in American Foreign Policy” by Joseph Nye from  Paradox of American Power, pp. 4–17, copyright 
© 2002 by Joseph S. Nye, Jr. Used by permission of Oxford University Press.

110
JOSEPH S. NYE, JR.
The ability to obtain the outcomes one wants is often 
associated with the possession of certain  resources, 
and so we commonly use shorthand and define 
power as possession of relatively large amounts of 
such elements as population, territory, natural re-
sources, economic strength, military force, and po-
litical stability. Power in this sense means holding 
the high cards in the international poker game. If 
you show high cards, others are likely to fold their 
hands. Of course, if you play your hand poorly or 
fall victim to bluff and deception, you can still lose, 
or at least fail to get the outcome you want. For 
example, the United States was the largest power 
after World War I, but it failed to prevent the rise 
of Hitler or Pearl Harbor. Converting America’s po-
tential power resources into realized power requires 
well-designed policy and skillful leadership. But it 
helps to start by holding the high cards. 
 Traditionally, the test of a great power was 
“strength for war.”  1  War was the ultimate game in 
which the cards of international politics were played 
and estimates of relative power were proven. Over 
the centuries, as technologies evolved, the sources of 
power have changed. In the agrarian economies of 
seventeenth- and eighteenth-century Europe, popula-
tion was a critical power resource because it provided 
a base for taxes and the recruitment of infantry (who 
were mostly mercenaries), and this combination of 
men and money gave the edge to France. But in the 
nineteenth century, the growing importance of in-
dustry benefited first Britain, which ruled the waves 
with a navy that had no peer, and later Germany, 
which used efficient administration and railways to 
transport armies for quick victories on the Continent 
(though Russia had a larger population and army).
By the middle of the twentieth century, with the 
advent of the nuclear age, the United States and the 
Soviet Union possessed not only industrial might but 
nuclear arsenals and intercontinental missiles. 
 Today the foundations of power have been 
moving away from the emphasis on military force 
and conquest. Paradoxically, nuclear weapons were 
one of the causes. As we know from the history of 
the Cold War, nuclear weapons proved so awesome 
and destructive that they became muscle bound—
too costly to use except, theoretically, in the most 
extreme circumstances.  2  A second important change 
was the rise of nationalism, which has made it more 
difficult for empires to rule over awakened popula-
tions. In the nineteenth century, a few adventurers 
conquered most of Africa with a handful of soldiers, 
and Britain ruled India with a colonial force that was 
a tiny fraction of the indigenous population. Today, 
colonial rule is not only widely condemned but far 
too costly, as both Cold War superpowers discov-
ered in Vietnam and Afghanistan. The collapse of 
the Soviet empire followed the end of European 
empires by a matter of decades. 
 A third important cause is societal change inside 
great powers. Postindustrial societies are focused on 
welfare rather than glory, and they loathe high ca-
sualties except when survival is at stake. This does 
not mean that they will not use force, even when 
casualties are expected—witness the 1991 Gulf War 
or Afghanistan today. But the absence of a warrior 
ethic in modern democracies means that the use of 
force requires an elaborate moral justification to en-
sure popular support (except in cases where survival 
is at stake). Roughly speaking, there are three types 
of countries in the world today: poor, weak preindus-
trial states, which are often the chaotic remnants of 
collapsed empires; modernizing industrial states such 
as India or China; and the postindustrial societies 
that prevail in Europe, North America, and Japan. 
The use of force is common in the first type of coun-
try, still accepted in the second, but less tolerated in 
the third. In the words of British diplomat Robert 
Cooper, “A large number of the most powerful states 
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   How have the sources of power changed over the centuries?  
 2.  What are the causative factors that explain the foundations of power moving away from an 
historical emphasis on military force and conquest?  
 3.  Why are soft-power resources not under the exclusive control of the state?  
 4.  In terms of measurement, what problems does the concept of soft power pose? To what extent 
is it expressed in relations between or among states or in control over outcomes?  
 5.  Some realists have predicted that it is only a matter of time before the power supremacy of 
the United States will be challenged by other rising powers. To what extent could the U.S. 
exercise of soft power explain why that prediction has yet to come about?  

 
Hard and Soft Power in American Foreign Policy 
111
no longer want to fight or to conquer.”  3  War remains 
possible, but it is much less acceptable now than it 
was a century or even half a century age.  4  
 Finally, for most of today’s great powers, the use 
of force would jeopardize their economic objectives. 
Even nondemocratic countries that feel fewer popular 
moral constraints on the use of force have to consider 
its effects on their economic objectives. As Thomas 
Friedman has put it, countries are disciplined by an 
“electronic herd” of investors who control their ac-
cess to capital in a globalized economy.  5  And Richard 
Rosecrance writes, “In the past, it was cheaper to seize 
another state’s territory by force than to develop the 
sophisticated economic and trading apparatus needed 
to derive benefit from commercial exchange with it.”  6  
Imperial Japan used the former approach when it cre-
ated the Greater East Asia Co-prosperity Sphere in the 
1930s, but Japan’s post–World War II role as a trading 
state turned out to be far more successful, leading it 
to become the second largest national economy in 
the world. It is difficult now to imagine a scenario in 
which Japan would try to colonize its neighbors, or 
succeed in doing so. 
 As mentioned above, none of this is to suggest 
that military force plays no role in international poli-
tics today. For one thing, the information revolution 
has yet to transform most of the world. Many states 
are unconstrained by democratic societal forces, as 
Kuwait learned from its neighbor Iraq, and terrorist 
groups pay little heed to the normal constraints of 
liberal societies. Civil wars are rife in many parts of 
the world where collapsed empires left power vacu-
ums. Moreover, throughout history, the rise of new 
great powers has been accompanied by anxieties that 
have sometimes precipitated military crises. In Thucy-
dides’s immortal description, the Peloponnesian War 
in ancient Greece was caused by the rise to power 
of Athens and the fear it created in Sparta.  7  World 
War I owed much to the rise of the kaiser’s Germany 
and the fear that created in Britain.  8  Some foretell a 
similar dynamic in this century arising from the rise 
of China and the fear it creates in the United States. 
 Geoeconomics has not replaced geopolitics, al-
though in the early twenty-first century there has 
clearly been a blurring of the traditional boundaries 
between the two. To ignore the role of force and 
the centrality of security would be like ignoring oxy-
gen. Under normal circumstances, oxygen is plen-
tiful and we pay it little attention. But once those 
conditions change and we begin to miss it, we can 
focus on nothing else.  9  Even in those areas where the 
direct  employment of force falls out of use among 
countries—for instance, within Western Europe or 
between the United States and Japan—nonstate actors 
such as terrorists may use force. Moreover, military 
force can still play an important political role among 
advanced nations. For example, most countries in 
East Asia welcome the presence of American troops 
as an insurance policy against uncertain neighbors. 
Moreover, deterring threats or ensuring access to a 
crucial resource such as oil in the Persian Gulf in-
creases America’s influence with its allies. Sometimes 
the linkages may be direct; more often they are present 
in the back of statesmen’s minds. As the Defense De-
partment describes it, one of the missions of American 
troops based overseas is to “shape the environment.” 
 With that said, economic power  has become 
more important than in the past, both because 
of the relative increase in the costliness of force 
and because economic objectives loom large in the 
values of postindustrial societies.  10  In a world of 
economic globalization, all countries are to some 
extent dependent on market forces beyond their di-
rect control. When President Clinton was struggling 
to balance the federal budget in 1993, one of his 
advisors stated in exasperation that if he were to be 
reborn, he would like to come back as “the market” 
because that was clearly the most powerful player.  11  
But markets constrain different countries to differ-
ent degrees. Because the United States constitutes 
such a large part of the market in trade and finance, 
it is better placed to set its own terms than is Argen-
tina or Thailand. And if small countries are willing 
to pay the price of opting out of the market, they 
can reduce the power that other countries have over 
them. Thus American economic sanctions have had 
little effect, for example, on improving human rights 
in isolated Myanmar. Saddam Hussein’s strong pref-
erence for his own survival rather than the welfare 
of the Iraqi people meant that crippling sanctions 
failed for more than a decade to remove him from 
power. And economic sanctions may disrupt but not 
deter non-state terrorists. But the exceptions prove 
the rule. Military power remains crucial in certain 
situations, but it is a mistake to focus too narrowly 
on the military dimensions of American power. 
Soft Power 
 In my view, if the United States wants to remain 
strong, Americans need also to pay attention to our 
soft power. What precisely do I mean by soft power? 

112
JOSEPH S. NYE, JR.
Military power and economic power are both ex-
amples of hard command power that can be used to 
induce others to change their position. Hard power 
can rest on inducements (carrots) or threats (sticks). 
But there is also an indirect way to exercise power. A 
country may obtain the outcomes it wants in world 
politics because other countries want to follow it, 
admiring its values, emulating its example, aspiring 
to its level of prosperity and openness. In this sense, 
it is just as important to set the agenda in world poli-
tics and attract others as it is to force them to change 
through the threat or use of military or economic 
weapons. This aspect of power—getting others to 
want what you want—I call soft power.  12  It co-opts 
people rather than coerces them. 
 Soft power rests on the ability to set the political 
agenda in a way that shapes the preferences of others. 
At the personal level, wise parents know that if they 
have brought up their children with the right beliefs 
and values, their power will be greater and will last 
longer than if they have relied only on spankings, cut-
ting off allowances, or taking away the car keys. Simi-
larly, political leaders and thinkers such as Antonio 
Gramsci have long understood the power that comes 
from setting the agenda and determining the frame-
work of a debate. The ability to establish preferences 
tends to be associated with intangible power resources 
such as an attractive culture, ideology, and institu-
tions. If I can get you to  want to do what I want, then 
I do not have to force you to do what you do  not want 
to do. If the United States represents values that others 
want to follow, it will cost us less to lead. Soft power 
is not merely the same as influence, though it is one 
source of influence. After all, I can also influence you 
by threats or rewards. Soft power is also more than 
persuasion or the ability to move people by argument. 
It is the ability to entice and attract. And attraction 
often leads to acquiescence or imitation. 
 Soft power arises in large part from our values. 
These values are expressed in our culture, in the 
policies we follow inside our country, and in the way 
we handle ourselves internationally. The government 
sometimes finds it difficult to control and employ 
soft power. Like love, it is hard to measure and to 
handle, and does not touch everyone, but that does 
not diminish its importance. As Hubert Védrine la-
ments, Americans are so powerful because they can 
“inspire the dreams and desires of others, thanks 
to the mastery of global images through film and 
television and because, for these same reasons, large 
numbers of students from other countries come to 
the United States to finish their studies.”  13  Soft power 
is an important reality. 
 Of course, hard and soft power are related and 
can reinforce each other. Both are aspects of the abil-
ity to achieve our purposes by affecting the behavior 
of others. Sometimes the same power resources can 
affect the entire spectrum of behavior from coercion 
to attraction.  14  A country that suffers economic and 
military decline is likely to lose its ability to shape the 
international agenda as well as its attractiveness. And 
some countries may be attracted to others with hard 
power by the myth of invincibility or inevitability. 
Both Hitler and Stalin tried to develop such myths. 
Hard power can also be used to establish empires and 
institutions that set the agenda for smaller states—
witness Soviet rule over the countries of Eastern Eu-
rope. But soft power is not simply the reflection of 
hard power. The Vatican did not lose its soft power 
when it lost the Papal States in Italy in the nineteenth 
century. Conversely, the Soviet Union lost much of its 
soft power after it invaded Hungary and Czechoslova-
kia, even though its economic and military resources 
continued to grow. Imperious policies that utilized 
Soviet hard power actually undercut its soft power. 
And some countries such as Canada, the Netherlands, 
and the Scandinavian states have political clout that 
is greater than their military and economic weight, 
because of the incorporation of attractive causes such 
as economic aid or peacekeeping into their definitions 
of national interest. These are lessons that the unilat-
eralists forget at their and our peril. 
 Britain in the nineteenth century and America 
in the second half of the twentieth century enhanced 
their power by creating liberal international eco-
nomic rules and institutions that were consistent 
with the liberal and democratic structures of British 
and American capitalism—free trade and the gold 
standard in the case of Britain, the International 
Monetary Fund, World Trade Organization, and 
other institutions in the case of the United States. 
If a country can make its power legitimate in the 
eyes of others, it will encounter less resistance to 
its wishes. If its culture and ideology are attractive, 
others more willingly follow. If it can establish in-
ternational rules that are consistent with its society, 
it will be less likely to have to change. If it can help 
support institutions that encourage other countries 
to channel or limit their activities in ways it prefers, 
it may not need as many costly carrots and sticks. 
 In short, the universality of a country’s culture 
and its ability to establish a set of favorable rules 

 
Hard and Soft Power in American Foreign Policy 
113
and institutions that govern areas of international 
activity are critical sources of power. The values 
of democracy, personal freedom, upward mobility, 
and openness that are often expressed in American 
popular culture, higher education, and foreign policy 
contribute to American power in many areas. In the 
view of German journalist Josef Joffe, America’s soft 
power “looms even larger than its economic and 
military assets. U.S. culture, low-brow or high, radi-
ates outward with an intensity last seen in the days of 
the Roman Empire—but with a novel twist. Rome’s 
and Soviet Russia’s cultural sway stopped exactly at 
their military borders. America’s soft power, though, 
rules over an empire on which the sun never sets.”  15  
 Of course, soft power is more than just cul-
tural power. The values our government champions 
in its behavior at home (for example, democracy), in 
 international institutions (listening to others), and in 
foreign policy (promoting peace and human rights) 
also affect the preferences of others. We can attract 
(or repel) others by the influence of our example. But 
soft power does not belong to the government in the 
same degree that hard power does. Some hard power 
assets (such as armed forces) are strictly governmen-
tal, others are inherently national (such as our oil 
and gas reserves), and many can be transferred to 
collective control (such as industrial assets that can 
be mobilized in an emergency). In contrast, many 
soft power resources are separate from American 
government and only partly responsive to its pur-
poses. In the Vietnam era, for example, American 
government policy and popular culture worked at 
cross-purposes. Today popular U.S. firms or non-
governmental groups develop soft power of their 
own that may coincide or be at odds with official 
foreign policy goals. That is all the more reason for 
our government to make sure that its own actions 
reinforce rather than undercut American soft power. 
[A]ll these sources of soft power are likely to become 
increasingly important in the global information age 
of this new century. And, at the same time, the 
arrogance, indifference to the opinions of others, 
and narrow approach to our national interests ad-
vocated by the new unilateralists are a sure way to 
undermine our soft power. 
 Power in the global information age is becoming 
less tangible and less coercive, particularly among 
the advanced countries, but most of the world does 
not consist of postindustrial societies, and that lim-
its the transformation of power. Much of Africa 
and the Middle East remains locked in preindustrial 
agricultural societies with weak institutions and au-
thoritarian rulers. Other countries, such as China, 
India, and Brazil, are industrial economies analo-
gous to parts of the West in the mid-twentieth cen-
tury.  16  In such a variegated world, all three sources 
of power—military, economic, and soft—remain 
relevant, although to different degrees in different 
relationships. However, if current economic and so-
cial trends continue, leadership in the information 
revolution and soft power will become more im-
portant in the mix.  Table   2.1  provides a simplified 
Table 2.1 
Leading States and Their Power Resources, 1500–2000 
Period
State
Major Resources 
Sixteenth century 
 Spain
Gold bullion, colonial trade, mercenary armies, dynastic ties 
Seventeenth century 
 Netherlands
Trade, capital markets, navy 
Eighteenth century 
 France
Population, rural industry, public administration, army, 
culture (soft power) 
Nineteenth century 
 Britain
Industry, political cohesion, finance and credit, navy, liberal 
norms (soft power), island location (easy to defend) 
Twentieth century 
 United States 
 Economic scale, scientific and technical leadership, location, 
military forces and alliances, universalistic culture and liberal 
international regimes (soft power) 
Twenty-first century 
 United States 
 Technological leadership, military and economic scale, soft 
power, hub of transnational communications 

114
JOSEPH S. NYE, JR.
description of the evolution of power resources over 
the past few centuries.  
 Power in the twenty-first century will rest on 
a mix of hard and soft resources. No country is 
 better endowed than the United States in all three 
 dimensions—military, economic, and soft power. Our 
greatest mistake in such a world would be to fall into 
one-dimensional analysis and to believe that investing 
in military power alone will ensure our strength.  
Balance or Hegemony? 
 America’s power—hard and soft—is only part of the 
story. How others react to American power is equally 
important to the question of stability and gover-
nance in this global information age. Many realists 
extol the virtues of the classic nineteenth- century 
European balance of power, in which  constantly 
shifting coalitions contained the ambitions of any 
especially aggressive power. They urge the United 
States to rediscover the virtues of a balance of power 
at the global level today. Already in the 1970s, Rich-
ard Nixon argued that “the only time in the history 
of the world that we have had any extended periods 
of peace is when there has been a balance of power. 
It is when one nation becomes infinitely more pow-
erful in relation to its potential competitors that the 
danger of war arises.”  17  But whether such multipo-
larity would be good or bad for the United States and 
for the world is debatable. I am skeptical. 
 War was the constant companion and crucial 
instrument of the multipolar balance of power. The 
classic European balance provided stability in the 
sense of maintaining the independence of most coun-
tries, but there were wars among the great powers 
for 60 percent of the years since 1500.  18  Rote adher-
ence to the balance of power and multipolarity may 
prove to be a dangerous approach to global gover-
nance in a world where war could turn nuclear. 
 Many regions of the world and periods in history 
have seen stability under hegemony—when one power 
has been preeminent. Margaret Thatcher warned 
against drifting toward “an Orwellian future of Ocea-
nia, Eurasia, and Eastasia—three mercantilist world 
empires on increasingly hostile terms. . . . In other 
words, 2095 might look like 1914 played on a some-
what larger stage.”  19  Both the Nixon and Thatcher 
views are too mechanical because they ignore soft 
power. America is an exception, says Josef Joffe, “be-
cause the ‘hyper power’ is also the most alluring and 
seductive society in history. Napoleon had to rely on 
bayonets to spread France’s revolutionary creed. In 
the American case, Munichers and Muscovites  want 
what the avatar of ultra-modernity has to offer.”  20  
 The term “balance of power” is sometimes used 
in contradictory ways. The most interesting use of 
the term is as a predictor about how countries will 
behave; that is, will they pursue policies that will pre-
vent any other country from developing power that 
could threaten their independence? By the evidence 
of history, many believe, the current preponderance 
of the United States will call forth a countervailing 
coalition that will eventually limit American power. 
In the words of the self-styled realist political sci-
entist Kenneth Waltz, “both friends and foes will 
react as countries always have to threatened or real 
predominance of one among them: they will work to 
right the balance. The present condition of interna-
tional politics is unnatural.”  21  
 In my view, such a mechanical prediction misses 
the mark. For one thing, countries sometimes react 
to the rise of a single power by “bandwagoning”— 
that is, joining the seemingly stronger rather than 
weaker side—much as Mussolini did when he de-
cided, after several years of hesitation, to ally with 
Hitler. Proximity to and perceptions of threat also 
affect the way in which countries react.  22  The United 
States benefits from its geographical separation from 
Europe and Asia in that it often appears as a less 
proximate threat than neighboring countries inside 
those regions. Indeed, in 1945, the United States 
was by far the strongest nation on earth, and a 
mechanical application of balancing theory would 
have predicted an alliance against it. Instead, Europe 
and Japan allied with the Americans because the 
Soviet Union, while weaker in overall power, posed 
a greater military threat because of its geographical 
proximity and its lingering revolutionary ambitions. 
. . . Nationalism can also complicate predictions. 
For example, if North Korea and South Korea are 
reunited, they should have a strong incentive to 
maintain an alliance with a distant power such as 
the United States in order to balance their two giant 
neighbors, China and Japan. But intense national-
ism resulting in opposition to an American presence 
could change this if American diplomacy is heavy-
handed. Non-state actors can also have an effect, as 
witnessed by the way cooperation against terrorists 
changed some states’ behavior after September 2001. 
 A good case can be made that inequality of 
power can be a source of peace and stability. No 
matter how power is measured, some theorists 

 
Hard and Soft Power in American Foreign Policy 
115
 argue, an equal distribution of power among major 
states has been relatively rare in history, and efforts 
to maintain a balance have often led to war. On 
the other hand, inequality of power has often led 
to peace and stability because there was little point 
in declaring war on a dominant state. . . . Robert 
Gilpin has argued that “ Pax Britannica and  Pax 
Americana, like the  Pax Romana, ensured an in-
ternational system of relative peace and security.” 
And the economist Charles Kindleberger claimed 
that “for the world economy to be stabilized, there 
has to be a stabilizer, one stabilizer  23  Global gov-
ernance requires a large state to take the lead. But 
how much and what kind of inequality of power is 
necessary—or tolerable—and for how long? If the 
leading country possesses soft power and behaves 
in a manner that benefits others, effective counter-
coalitions may be slow to arise. If, on the other hand, 
the leading country defines its interests narrowly and 
uses its weight arrogantly, it increases the incentives 
for  others to coordinate to escape its hegemony. 
 Some countries chafe under the weight of Amer-
ican power more than others.  Hegemony is some-
times used as a term of opprobrium by political 
leaders in Russia, China, the Middle East, France, 
and others. The term is used less often or less nega-
tively in countries where American soft power is 
strong. If hegemony means being able to dictate, 
or at least dominate, the rules and arrangements 
by which international relations are conducted, as 
Joshua Goldstein argues, then the United States is 
hardly a hegemon today.  24  It does have a predomi-
nant voice and vote in the International Monetary 
Fund, but it cannot alone choose the director. It 
has not been able to prevail over Europe and Japan 
in the World Trade Organization. It opposed the 
Land Mines Treaty but could not prevent it from 
coming into existence. The U.S. opposed Russia’s 
war in Chechnya and civil war in Colombia, but to 
no avail. If hegemony is defined more modestly as a 
situation where one country has significantly more 
power resources or capabilities than others, then it 
simply signifies American preponderance, not neces-
sarily dominance or control.  25  Even after World War 
II, when the United States controlled half the world’s 
economic production (because all other countries 
had been devastated by the war), it was not able to 
prevail in all of its objectives.  26  
 Pax-Britannica in the nineteenth century is often 
cited as an example of successful hegemony, even 
though Britain ranked behind the United States and 
Russia in GNP. Britain was never as superior in pro-
ductivity to the rest of the world as the United States 
has been since 1945, but Britain also had a degree of 
soft power. Victorian culture was influential around 
the globe, and Britain gained in reputation when it 
defined its interests in ways that benefited other na-
tions (for example, opening its markets to imports or 
eradicating piracy). America lacks a global territorial 
empire like Britain’s, but instead possesses a large, 
continental-scale home economy and has greater 
soft power. These differences between Britain and 
America suggest a greater staying power for Ameri-
can hegemony. Political scientist William Wohlforth 
argues that the United States is so far ahead that po-
tential rivals find it dangerous to invite America’s fo-
cused enmity, and allied states can feel confident that 
they can continue to rely on American protection.  27  
Thus the usual balancing forces are weakened. 
 Nonetheless, if American diplomacy is unilat-
eral and arrogant, our preponderance would not 
prevent other states and non-state actors from tak-
ing actions that complicate American calculations 
and constrain our freedom of action.  28  For example, 
some allies may follow the American bandwagon on 
the largest security issues but form coalitions to bal-
ance American behavior in other areas such as trade 
or the environment. And diplomatic maneuvering 
short of alliance can have political effects. As Wil-
liam Safire observed when presidents Vladimir Putin 
and George W. Bush first met, “Well aware of the 
weakness of his hand, Putin is emulating Nixon’s 
strategy by playing the China card. Pointedly, just 
before meeting with Bush, Putin traveled to Shang-
hai to set up a regional cooperation semi-alliance 
with Jiang Zemin and some of his Asian fellow trav-
elers.”  29  Putin’s tactics, according to one reporter, 
“put Mr. Bush on the defensive, and Mr. Bush was 
at pains to assert that America is not about to go it 
alone in international affairs.”  30  
 Pax Americana is likely to last not only because 
of unmatched American hard power but also to the 
extent that the United States “is uniquely capable 
of engaging in ‘strategic restraint,’ reassuring part-
ners and facilitating cooperation.”  31  The open and 
pluralistic way in which our foreign policy is made 
can often reduce surprises, allow others to have a 
voice, and contribute to our soft power. Moreover, 
the impact of American preponderance is softened 
when it is embodied in a web of multilateral institu-
tions that allows others to participate in decisions 
and that act as a sort of world constitution to limit 

116
JOSEPH S. NYE, JR.
the capriciousness of American power. That was 
the lesson we learned as we struggled to create an 
antiterrorist coalition in the wake of the September 
2001 attacks. When the society and culture of the 
hegemon are attractive, the sense of threat and need 
to balance it are reduced.  32  Whether other countries 
will unite to balance American power will depend on 
how the United States behaves as well as the power 
resources of potential challengers.  
Notes
 1.   A. J. Taylor,  The Struggle for Mastery in Europe, 
1848–1918 (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1954), 
xxix.  
 2.   Whether this would change with the proliferation of 
nuclear weapons to more states is hotly debated among 
theorists. Deterrence should work with most states, but the 
prospects of accident and loss of control would increase. 
For my views, see Joseph S. Nye Jr.,  Nuclear Ethics (New 
York: Free Press, 1986).  
 3.   Robert Cooper,  The Postmodern State and the World 
Order (London: Demos, 2000), 22.  
 4.   John Mueller,  Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsoles-
cence of Major War (New York: Basic Books, 1989).  
 5.   Thomas Friedman,  The Lexus and the Olive Tree: 
Understanding Globalization (New York: Farrar, Straus 
and Giroux, 1999),  chapter   6 . 
 6.   Richard N. Rosecrance,  The Rise of the Trading State 
(New York: Basic Books, 1986), 16, 160.  
 7.   Thucydides,  History of the Peloponnesian War, trans. 
Rex Warner (London: Penguin, 1972), book I,  chapter   1 . 
 8.   And in turn, as industrialization progressed and rail-
roads were built, Germany feared the rise of Russia.  
 9.   Henry Kissinger portrays four international systems 
existing side by side: the West (and Western Hemisphere), 
marked by democratic peace; Asia, where strategic conflict 
is possible; the Middle East, marked by religious conflict; 
and Africa, where civil wars threaten weak postcolonial 
states. “America at the Apex,”  The National Interest, sum-
mer 2001, 14. 
 10.  Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye Jr.,  Power and 
Interdependence, 3rd ed. (New York: Longman, 2000), 
 chapter   1 . 
 11.  James Carville quoted in Bob Woodward,  The 
Agenda: Inside the Clinton White House (New York: 
Simon and Schuster, 1994), 302.  
 12.  For a more detailed discussion, see Joseph S. Nye Jr., 
 Bound to Lead: The Changing Nature of American Power  
(New York: Basic Books, 1990),  chapter   2 . This builds 
on what Peter Bachrach and Morton Baratz called the 
“second face of power” in “Decisions and Nondecisions: 
An Analytical Framework,”  American Political Science 
Review, September 1963, 632–42. 
 13.   Védrine,  France in an Age of Globalization, 3.  
 14.   The distinction between hard and soft power is one of 
degree, both in the nature of the behavior and in the tan-
gibility of the resources. Both are aspects of the ability to 
achieve one’s purposes by affecting the behavior of others. 
Command power—the ability to change what others do—
can rest on coercion or inducement. Co-optive power—the 
ability to shape what others want—can rest on the at-
tractiveness of one’s culture and ideology or the ability to 
manipulate the agenda of political choices in a manner that 
makes actors fail to express some preferences because they 
seem to be too unrealistic. The forms of behavior between 
command and co-optive power range along a continuum: 
command power, coercion, inducement, agenda setting, 
attraction, co-optive power. Soft power resources tend 
to be associated with co-optive power behavior, whereas 
hard power resources are usually associated with com-
mand behavior. But the relationship is imperfect. For ex-
ample, countries may be attracted to others with command 
power by myths of invincibility, and command power 
may sometimes be used to establish institutions that later 
become regarded as legitimate. But the general association 
is strong enough to allow the useful shorthand reference to 
hard and soft power.  
 15.   Josef Joffe, “Who’s Afraid of Mr. Big?”  The National 
Interest, summer 2001, 43.  
 16.   See Cooper,  Postmodern State; Bell,  The Coming of 
Post-Industrial Society. 
 17.   Nixon quoted in James Chace and Nicholas X. Rizo-
poulos, “Towards a New Concert of Nations: An American 
Perspective,”  World Policy Journal, fall 1999, 9.  
 18.   Jack S. Levy,  War in the Modern Great Power Sys-
tem, 1495–1975 (Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 
1983), 97.  
 19.   Margaret Thatcher, “Why America Must Remain 
Number One,”  National Review, July 31, 1995, 25.  
 20.   Josef Joffe, “Envy,”  The New Republic, January 17, 
2000, 6.  
 21.   Kenneth Waltz, “Globalization and American 
Power,”  The National Interest, spring 2000, 55–56.  
 22.   Stephen Walt, “Alliance Formation and the Balance 
of Power,”  International Security, spring 1985.  
 23.   Robert Gilpin,  War and Change in World Politics 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1981), 144–45; 
Charles Kindleberger,  The World in Depression, 1929–1939 
(Berkely: University of California Press, 1973), 305.  
  24.   Joshua S. Goldstein,  Long Cycles: Prosperity and 
War in the Modern Age (New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1988), 281.  
 25.   See Robert O. Keohane,  After Hegemony: Coopera-
tion and Discord in the World Political Economy (Princ-
eton: Princeton University Press, 1984), 235.  
 26.   Over the years, a number of scholars have tried 
to predict the rise and fall of nations by developing a 
general historical theory of hegemonic transition. Some 
have tried to generalize from the experience of Portugal, 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
117
Spain, the Netherlands, France, and Britain. Others have 
focused more closely on Britain’s decline in the twentieth 
century as a predictor for the fate for the United States. 
None of these approaches has been successful. Most of the 
theories have predicted that America would decline long 
before now. Vague definitions and arbitrary schematiza-
tions alert us to the inadequacies of such grand theories. 
Most try to squeeze history into procrustean theoretical 
beds by focusing on particular power resources while 
ignoring others that are equally important. Hegemony 
can be used as a descriptive term (though it is sometimes 
fraught with emotional overtones), but grand hegemonic 
theories are weak in predicting future events. See Im-
manuel Wallerstein,  The Politics of the World Economy: 
The States, the Movements, and the Civilizations: Essays 
(New York: Cambridge University Press, 1984), 38, 41; 
George Modelski, “The Long Cycle of Global Politics and 
the Nation-State,”  Comparative Studies in Society and 
History, April 1978; George Modelski,  Long Cycles in 
World Politics (Seattle: University of Washington Press, 
1987). For a detailed discussion, see Nye,  Bound to Lead, 
 chapter   2 .  
 27.   William Wohlforth, “The Stability of a Unipolar 
World,”  International Security 24, 1 (summer 1999): 5–41. 
 28.   Stephen Walt, “Keeping the World ‘Off-Balance’: 
Self-Restraint and US Foreign Policy,” Kennedy School 
Research Working Paper Series 00–013, October 2000.  
 29.   William Safire, “Putin’s China Card,”  New York 
Times, June 18, 2001, A29.  
 30.   Patrick Tyler, “Bush and Putin Look Each Other in 
the Eye,”  New York Times, June 17, 2001, A10.  
 31.   Ikenberry, “Institutions, Strategic Restraint,” 47; also 
Ikenberry, “Getting Hegemony Right,”  The National In-
terest, spring 2001, 17–24.  
 32.   Josef Joffe, “How America Does It,”  Foreign Affairs, 
September–October 1997.  
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
 Below are lists of works on realism categorized by 
theme; these lists only scratch the surface of a very 
rich, extensive literature. As with any such taxonomy, 
the categories overlap as do the works within them. 
Nevertheless, we hope they will be helpful as an over-
view of representative works (or parts of them) that are 
reflective of the realist image of international relations. 
 j  On Classical and Neoclassical Realism  
 j  On Realism and Structural Realism (Neorealism)  
 j  On Power, Balance of Power, Anarchy, and 
Security 
 j  On War, Its Causes, and Remedies  
 j  On Leadership, Hegemony, and Hegemonic 
Stability  
 j  On Power, War, and Peace: Rational Choice and 
Statistical Analyses  
 j  On Deterrence  
 j  On Anarchy and Cooperation under Anarchy  
 j  On Empires  
 j  On International Political Economy  
 j  On Long Cycles, History, and International 
Relations Theory  
 j  Other, Earlier Work in the Field  
 j  Realist Critiques, Challenges, and Modifications  
j On Classical and Neoclassical Realism 
 Bell, Duncan.  Political Thought and International Re-
lations: Variations on a Realist Theme. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 Carr, Edward H.  The Twenty Year’s Crisis. New York: 
Palgrave, 2001. 
 Clausewitz, Carl von.  On War. (Various editions.) 
 Clinton, W. David, ed.  The Realist Tradition and Con-
temporary International Relations. Baton Rouge, 
LA: Louisiana State University Press, 2007. 
 Davis, Reed M.  A Politics of Understanding: The Inter-
national Thought of Raymond Aron. Baton Rouge, 
LA: Louisiana University Press, 2009. 
 Doyle, Michael.  The Ways of War and Peace. New 
York: Norton, 1997. [Part One addresses Realism.] 
 Frankel, Benjamin.  Roots of Realism. London: Rout-
ledge, 1997. 
 Gulick, Edward.  Europe’s Classical Balance of Power. 
New York: W. W. Norton, 1995. 
 Haslam, Jonathan.  No Virtue like Necessity: Realist 
Thought in International Relations Since Machia-
velli. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 2002. 
 Herz, John. “Political Realism Revisited.”  Interna-
tional Studies Quarterly 25, 2,  Symposium in Honor 
of Hans J. Morgenthau (June 1981): 182–97. 
 Hobbes, Thomas.  Leviathan. Various editions. [origi-
nally published 1651]. 
 Kissinger, Henry.  Diplomacy. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1994. 
 ———.  A World Restored; Metternich, Castlereagh 
and the Problems of Peace, 1812–22. Boston, MA: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1957. 
 Larkins, Jeremy.  From Hierarchy to Anarchy: Territory 
and Politics Before Westphalia. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2010. 

118 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Lebow, Richard Ned. “Classical Realism.” In  Interna-
tional Relations Theories: Discipline and Diversity, 
eds. Tim Dunne, Milja Kurki, and Steve Smith. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2007. 
 ———.  Coercion, Cooperation and Ethics in Interna-
tional Relations. New York: Routledge, 2007. 
 Liska, George.  The Ways of Power. Cambridge, Eng-
land: Basil Blackwell, 1990. 
 Lobell, Steven E., Norrin M. Ripsman, and Jeffrey W. 
Taliaferro, eds.  Neoclassical Realism, the State, and 
Foreign Policy . New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2009. 
 Lowell, Gustafson, ed.  Thucydides’ Theory of Inter-
national Relations: A Lasting Possession. Baton 
Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 2000. 
 Machiavelli, Niccolo.  The Prince, The Discourses, The 
Art of War and  History of Florence. Various trans-
lations and editions. 
 Mearsheimer, John J.  Liddell Hart and the Weight of 
History. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988. 
 Morgenthau, Hans [1904–80], and Kenneth Thomp-
son.  Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for 
Power and Peace. 6th ed. New York: Knopf, 1985. 
 Neacsu, Mihaela.  Hans J. Morgenthau’s Theory of 
International Relations. New York: Palgrave Mac-
millan, 2010. 
 Scheuerman, William E.  Hans Morgenthau: Realism 
and Beyond. Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2009. 
 Thucydides.  The Peloponnesian War. New York: The 
Modern Library, 1951. 
 Waltz, Kenneth N.  Man, the State and War. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1959. 
 Williams, Michael.  Realism Reconsidered. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2007.  
j On Realism and Structural 
Realism (Neorealism) 
 Barkin, Samuel J.  Realist Constructivism: Rethinking 
International Relations Theory. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2010. 
 Brecher, Michael, and Frank Harvey.  Realism and In-
stitutionalism in International Studies. Ann Arbor, 
MI: University of Michigan Press, 2002. 
 Buzan, Barry, Charles Jones, and Richard Little.  The 
Logic of Anarchy: Neorealism to Structural Real-
ism, New York: Columbia University Press, 1993. 
 Buzan, Barry, and Ole Waever.  Regions and Powers: 
The Structure of International Security. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Crawford, Robert.  Idealism and Realism in Interna-
tional Relations: Beyond the Discipline. Taylor and 
Francis, 2007. 
 Donnelly, Jack.  Realism and International Relations. 
Boston: Cambridge University Press, 2000. 
 Drezner, Daniel W. “The Realist Tradition in American 
Public Opinion,”  Perspectives on Politics. Vol. 6, 
No. 1 (March 2008). 
 Frankel, Benjamin, ed.  Realism: Restatements and 
 Renewal. London: Frank Cass and Company, 1996. 
 Gilpin, Robert.  War and Change in World Politics. 
Boston: Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
 Glenn, John, Darryl Howlett, and Stuart Poore, eds. 
 Neorealism Versus Strategic Culture. Burlington, 
VT: Ashgate, 2004. 
 Griffiths, Martin.  Realism, Idealism and International 
Politics. New York: Taylor and Francis, 2007. 
 Griffiths, Martin, and Terry O’Callaghan. “Realism.” 
In  An Introduction to International Relations: Aus-
tralian Perspectives, eds. Devetak Richard, Anthony 
Burke, and Jim George. New York: Cambridge 
 University Press, 2007. 
 Hanami, Andrew, ed.  Perspectives on Structural Real-
ism. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. 
 Jervis, Robert.  System Effects. New Jersey: Princeton 
University Press, 1998. 
 Layne, Christopher. “The Unipolar Illusion: Why New 
Great Powers Will Rise,”  International Security 17, 
4 (Spring 1993): 5–51. 
 Lobell, Steven, Ripsman Norrin, and Jeffrey Taliaferro, 
eds.  Neoclassical Realism, the State, and Foreign 
Policy. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2009. 
 Kapstein, Ethan, and Michael Mastanduno, eds.  Uni-
polar Politics: Realism and State Strategies after the 
Cold War. New York: Columbia University Press, 
1999. 
 Kolodziej, Edward.  Security and International Rela-
tions. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2005, Ch. 4. 
 Mastanduno, Michael. “Preserving the Unipolar Mo-
ment. Realist Theories and US Grand Strategy after 
the Cold War.”  International Security 21, 4 (Spring 
1997): 49–88. 
 Mearsheimer, John. “Structural Realism.” In  Interna-
tional Relations Theories: Discipline and Diversity, 
eds. Tim Dunne, Milja Kurki, and Steve Smith. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2007. 
 ———.  The Tragedy of Great Power Politics. New 
York: W. W. Norton and Company, 2001. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
119
 Powell, Robert. “Absolute and Relative Gains in In-
ternational Relations Theory,”  American Political 
Science Review 85, 4 (December 1991): 1303–20. 
 Pressman, Jeremy.  Warring Friends: Alliance Restraints 
in International Politics. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 2008. 
 Rose, Gideon. “Neoclassical Realism and Theories 
of Foreign Policy.”  World Politics 51, 1 (October 
1998): 144–72. 
 Rosecrance, Richard. “Has Realism Become Cost-
Benefit Analysis? A Review Essay.”  International 
Security 26, 2 (Fall 2001): 132–54. 
 Rosenau, James, and Mary Durfee.  Thinking Theory 
Thoroughly: Coherent Approaches to an Incoherent 
World, 2nd ed. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 2000, 
Ch. 3. 
 Ruggie, John. “Continuity and Transformation in 
the World Polity: Toward a Neorealist Synthesis,” 
 World Politics, 35, 2 (January 1983): 261–85. 
 Schroeder, Paul. “Historical Reality vs. Neo-Realist 
Theory,”  International Security, 19, 1 (Summer 
1994): 108–48. 
 Taliaferro, Jeff.  Realism and U.S. Foreign Policy: The 
Primacy of Politics. London: Routledge, 2009. 
 Vazquez, John, and Colin Elman, eds.  Realism and the 
Balancing of Power: A New Debate. Upper Saddle 
River, NJ: Prentice Hall, 2003. 
 Walt, Stephen.  The Origins of Alliances. New York: 
Cornell University Press, 1990. 
 ———. “The Progressive Power of Realism.”  American 
Political Science Review 91, 4 (December 1997): 
931–35. 
 ———.  Revolution and War. New York: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1997. 
 ———. “Why Alliances Endure or Collapse.”  Survival 
39, 1 (Spring 1997): 156–79. 
 Waltz, Kenneth.  Realism and International Politics. 
London: Routledge, 2008. 
 ———. “Realist Thought and Neorealist Theory.” 
 Journal of International Affairs 44 (Spring/Summer 
1990): 21–37. 
 ———. “Structural Realism after the Cold War.”  In-
ternational Security 25, 1 (Summer 2000): 5–41. 
 ———. “The Emerging Structure of International 
Politics.”  International Security 18, 2 (Fall 1993): 
45–73. 
 ———. “The New World Order.”  Millennium 22 
(1993): 187–95. 
 ———.  Theory of International Politics. New York: 
McGraw-Hill (first published by Addison-Wesley), 1979. 
 ———. “Theory of International Relations.” In 
 Handbook of Political Science, Vol. 8, ed. Nelson 
W. Polsby and Fred I. Greenstein. Reading, MA: 
 Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
 Williams, Michael.  The Realist Tradition and the Lim-
its of International Relations. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 2005. 
 ———. “What Is the National Interest? The Neocon-
servative Challenge in IR Theory.”  European Journal 
of International Relations 11, 3 (2005): 307–37. 
 Wohlforth, William. “Realism.” In  The Oxford Hand-
book of International Relations, eds. Reus-Smit 
Christian and Duncan Snidal. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2008. 
 ———. “The Stability of a Unipolar World.”  Interna-
tional Security 24, no. 1 (Summer 1999): 5–41.  
j On Power, Balance of Power, 
Anarchy, and Security 
 Arreguin-Toft, Ivan.  How the Weak Win Wars: A The-
ory of Asymmetric Conflict. New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005. 
 Art, Robert, and Robert, Jervis.  International Politics: 
Enduring Concepts and Contemporary Issues , 7th 
ed. New York: Longman, 2005. Selected articles 
from Kenneth Waltz, Robert Jervis, Stephen Walt, 
and John Mearsheimer. 
 Betts, Richard K.  Enemies of Intelligence: Knowledge 
and Power in American National Security. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 2007. 
 Berenskoetter, Felix, and M. J. Williams, eds.  Power in 
World Politics. New York: Routledge, 2007. 
 Brooks, Stephen G. “Dueling Realisms.”  International 
Organization 51, 3 (Summer 1997): 445–77. 
 Brooks, Stephen, and William Wohlforth.  Worlds Out 
of Balance: International Relations and the Chal-
lenge of American Primacy. Princeton, NJ: Princ-
eton University Press, 2008, Ch. 1, 2, 3, and 7. 
 Brown, Michael, Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven 
Miller, eds.  Perils of Anarchy: Contemporary Real-
ism and International Security. Cambridge, MA: 
The MIT Press, 1995. 
 Cederman, Lars-Erik. “Emerging Polarity: Analyzing 
State-Formation and Power Politics.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 38, 4 (December 1994): 501–33. 
 Christensen, Thomas, and Jack Snyder. “Chain Gangs 
and Passed Bucks: Predicting Alliance Patterns in 
Multipolarity.”  International Organization 44, 2 
(Spring 1990): 137–68. 

120 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Grieco, Joseph. “Anarchy and the Limits of Coop-
eration: A Realist Critique of the Newest Liberal 
Institutionalism,”  International Organization 42, 3 
(Summer 1988): 485–506. 
 Grygiel, Jakub J.  Great Powers and Geopolitical 
Change. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University 
Press, 2006. 
 Gulick, Edward.  The Time Is Now: Strategy and Struc-
ture for World Governance. Lanham, MD: Lexing-
ton Books, 1999, Ch. 2. 
 Jervis, Robert. “Cooperation under the Security 
 Dilemma,”  World Politics 30, 2 (January 1978): 
167–214. 
 ———. “Realism, Game Theory, and Cooperation.” 
 World Politics 40, 3 (April 1988): 317–49. 
 ———. “Realism, Neoliberalism, and Cooperation.” 
 International Security 24, 1 (Summer 1999): 42–63. 
 ———.  Why Intelligence Fails: Lessons from the 
 Iranian Revolution and the Iraq War. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2010. 
 Jervis, Robert, and Jack Snyder, eds.  Dominoes and 
Bandwagons. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1991. 
 Katzenstein, Peter J.  The Culture of National Security. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1996. 
 Kegley, Charles W., Jr., and Gregory A. Raymond. 
 A Multipolar Peace? Great-Power Politics in the 
Twenty-first Century. New York: St. Martin’s, 
1994. 
 Krasner, Stephen D.  Problematic Sovereignty. New 
York: Columbia University, 2001. 
 ———.  Sovereignty. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1999. 
 Lake, David. “Anarchy, Hierarchy, and the Variety of 
International Relations.”  International Organiza-
tion 50, 1 (Winter 1996): 1–34. 
 ———. “Beyond Anarchy: The Importance of Security 
Institutions.”  International Security 26, 1 (Summer 
2001): 129–60. 
 ———.  Hierarchy in International Relations. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2009. 
 Layne, Christopher. “From Preponderance to Offshore 
Balancing: America’s Future Grand Strategy,”  Inter-
national Security 22, 1 (1997): 86–124. 
 ———.  The Peace of Illusions: American Grand Strat-
egy from 1940 to the Present. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2006. 
 ———. “The Unipolar Illusion Revisited: The Coming 
End of the United States’ Unipolar Moment.”  Inter-
national Security 31, 2 (Fall 2006): 7–41. 
 Lebow, Richard Ned, and Thomas Risse-Kappen.  In-
ternational Relations Theory and the End of the 
Cold War. New York: Columbia University Press, 
1995. 
 Legro, Jeffrey W.  Rethinking the World: Great Power 
Strategies and International Order . Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 2005. 
 Lemke, Douglas.  Regions of War and Peace. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
 Lieber, Robert J.  The American Era: Power and Strat-
egy for the 21st Century . New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2005. 
 Little, Richard. “Balance of Power.” In  Contending 
Images of World Politics, eds. Greg Fry and Jacinta 
O’Hagan. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 2000. 
 ———.  The Balance of Power in International Rela-
tions: Metaphors, Myths and Models. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
 Mearsheimer, John. “The False Promise of Interna-
tional Institutions.”  International Security 19, 3 
(Winter 1994–1995): 5–49. 
 ———.  The Tragedy of Great Power Politics. New 
York: W.W. Norton, 2001. 
 ——— and Stephen M. Walt.  The Israel Lobby and 
U.S. Foreign Policy. New York: Farrar, Straus and 
Giroux, 2007. 
 McCormick, John.  The European Superpower. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
 Miller, Benjamin.  States, Nations, and the Great Pow-
ers: The Source of Regional War and Peace. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
 Milner, Helen. “The Assumption of Anarchy in Inter-
national Relations Theory: A Critique.” In  Neoreal-
ism and Neoliberalism: The Contemporary Debate, 
ed. David Baldwin. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1993. 
 Moens, Alexander, Lenard J. Cohen, and Allen G. 
Sens.  NATO and European Security: Alliance Poli-
tics from the End of the Cold War to the Age of 
Terrorism. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003. 
 Molloy, Seán.  The Hidden History of Realism: A Gene-
alogy of Power Politics. New York: Palgrave Mac-
millan, 2006. 
 Montgomery, Evan. “Breaking Out of the Security 
Dilemma: Realism, Reassurance, and the Problem 
of Uncertainty.”  International Security 31, 2 (Fall 
2006): 151–85. 
 Mowle, Thomas, and David Sacko.  The Unipolar 
World: An Unbalanced Future. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2007. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
121
 Niou, Emerson, and Peter Ordeshook. “Stability in 
Anarchic International Systems.”  American Politi-
cal Science Review, 4 (December 1990): 1207–34. 
 Niou, Emerson, Peter Ordeshook, and Rose Gregory, 
eds.  The Balance of Power. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1989. 
 Nye, Joseph S., Jr.  Power in the Global Information 
Age. New York: Routledge, 2004. 
 Odgaard, Liselotte.  The Balance of Power in Asia- 
Pacific Security: US-China Policies on Regional 
 Order. London: Routledge, 2007. 
 Paul, T. V., James Wirtz, and Michel Fortman, eds. 
 Balance of Power: Theory and Practice in the 21st 
Century. Palo Alto, CA: Stanford University Press, 
2004. 
 Rendall, Mathew. “Defensive Realism and the Con-
cert of Europe.”  Review of International Studies 32 
(2006): 523–40. 
 Schweller, Randall. “Bandwagoning for Profit: Bring-
ing the Revisionist State Back In.”  International 
Security 19, 1 (Summer 1994): 72–107. 
 ———.  Deadly Imbalances :  Tripolarity and Hitler’s 
Strategy of World Conquest. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1998. 
 ———. “The Problem of International Order Revis-
ited: A Review Essay,”  International Security 26, 1 
(2001): 161–86. 
 ———. “Unanswered Threats: A Neoclassical Realist 
Theory of Underbalancing.”  International Security 
29, 2 (Fall 2004): 159–201. 
 ———.  Unanswered Threats: Political Constraints on 
the Balance of Power. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2006. 
 Snyder, Glenn. “Mearsheimer’s World-Offensive Real-
ism and the Struggle for Security.”  International 
Security 27, 1 (Summer 2002): 149–73. 
 Stein, Arthur.  Why Nations Cooperate: Circumstance 
and Choice in International Relations. Ithaca, New 
York: Cornell University Press, 1990. 
 Taliaferro, Jeffrey. “Security Seeking under Anarchy: 
Defensive Realism Revisited.”  International Secu-
rity 25, 3 (Winter 2000–2001): 128–61. 
 Tang, Shiping.  A Theory of Security Strategy for Our 
Time: Defensive Realism . New York: Palgrave 
 Macmillan, 2010. 
 Thies, Wallace J.  Why NATO Endures . New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2009. 
 Wagner, Harrison. “The Theory of Games and the Bal-
ance of Power.”  World Politics 38, 4 (July 1986): 
546–76. 
 ———. “What Was Bipolarity,”  International Organi-
zation 47, 1 (Winter 1993): 77–106. 
 Walt, Stephen.  Taming American Power: The Global 
Response to U.S. Primacy. New York: Norton, 2005. 
 Wendt, Alexander, and Michael N. Barnett. “Depen-
dent State Formation and Third World Militariza-
tion.”  Review of International Studies 19 (1993): 
321–47. 
 Wohlforth, William. “The Stability of a Unipolar 
World.”  International Security 24, 1 (Summer 
1999): 5–41.  
j On War, Its Causes, and Remedies 
 Allison, Graham T.  Nuclear Terrorism: The Ultimate 
Preventable Catastrophe. New York: New York 
Times Books/Henry Holt, 2004. 
 Aron, Raymond.  On War. London: Secker and War-
burg, 1958. 
 ———.  Peace and War. Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 
1966. 
 Blum, Gabriella.  Islands of Agreement :  Managing En-
during Armed Rivalries. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2007. 
 Brodie, Bernard.  War and Politics. New York: Macmil-
lan, 1973. 
 Brown, Michael, ed.  Theories of War and Peace. Cam-
bridge, MA: MIT Press, 1998. 
 Brown, Seyom.  The Causes and Prevention of War. 
New York: St. Martin’s, 1987. 
 Copeland, Dale.  The Origins of Major War. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2000. 
 Doyle, Michael W.  Ways of War and Peace. New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1997. 
 Doyle, Michael W., and Nicholas Sambanis.  Making 
War and Building Peace. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 2006. 
 Fearon, James D. “Rationalist Explanations for War.” 
 International Organization 49, 3 (Summer 1995): 
379–414. 
 George, Alexander, and Richard Smoke.  Deterrence 
in American Foreign Policy. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1974. 
 George, Alexander L.  Bridging the Gap: Theory and 
Practice in Foreign Policy. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Institute of Peace, 1993. 
 Gilpin, Robert.  War and Change in World Politics. Cam-
bridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
 Hoffmann, Stanley.  The State of War. New York: 
 Praeger, 1965. 

122 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Hoffmann, Stanley, and David Fidler.  Rousseau on 
 International Relations. Oxford, England: Claren-
don Press, 1991. 
 Holsti, Kalevi J.  Peace and War: Armed Conflicts and 
International Order, 1648–1989. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1991. 
 ———.  The State, War, and the State of War. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 Howard, Michael.  The Causes of War and Other Essays. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1983. 
 ———.  War and the Liberal Conscience. New Bruns-
wick, NJ: Rutgers University Press, 1978. 
 Jervis, Robert.  American Foreign Policy in a New Era. 
New York: Routledge, 2005, Ch. 1. 
 Lebow, Richard Ned.  Between Peace and War. Balti-
more: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 1981. 
 Mayhew, David R. “Wars and American Politics,”  Per-
spectives on Politics 3, 3 (September 2005): 473–93. 
 Miller, Benjamin.  States, Nations, and the Great Pow-
ers: The Sources of Regional War and Peace. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
 Mueller, John.  Quiet Cataclysm: Reflections on the Re-
cent Transformation of World Politics. New York: 
HarperCollins, 1995. 
 ———.  The Remnants of War. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2004. 
 ———.  Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsolescence of 
Major War. New York: Basic Books, 1989. 
 Sagan, Scott, and Kenneth N. Waltz.  The Spread of 
Nuclear Weapons: A Debate. New York: W. W. 
Norton, 1995, 2003. [Waltz presents a realist case 
and Sagan responds with a liberal-institutionalist 
understanding grounded in organization theory.] 
 Schelling, Thomas S.  Arms and Influence. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1966. 
 ———.  The Strategy of Conflict. New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1960. 
 Stoessinger, John G.  Why Nations Go to War. New 
York: St. Martin’s, 1978. 
 Thompson, William R.  On Global War: Historical-
Structural Approaches to World Politics. Columbia: 
University of South Carolina Press, 1990. 
 Van Evera, Stephen.  Causes of War: Power and the 
Roots of Conflict. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1999. 
 ———. “Hypotheses on Nationalism and War.”  Inter-
national Security 18, 4 (Spring 1994): 5–39. 
 Wagner, Harrison.  War and the State: The Theory of 
International Politics. Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
Michigan Press, 2007. 
 Walt, Stephen M.  Revolution and War. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1996. 
 Waltz, Kenneth N. “Kant, Liberalism, and War.” 
 American Political Science Review 56 (June 1962): 
331–40. 
 ———.  Man, the State and War. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1959. 
 Wolfsfeld, Gadi.  Media and the Path to Peace. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
 Wright, Quincy.  A Study of War. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1964.  
j On Leadership, Hegemony, 
and Hegemonic Stability 
 Brooks, Stephen G., and William C. Wohlforth. “In-
ternational Relations Theory and the Case Against 
Unilateralism,”  Perspectives on Politics 3, 3 (Sep-
tember 2005): 509–24. 
 Feste, Karen A.  Intervention: Shaping the Global Or-
der. Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003. 
 Keohane, Robert O.  After Hegemony: Cooperation 
and Discord in the World Political Economy. Princ-
eton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984. 
 ———. “The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and 
Changes in International Economic Regimes, 1967–
1977,” ACIS Working Paper No. 22. Los Angeles: 
University of California Center for International 
and Strategic Affairs, 1980. 
 Lebow, Richard Ned, and Barry S. Strauss, eds.  He-
gemonic Rivalry: From Thucydides to the Nuclear 
Age. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1991. 
 Lepgold, Joseph.  The Declining Hegemon. New York: 
Praeger, 1990. 
 Nau, Henry.  The Myth of America’s Decline. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1990. 
 Nye, Joseph S.  Bound to Lead: The Changing Nature 
of American Power. New York: Basic Books, 1990. 
 Strange, Susan. “The Persistent Myth of Lost Hege-
mony.”  International Organization 41, 4 (Autumn 
1987): 551–74.  
j On Power, War, and Peace: Rational 
Choice and Statistical Analyses 
 Alt, James, Randall Calvert, and Biran Humes. “Repu-
tation and Hegemonic Stability: A Game-Theoretic 
Analysis,”  American Political Science Review 82, 2 
(June 1996): 445–66. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
123
 Bennett, D. Scott, and Allan C. Stam.  The Behavioral 
Origins of War. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Mich-
igan Press, 2004. 
 Berejikian, Jeffrey D.  International Relations Under 
Risk: Framing State Choice. Albany, NY: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 2004. 
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce. “Game Theory, Political 
Economy, and the Evolving Study of War,”  Amer-
ican Political Science Review 100, 4 (November 
2006): 637–42. 
 ———. “Risk, Power Distributions, and the Likeli-
hood of War.”  International Studies Quarterly 25, 
4 (December 1981): 541–68. 
 ———.  The War Trap. New Haven, CT: Yale Univer-
sity Press, 1981. 
 ———. “The War Trap Revisited: A Revised Expected 
Utility Model.”  American Political Science Review 
79, 1 (March 1985): 156–73. 
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, and David Lalman. “Em-
pirical Support for Systemic and Dyadic Explana-
tions of International Conflict.”  World Politics 41, 
1 (October 1988): 1–20. 
 ———.  War and Reason: Domestic and International 
Imperatives. New Haven: Yale University Press, 
1992. 
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, James Morrow, and Ethan 
Zorick. “Capabilities, Perception, and Escalation.” 
 American Political Science Review 91, 1 (March 
1997): 15–27. 
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce and Randolph M. Siver-
son. “War and the Survival of Political Leaders.” 
 American Political Science Review 89, 4 (December 
1995): 841–55. 
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, Randolph M. Siverson, 
and Gary Woller. “War and the Fate of Regimes.” 
 American Political Science Review 86 (1992): 
638–46. 
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, et al., “Capabilities, Per-
ception and Escalation.”  American Political Science 
Review 91, 1 (March 1997): 15–27. 
 Choucri, Nazli, and Robert C. North.  Nations in Con-
flict. San Francisco: W. H. Freeman, 1975. 
 Cioffi-Revilla, Claudio.  The Scientific Measurement 
of International Conflict. Boulder, CO: Lynne 
 Rienner, 1990. 
 Diehl, Paul F., ed.  The Scourge of War: New Exten-
sions on an Old Problem. Ann Arbor, MI: The 
University of Michigan Press, 2004. [This is a  Fest-
schrift of articles honoring the work on warfare of 
J. David Singer (see below).] 
 Fearon, James. “Rationalist Explanations of War,” 
 International Organization  49, 3 (Summer 1995): 
379–414. 
 Geller, Daniel. “Capability Concentration, Power 
Transition, and War.”  International Interactions 
17, 3 (May 1992): 269–84. 
 Gilpin, Robert. “The Theory of Hegemonic War,”  Journal 
of Interdisciplinary History 18 (Spring 1988): 591–614. 
 ———.  War & Change in World Politics. Cambridge 
University Press, 1981. 
 Hagan, Joe D. “Domestic Political Systems and War 
Proneness.”  Mershon International Studies Review 
38 (1994): 183–207. 
 James, Patrick. “Structural Realism and the Causes of 
War.”  Mershon International Studies Review 39, 2 
(October, 1995): 181–208. 
 Kugler, Jacek, and Douglas Lemke, eds.  Parity and 
War: Evaluations and Extensions of the War Led-
ger. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1996. 
 Kydd, Andrew H.  Trust and Mistrust in International 
Relations. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2009. 
 Lemke, Douglas, and Jacek Kugler. “The Evolution of 
the Power Transition Perspective.” In  Parity and 
War, eds. Jacek Kugler and Douglas Lemke. Michi-
gan: University of Michigan Press, 1996. 
 Lemke, Douglas, and Suzanne Werber. “Power Parity, 
Commitment to Change, and War.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 40, 2 (June 1996): 235–60. 
 Levy, Jack. “Alliance Formation and War Behavior: An 
Analysis of the Great Powers, 1495–1975.”  Jour-
nal of Conflict Resolution 25, 4 (December 1981): 
581–613. 
 ———. “Prospect Theory, Rational Choice, and In-
ternational Relations.”  International Studies Quar-
terly 41, 1 (March 1997): 87–112. 
 ———. “The Diversionary Theory of War.” In Ma-
nus Midlarsky,  Handbook of War Studies. Boston: 
 Unwin Hyman, 1989. 
 ———. “Theories of General War.”  World Politics 37, 
3 (April 1985): 344–74. 
 Mansfield, Edward D.  Power, Trade, and War. Princ-
eton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1994. 
 ———. “The Concentration of Capabilities and the 
Onset of War.”  Journal of Conflict Resolution 36, 
1 (March 1992): 3–24. 
 Mansfield, Edward D. and Brian M. Pollins, Eds.  Eco-
nomic Interdependence and International Conflict: 
New Perspectives on an Enduring Debate. Ann 
 Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2002. 

124 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Maoz, Zeev, and Ben D. Mor.  Bound by Struggle: 
The Strategic Evolution of Enduring Rivalries. Ann 
 Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 2002. 
 Mearsheimer, John. “Back to the Future: Instability in 
Europe after the Cold War.”  International Security 
15, 1(Summer 1990): 5–56. 
 Midlarsky, Manus, ed.  The Evolution of Inequality: 
War, State Survival, and Democracy in Compara-
tive Perspective. Stanford, CA: Stanford University 
Press, 1999. 
 ———.  Handbook of War Studies. Three volumes. 
Boston: Unwin Hyman, 1989 (Volume I on inter-
state war) and Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michi-
gan Press, 2000 and 2009 (Volume II on interstate 
war and Volume III on intrastate conflict). 
 ———.  The Killing Trap: Genocide in the Twentieth 
Century. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 2005. 
 ———.  The Onset of World War. Boston: Unwin 
 Hyman, 1988. 
 Morrow, James. “Alliances and Asymmetry: An Alter-
native to the Capability Aggregation Model of Alli-
ances,”  American Journal of Political Science 35, 4 
(November 1991): 904–33. 
 O’Hanlon, Michael E.  The Science of War: Defense 
Budgeting, Military Technology, Logistics, and 
Combat Outcomes. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2009. 
 Powell, Robert. “Stability and the Distribution of Power.” 
 World Politics 48, 2 (January 1996): 239–67. 
 Rapoport, Anatol.  The Origins of Violence. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1989, 1995. 
 Reiter, Dan. “Learning, Realism, and Alliances: The 
Weight of the Shadow of the Past.”  World Politics 
46, 4 (July 1994): 490–526. 
 Richardson, Lewis F.  Arms and Insecurity. Pittsburg, 
PA: Boxwood, 1960. 
 ———.  Statistics of Deadly Quarrels. Chicago: Quad-
rangle Books, 1960. 
 Rummel, Rudolph.  Dimensions of Nations. Beverly 
Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1972. 
 ———.  Understanding Conflict and War (5 volumes). 
Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1975–81. 
 Singer, J. David, Stuart Bremer, and John Stuckey. “Ca-
pability Distribution, Uncertainty, and Major Power 
War, 1820–1965.” In  The Scientific Study of Peace 
and War, eds. John Vazquez and Marie Henehan. 
New York: Macmillan/Lexington Books, 1992, Ch. 2. 
 Singer, J. David, and P. F. Diehl.  Measuring the Cor-
relates of War. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press, 1993. 
 Singer, J. David, and Melvin Small.  The Wages of War, 
1816–1965. New York: John Wiley, 1972. 
 Small, Melvin, and J. David Singer, eds.  International 
War: An Anthology and Study Guide. Homewood, 
IL: Dorsey Press, 1985. 
 Smith, Alastair. “Alliance Formation and War.”  Inter-
national Studies Quarterly 39, 4 (December 1995): 
405–25. 
 Sullivan, Michael P.  Power in Contemporary Interna-
tional Politics. Columbia: University of South Caro-
lina Press, 1990. 
 Trager, Robert F., “Diplomatic Calculus in Anarchy: 
How Communication Matters,”  American Political 
Science Review 104, 2 (May 2010): 347–68. 
 Vasquez, John A. “The Realist Paradigm and Degen-
erate Versus Progressive Research Programs: An 
Appraisal of Neotraditional Research on Waltz’s 
Balancing Proposition.”  American Political Science 
Review 91, 4 (December 1997): 899–912. 
 ———. “The Steps to War: Toward a Scientific Expla-
nation of the Correlates of War Findings.”  World 
Politics 40, 1 (October 1987): 108–45. 
 ———.  The War Puzzle. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993. 
 Wagner, Harrison. “Peace, War, and the Balance of 
Power.”  American Political Science Review 88, 3 
(September 1994): 593–607. 
 Wohlforth, William. “Realism and the End of the Cold 
War.”  International Security 19, 3 (Winter 1994–
1995): 91–129. 
 Woosang, Kim, and James Morrow. “When Do Power 
Shifts Lead to War?”  American Journal of Political 
Science 36, 4 (November 1992): 896–922.  
j On Deterrence 
 Achen, Christopher, and Duncan Snidal. “Rational 
 Deterrence Theory and Comparative Case Studies.” 
 World Politics 41, 2 (January 1989): 143–69. 
 Adams, Karen. “Attack and Conquer? International 
Anarchy and the Offense-Defense-Deterrence Bal-
ance.”  International Security 28, 3 (Winter 2003–04): 
45–83. 
 Coleman, David, and Joseph Siracusa.  Real-World 
Nuclear Deterrence: The Making of International 
Strategy. Westport, CT: Praeger Security Interna-
tional, 2006. 
 Crawford, Timothy W.  Pivotal Deterrence: Third-
Party Statecraft and the Pursuit of Peace. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 2003. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
125
 Danilovic, Vesna.  When the Stakes Are High: 
Deterrence and Conflict among Major Powers. 
Ann  Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press, 
2002. 
 Downs, George. “The Rational Deterrence Debate,” 
 World Politics 41, 2 (January 1989): 225–37. 
 Downs, George, and David Rocke. “Tacit Bargaining 
and Arms Control,”  World Politics 39, 3 (April 
1987): 297–325. 
 Fearon, James. “Signaling Versus the Balance of Power 
and Interests: An Empirical Test of a Crisis Bargain-
ing Model.”  Journal of Conflict Resolution 38, 2 
(June 1994): 236–69. 
 Freedman, Lawrence.  Deterrence. Cambridge, MA: 
Polity Press, 2004. 
 George, Alexander, and Richard Smoke. “Deterrence 
and Foreign Policy.”  World Politics 41, 2 (January 
1989): 170–82. 
 Glaser, Charles. “When Are Arms Races Dangerous? 
Rational Versus Suboptimal Arming.”  International 
Security 28, 4 (Spring 2004): 44–84. 
 Gray, Colin.  Maintaining Effective Deterrence. Carl-
isle, PA: Strategic Studies Institute, U.S. Army War 
College, 2003. 
 Huth, Paul, Christopher Gelpi, and Scott Bennet. “The 
Escalation of Great Power Militarized Disputes: 
Testing Rational Deterrence Theory and Structural 
Realism.”  The American Political Science Review 
87, 3 (September 1993): 609–23. 
 Huth, Paul, and Bruce Russett. “General Deterrence 
between Enduring Rivals: Testing Three Competing 
Models.”  American Political Science Review 87, 
1(March 1993): 61–73. 
 Jervis, Robert.  Perception and Misperception in Inter-
national Politics. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1976. 
 ———. “Rational Deterrence: Theory and Evidence.” 
 World Politics 41, 2 (January 1989): 183–207. 
 Kenyon, Ian, and John Simpson.  Deterrence and the 
New Global Security Environment. New York: 
Routledge, 2006. 
 Lebow, Richard, and Janice Stein. “Rational Deter-
rence Theory: I Think, Therefore I Deter.”  World 
Politics 41, 2 (January 1989): 208–24. 
 Mearsheimer, John J.  Conventional Deterrence. Ithaca, 
NY: Cornell University Press, 1983. 
 Morgan, Patrick M.  Deterrence Now. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
 Morrow, James. “A Spatial Model of International 
Conflict.”  American Political Science Review 80, 4 
(December 1986): 1131–50. 
 ———. “Signaling Difficulties with Linkage in Crisis 
Bargaining.”  International Studies Quarterly 36, 1 
(March 1992): 153–72. 
 Ochmanek, David, and Lowell Schwartz.  The Chal-
lenge of Nuclear-Armed Regional Adversaries. 
Santa Monica, CA: Rand Corp., 2008. 
 Press, Daryl G.  Calculating Credibility: How Leaders 
Assess Military Threats. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 2005. 
 Sartori, Anne E.  Deterrence by Diplomacy. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005. 
 Schelling, Thomas.  The Strategy of Conflict. Cam-
bridge: Harvard University Press, 1980. 
 Smith, Derek D.  Deterring America: Rogue States and 
the Proliferation of Weapons of Mass Destruction. 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006. 
 Weber, Steven. “Realism, Detente, and Nuclear Weap-
ons.”  International Organization 44, 1 (Winter 
1990): 55–82. 
 Zagare, Frank. “Rationality and Deterrence.”  World 
Politics 42, 2 (January 1990): 238–60.  
j On Anarchy and Cooperation 
under Anarchy 
 Brown, Michael E., Sean M. Lynn-Jones, and Steven E. 
Miller, eds.  The Perils of Anarchy: Contemporary 
Realism and International Security. Cambridge, 
MA: MIT Press, 1995. 
 Bull, Hedley.  The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order 
in World Politics. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1977. 
 Buzan, Barry, Richard Little, and Charles Jones.  The 
Logic of Anarchy: Neorealism to Structural Real-
ism. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993. 
 Grieco, Joseph M. “Anarchy and the Limits of Coop-
eration.”  International Organization 42, 3 (Summer 
1988): 485–506. 
 ———.  Cooperation among Nations. Ithaca, NY: Cor-
nell University Press, 1990. 
 Oye, Kenneth A., ed.  Cooperation under Anarchy. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986. 
 Stein, Arthur.  Why Nations Cooperate: Circumstance 
and Choice in International Relations. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1993.  
j On Empires 
 Bacevich, Andrew J.  American Empire: The Realities 
and Consequences of U.S. Diplomacy. Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2002. 

126 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Chomsky, Noam.  Failed States: The Abuse of Power 
and the Assault on Democracy. New York: Henry 
Holt, Metropolitan Books, 2006. 
 ———.  Hegemony or Survival: America’s Quest 
for Global Dominance. New York: Henry Holt, 
 Metropolitan Books, 2003 and 2004. 
 ———.  Imperial Ambitions: Conversations on the 
Post-9/11 World. New York: Henry Holt, Metro-
politan Books, 2005. 
 Daalder, Ivo, and James Lindsay.  America Unbound: 
The Bush Revolution in Foreign Policy. Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley, 2005. 
 Doyle, Michael.  Empires. New York: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 1986. 
 Elliott, J. H.  Empires of the Atlantic World. New Ha-
ven, CT: Yale University Press, 2006. 
 Ferguson, Niall.  Empire: How Britain Made the Mod-
ern World. London: Penguin, 2004. 
 ———.  Empire: The Rise and Demise of the British 
World Order and the Lessons for Global Power. 
New York: Basic Books, 2004. 
 Gordon, Michael, and General Bernard E. Trainor. 
 Cobra II: The Inside Story of the Invasion and Oc-
cupation of Iraq. New York: Pantheon, 2006. 
 Harvey, David.  The New Imperialism. Oxford and 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
 Howe, Stephen.  Empire: A Very Short Introduction. Ox-
ford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2002. 
 Huntington, Samuel.  The Clash of Civilizations and the 
Remaking of the World Order. New York: Simon & 
Schuster, 1996. 
 Ikenberry, John, ed.  America Unrivaled. Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 2002. [See in particular the 
Introduction and Part I on the Durability of Unipo-
larity (Waltz, Kupchan, and Wohlforth).] 
 ———. “America’s Imperial Ambition.” In Art and 
Waltz,  Use of Force, 6th ed. Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 2003. 
 Joffe, Josef.  Überpower: The Imperial Temptation of 
America. New York: Norton, 2006. 
 Johnson, Chalmers.  A Trilogy: Nemesis: The Last Days 
of the American Republic (2007);  The Sorrows of 
Empire: Militarism, Secrecy and the End of the Re-
public (2004); and  Blowback: The Costs and Conse-
quences of American Empire (2000 and 2004).  New 
York: Henry Holt, Metropolitan Books. 
 Kennedy, Paul.  The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers: 
Economic Change and Military Conflict from 1500 
to 2000. New York: Random House, 1987. 
 Kinzer, Stephen.  All the Shah’s Men: An American 
Coup and the Roots of Middle East Terror. New 
York: John Wiley & Sons, 2003. 
 ———.  Overthrow: America’s Century of Regime 
Change from Hawaii to Iraq. New York: Times 
Books, 2006. 
 Kupchan, Charles A.  The Vulnerability of Empire. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1994. 
 Layne, Christopher, and Bradley A. Thayer.  American 
Empire: A Debate. London: Routledge, 2007. 
 ———.  The Peace of Illusions: American Grand Strat-
egy from 1940 to the Present. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2006. 
 Lefever, Ernest W.  America’s Imperial Burden: Is the 
Past Prologue? Boulder, CO: Westview, 1999. 
 Luttwak, Edward N.  The Grand Strategy of the Roman 
Empire: From the First Century A.D. to the Third. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1976. 
 Mearsheimer, John J.  The Tragedy of Great Power 
Politics. New York: W. W. Norton and Company, 
2001. 
 Nexon, Daniel H., and Thomas Wright. “What’s at 
Stake in the American Empire Debate,”  American 
Political Science Review 101, 2 (May 2007): 253–71. 
 Peters, Ralph.  New Glory: Expanding America’s Global 
Supremacy. New York: Penguin Group, 2005. 
 Ricks, Thomas E.  Fiasco: The American Military Ad-
venture in Iraq. New York: Penguin, 2006. 
 Simes, Dimitri. “America’s Imperial Dilemma.”  For-
eign Affairs 82, 6 (2003): 91–100. 
 Snyder, Jack.  Myths of Empire: Domestic Politics and 
International Ambition. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1991. 
 Spruyt, Hendrik.  Ending Empire: Contested Sover-
eignty and Territorial Partition. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2005. 
 Tilly, Charles. “How Empires End.” In K. Barkey and 
M. von Hagen, eds.  After Empire: Multiethnic Soci-
eties and Nation-Building. Boulder, CO: Westview, 
1997: 1–11. 
 Tucker, Robert W., and David Hendrickson.  The Im-
perial Temptation: The New World Order & Amer-
ica’s Purpose. New York: NYU Press, 1992. 
 Walt, Stephen M.  Taming American Power: The 
Global Response to U.S. Primacy. New York: W.W. 
Norton, 2006.  
j On International Political Economy 
 Gilpin, Robert.  Global Political Economy: Under-
standing the International Economic Order. Andhra 
Pradesh, India: Orient Longman, 2003. 
 ———.  The Political Economy of International Re-
lations. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1987. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
127
 ———.  U.S. Power and the Multinational Corpora-
tion. New York: Basic Books, 1975. 
 Grieco, Joseph M.  Cooperation among Nations: Eu-
rope, America, and Non-Tariff Barriers to Trade. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1990. 
 Grieco, Joseph M., and G. John Ikenberry.  State Power 
and World Markets: The International Political Econ-
omy. New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 2002. 
 Katzenstein, Peter J.  Small States in World Markets. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1985. 
 Kindleberger, Charles P.  World Economic Primacy, 
1500–1900. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1996. 
 Knorr, Klaus.  The Power of Nations: The Political 
Economy of International Relations. New York: 
Basic Books, 1975. 
 Krasner, Stephen D.  Structural Conflict: The Third 
World against Global Liberalism. Berkeley: Univer-
sity of California Press, 1985. 
 Mastanduno, Michael. “Do Relative Gains Matter? 
America’s Response to Japanese Industrial Policy.” 
In  Neorealism and Neoliberalism, ed. David Bald-
win. New York: Columbia University Press, 1993: 
250–66. 
 Olson, Mancur.  The Rise and Decline of Nations. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1982. 
 Rosecrance, Richard.  The Rise of the Trading State. 
New York: Basic Books, 1986. 
 Strange, Susan.  States and Markets. London: Pinter, 
1988, 1994. 
 Zysman, John.  Governments, Markets and Growth. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1983.  
j On Long Cycles, History, and 
International Relations Theory 
 Goldstein, Joshua S.  Long Cycles: Prosperity and War 
in the Modern Age. New Haven: Yale University 
Press, 1988. 
 ———. “The Possibility of Cycles in International 
 Relations.”  International Studies Quarterly 35, 4 
(December 1991): 477–80. 
 Haas, Mark L.  The Ideological Origins of Great Power 
Politics, 1789–1989. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 2005. 
 Kennedy, Paul.  The Rise and Fall of the Great Powers. 
New York: Random House, 1987. 
 Modelski, George.  Exploring Long Cycles. Boulder, 
CO: Lynne Rienner, 1987. 
 Modelski, George, and W. R. Thompson.  Leading Sec-
tors and World Powers. Columbia: University of 
South Carolina Press, 1996. 
 ———.  Seapower in Global Politics, 1494–1993. 
 Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1988. 
 Rasler, Karen A., and William R. Thompson.  The 
Great Powers and Global Struggle, 1490–1990. 
Lexington: University Press of Kentucky, 1994. 
 Rosecrance, Richard. “Long Cycle Theory in Interna-
tional Relations.”  International Organization 41, 2 
(Spring 1987): 283–301. 
 Thompson, William R. “Long Waves, Technological 
Innovation, and Relative Decline.”  International 
Organization 44, 2 (Spring 1990): 201–33.  
j Other, Earlier Work in the Field 
 Claude, Inis.  Power and International Relations. New 
York: Random House, 1962. 
 Herz, John.  Political Realism and Political Idealism. 
Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1951. 
 ———. “Political Realism Revisited.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 25, 2 (June 1981): 182–241. 
 Hoffmann, Stanley. “Raymond Aron and the Theory 
of International Relations.”  International Studies 
Quarterly 29, 1 (March 1985): 13–27. 
 Iklé, Fred C.  How Nations Negotiate. New York: 
Harper & Row, 1964. 
 Kaplan, Morton.  System and Process in International 
Politics. New York: John Wiley, 1957. 
 Kissinger, Henry.  A World Restored. New York: Gros-
set and Dunlap, 1964. 
 Liska, George.  Nations in Alliance. Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1968. 
 Mackinder, Halford J. “The Round World and the 
Winning of the Peace.”  Foreign Affairs 21, 4 (July 
1943): 595–605. 
 Morgenthau, Hans. J.  In Defense of the National Inter-
est. New York: Knopf, 1951. 
 ———.  Politics among Nations, 5th ed. New York: 
Knopf, 1978. 
 Osgood, Robert E.  Alliances and American Foreign 
Policy. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1967. 
 Osgood, Robert E., and Robert W. Tucker.  Force, 
Order and Justice. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Press, 1967. 
 Riker, William H.  A Theory of Political Coalitions. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1962. 
 Rosecrance, Richard.  Action and Reaction in World 
Politics. Boston: Little, Brown, 1963. 
 Russett, Bruce M.  International Regions and the In-
ternational System. Chicago: Rand McNally, 1967. 
 Tucker, Robert W.  The Inequality of Nations. New 
York: Basic Books, 1977. 

128 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Waltz, Kenneth N.  Foreign Policy and Democratic Pol-
itics :  The American and British Experience. Boston: 
Little, Brown, 1967. 
 Wolfers, Arnold.  Discord and Collaboration. Balti-
more: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1962. 
 Wright, Quincy.  The Study of International Relations. 
New York: Appleton-Century-Crofts, 1955.  
j Realist Critiques, Challenges, 
and Modifications 
 Ashley, Richard K. “Political Realism and Human In-
terests.”  International Studies Quarterly 25, 2 (June 
1981): 204–36. 
 Baldwin, David A., ed.  Neorealism and Neoliberalism: 
The Contemporary Debate. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1993. 
 Beer, Francis A., and Robert Hariman, eds.  Post-Realism: 
The Rhetorical Turn in International Relations. East 
Lansing, MI: Michigan State University Press, 1996. 
 Grieco, Joseph M. “Anarchy and the Limits of Coop-
eration: A Realist Critique of the Newest Liberal 
Institutionalism.”  International Organization 42, 3 
(Summer 1988): 485–506. 
 ———.  Cooperation among Nations. Ithaca, NY: Cor-
nell University Press, 1990. 
 ———. “The Relative-Gains Problem for International 
Cooperation.”  American Political Science Review 
87, 3 (September 1993): 729–35. 
 Haas, Ernst B. “The Balance of Power: Prescription, 
Concept or Propaganda?”  World Politics 5, 4 (July 
1953): 442–77. 
 Hoffmann, Stanley. “Obstinate or Obsolete? The Fate 
of the Nation-State and the Case of Western Eu-
rope.”  Daedalus 95 (Summer 1966): 862–915. 
 Kegley, Charles W., ed.  Controversies in International 
Relations Theory: Realism and the Neoliberal Chal-
lenge. New York: St. Martin’s, 1995. 
 Keohane, Robert O.  After Hegemony: Cooperation and 
Discord in the World Political Economy.  Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1984. 
 ———.  International Institutions and State Power. 
Boulder, CO: Westview, 1989. 
 ———. ed.  Neorealism and Its Critics. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1986. 
 ———. “The Theory of Hegemonic Stability and 
Changes in International Economic Regimes.” In 
 Change in the International System, ed. Ole  Holsti, 
Randolph M. Siverson, and Alexander George. 
Boulder, CO: Westview, 1980. 
 ———. “Theory of World Politics: Structural Real-
ism and Beyond.” In  Political Science: State of the 
Discipline, ed. Ada W. Finifter. Washington, DC: 
American Political Science Association, 1983. 
 Keohane, Robert O., and Joseph S. Nye.  Power and 
Interdependence. Boston: Little, Brown, 1977. 
 Lyons, Gene M., and Michael Mastanduno, eds.  Be-
yond Westphalia: State Sovereignty and Interna-
tional Intervention. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins 
University Press, 1995. 
 Nye, Joseph S. “Neorealism and Neoliberalism.” 
 World Politics  40, 2 (January 1988): 235–51. 
 Patomški, Heikki.  After International Relations: Criti-
cal Realism and the (Re)construction of World Poli-
tics. London, New York: Routledge, 2002. 
 Powell, Robert. “Absolute and Relative Gains in In-
ternational Relations Theory.”  American Political 
Science Review 85 (1991): 1303–20. 
 ———. “Anarchy in International Relations Theory: 
The Neorealist-Neoliberal Debate.”  International 
Organization 48 (1994): 313–44. 
 Rapoport, Anatol.  Strategy and Conscience. New 
York: Schocken Books, 1969. 
 Rosecrance, Richard, and Arthur Stein.  The Domestic 
Bases of Grand Strategy. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1993. 
 Snidal, Duncan. “Relative Gains and the Pattern of 
International Cooperation.”  American Political Sci-
ence Review 85, 3 (September 1991): 701–26. 
 Spruyt, Hendrik.  The Sovereign State and Its Com-
petitors. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1994. 
 Vasquez, John A. “The Realist Paradigm and Degen-
erative Versus Progressive Research Programs: An 
Appraisal of Neotraditional Research on Waltz’s 
Balancing Proposition.”  American Political Science 
Review 91, 4 (December 1997): 899–912. 
 ———.  The War Puzzle. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993. 
 Waltz, Kenneth N. “Reflections on  Theory of Inter-
national Politics: Response to My Critics.” In ed. 
Robert O. Keohane,  Neorealism and Its Critics. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1986. 
 Wendt, Alexander E. “The Agent-Structure Problem 
in International Relations Theory.”  International 
Organization 41, 3 (Summer 1987): 335–70.  

 Liberalism: 
Interdependence and 
Global Governance 
 MAJOR ACTORS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
 Realists are primarily interested in power and the balance of power— explanations 
of political and economic competition, war, and other conflicts that are so preva-
lent in international relations. Liberals, by contrast, are primarily interested in 
explaining the conditions under which international cooperation or collaboration 
becomes possible. For many realists, particularly structural realists, the interna-
tional system is the starting point for analysis and factors at the unit or state-societal 
level of analysis are of secondary importance. For many theorists in the liberal 
tradition, however, the opposite is the case, with such “second-” and “first-image” 
factors  1  being critical to explaining international outcomes. The liberal image of 
international relations is a large, seemingly all-inclusive tent—not just states, but 
also international and nongovernmental organizations and the often cross-cutting 
networks that connect them. With liberal lenses firmly in place, the focus may be on 
democratic peace theory, integration, interdependence, regime theory, neoliberal 
institutionalism, or the ways and means of global governance. 
 Underlying the liberal image of international relations are four key assumptions. 
First, states as well as non-state, transnational actors are important entities in world 
politics. International organizations, for example, may on certain issues be inde-
pendent actors in their own right. Similarly, other nongovernmental, transnational 
organizations such as multinational corporations (MNCs) and human rights and 
environmental groups play important roles in world politics. On occasion even in-
dividuals can have a significant impact. The liberal image is therefore a pluralist one 
in which multiple kinds of state and non-state actors play substantial roles in world 
politics. Indeed, many liberals prefer  world or  global  rather than  international  politics 
since the latter term tends to privilege the state over international and nongovernmen-
tal organizations, groups, and individuals. To these liberals, referring to international 
politics is really a euphemism for interstate politics—an understanding more suited 
3
 CHAPTER
129

130
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
to realists. The analytical challenge for liberals is to explain how, to what extent, and 
under what circumstances these diverse actors influence world politics. 
 Second, many liberals see economic or other forms of interdependence or in-
terconnectedness among both state and non-state actors as tending to have if not a 
pacifying, then at least a moderating effect on state behavior. As the world is ever 
more closely bound with a veritable cobweb not only of economic, but also social, 
cultural, and political or transnational ties, the literature on interdependence natu-
rally flows into discussion of the process of globalization. In an increasingly global-
ized world, liberals see states, international and nongovernmental organizations, 
multinational corporations, groups, and individuals operating in complex arrays of 
overlapping or cross-cutting coalitions and networks. The growth of transnational 
networks oriented around common strategies and goals epitomizes the rapid ex-
pansion of “sovereignty-free” actors and the coining of the term  global civil society . 
On the other hand, terrorist and criminal organizations could be viewed as the dark 
side of globalization, posing various degrees of threats to states and peoples. 
 Third, for liberals the agenda of international politics is extensive. The liberal 
rejects the notion that the agenda of international politics is dominated only by 
military-security issues. The distinction between high and low politics is falsely 
drawn. Economic, social, and environmental issues also matter. Sometimes they 
also can be understood as security issues in their own right, perhaps even more 
salient than other military-related security matters. 
 Fourth, as opposed to structural realists with their “top-down” view on how 
anarchy and the distribution of capabilities affect state behavior, many liberals take 
an “inside-out” view that examines how factors at the state-society and individual 
levels of analysis affect international relations and outcomes. For its part, democratic 
peace theory attempts to show how political culture, values, and domestic political 
structures influence the prospects for international peace. Other work examines the 
role of perception, small-group behavior, and decision-making processes. Particular 
policies may enhance the bureaucratic power, prestige, and standing of one organiza-
tion or institution at the expense of others or of the state as a whole. Decision-making 
processes associated with coalition and counter-coalition building, bargaining, and 
compromising may not yield a best or optimal decision for a particular state. 
 Fifth, the key analytical task is to discover under what conditions international 
collaboration, if not peace, might be achieved. The role of international organiza-
tions is a major focus, for example, in the work on regional integration and inter-
dependence. The task is to go beyond mere description and achieve explanation. 
Toward this end, for example,  neoliberal institutionalists (as do structural realists) 
utilize the rational actor assumption to help generate testable hypotheses on how 
international organizations can affect states’ calculations of interests. The staff of 
a particular international organization may play an important role in monitoring 
and adjudicating disputes arising from decisions made by constituent states. Or the 
organization may have a great deal of power in terms of agenda setting as well as 
in providing information that may influence how states define their interests. Other 
liberals note that calculations of interest or utility—gains and losses—can also be 
affected by misunderstanding or misperceptions on the part of state decisionmakers 
as a result of incomplete information, bias, or uncertainty about cause-and-effect 
relations related to policy options under consideration. 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
131
 Even in the absence of a formal international organization, scholars of regime 
theory argue that collaboration is possible where principles, norms, and actors’ ex-
pectations converge on a particular issue area. Liberalism therefore takes from  game 
theory a  positive-sum perspective—the size of the pie can be increased. Absolute 
gains (all can win) are opposed to the realist assumption of  relative gains that 
supposedly drives interstate competition—when one gains or loses disproportion-
ately more than others or when one’s gain is another’s loss—a  zero-sum outcome. 
Despite their differences, integration, interdependence, regime, and neoliberal insti-
tutionalist theories all examine the possibilities of upgrading the common interest 
to include the impact of nonmaterial factors such as ideas and norms. Hence, some 
liberals incorporate social constructivist understandings within their work. 
 In sum, for liberals human agents matter as we take into account how they 
relate to the material or ideational factors that may facilitate or constrain their con-
duct. Liberal theorists dealing with agency may refer to states and international and 
nongovernmental organizations as actors, but they also are prone to look within the 
state or other institutions to find agency at the human level of individuals and small 
groups. While cognizant of the impact of system-level influences, these efforts chal-
lenge the realist assumption of a rational, unified decisionmaker except as a meth-
odological starting point to understand the role of international organizations and 
regimes in enhancing collaboration among states. The liberal approach to theory, 
then, can be characterized as building separate islands of theory (each explaining 
some things but not others), perhaps with the eventual goal of connecting them 
together within a more general theory of international politics. Reaching this goal is 
by no means easy, particularly given the non-additivity of the parts—a multiplicity 
of diverse theories not so easily linked or joined to comprise a coherent whole. 
 Compared to structural realists and many economic structuralists in particu-
lar, liberals tend to be voluntarists—more open to including human agency as an 
important factor in the theories they formulate. While globalization is not without 
its costs, liberals tend to be cautiously optimistic that international collaboration 
or partial global governance is achievable. Explaining the logic and identifying 
the circumstances under which this can be achieved is their major theoretical and 
empirical challenge.  
INTELLECTUAL PRECURSORS AND INFLUENCES 
 With realism it was relatively easy to identify intellectual precursors. In the case 
of liberalism, however, the impact of particular theorists has tended to be more 
indirect. Many of these writers have not been observers of international relations 
 per se but have been economists, social scientists, theologians, or political scientists 
primarily interested in domestic politics. Their one common denominator, how-
ever, has been an interest not simply in the role of the state, but also in important 
roles played by individuals and groups. 
 Agency—a focus on actors—is an important theme among these intellectual 
precursors even as they also have examined the impact societal, systemic, or struc-
tural factors have had on agents, and vice versa. Although some aspects of liberal 
thought also have influenced realist scholars—particularly classical realists—
we focus here on those aspects of liberalism that have informed work on 

132
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
transnationalism, interdependence, democratic peace theory, global governance, 
and decision making. First, however, we discuss briefly the tradition of political 
thought known as Stoicism. 
Stoicism
 Realism emphasizes what separates political entities and people.  Idealism is an-
other tradition of political thought that emphasizes what unites people. From this 
perspective, ideas are an important factor that significantly influences how we live 
our lives, how we relate to others, and the institutions we construct. Idealism—an 
important, underlying influence on contemporary liberal thought—can be traced 
back in western philosophy to stoicism, a school of thought that arose in Greece 
around 300  b.c. Today the term  stoicism is generally associated with the idea that 
one should bravely face life’s adversities, accept pain with grace, and persevere 
despite all odds. More important for our purposes, however, the Stoics also argued 
that we are all part of a larger community of humankind, regardless of our different 
political communities and cultures. Stoic ideas were very influential in republican 
and imperial Rome—Emperor Marcus Aurelius and Paul of Tarsus (the Christian 
St. Paul) were among those identified as stoics. The universalism in stoic thought 
anticipated the worldviews of the seventeenth-century Dutch legal writer Hugo 
Grotius and the nineteenth-century German scholar Immanuel Kant. 
 For the Stoics, the ability to reason is a quality shared by all humans. It is this 
reasoning or thinking capacity that distinguishes  homo sapiens from other ani-
mals. Reason is a divine spark, a reflection of the God within us. Many followers 
of stoicism thought of the divine as the source of the laws of nature. Humanity’s 
universal ability to reason and the universal applicability of these laws of nature led 
the Stoics to emphasize the essential equality of people and the factors that unite 
them as opposed to what divides them, whether those divisions are geographic, 
cultural, ethnic, or political. Although they did not use the term, stoicism had a 
very transnationalist perspective.  
Liberalism—Classical and Social Variants 
 Influenced directly or indirectly by thought rooted in stoicism,  liberalism is a tradition 
of political thought composed of a set of practical goals and ideals. For classical lib-
eral theorists, the individual is the most important unit of analysis and the claimant of 
rights. The state is to play a minimal role in a classical-liberal society—the domain of 
 laissez faire , principally acting as arbiter in disputes between individuals and ensuring 
the maintenance of conditions under which individuals can enjoy their rights to the 
fullest. This emphasis on the individual and the limited state is perhaps best exempli-
fied in John Locke’s  Second Treatise on Government , published in England in 1689. 
 The classical-liberal preference for the role of the state limited to maintaining 
a stable political, social, and economic environment within which individuals can 
interact and pursue their chosen ends underlies much of contemporary social- 
conservative thought, even though many of this persuasion avoid the term  liberal 
lest they be confused with those seeking what they consider too great a role in social 
life for the state and the international organizations to which they belong. 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
133
 Social liberals (progressives or social democrats), by contrast, typically see a 
larger role for the state and global governance structures and processes as means 
to advance individuals and the human conditions that define the general welfare. 
These are important differences among liberal theorists that also influence the 
direction they take in their theoretical work—the social or societal questions (the 
dependent variables) they think important and thus choose to explore. Even as they 
differ normatively on the degree to which people should be assisted by governing 
structures or, instead, left as much as possible to their own devices, both classical 
liberals (social conservatives) and social liberals (social democrats or progressives) 
do agree on the primacy of the individual in political life—a perspective that makes 
them all “liberals” in the broadest sense of the term. To liberals, individuals (and 
groups of individuals) matter. What they think and do also matter in the theories 
liberals formulate, whether these “liberal” scholars are socially conservative or 
progressive in their political orientations. 
 Classical liberalism as an ideology came to dominate much of the political and 
economic thought in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, particularly in Great 
Britain and the United States. Liberal concerns for the individual were reinforced by 
Adam Smith’s and David Ricardo’s works in economics. They emphasized the im-
portant role of the individual entrepreneur who should be relatively unconstrained 
by a minimalist state—a major theme in early capitalist writings. David Hume’s 
contribution to logic and the philosophy of science similarly stressed the impor-
tance of the individual as the unit of analysis. The nineteenth-century essays of 
such  utilitarians as Jeremy Bentham and John Stuart Mill viewed people as rational, 
calculating individuals capable of deciding what was best for themselves without 
much government interference. Classical liberalism reigned supreme, virtually un-
challenged in the United States and Great Britain until the twentieth century. Both 
domestic and international trade and investment were ideally to be free of govern-
ment interference—economic domains open to individual and corporate choice. 
 The spirit of liberalism and its emphasis on the individual pervaded all spheres 
of life and thought—scientific, political, economic, social, and religious. The 
Industrial Revolution, however, eventually resulted in social modifications of 
classical-liberal doctrine which, although retaining an emphasis on the individual, 
now allowed the state to be given a more activist role in order to mitigate the most 
harmful effects of unrestrained economic competition. Still elevating the individual, 
this new strain of  social liberalism also brought to bear the resources of government 
to help individuals realize their potential. Whether of the classical or social variety, 
as noted above, individuals (and individualism) mattered to liberals of all stripes. 
 For classical liberals, the minimal state was a possibility (and necessity) because 
it was assumed that no particular government had a monopoly on sound judgment. 
Just as the competition of the marketplace would produce the best goods, so too 
would the marketplace of political ideas eventually produce the best governance, 
the balance held by the governed. Consistent with this logic, liberals emphasized 
the positive role played by public opinion in providing guidance to state officials 
and producing good public policy, including foreign policy. The state, therefore, 
was not some unitary, solitary actor pursuing its own course independently of 
the public. To the contrary, it was composed of numerous persons representing a 
multitude of interests. Out of the clash of ideas and interests would come political 

134
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
consensus. The attainment of this consensus, therefore, presumed faith that an 
underlying harmony of interests existed for the greater good to the benefit of the 
greatest number—the utilitarian ideal.  
Immanuel Kant 
 This view of the domestic polity was carried over into the international realm. Liberals 
recognized that war was a defining characteristic of international politics. They also 
agreed with realists that the state of anarchy that characterized world (as opposed to 
domestic) politics contributed to suspicion and distrust among states, posing an obsta-
cle to cooperation and peace. But just as it was assumed that there could be a harmony 
of interests among individuals within a given state, so too did liberal theorists argue 
that a harmony of interests among states was possible. The most famous argument in 
this genre of thought was made by the Prussian scholar Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) 
whose writings have influenced some contemporary democratic-peace theorists. 
 The stoic roots of Kant’s thoughts on world politics are quite clear as evidenced 
by his universalism, his concept of world citizenship, and his advocacy of a federa-
tion among states as a means to peace. Kant’s vision is of a diverse world in which 
human beings can live freely and without war. Kant was no head-in-the-clouds 
idealist, and he realized the transformation of world politics was neither imminent 
nor easy to achieve. The sovereign state was a reality, and any plan to deal with 
international anarchy had to take states into account. Even if it were possible to 
eliminate states and create an empire, this would not solve the problem of war be-
cause warring groups could still arise within any such empire. 
 Kant proposed instead something less than an empire—a league or federation 
of nations constituted as republics (representative democracies)—an arrangement 
that would leave sovereign states intact, but alter their collective character. How 
did Kant reach this conclusion? On the one hand, he recognized the continuous 
threat of war due to the condition of anarchy in international relations. On the 
other hand, Kant disagreed with Thomas Hobbes in that he believed that the 
gradual transformation of human beings and international society was possible. Put 
another way, Kant shared Jean-Jacques Rousseau’s somewhat more optimistic as-
sessment of prospects for altering the human condition—rejection of an inherently 
negative characterization of human nature with a focus instead on the domestic 
societal and international environment within which individuals and the republics 
they comprise are immersed. Over time, Kant maintained, discord among human 
beings will lead them to learn ways to avoid future wars. As reasoning beings con-
cerned with self-preservation and self-improvement, people will learn that states 
of republican form are essential to securing internal peace and realizing justice in 
society. This emphasis on learning is also shared by many present-day liberals. 
 Clearly reflecting the democratic and social-contract influence of Rousseau, 
Kant claimed that the best way to ensure progress toward peace is to encourage 
the growth of republics that manifest the popular will. In a statement echoed by 
many political leaders to this day, Kant argued that a federation of republics would 
be inclined toward peace and more likely to take international law seriously than 
would monarchies or empires. As the number of republics gradually increased, the 
world would move ever closer to a “perpetual peace.” By transforming the state, 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
135
the violent manifestations of international anarchy can eventually be overcome. 
Just as the ethical standing of individuals can improve by their subscription to uni-
versal principles to guide their behavior, so too can states constituted as republics 
(and their agents) choose to act morally—opting for peace rather than war—in their 
relations with other states. This unit-level explanation of how international peace 
can be achieved is a basis underlying the prolific democratic-peace literature that 
spans the twentieth and twenty-first centuries.  
Richard Cobden 
 Economics and the welfare of human beings matter to liberals. Richard Cobden (1804–
1865) was the foremost exponent of what could be called commercial liberalism. Other 
prominent eighteenth- and nineteenth-century writers associated with this perspective 
include Adam Smith, Jeremy Bentham, Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Montesquieu, and 
John Stuart Mill. Cobden made three ambitious claims concerning the impact of free 
trade on peace. First, he asserted that most wars were fought by states to achieve their 
mercantilist goals. Free trade as part of a capitalist system would show leaders a much 
more effective—and peaceful—means to achieve national wealth. Second, even in the 
case of wars not arising from commercial rivalry, states with domestic interests that 
suffer from the interruption of free trade caused by war would be less inclined to resort 
to hostilities because of the losses they would sustain. Finally, Cobden argued that with 
an expansion of free trade, contact and communication among peoples would expand. 
This in turn would encourage international friendship and understanding. This posited 
relation between increased economic interdependence and international peace has been 
a recurrent liberal proposition in works we will examine subsequently.  
Joseph Schumpeter 
 Kant’s belief in the power of democracy combined with Cobden’s faith that unre-
stricted capitalism would enhance the possibility of international harmony came to-
gether in the works of Joseph Schumpeter (1883–1950). Contrary to the arguments 
of Marxist-Leninists, while arms sellers or “merchants of death” might register 
some narrow, short-term gains, the net effect of war is to destroy capital—the pro-
ductive capacity of economies. Because it is the capitalists who own this productive 
capacity, their real interest is in protecting and expanding capital, not destroying 
it. According to this reasoning, peace is served by the spread of capitalism and 
commercial values that displace heroism, gallantry, glory, and other obsolete, war-
oriented values of an earlier pre-capitalist or feudal period. In sum, democratic 
capitalism leads to peace. The arguments of Kant, Cobden, and Schumpeter have 
one thing in common: It is the nature of state and society or the political and eco-
nomic regime and the ideas underpinning them that are responsible for increasing 
or decreasing the likelihood of war.  
Interest-Group Liberalism 
 We have to be careful in thinking about societal or structural representations so 
that we don’t overlook agents at the individual and small-group levels of analysis 
that also matter in liberal understandings. Indeed, the liberalism we find among 

136
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
many American and European IR scholars is not unrelated to the way they also see 
domestic politics. 
 It is a multi-actor pluralism of individuals in groups interacting, forming coali-
tions and counter-coalitions in the domestic arenas of politics, that many liberal 
scholars project as capturing the essence of politics across the entire globe as well. 
From this perspective, international political processes are not all that different from, 
and may even be considered an extension of, those conducted within the boundar-
ies of a given state. As a result, many liberals reject the realist distinction between 
“international” and “domestic” politics. For the liberal, one is an extension of the 
other. This perspective is quite evident in much of the literature on decision making 
and transnationalism that disaggregates the state-as-actor into its component parts, 
placing particular emphasis on agency—the decisionmakers themselves. 
 The connection of interest-group liberalism to earlier currents in eighteenth- 
and nineteenth-century liberal thought is apparent. Theodore Lowi observes that 
interest-group liberalism assumes the “role of government is one of assuring access 
to the most effectively organized, and of ratifying the agreements and adjustments 
worked out among competing leaders and their claims.” Second, there is a “belief 
in a natural harmony of group competition.” Finally, interest group liberalism de-
fines both “the policy agenda and the public interest . . . in terms of the organized 
interests in society.”  2  All three observations are consistent with the liberal notions 
of (1) the state as neutral arbiter; (2) the potential for a natural harmony of interest, 
in this case among groups of individuals; and (3) public concern for, and participa-
tion in, a policy process not restricted to elites. 
 In the image of politics held by adherents of interest-group liberalism, conflict 
and competition as well as cooperation and collaboration among interest groups 
thus play an important role. There is a proliferation of interest groups. Individuals 
form interest groups in attempts to outmaneuver, end-run, or overwhelm oppos-
ing groups or coalitions. Viewed in this way, politics is a game, but a game with 
very real stakes to be won or lost. Authoritative choices (or decisions) are made by 
government decisionmakers as the outcome of this process. 
 David Truman (1913–2003), whose writings are in the school of interest-group 
liberalism, acknowledges his intellectual debt to Arthur F. Bentley (1870–1957), 
whose 1908 volume  The Process of Government served as “the principal bench 
mark for my thinking.” Truman observes that “the outstanding characteristic of 
American politics” is the “multiplicity of co-ordinate or nearly co-ordinate points 
of access to governmental decisions.” He proceeds to describe the conflictual nature 
of American politics, but comments that “overlapping membership among orga-
nized interest groups” provides “the principal balancing force in the politics of a 
multi-group society such as the United States.” 
 The writings of Harold Lasswell (1902–1978) and Robert Dahl (b. 1915) are 
also illustrative of this image. Dahl describes American politics as a “system in 
which all the active and legitimate groups in the population can make themselves 
heard at some crucial stage in the process of decision.” Noting that it is a decentral-
ized system, he observes that “decisions are made by endless bargaining.” Groups 
are central to the process. Rather than either majority rule or minority rule, Dahl 
argues that the term  minorities rule is the more accurate. Politically active groups—
minorities—are the most influential. 

Integration
137
 Thus, the image of politics that interest-group liberals hold is of a fragmented 
political system, one in which multiple actors compete. Agents matter to liberals 
at least as much (and for many a good deal more) than societal factors, systems, 
or structures do. The image is shared by most American political scientists even 
though their views may differ greatly on other conceptual and normative matters. 
The scholars mentioned are not, of course, creators of this image of American poli-
tics. Certainly  The Federalist Papers , especially the writings of James Madison and 
later those of the Frenchman Alexis de Tocqueville, expose one to a good dose of 
this pluralist view of American domestic politics. 
 In sum, what the group is to the interest-group liberal, the individual is to the 
liberal philosopher. What they have in common is agreement on the fragmented 
nature of the state and society and the potential for harmony to develop out of 
competition and conflict. The state is not an independent, coherent, autonomous 
actor separated or aloof from society. Its primary function is as arbiter of con-
flicting demands and claims, or as an arena for the expression of such interests. 
Furthermore, the focus of analysis is less on the state and more on both competition 
and cooperation among individuals and groups as agents of both state and non-
state actors in world politics. 
 Let us now turn to an overview of theoretical efforts that reflect the influence 
of the liberal tradition in an attempt to understand how international order and 
collaboration can be achieved to enhance the prospects for material welfare and 
peace. Our discussion presents these theorists in roughly the chronological order in 
which their works appeared. As will become evident, their efforts to a certain extent 
reflect the international problems confronted at the time of their research and writ-
ing, running from the end of World War II and the Cold War that followed to the 
current twenty-first-century challenges posed by globalization.  
INTEGRATION
 The League of Nations established in the aftermath of World War I as an effort 
to maintain the peace drew upon European diplomatic experience—the post- 
Napoleonic peace found in a Concert of Europe—and reflected liberal ideas found 
in Kant and others. Influenced among others by American President Woodrow 
Wilson’s liberal thought—he was not alone in these views as is often suggested— 
negotiators moved away from alliances (and secret agreements among them that 
were thought to have triggered World War I), power, and the balance of power. 
These were understood to be more the cause of war than a mechanism for main-
taining the peace. It was instead to be a  collective security based on the rule of law. 
 Aggression was prohibited (and war later declared illegal). Law-abiding states in 
these collective security arrangements were to come together as collective law en-
forcers against any state committing aggression. Realist critics observed that such 
idealism posed no effective obstacles to stop aggression by Germany, Italy, Japan, 
and other states joining with them. 
 This failed experience with collective security through the rule of law was at 
the root of the realist-idealist debate in the interwar period that continued after 
World War II. On security matters, the new United Nations retained collective se-
curity (see  Chapter   7 , particularly Article 42 of the U.N. Charter), but augmented 

138
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
it with  collective defense —a euphemism for bringing alliances back into the mix 
(see Articles 51 and 52) as a supplement to a sovereign state’s right to self-defense 
under international law. In practice, then, liberal and realist conceptions came 
together in the multilateral security mechanism constituted under the authority of 
the U.N. Security Council. In other respects, liberal ideas became embedded in a 
wide variety of U.N.-affiliated and other international organizations—the World 
Bank, International Monetary Fund, the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
and later the World Trade Organization, the International Telecommunications 
Union, the International Civil Aviation and Maritime Organizations, the World 
Health Organization, the Food and Agricultural Organization, the International 
Labor Organization, and the U.N. High Commission on Human Rights, to men-
tion just a few. 
 The present-day story of liberalism and IR theory, then, begins in Europe and 
particularly in the aftermath of World Wars I and II. Notwithstanding embedded 
liberalism in international organizations, with the advent of the Cold War real-
ism secured a preeminent place in the study of international relations. But while 
headlines focused on crises in Berlin and the rise in East-West tensions, Europe 
was also the test bed for theories in the liberal tradition. The economic rebuilding 
of Western Europe was not simply a humanitarian priority, but a political one as 
well. The fear was that a failure to rebuild Europe would make communist subver-
sion and political unrest more likely, particularly in Germany. Furthermore, the 
hope was that a rebuilt Europe would eventually tie together states such as France 
and Germany into a web of interdependencies in order to reduce the likelihood of 
another devastating war. In keeping with liberal theory, increased economic ties 
would play a major role. 
 The first scholar to explicate the hope and logic of  integration was David 
Mitrany. In the process he broke away from the liberal tradition of merely describ-
ing international organizations and exhorting the expansion and application of 
international law. His goal was to develop a theory as to how collaborative be-
havior among states could be achieved. The result was his theory of  functionalism . 
Mitrany argued that modern society faced a myriad of technical problems that can 
best be resolved by experts as opposed to politicians. This is true within states as 
well as among states in multilateral arrangements. Indeed, he saw the prolifera-
tion of common problems logically requiring collaborative responses from states. 
Hence, these essentially nonpolitical problems (economic, social, scientific) should 
be assigned to nonpolitical experts from the affected countries for resolution. 
 Mitrany reasoned that successful collaboration in one particular technical field 
would lead to further collaboration in other related fields. Governments would recog-
nize the common benefits to be gained by such cooperative endeavors and so would 
encourage or allow for a further expansion of collaborative tasks. In effect, Mitrany 
saw a way to sneak up on the authority of the sovereign state. As states and societies 
became increasingly integrated due to the expansion of collaboration in technical 
areas in which all parties made absolute gains, the cost of breaking these functional 
ties would be great and hence give leaders reason to pause before doing so. 
 The interest in Mitrany’s functionalist theory—and integration in general—
was spurred by the successful creation of the European Coal and Steel Community 
(ECSC) in 1952 and formation of the European Economic Community (EEC) or 

Integration
139
Common Market in the 1956 Treaty of Rome. The EEC even seemed to hold out 
promise for the eventual political integration of Western Europe. Furthermore, the 
EEC’s initial successes in the realm of economic integration increased interest in 
the more general question: Under what conditions is integration among states pos-
sible? Scholars noted that what was occurring in Western Europe did not match the 
Hobbesian image of states constantly prepared to go to war, an image that included 
little faith in the possibility of collaborative behavior among sovereign states. 
 Karl Deutsch (1912–1992) pioneered in developing the idea of a security com-
munity in Europe—an approach still underway in a continent and its islands in 
what some now refer to as a zone of peace. A separate enterprise has been build-
ing a secure Europe through collaboration in economic and social activities—first 
establishing what would come to be called webs of interdependence and intercon-
nectedness across an increasingly integrated Europe. The European Union seeks a 
common foreign and security policy among its members even as most also remain 
members of the NATO alliance, Council of Europe, and the Organization for 
Security and Co-operation in Europe (OSCE). 
 The most prominent theorist of regional integration was Ernst Haas (1924–
2003), whose work and that of his colleagues was referred to as  neofunctionalism . 
Mitrany’s functionalist logic of technical tasks driving the creation of international 
organizations had discounted the importance of politics. Neofunctionalists now put 
politics back in center stage. The prefix  neo was added to the term  functionalism 
precisely to acknowledge how integral politics is to integration processes. While 
acknowledging his intellectual debt to Mitrany, Haas and fellow neofunctional-
ists parted company with Mitrany, rejecting the notion that one somehow can 
separate technical tasks from politics. For integration to occur, Haas argued that 
it must be perceived by politically connected elites to be in their interest to pursue 
such aims—whether they be experts in economics and finance, agriculture, health, 
environment, telecommunications, one or another scientific field, education, or any 
other specialization. 
 An early constructivist (even before the term came into common usage), Haas 
saw ideas grounded in the interests of the actors as driving forces in politics. The 
assigning of tasks to an international organization—even if this involves a seem-
ingly technical function such as supervising an international mail system—will be 
attained and sustained only if actors believe their interests are best served by mak-
ing a political commitment to constructing and maintaining such institutions. 
 Applying game theory to neofunctional understandings, politics can produce a 
variable- or positive-sum outcome for all actors. Stated another way, the perspective 
on Rousseau’s stag hunt fable discussed in  Chapter   2 is that collaborative behavior 
is possible and in the enlightened self-interest of states. Rather than just compete 
in ongoing zero-sum contests, optimizing short-term self-interest at the expense of 
others, they can upgrade service of their common and long-term interests through 
cooperative and collaborative efforts reflected in international institutions—the 
organizations they construct and the processes they establish. 
 Integration—the focal point of most neofunctional thought—can be under-
stood as moving from surface-level cooperation down a progressive ladder into 
deeper forms of collaboration. At the surface level—or, more precisely, the first 
step down our ladder into a deeper degree of integration—is establishing a free 

140
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
trade area—in principle removing all tariffs and other barriers to trade as has been 
underway since the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) came into 
effect in 1994. Even taking this first step down into deeper integration is  difficult—
witness challenges faced in economic integration efforts in the Caribbean, Central 
and South America, various parts of Africa, South and Southeast Asia, and the 
Asia-Pacific area. 
 By contrast, European integration has gone much deeper than any other re-
gional effort. A customs union adds an additional, important step down on the in-
tegration ladder—going beyond merely free trade among participating countries to 
agreements among them on common external tariffs charged against imports from 
outside the union. A step yet further down to deeper integration is to establish free 
movement of land (resources), labor, and capital—the factors of production—in 
a common market. A final step down this ladder—the deepest level of economic 
integration—is constructing an economic and monetary union with a common cur-
rency and central bank. 
 Although politics have always been part of the process of deepening levels of 
integration, at this point European integration has moved substantially into the 
political realm—the domain of macroeconomic, fiscal, and monetary policy. The 
latter is the most integrated with an EU central bank and the euro as common 
currency among participating members, but treasuries and political authority over 
them still remain in national hands. The degree of integration of foreign policy, 
defense, and other, often local matters remains a matter of choice—some functions 
reserved by design to states and lower institutional levels within states where, in 
principle, they can be performed more effectively (a principle sometimes referred 
to as  subsidiarity ). 
 Rather than just gloss over integration theory merely as an artifact of liberal-
ism in IR from past decades, we think it useful to survey briefly the European case 
here, assessing its theoretical implications. The internal logic of neofunctionalism 
applied to the European case led theorists to anticipate how increased integration in 
particular economic sectors would “spill over” into other related sectors—a process 
carried by politically connected elites seeing positive gains to be found in increased 
collaboration as states became increasingly integrated economically. Six European 
states (Germany, France, Italy, Belgium, Netherlands, Luxembourg) agreed in 1958 
to move beyond the coal-and-steel community (ECSC) established in 1953 to es-
tablish two additional communities—one for atomic energy (EURATOM) and the 
other a European Economic Community (EEC)—a full customs union that finally 
was achieved by 1967. 
 Early predictions of further progress in regional integration did not occur, 
at least not to the extent anticipated. In the 1960s and 1970s, strong nationally 
oriented leaders were able to block transfers of too much more authority to the 
three European Communities (EC). Moreover, politically powerful farm interests 
in some countries made trying to facilitate trade by hammering out price arrange-
ments across heavily subsidized domestic agricultural sectors extraordinarily diffi-
cult. If that were not enough, agreement on agricultural pricing using the then fixed 
exchange rate of the U.S. dollar as the common measure became unglued when the 
United States decided in 1971 to let the dollar float. The need for an independent 
European monetary measure became apparent, which in practice soon took the 

Integration
141
form of a carefully selected “basket” of currencies, stability in the measure assured 
when upward movements of some currencies were offset by downward movement 
by others. 
 By the early 1970s the integration process had stalled. The internal logic of 
spillover from one economic sector to another no longer seemed to be driving 
European integration. Rather than expecting further “spillover” in further progress 
to greater integration, some worried about “spillback”—reversing earlier gains. It 
was, in fact, increased competition the EC countries faced in the 1980s from the 
United States, Japan, and other rising economies—a factor external to Europe that 
Haas saw reigniting the integration engine and calls in 1987 to move toward a full 
common market by 1992. Bringing Europe together would achieve economies of 
scale, allowing Europe to compete globally in production of goods and services 
increasingly dependent upon ever-higher technologies. 
 Achieved with much fanfare, the EC countries renamed themselves the European 
Union (EU) in 1992 and set their sights on a full economic and monetary union by 
the dawn of the twenty-first century. Some members, guarding their national pre-
rogatives, chose not to go all the way down to this deepest level of integration, but 
most did. Critics now observed that European integration had become à la carte, 
allowing members to pick and choose the level of integration that suited their fancy. 
The problem has grown with the expansion of the EU, incorporating European 
states of great diversity in levels of economic development—critics of “widening” 
the membership noting that doing so would make “deepening” of integration 
ever more difficult. Be that as it may, the overall level of integration that has been 
achieved was thought decades earlier as highly unlikely, if not impossible to achieve 
in so short a period of time. 
 How did this occur? Politically connected elites still mattered in driving this pro-
cess; some key players in institutionalized settings like the European Commission 
in Brussels (in effect the EU’s executive branch) cultivated their counterparts in 
European governments and elites in the nongovernmental or private sectors as 
well. To Haas and others who shared his views, this external focus on worldwide 
competitors and carving out a competitive position for Europe as a whole had dis-
placed the intra-European, inward-looking logic that neofunctionalists had seen as 
advancing the earlier stages of regional integration. 
 Integration as a robust research program has faded, no longer enjoying the 
luster it once had. Haas himself concluded that regional integration theories should 
be subordinated to a broader theory of interdependence, which did not anticipate a 
transfer of state sovereignty to regional organizations. As we look back, however, 
we can find within the neofunctional and integration research program the seeds of 
the still unresolved agency-structure debates that remain prominent in the IR field, 
particularly among constructivists. How ideas relate to material considerations in 
the heads of agents and how they relate to ideational and material structures that 
enable or constrain them are not new topics. Referring to the 1970s, when Ernst 
Haas and others were grappling with such questions, John Ruggie has commented 
that we were all constructivists then but didn’t know it—the term not yet having 
entered the IR field. 
 For his part, Haas held to the position that agency matters. Individuals need 
not be captives of system structure, but can in fact influence the course of events. 

142
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
Changing knowledge, for example, can lead to redefining interests. Organizations 
composed of thinking people can adapt, learn, and innovate in changing circum-
stances. Nevertheless, they still face enormous challenges that theorists can reflect 
upon. Cognitive challenges—the apparent turbulence confronting decisionmak-
ers in the present time—stem, according to Haas, from “confused and clashing 
perceptions of organizational actors which find themselves in a setting of great 
social complexity.” Not only must agents deal with a large number of fellow 
actors, but each may be pursuing “a variety of objectives which are mutually 
incompatible,” compounded by uncertainty surrounding “trade-offs between the 
objectives.”  3  
 Though not an integration theorist, much of James Rosenau’s work also has 
been focused on the important roles played by both state and non-state actors in 
world politics. Like Haas, Rosenau (both scholars born in 1924) also identifies tur-
bulence as a substantial challenge.  4  In this regard, Rosenau reveals his ontology as 
one seeing two competing “worlds”—the first he describes as state-centric and the 
other multicentric involving diverse state and non-state actors. The agency-structure 
issue is reflected in the distinction he draws between parameters at micro-level 
(individual) and macro-level (system structure) and the “relational one” that tries 
to put the micro and macro together. Change is propelled by the dynamics of tech-
nology, the emergence of complex issues, the reduced capacity of states to deal ef-
fectively with many contemporary problems, and the emergence of “subgroupism” 
and individuals who are analytically ever more capable and diverse in orientation. 
Agents obviously still matter to Rosenau, as they also did to Haas.  
TRANSNATIONALISM
 By the early 1970s, just as neofunctional understandings of regional integration 
were losing conceptual steam, the concept of transnationalism entered the main-
stream IR theory lexicon. Attention turned to the increasing role of multinational 
corporations abroad and the challenge they posed to the sovereign prerogatives 
of states as they transited across national boundaries in the daily conduct of 
their business transactions. Interest in international political economy increased 
substantially. The unilateral decision by the United States in 1971 to go off the 
gold-exchange standard of $35 an ounce (a rate the Treasury had maintained since 
1934) and allow the dollar’s value to float downward in value caused turmoil in 
international currency markets. Similar disruption of the status quo occurred when 
major oil-producing countries in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Coun-
tries (OPEC) cartel dramatically raised the cost of oil by regulating its supply to 
global markets. Economics now seemed to be “high politics” as opposed to merely 
“low politics.” 
 Even on security matters things seemed to be changing. Zero-sum calculations 
and relative gains prominent in realist thought were augmented by positive-sum 
understandings more common among liberals. An initial thawing of U.S.-Soviet 
relations in the late 1960s—still in the midst of Cold War—had produced  détente , 
or a relaxation of tensions between the two superpowers, a climate conducive to 
arms control. Explicitly intended as balance-of-power politics vis-à-vis the Soviet 

Transnationalism
143
Union, Washington also played its “China card” and reached out to Beijing, setting 
in motion a process that would lead to normalization of relations between the two 
Cold War adversaries. At the same time, power-based realist ideas—that the strong 
do what they will and the weak do what they must—had difficulty accounting for 
why a superpower like the United States could get bogged down and eventually lose 
a war in Vietnam, forced to evacuate its remaining forces in 1975. 
 These events in the late 1960s and early 1970s contributed to ferment in the IR 
field, setting the stage for new developments in both realist and liberal theories of 
IR. In 1971 and 1972 two works raised the question of the conceptual adequacy 
of the realist approach to international relations. John W. Burton argued in  World 
Society that a “cobweb” model of multiple state and non-state actors better 
captured the nature of current reality than did the realist “billiard ball” model 
merely of states interacting with one another. He also asserted that the idea of a 
“world society” was descriptively more accurate than the concept of international 
relations. 
 Also published at this time was the seminal work  Transnational Relations and 
World Politics by Joseph Nye, Jr. and Robert Keohane.  5  This work brought at-
tention to multinational corporations and other nongovernmental, transnational 
organizations as well as bureaucratic agencies, departments, or other components 
of governments that in their own right operate transnationally across state bound-
aries, sometimes even forming transgovernmental coalitions and counter-coalitions 
with their counterparts in other countries. Thus, diplomats and civil servants in 
the U.S. State Department might find common ground with fellow professionals 
in Germany or the United Kingdom on an issue like arms control that might be at 
odds with views in their respective defense ministries. 
 Liberal theories now moved to center stage within the IR field. The term 
 transnational itself was used to describe either an actor (i.e., MNC) or a pattern 
of behavior (i.e., “MNCs act transnationally”). The new focus was on study-
ing these actors, their interactions, and the coalitions they form across state 
boundaries that involved diverse nongovernmental actors such as multinational 
corporations (MNCs), banks, churches, and eventually human rights, environ-
mental, and terror or criminal networks. Transgovernmental links at the level 
of bureaucracies were also a new item on the liberal agenda, challenging realist 
claims to the state as unitary actor. Links or coalitions between nongovernmen-
tal organizations and transgovernmental actors also became a subject of some 
interest. 
 Was there in fact a chipping-away or leakage of state sovereignty? Just as the 
regional integration literature posited the possibility of going beyond the nation-
state, so too did much of the transnational literature leave the impression that 
states, assuming they survived as actors over the long term, would become ensnared 
like Gulliver in Jonathan Swift’s classic political novel  Gulliver’s Travels . 
 A problem with this new transnational literature, however, was that in most 
cases the work was highly descriptive, lacking in theoretical content. A realist 
 response—reasserting the enduring importance of the state and capabilities or 
power among states—was soon heard from Kenneth Waltz initially in his article 
“Theory of International Relations” and later in his book  Theory of International 
Politics referenced in  Chapter  2 . 

144
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
INTERDEPENDENCE
 In 1977 Keohane and Nye published their influential  Power and Interdependence: 
World Politics in Transition . The title says it all: To develop the concept of interde-
pendence and make it analytically useful, power must be taken into consideration. For 
Nye and Keohane, interdependence is simply defined as mutual dependence resulting 
from the types of international transactions catalogued by transnationalists—flows 
of money, goods, services, people, communications, etc. Interdependence exists when 
there are “reciprocal [though not necessarily symmetrical] effects among countries or 
among actors in different countries.”  6  There is, in other words, sensitivity in Country 
 B to what is going on in or emanating from Country  A . Although there are costs asso-
ciated with interdependence, as it by definition restricts autonomy, benefits to either or 
both parties may outweigh these costs. Thus, interdependence is not necessarily only 
a matter of Country  B ’s vulnerability to Country  A , which is the realist perspective. 
While Nye and Keohane fully recognized the importance of vulnerability interdepen-
dence such as when one country can manipulate the flow of oil to other countries, 
their interests lay elsewhere. 
 The centerpiece of their work was the concept of  complex interdependence —an 
ideal type constructed to analyze situations involving transnational issues. In a situ-
ation of complex interdependence, multiple channels connect societies, there is an 
absence of hierarchy among issues, and military force is not used by governments 
against other governments involved in the interdependent relation. While some en-
thusiasts greeted  Power and Interdependence as a challenge to realist conceptions 
of international relations, Nye and Keohane have always asserted that the work 
was rather designed to provide analytical insights and a research program in areas 
that the traditional realist focus on matters of military security and force tended 
to discount.  
INTERNATIONAL REGIMES 
 Keohane and Nye’s work on complex interdependence did not displace the state 
as principal focus of study. As noted, interdependence involves reciprocal effects 
among countries or other actors in different countries. Furthermore, even most of 
the elements of the complex interdependence model involved states—states’ goals 
varied by issue area, states could use their power resources to manipulate interde-
pendent relations, and it was states that would experience difficulties in linking 
issues together. 
 One important area that was highlighted, however, was that of international 
organizations (IO). IOs were not just institutions composed of state members, but 
also actors that could set agendas, encourage coalition-formation, and act as are-
nas for political action even by small, relatively weaker states. Nongovernmental 
organizations were also quite capable of establishing their own ties with these 
intergovernmental organizations. Instead of viewing the policies of these interna-
tional organizations simply as the dependent variable (decisions or actions to be 
explained), they and their agents (leaders and staffs) came to be understood as inde-
pendent variables in their own right, sometimes with substantial influence on states. 

International Regimes 
145
 This was a new “institutionalism” that found its way into the IR field even 
before such studies became prominent in other political science fields during the 
1980s. In liberal IR scholarship, the institutional turn took the form of a robust 
research program on the role of  international regimes —rules agreed to by states 
(some with the binding character of international law) concerning their conduct 
in specific issue areas (trade, monetary exchange, navigation on the high seas or 
in the air, nonproliferation of weapons of mass destruction, etc.) and often as-
sociated with international and nongovernmental organizations linked to these 
regimes. 
 The regime literature has focused, then, on the ways and means of constructing 
and maintaining or managing interdependent relations found in these multilateral, 
institutionalized arrangements. The term  regime was borrowed from domestic 
politics, where it refers typically to an existing governmental or constitutional 
order (democratic, authoritarian, or otherwise). In its international context, given 
the absence of a superordinate or overarching central authority, these rules are 
voluntarily established by states to provide some degree of order in international 
relations. Thus, there is a strong Grotian strain in liberal thought, particularly when 
talk turns to managing interdependence through the construction of regimes or, 
more recently, provisions for global governance. 
 As sets of principles, norms, rules, and procedures, international regimes are 
not the same as international organizations (although they usually are associ-
ated with them)—they do not require a mailing address or possess the capacity 
to act. In IR theory they are merely analytical constructs defined by observers. 
Action remains with states and both international and nongovernmental organiza-
tions. Furthermore, an organization associated with a particular regime (e.g., the 
International Telecommunications Union that regulates the global distribution of 
frequencies) also may concern itself with other regimes covering diverse issue areas 
in a global context within what is referred to as the United Nations “system” of 
international organizations. 
 The regime literature, then, is concerned with such basic questions as: How and 
why are international regimes formed? What accounts for rule-based cooperation? 
How do regimes affect state behavior and collective outcomes in particular issue 
areas? How and why do regimes evolve or dissolve? There are several schools of 
thought on such questions.  7  
 Power-Based Realist Theories  These theories emphasize, not surprisingly, the 
role of anarchy and the impact of the relative distribution of capabilities. The best-
known realist regime theory, hegemonic stability, was discussed in  Chapter   2 . The 
basic argument is that regimes are established and maintained when a state holds 
a preponderance of power resources, as did the United States after World War II. 
Once this hegemonic power declines and power is spread more equally among 
states, if regimes do not adapt themselves to changed circumstances, they can be 
expected to decline. While a few realists are completely dismissive of international 
regimes and organizations, most would accept Stephen Krasner’s view that regimes 
help states avoid uncoordinated action and in some cases can actually be a source 
of power for weaker states.  8  

146
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
 Knowledge-Based Cognitive Regime Theories  Scholars associated with these theo-
ries have been critical of both realist (hegemonic stability) and the neoliberal 
institutionalist perspective discussed below. Cognition theorists (some identified 
as constructivists we discuss in  Chapter  6 ) argue that state interests are not given, 
but rather created. This leads them to examine the role of normative and causative 
beliefs of decisionmakers in explaining preferences and interest formation. In other 
words, the focus is less on overt behavior and more on inter-subjective understand-
ings. Learning matters as when a change in beliefs or understandings influences 
subsequent behavior. Cognition theorists attempt to demonstrate that states can 
redefine their interests without any shift in the overall systemic distribution of 
power and use regimes and institutions to “lock in” to their advantage the learning 
that has occurred. 
 One way knowledge might come to be shared by decisionmakers is through the 
influence of transnational,  epistemic communities , defined as “network[s] of pro-
fessionals with recognized expertise and competence in a particular domain and an 
authoritative claim to policy-relevant knowledge within that domain.”  9  Epistemic 
communities (for example, environmentalists, scientists, international economists, 
and other specialists), it is argued, can influence the creation and maintenance of 
international regimes in a number of ways. 
 Path-breaking work on epistemic communities by Peter Haas, Emanuel Adler, 
and others has had a substantial impact on liberal understandings of how ideas 
carried by transnational groups of specialists impact policy processes. These com-
munities are composed of politically connected elites one also finds in the earlier 
work on integration by Ernst Haas. Common understandings and ideas held by 
these communities of professionals or experts have global impact on how policies 
are made in diverse institutional contexts. Peter Haas observes that “members of 
epistemic communities not only hold in common a set of principled and causal be-
liefs, but also have shared notions of validity and a shared policy enterprise.” When 
called upon by policymakers, these specialists bring their socially constructed inter-
pretations of facts or knowledge and causality to the questions at issue. Studying 
the roles played and influence on policy by epistemic communities is itself a major 
research program. 
 International regimes are embedded in the broader normative structures of 
international society and, as a result, states typically are not free to ignore institu-
tional commitments without paying a price. A focus on self-interest alone will not 
explain regime maintenance. Regimes have more than a regulative function that 
requires states to behave in accordance with certain norms and rules. They also 
create a common social world that interprets the meaning of international behavior. 
In other words, regimes have what is called a “constitutive” dimension—they are 
socially constructed—and hence, cognitive regime theorists have advocated open-
ing “the positivist epistemology to more interpretive strains, more closely attuned 
to the reality of regimes.”  10  
 This view of regimes can therefore be placed in the broader social constructiv-
ist approach to international relations. As discussed in  Chapter   6 , the focus is on 
the social construction of world politics and identities in particular. It is argued 
that actors in international politics make decisions based upon what the world 
appears to be and how they conceive their roles in it. These conceptions derive 

Neoliberal Institutionalism 
147
from systemic, inter-subjective shared understandings and expectations. In terms 
of regimes, it logically follows that rule-governed cooperation can, over time, lead 
actors to change their beliefs about who they are and how they relate to the rest of 
the world. Cooperative and collaborative behaviors can become a matter of habit.  
NEOLIBERAL INSTITUTIONALISM 
 Perhaps the most widely cited approach to regime theory was developed by Robert 
Keohane, his colleagues, and students in the 1980s. In fact, for Keohane, “regime 
theory” is too limiting a term to describe his approach to the conditions under which 
international cooperation can be achieved. He has developed the broader concept 
of “institutions” that he defines as “persistent and connected sets of rules (formal 
and informal) that prescribe behavioral roles, constrain activity, and shape expecta-
tions.”  11  Thus defined, international institutions can take one of three forms: 
 1.  Formal Intergovernmental or Cross-national, Nongovernmental 
Organizations.   These are purposive entities, bureaucratic organizations with 
explicit rules and missions. The United Nations is a prime example of the 
former, the International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) of the latter.  
 2.  International Regimes.   Institutionalized rules explicitly agreed upon by 
governments that deal with a particular set of issues. Examples would 
include the international monetary regime established in 1944 but adapted 
to changing circumstances since then, the Law of the Sea regime developed 
in the 1970s, and the various arms control agreements between the United 
States and the Soviet Union during the Cold War.  
 3.  Conventions.   Informal institutions (or customary norms and practices) with 
implicit rules and understandings. These implicit understandings allow actors 
to understand one another and coordinate their behavior. Not only do they 
facilitate coordination, but they also affect actors’ incentives not to defect in 
those situations where at least in the short term it might be in their interest to 
do so. “Reciprocity” is an example of a convention—political leaders expect 
reciprocal treatment in international dealings, both positive and negative, 
and anticipate costs of one kind or another if they violate the convention. 
Diplomatic immunity is an example of a convention that existed for centuries 
before it was codified in formal agreements in the 1960s.  
 The point to keep in mind is that Keohane’s neoliberal institutionalist formu-
lation is not restricted to formal organizations and regimes. It is a counter within 
liberal thought to what some perceived as the intellectual hegemony of neorealist 
writings within the IR field. Keohane’s starting point is the proposition that “varia-
tions in the institutionalization of world politics exert significant impacts on the 
behavior of governments. In particular, patterns of cooperation and discord can be 
understood only in the context of the institutions that help define the meaning and 
importance of state action.”  12  
 His first stab at a theory of institutions was in  Power and Interdependence 
in what he and Nye referred to as the international organization model of regime 
change. Subsequent work in the 1980s was done against the backdrop of rising 

148
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
challengers to the primacy of the United States in world politics. Much to the con-
sternation of a number of scholars associated with regime theory and global civil 
society, Keohane’s  After Hegemony (1984) in fact adopts several realist premises. 
They include a desire to explain behavioral regularities in a decentralized inter-
national system, yet epistemologically sensitive to the fact that while theories can 
and must be tested, it is naïve to believe that reality can be objectively known. 
Furthermore, state power must be taken seriously, and it is assumed that leaders 
of states calculate the costs and benefits of contemplated courses of action. Finally, 
he also shares with neorealists an interest in the applicability to IR of economic 
theories of market behavior. With these premises as a starting point, he addresses 
the puzzle of why even self-interested, rational egoists—individuals seeking to 
maximize gains—would pursue multilateral, cooperative behavior. 
 Yet Keohane argues that despite these affinities with neorealism, neoliberal 
institutionalism is a distinct school of thought. First, neorealists and neoliberal 
institutionalists agree that international relations or world politics lack a stable 
hierarchy due to its anarchic or decentralized character. Neoliberals, however, are 
much more emphatic that there is no necessary logical link between the condition 
of anarchy and war. If any connection does exist between warfare and lack of har-
mony among states, it is conditional on the nature of prevailing expectations among 
actors to include those held by institutions. 
 Second, some realists, particularly neorealists, claim that in a condition of an-
archy, relative gains are more important than absolute gains. States, therefore, are 
concerned with preventing others from achieving advances in their relative capabili-
ties. So even though two states may both make material gains such as enhancing their 
military capabilities, the important question to most realists is who gained more? Is 
the power gap widening? This realist formulation seems to characterize U.S.-Soviet 
relations during the Cold War (and, perhaps, between India and Pakistan at present). 
 Neoliberals counter that this realist understanding does not accurately describe 
U.S. policy toward Europe or Japan in which the United States actively promoted 
economic recovery and development, and at least in the case of Europe pleaded 
for greater defense spending as the senior partner in the North Atlantic Treaty 
Organization (NATO). Nor does the neorealist formulation explain the peaceful 
relations among members of the European Union where, despite economic integra-
tion favoring some states more than others, members across the board are willing 
to accept an asymmetric distribution of absolute gains—some clearly gaining more 
than others. Neoliberals concede, of course, that this absolute gains argument may 
be more applicable in conditions where substantial mutual gains can be achieved 
and governments do not expect others will threaten to use force against them. 
 As with all propositions in international relations theory, such statements 
are conditional. But conditionality for neoliberals is a function of prevailing rules 
and expectations. States use international institutions for self-interested reasons— 
institutions perform important tasks that enhance cooperation. For example, the 
transaction costs—making, monitoring, and enforcing rules—are reduced when 
institutions provide information to all parties and facilitate the making of credible 
commitments. What, however, are the guarantors of compliance to the commit-
ments made by states? Reputation is one. Reciprocity is another, which includes 
threats of retaliation as well as promises of reciprocal cooperation. 

Global Governance 
149
 While Keohane’s focus on trade, monetary, and energy issues deals with ma-
terial self-interest in which reciprocity plays a key role, he argues that the same 
framework works with environmental issues that often include a normative dimen-
sion and the role of principled ideas. His work with Judith Goldstein underscores 
the importance of ideas as a significant independent variable in explanations of 
foreign policy.  13  Worldviews, principled beliefs, and causal beliefs are ideas that 
become embedded in institutions and impact the making of policy by acting as cog-
nitive road maps. Ideas define the universe of possibilities for action. To Keohane, 
“interests are incomprehensible without an awareness of the beliefs that lie behind 
them.” These ideas shape agendas and, as a result, directly affect outcomes. When 
ideas become institutionalized, they assume a life of their own as socially embedded 
norms. Ideas linked to interests do influence the making of foreign policy choices. 
 Neoliberals like Keohane claim that institutions and regimes matter because 
they enable states to do things they otherwise  could not do . With rising levels of 
interdependence and interconnectedness in world politics, it is hypothesized that 
states likely will rely more heavily on regimes for their own selfish reasons. Hence, 
while realists tend to view regimes as constraints on state behavior, neoliberals view 
regimes more positively as actually enabling states to achieve mutually beneficial 
outcomes. 
 Such thinking brings us back to Rousseau’s stag hunt allegory discussed in 
 Chapter   2 and the possibilities of upgrading the common interest, despite the 
underlying condition of anarchy. In sum, the literature on international organiza-
tions, regimes, and institutions in the liberal tradition offers insight on how states 
may accommodate differences and upgrade the interests they share in common. 
Consistent with Rousseau’s stag hunt fable, the actors may agree to collaborate in 
certain circumstances in hunting the stag rather than serve only narrowly defined, 
short-term self-interest. Absolute gains for all are possible as policymakers learn the 
benefits of cooperation in areas of interest to them.  
GLOBAL GOVERNANCE 
 The increasing complexity of issues on the global agenda brings neoliberal insti-
tutionalists to the question of global governance. The concept is not new. Indeed, 
Kant’s proposal of a decentralized, self-enforcing peace without world government 
is an example. Governance involves the processes and institutions, both formal 
and informal, that guide and restrain the collective activities of groups. Keohane 
describes a “partially globalized world” as one with “thick networks of interde-
pendence in which boundaries and states nevertheless matter a great deal.”  14  With 
increasing interdependence in this partially globalized world, Keohane sees greater 
institutionalization as the world becomes more like a polity with governance es-
sential to trade, finance, environment, security, and other matters of global import. 
 Keohane does not see global governance as if it were the same as world 
government—a new, unitary super state. It is merely a design that integrates “net-
works among agents and norms—standards of expected behavior—that are widely 
accepted among agents.” Devising better, more effective global institutions to serve 
the needs of humankind is an imperative. On this, Keohane boldly asserts that “the 

150
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
challenge for American political science resembles that of the founders of the United 
States: how to design institutions for a polity of unprecedented size and diversity.”  15  
 He notes that “increased interdependence among human beings produces 
discord, since self-regarding actions affect the welfare of others.” Moreover, he is 
concerned that institutional approaches to problems may not always be benign. 
Indeed, left to their own devices, they “can foster exploitation or even oppression.” 
He observes that the stakes in the mission of establishing the ways and means of 
global governance are high—that “if global institutions are designed well, they will 
promote human welfare, but if we bungle the job, the results could be disastrous.”  16  
 To avoid adverse outcomes, we need instead to draw insights “from a variety of 
perspectives, including game theory, the study of political culture, and work on the 
role that ideas play in politics”—learning “how important beliefs are in reaching 
equilibrium solutions and how institutionalized beliefs structure situations of politi-
cal choice.” It is indeed a large order for applied theory to fill! As Keohane puts it: 
“From traditional political theory we are reminded of the importance of normative 
beliefs for the practice of politics . . . , from historical institutionalism and political 
sociology we understand how values and norms operate in society . . . [and] from 
democratic theory we discover the crucial roles of accountability, participation, and 
especially persuasion in creating legitimate political institutions.”  17  
 In sum, most issues on the global governance agenda cannot be managed 
unilaterally even if states wished to do so. Global economy, health, human rights, 
and the environment are among the issues on global-governance agendas of both 
governmental and nongovernmental organizations. Developing consensus on what 
is to be done is by no means an easy task, much less finding resources that can be 
allocated to these matters. Quite apart from opposition to proposed remedies by 
those whose economic or other interests would be adversely affected are genuine 
disagreements over outcomes to be sought as well as confusion about the “science” 
associated with particular problems—understanding cause-effect relations associ-
ated with different options under consideration. 
Green Politics and the Environment 
 In J. D. Thompson’s classic study of organizations, he noted how uncertainties 
can make decision making difficult.  18  If we apply his insights to global governance 
concerns such as global warming, we find a consensus that it is in fact occurring, 
but still great uncertainty among atmospheric scientists about the relative impor-
tance of different causes, proposed remedies, and possible outcomes (whether it 
can be slowed and its effects managed through adaptation or whether we face a 
real danger of sudden, accelerated warming—cataclysmic climate change with 
disastrous consequences for human and other forms of life on the planet). As a 
practical matter, these uncertainties make it extraordinarily difficult to form a 
national, not to mention global political consensus on what is to be done and how 
fast we need to do it, especially since proposed remedies are usually very costly. 
Confounding the problem of finding consensus among those genuinely committed 
to finding effective remedies, of course, is political opposition to environmentally 
friendly measures by those whose interests lie in the continued mass consumption 
of fossil fuels. 

Global Governance 
151
 Thompson’s matrix ( Figure  3.1 ) may help us understand these problems ana-
lytically since building political consensus nationally and globally on appropriate 
environmental remedies is central to global governance. The debate that began 
in the late 1980s on carbon-emissions caps was accompanied over the next two 
decades by politically motivated naysayers who either denied global warming was 
occurring or discounted its effects. Even those who saw global warming as a prob-
lem have not been entirely certain about the magnitude of the effect—how many 
degrees the Earth would warm over coming decades, what the effects would be on 
various parts of the Earth, and what impact various remedies would have on efforts 
to slow global warming. 
 Long stuck in cell D, there has been movement more recently on global warm-
ing toward greater understanding of cause-effect relations as well as greater agree-
ment on preferences regarding possible outcomes. Facilitating the formation of an 
emerging “green” consensus, of course, is the interest some have in securing market 
share in one or another of the proposed remedies (alternative energy sources; more 
efficient engineering of automobiles, public transportation, and power plants; new 
technologies for trapping carbon emissions and “sequestering” them from release 
to the atmosphere, etc.). 
 By contrast to global warming, the scientific understanding of ozone-layer 
depletion caused by chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions has been far clearer and 
agreement on preferred outcomes easier to forge—a position in cell A, making a 
political consensus on remedies to be implemented much easier to achieve. The 
initial result was agreement in the Montreal Protocol, which eliminates or tries at 
least to reduce CFC emissions substantially. Somewhere in between global warming 
and ozone-layer depletion in terms of degree of uncertainty is the case of increased 
acidification of precipitation—acid rain. 
Certainty
Certainty
A
C
D
B
Uncertainty
Uncertainty
Beliefs About
Cause-Effect
Relations
Preferences Regarding Possible Outcomes
FIGURE 3.1 
Decision-Making Matrix
Source: J. D. Thompson, Organizations in Action (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967), 134–135.

152
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
 The matrix gives us a convenient way to categorize our understanding (or lack 
of understanding) of any number of issues on global agendas. It may be even more 
helpful to array degrees of certainty or uncertainty as a continuum rather than as 
either-or cells in a matrix. Be that as it may, Thompson’s matrix focuses our atten-
tion on objectives, means and ends that are too often discounted, overlooked, or 
dismissed as too hard to solve. Making decisions collectively in global governance 
is by no means an easy process when we are uncertain not only about what is to 
be done, but also about the implications of different courses of action or inaction. 
 In the final analysis, of course, decisions on such matters are political choices. 
Even the best of ideas likely will go nowhere unless grounded in the interests of the 
relevant players. This seems as true in global governance as it is in all other levels of 
politics. When ideas enjoy interest-based support, agreements can be reached and 
implemented on even the most difficult of issues on global agendas. Put another 
way, liberals do not leave the concept of interest only to realists. It remains an in-
tegral part of their work as well.  
ECONOMIC INTERDEPENDENCE AND PEACE 
 The eighteenth- and nineteenth-century argument associating increased trade 
among states with peace is reflected in Richard Rosecrance’s  The Rise of the Trad-
ing State .  19  Rosecrance contrasts the realist military-political world with the liberal 
trading world, utilizing game theory to highlight their respective constant-sum or 
variable-sum characters. His essential argument is that the rise of a new “trading 
world” offers the possibility of escaping major international conflicts and establish-
ing new patterns of cooperation among states. The benefits of trade greatly exceed 
those of military competition and territorial aggrandizement as exemplified in the 
post–World War II period by such countries as Japan. 
 In fact, territorial acquisition may actually harm the ability of a state to increase 
its national wealth. Rosecrance does not deny that traditional military competition 
will continue, but rather suggests states will calculate out of self-interest that an 
open international trading system will allow them to find a productive niche in the 
structure of world commerce. Part of the reason for such an opportunity is that 
since 1945 the threat of an all-out nuclear war made major wars less likely to occur 
if not, in the words of another author, obsolete.  20  
 Following this logic, the prevalence of the trading option since 1945 increases 
peaceful possibilities among states that were lacking in the late nineteenth century and 
in the 1930s when competitive economic policies helped to drive the world into de-
pression. As economic interdependence spreads, economic development through trade 
and foreign investment becomes a self-reinforcing process and an integral part of state 
strategy. Rosecrance thus expands our theoretical focus by including trade and com-
merce in strategic understandings, not just confining strategy to the military sector. 
 Realists have been skeptical if not outright hostile to the peace-through-
economic interdependence proposition. Kenneth Waltz and John Mearsheimer, 
for example, have noted that the late nineteenth-century Western trading system 
had extremely high levels of interdependence, but this did not prevent the disaster 
of World War I—national security concerns trumped economic interests. If states 

Economic Interdependence and Peace 
153
feel threatened, they will take whatever military action is required despite the costs 
of breaking economic ties. This is even more the case if an aggressive great power 
attempts to upset the territorial status quo and embarks on a series of cumulative 
military conquests. 
 The question of how shifts in the international economy can affect international 
security relations has been rejoined in the past decade as the scope of international 
economic integration has been examined under the increasingly popular rubric of 
“globalization.” An intriguing work in this genre is Stephen Brooks’  Producing 
Security: Multinational Corporations, Globalization, and the Changing Calculus 
of Conflict .  21  His focus is not on the traditional debate concerning the hypoth-
esized pacification of interstate relations through international trade, but rather 
the impact of the globalization of production on great power security relations 
and security relations among states in general. Brooks argues that an historically 
unprecedented development has been left out of the debate: the geographic disper-
sion of production by multinational corporations. Where and how these MNCs 
organize their international production activities are now the key integrating force 
of global commerce, not trade  per se . 
 Unlike the work on MNCs in the 1970s that focused on the extraction of 
raw materials from exploited Third World states, his study on the globalization 
of production examines broader international security implications. Rather than 
focusing on a dependent variable and seeking to explain a particular case (such as 
the outbreak of World War I) or a general class of events (such as interstate wars), 
Brooks uses his independent variable—the globalization of production—and ex-
amines how it could influence security calculations. He does not assume that such 
production is a force for peace, but wishes to leave this an open question. 
 Brooks examines three major means by which the international economy can 
influence security—changing capabilities, incentives, and the nature of the ac-
tors. The capabilities issue addresses whether the globalization of production has 
changed the parameters of weapons production—is self-sufficiency still possible? 
He concludes that autarkic, go-it-alone arms production is in decline. To remain 
on the cutting edge of military technology requires engagement in the production 
of weaponry beyond one’s borders. In terms of incentives, has the geographic dis-
persion of MNC production reduced the benefits of the physical conquest of other 
states? He concludes while there are exceptions, the economic benefits of military 
conquest have been greatly reduced, at least among the advanced industrial states. 
Finally, with regard to actors, has dispersed MNC production positively influenced 
the prospects for regional integration? He states it has, even where traditional secu-
rity rivalries have existed. While perhaps not the primary cause of such integration, 
it can help deepen it. These three mechanisms are the primary focus of his book, 
although he examines others as well. 
 His conclusion is that the influence of the globalization of production is most ev-
ident in terms of great-power relations. While cognizant of other explanations such 
as democratic peace theory, Brooks believes his evidence strengthens the argument 
that international commerce indeed acts as a force for peace among great powers. 
As for the rest of the world, there is a differential impact. The security implications 
of the globalization of production is a mixed bag between the great powers and 
developing countries, and actually negative among developing countries.  

154
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
THE DEMOCRATIC PEACE 
 As noted earlier, for liberals the likelihood of war is reduced not only through the 
expansion of free trade, but also democracy—more precisely, republican or repre-
sentative forms of governance. Particularly with the end of the Cold War in 1991, 
scholars have attempted to answer empirically the question: “Are democracies 
more peaceful in their foreign relations?” The collapse of communism and the rise 
of an increasing number of fledgling democracies to replace authoritarian regimes 
provided a good test bed for democratic peace theory. Following in the tradition 
of Immanuel Kant, scholars such as Michael Doyle, Rudolph Rummel, and Bruce 
Russett have argued that liberal democracies are unique in that they are able to 
establish peaceful relations among themselves based upon their shared values and 
common approach to establishing legitimate domestic political orders. 
 Democracies tend not to go to war with each other.  22  Doyle brought renewed 
attention to this Kantian idea of democratic peace, reexamining the traditional 
liberal claim that governments founded on a respect for individual liberty exercise 
restraint and peaceful intentions in their foreign policies. Despite the contradictions 
between liberal pacifism and liberal imperialism (both found in democratic prac-
tice), liberalism nevertheless does leave us with a coherent legacy on foreign affairs. 
Liberal states are different and indeed more peaceful, yet they also are prone to use 
force when they see it as in their interest to do so, albeit not in wars with each other. 
 Democracies certainly fight authoritarian regimes—sometimes representing 
themselves as “arsenals of democracy” as the United States did in its military cam-
paign against fascism in World War II. As with authoritarian regimes, democracies 
have engaged historically in violent imperial expansions that also have provided 
opportunities to spread their own liberal, democratic ideologies. Furthermore, 
recent empirical work suggests that newly emerging democratic states may even be 
 more prone to start wars than either long-established democracies or authoritarian 
regimes.  23  The key adjective or qualifier here is  emerging . 
 The democratic peace literature’s claims have spawned a substantial research 
program in liberal IR that seeks to identify and explain patterns of behavior ex-
hibited by democracies throughout the world. Indeed, some years ago one scholar 
commented that “the absence of war between democracies comes as close as any-
thing to an empirical law in international relations.” Another observed that the 
democratic peace proposition is “one of the strongest nontrivial or non-tautological 
generalizations that can be made about international relations.”  24  
 The excitement generated, particularly during the 1990s, fueled an increasingly 
robust research program. While the proposition dates back at least to Immanuel 
Kant, as noted it was the collapse of the Soviet Union and breakup of the Warsaw 
Pact that produced a wave of new democracies and promised new empirical pos-
sibilities to test the theory. For liberals, here was a proposition that seemed to 
undermine the neorealist argument that it is the structure of the international 
system (not the nature of governments or societies) that explains a state’s policies. 
To democratic-peace theorists, state and society do matter as do the people that 
compose them. 
 The theory has even been used (many would say “misused”) by politicians since 
the end of the Cold War to make optimistic predictions concerning the future of 
international politics. Much to the dismay of many liberal scholars, the virtues of 

The Democratic Peace 
155
the theory were invoked by neoconservatives who added democratization to the list 
of reasons used to justify the American invasion of Iraq in 2003. A democratic Iraq 
would not only bring benefit to the Iraqi people, but also would provide a model 
for all of Araby—a positive domino effect on the rest of this troubled region. A 
liberal theory embraced in this way by policy elites for their own purposes is hardly 
a blessing. 
 As in most new research programs, scholarship has taken different directions 
on both complementary and contradictory research paths. Key concepts are defined 
in different ways, and different variables are utilized. Consider, for example, the ba-
sic question of how one defines democracy. Critics complain that democratic peace 
theorists are all over the lot in defining their independent variable. Democracy (or 
states with democratic regimes) purportedly explain the propensity for peaceful 
relations with other democracies, but what constitutes a democracy is not entirely 
clear. 
 To begin with, Immanuel Kant argued that republics made for more peaceful 
international relations, not democracies  per se . Republicanism as we now under-
stand it is  representative democracy supported by the rule of law and respect for 
basic freedoms or rights in civil society. It is not direct democracy in which the 
popular will (or the majority) necessarily prevails. People may not even choose to 
be active participants in day-to-day politics, effectively leaving such matters to their 
representatives with varying degrees of accountability to the electorate. 
 If we are not clear or lack consensus on what constitutes a democracy (or lib-
eral republic), testing democratic-peace hypotheses becomes problematic. Highly 
inclusive definitions compete with those excluding a large number of cases. After 
all, it takes more than just having elections to make a democracy. It is not the 
forms of democratic practice (even dictatorships can use elections to mask their 
authoritarian designs) that count, it is the  substance that matters. Fully developed, 
enduring democracies are buttressed by social structures, economies, and cultures 
of shared values conducive to democratic practice that are often lacking in emerging 
regimes we refer loosely to as democracies. 
 Even when we agree on what counts as a democracy, how are we to define 
the dependent variable, whether war or peace? How is it to be operationalized— 
measured or counted? If “war,” does that include armed interventions with marines 
landing on the beach, or only major and long, drawn-out conflicts involving wide-
spread death and destruction such as occurred in World Wars I and II? Similarly, 
if one wishes to utilize “peace” as the dependent variable, how is that defined? 
Is peace simply the absence of war? If so, are we left with a Hobbesian view that 
international anarchy is inherently a state of war and that the only remedy, then, is 
to eliminate anarchy, perhaps by establishing an all-powerful Leviathan or world 
government as the means to maintaining peace? How far must global governance 
go? Or can we rely more simply on peace-oriented norms of behavior—values 
shared by democracies? 
 Beyond such questions, what is the time period we need to examine to test 
democratic-peace hypotheses? Different historical time periods result in different 
findings as in some periods certain cases are included and others not. Finally, is 
the attribute of democracy the only explanatory factor as to why democratic states 
do not fight one another? Is democracy not only necessary, but also sufficient 

156
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
to provide explanation of peace? Or are other factors of equal or even greater 
importance? 
 Take, for example, the fact that states in western Europe have not engaged 
in war or exhibited warlike behaviors amongst themselves since 1945. Is that 
due to the logic of the democratic peace? Or due to the fact that the Soviet threat 
from 1945–1991 bound these states together under a U.S. security umbrella that 
provided a comfortable deterrent effect against would-be invaders? Or perhaps 
historical memories of the devastation caused by two world wars on the continent 
are enough to discourage war? Or, as suggested above, are the pacifying effects 
of economic interdependence and the integration process the key to peace in the 
European context? 
 Given these and other theoretical and empirical challenges, democratic peace 
theorists still have their work cut out for them.  25  They find themselves in what 
Imre Lakatos termed a “progressive research program,” seeking new insights in the 
pursuit of answers to central questions on matters of war and peace. Will future 
efforts expand beyond a single variable effectively integrating other causal factors 
in the development of a more comprehensive model of the relation between de-
mocracy and peace? Will the program turn as well to broader questions of global 
governance? Quite apart from their normative preferences, should studies of demo-
cratic peace be augmented or expanded to include questions of distributive justice 
as Doyle and others have done? What can be said about justice and its relation to 
peace in “one world” composed of “many peoples”?  26  
DECISION MAKING 
 Perhaps the most important liberal insight on international relations is the central-
ity of state-society relations. This is most evident in the democratic-peace litera-
ture. Instead of viewing the state as a rational, unified actor, the state is composed 
of diverse societal actors. Ideas, group interests, institutions, and individuals shape 
state preferences; they are not a given. When combined with the reality of the 
impact of interdependence and globalization, the liberal IR theorist has a catalog 
of independent variables that helps to account for state behavior in any particular 
issue area. 
 Pathbreaking work in the early 1960s on  Foreign Policy Decision-Making 
by Richard Snyder, H. W. Bruck, and Burton Sapin set the stage for substantial 
work in this genre that looked inside the state and society, disaggregating the 
neorealist rational, unified actor. It reflects and parallels the perspectives of the 
authors summarized under the heading on Interest-Group Liberalism discussed 
earlier. Included in the Snyder, Bruck, and Sapin (SBS) taxonomy were bureau-
cracies, interest groups, and both psychological and social-psychological factors 
that influence decisionmakers. Valerie Hudson has led a reexamination of work 
by SBS, tracing its impact over the decades and on more recent work that would 
follow in this genre.  27  
 SBS were well aware of the agent-structure issue. The debate is not really new. 
They wanted “to avoid deterministic explanations” and what they saw as “the 
awkward problems of the objective-subjective dilemma” by turning their attention 

Decision Making 
157
to the agent—an “attempt to see the world through the decision-maker’s eyes.”  28  
The state-as-actor has meaning only when we look within the state to the decision-
makers themselves and examine how they are influenced by domestic factors and 
how they relate to their decision-making counterparts in other states. Material and 
ideational factors intersect not at the abstract level of the state, but rather at the 
decision-making level. Real people make decisions. Both situational and biographi-
cal factors influence foreign policy choices. 
 Following the SBS lead, Hudson is impatient with “the supposed incom-
mensurability of rational choice and  verstehen ” methods. There is complemen-
tarity between “thin” rationality found in rational choice theories and “‘thick’ 
analysis of world views and values.” The two are not mutually exclusive. 
Beyond that, Hudson clearly stakes out her position in the agency-structure 
debate. She thinks it “theoretically foolish to retain a primary focus on system-
level variables, or even on enduring structural constraints.” Indeed, she com-
ments how “humans appear to have almost an infinite capacity for wriggling 
out of macro-level structures and constraints.” Finally, since “ideas do matter 
in international affairs,” we need to focus “below the state level to find the 
unit of analysis that can think of those ideas”—the human beings who are the 
decisionmakers.  29  
 Much has been accomplished over the decades since SBS first appeared, but 
much is left to be done. The renewed SBS research program thus raises many still 
unanswered questions that can be the subject of ongoing studies: (1) the interplay 
between cognition and emotion, (2) personal relations and trust, (3) the role of 
speeches and policy entrepreneurs in the policy process, (4) perceiving opportuni-
ties, and (5) the role of time constraints on decision making.  30  
 Work in psychology and social psychology has contributed substantially to 
our knowledge of how and why decisionmakers act. The cognitive orientations 
and ontologies decisionmakers have directly influence their perceptions and the 
meanings they ascribe to or infer from what they observe. Under what conditions 
are decisionmakers blinded from realities that contradict their prior expecta-
tions? Are our perceptions affected by what Leon Festinger called cognitive dis-
sonance—we tend not to see what we don’t expect to see?  31  If so, this can lead 
to intelligence failures and adversely affect decision making whether in crisis or 
noncrisis conditions. 
 Perceptions thus clearly play a particularly important role in times of crisis as 
argued by Robert Jervis in his classic  Perception and Misperception in International 
Politics . Individuals relate the images they have to the facts or at least to the in-
formation they have before them. Richard Ned Lebow tested similar ideas in his 
 Between Peace and War . Content analysis of documents has been utilized to ex-
plore the pattern of decisions, mindsets, and assumptions that led to the outbreak, 
for example, of World War I. Ole Holsti’s work on crisis decision making built 
upon this foundation, identifying how stress during crises compounded by the 
short time to receive and assess a large quantity of information can reduce span of 
attention, result in cognitive rigidity, and cause dysfunctions that adversely affect 
decision-making tasks.  32  
 Group dynamics can also result in dysfunctions with adverse effects on deci-
sionmaking. In  Victims of Groupthink , Irving Janis noted how consensus building 

158
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
and team play within a group—normally considered a plus—can lead the group to 
screen out information at odds with the consensus view. Any naysayers that chal-
lenge the common wisdom are likely to be ostracized or pay some high price for 
taking a contrary position.  33  
 In  Essence of Decision , Graham Allison challenged the rational-actor ap-
proach to explaining foreign policy choices.  34  The book expanded upon an earlier 
journal article on conceptual models and the Cuban Missile Crisis that almost led 
to war between the United States and the Soviet Union in October 1962. He and 
his colleagues questioned the conventional, realist assumption of rationality (re-
ferred to as Model I)—that states specify their objectives consistent with national 
interests, identify alternatives, and choose the options most likely to achieve these 
purposes. 
 By contrast, in Model II he asked whether organizational processes affect 
 decisions—the routines or standard operating procedures organizations employ 
and the ethos or perspectives that define their organizational essence and ways of 
doing the business of government. Allison has acknowledged that this insight owes 
much to Max Weber’s perspective on bureaucratic rationality defined as routin-
izing recurrent organizational functions in efforts to achieve efficiencies. Finally, 
in Allison’s Model III, bureaucratic politics were added to the mix—coalition and 
countercoalition formation and the pulling-and-hauling of day-to-day struggles 
within and among bureaucracies. 
 By the 1980s, there was an evident decline in the amount of literature devoted 
to decisionmaking. Nevertheless, cognitive factors remained part of the discourse 
with attention given to the role of ideas in foreign policy as reflected in work by 
Robert Keohane and Judith Goldstein. Goldstein argues that in order to understand 
U.S. trade policies over the years, a reliance on international structural or domestic 
economic interests is insufficient. Rather, one must also take into account actors’ 
causal beliefs as to which economic policies can best achieve preferred interests. 
For his part, Ernst Haas also underscored the importance of cognitive factors and 
ideas in his book  When Knowledge Is Power .  35  As discussed in  Chapter  6 , the role 
of ideas is also critical in constructivist theorizing about international relations and 
foreign policy. 
 Recent years have seen a revival of interest in the perception literature as applied 
to international relations. Dominic Johnson, for example, in his  Overconfidence 
and War revisits the perennial question of why states are susceptible to exaggerated 
ideas of their ability to control events and foresee future outcomes, particularly 
when differences in power would seem to suggest it is foolish to go to war.  36  He 
examines the power of “positive illusions” and overconfidence in case studies of 
World War I, the Munich Crisis of 1939, Vietnam, and Iraq. He draws on a diverse 
body of theoretical and empirical work to include not only psychology, but also 
evolutionary biology and international conflict. 
 Another good example is Dominic Johnson teaming with Dominic Tierney in 
 Failing to Win: Perceptions of Victory and Defeat in International Politics .  37  It is 
evident that the decision-making literature has invariably focused on the decision 
to go to war or factors influencing decisions during a crisis. Johnson and Tierney, 
however, are interested in evaluations of success or failure once the shooting 
has stopped or the crisis is resolved. The question they pose is: “What are the 

Decision Making 
159
psychological, political, and cultural factors that predispose observers (whether 
leaders, the public, or the media) to perceive outcomes of international disputes as 
victories or defeats?” They argue that there is often a huge gap between perceptions 
(observers’ personal interpretations) and reality. Sometimes perceptions and reality 
of events on the battlefield match, as in the case of the Fall of Berlin to the Soviet 
Union in April 1945. But other times they do not, or different observers judge simi-
lar events very differently. Why? 
 Johnson and Tierney note that evaluating winners and losers in wars and crises 
is not simply a matter of answering the question of which country made the greatest 
gains or achieved its stated goals. Quite often, “people end up evaluating outcomes 
on the basis of factors that are largely independent of the battlefield: their preexist-
ing beliefs, the symbolism of events, and manipulation by elites and the media.” By 
way of example, the War of 1812 between the United States and Great Britain was 
basically a draw on the ground and a return to the prewar status quo. Yet in the 
United States it was trumpeted as a great triumph, despite the failed U.S. attempt 
to annex Canada, the British burning of the White House, and divisions among 
Americans themselves. 
 Conversely, the U.S. involvement in the African country of Somalia in 1993 
is deemed a failure, etched in most people’s minds as the infamous “Blackhawk 
Down” firefight in which eighteen American soldiers died. What is forgotten is 
that the initial relief operation—a humanitarian effort (UNITAF/Operation Restore 
Hope)—saved, by varying estimates, anywhere from tens of thousands to one mil-
lion Somali lives. The initial mission was to stabilize the security environment to 
make humanitarian relief efforts possible, and many refugees were able to return 
home. Subsequent failures overshadowed these successes, and the result was politi-
cal leaders and the U.S. public souring on the idea of humanitarian interventions. 
This contributed to the lack of U.S. action several months later when in Rwanda the 
systematic genocide of Tutsis and moderate Hutus resulted in the deaths of 800,000 
people in a few short months. Other in-depth cases examined by the authors include 
the Cuban Missile Crisis (1962), the Tet Offensive in Vietnam (1968), and the Yom 
Kippur (or October) War between Egypt and Israel (1973). 
 Perceptions of victory and defeat are obviously important for leaders in demo-
cratic societies who are concerned with political survival. But perceived defeat, in 
particular, can have a traumatic effect on society at large, potentially defining a 
country’s self-image for years to come. Furthermore, perceptions of success and 
failure can shape current and future foreign policy options and decisions. 
 Johnson and Tierney devise a conceptual framework to explain the dependent 
variable: people’s perceptions of victory and defeat. First, they examine the con-
ventional wisdom hypothesis that people’s judgments of victory and defeat simply 
reflect the material outcome. They refer to this as score-keeping and provide five 
possible definitions of “victory” that can serve as empirically verifiable metrics. 
Second, the authors attempt to explain why the observed gains and losses made by 
each side often fail to explain people’s perceptions of victory in wars or crises, argu-
ing that the score-keeping approach fails to answer this question adequately. The 
explanatory concept they develop is termed “match-fixing” and relies on the vast 
body of literature on informational and psychological biases to include cognitive 
processes, affective processes, learning theory, and cultural influences. 

160
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
 No one would deny that the study of ideas, perceptions, and organizations is 
important if we wish to improve our understanding of foreign policy or national 
security decision making. Two important questions, however, are (1) How much 
emphasis should be placed on the domestic level of analysis as opposed to the in-
ternational level when attempting to explain international outcomes and patterns? 
and (2) How can theorists link the two levels to provide a complete accounting of 
the phenomena under consideration? The perennial challenge for IR scholars is to 
develop theories that account simultaneously for the interaction of domestic and 
international factors—more easily said than done.  
CHANGE AND GLOBALIZATION 
 Liberals note that while a great deal of international relations involves continuity, 
change is also a constant. The Soviet Union collapsed. American domination of the 
international economy has eroded. Radical Islam, the power of religion in general, 
and international terrorism did not loom large on the radar screen of IR scholars 
even fifteen years ago. To explain such changes by reference to shifts in the global 
distribution of power begs the question of how to explain those shifts in the first 
place. It is safe to say that of all of the images discussed in this book, liberalism 
is most open (and expectant) of change. This is in part due to its emphasis on the 
voluntarism end of the determinism–voluntarism spectrum. But liberalism, due to 
its emphasis on political economy as evident by the literature on integration and 
interdependence, would also seem to be well prepared to deal with the impact 
of globalization. Indeed, while interdependence was the buzzword of the 1970s, 
globalization attained a similar status in the 1990s. The temptation to simply 
substitute one concept for the other has been resisted by liberal scholars.  Global-
ization is not simply about linkages between societies and states, but concerns the 
way aspects of social life have been reorganized due to the velocity and intensity of 
transnational flows encouraged by the liberalization of trade and deregulation of 
financial markets. As John Ruggie has stated, globalization is to interdependence as 
Federal Express is to the exchange of letters between separate post offices.  38  
 With the exception of economic structuralism, compared to all the other images 
and understandings discussed in this book, the liberal perspective on world politics 
has the most affinity with globalization. Indeed, the concepts of transnationalism 
and interdependence are often component elements of definitions of globalization. 
This is not surprising. As noted in our discussion of intellectual precursors, liberal 
thinkers have long been concerned with meeting human desires for material wellbe-
ing and the achievement of civil and political rights. Technological advances have 
helped spur the international transportation of goods and the spread of ideas, key 
aspects of globalization. Integration, regime and neoliberal institutionalists have all 
studied how collaborative efforts (IMF, World Bank, WTO, etc.) can support global 
markets and upgrade the common interest in such other areas as human rights. The 
establishment of legal and institutional arrangements to stabilize markets and assist 
the spread of liberal democracy across the globe are related liberal projects.  39  
 In the wake of the global financial crisis that began in 2008, two important 
practical and theoretical questions arise. First, to what extent does globalization 

Liberals and Their Critics 
161
threaten the democratic peace? Realists have long noted that interdependence did 
not keep the major states from launching World War I. Particularly since the 1970s, 
the flow of trade and finance have changed the operation of the world’s economy, 
increasingly creating one large, global market. There have been winners and los-
ers, and resultant political tensions within and between states and world regions. 
Could globalization, far from creating harmony among states, exacerbate political 
tensions and result in a scenario more in tune with realist expectations? 
 Second, will global governance continue to expand or retract in an age of 
contested globalization? To what extent are the norms, institutions, and processes 
designed to enhance international collaboration sufficient to manage the challenge 
of globalization and the collective action problem it poses for states? Liberals are 
concerned over possible answers to these questions. There is an awareness that cur-
rent levels of efficiency and even effectiveness of international institutions are not 
sufficient to sustain their viability. What is lacking is sufficient degrees of legitimacy 
that are required to sustain any institution over time. 
 In response to this concern, recent years has seen a veritable explosion in the 
literature on deliberative global governance.  40  These theorists—whether liberal, 
cosmopolitan, or critical—have normative as well as practical concerns. It is argued 
that global civil society can and should act as an arena of deliberation, if not act as 
an agent for democratizing global governance. The goal is to have a decisive and 
positive influence on decisions. Current institutions would benefit from enhanced 
legitimacy if the principles of democratic accountability, transparency, and par-
ticipation were more rigorously applied. More important, it would enhance the 
ability of such multilateral fora to resolve global collective action challenges as they 
would be more representative of the needs of the global community. The problem 
is figuring out the mechanisms to achieve such goals. Global civil society is not an 
undifferentiated mass but is composed of various groups unequal in resources and 
with competing agendas.  
LIBERALS AND THEIR CRITICS 
Anarchy
 As noted, liberals argue that the role of anarchy and the security dilemma is over-
emphasized in explaining international relations, or argue that its worst aspects can 
be overcome through purposeful collaborative behavior to include international 
organizations, institutions, and regimes. Realists argue, however, that any analysis 
of world politics must begin with the anarchical structure of the system taken into 
account. How is it possible to assess realistically the possibilities for cooperation 
and peace between states unless we recognize the role of anarchy in creating suspi-
cion and distrust? The realist contends that if one ignores or reduces the importance 
of such considerations, thinking can quickly become utopian with little relation to 
reality. Furthermore, realists argue that states often have fundamentally different 
interests in which the drive for relative material gains makes conflict inevitable and 
part of the eternal landscape of international relations. 
 A liberal response is that placing so much emphasis on the security dilemma 
loads the dice against any change from the status quo. To see the world as nothing 

162
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
more than competition and conflict born of mistrust among states is itself a distor-
tion of reality, or even a self-fulfilling prophecy. One’s acts, if born of suspicion 
and distrust, will tend to produce similar responses in others, thus confirming one’s 
initial suspicions. 
 Furthermore, the history of world politics is a history not only of conflict but 
also of collaboration. To study instances of when the security dilemma has been 
overcome is just as important as studying instances when it has contributed to the 
onset of war. Liberals claim they have the conceptual tools to do so whether it is 
integration, interdependence, neoliberal institutionalism, regime theory, or the 
democratic peace and the role of ideas in accounting for actor preferences.  
Theory Building 
 Realists have argued that much of the work in the liberal tradition is highly de-
scriptive and lacking theoretical content. Hence, the generally disparaging attitude 
toward a term such as  globalization that is more of a popular buzzword than a 
theoretically useful concept. Realists claim that by describing the world in greater 
and greater detail, descriptive accuracy increases at the expense of developing  par-
simonious  theories of international relations that can explain patterns of behavior. 
In other words, theories should be as simple as possible. 
 Understanding increases by moving  away from the real world, not by moving 
closer to it. At first, this statement might seem counterintuitive or different from 
what one might expect. But ambitious theories aim at producing valid generaliza-
tions by viewing the forest as a whole, not individual trees. By faithfully cataloguing 
the complexity of the world, many liberals, according to critics, are in danger of 
remaining in the realm of merely describing things as opposed to explaining why 
things happen the way they do. 
 Scholars operating within the liberal image make a number of rebuttals. First, 
one only has to point to neoliberal institutionalism to rebut the charge of descrip-
tion at the expense of theoretical parsimony. The work of Robert Keohane and his 
colleagues has often been characterized as a theoretical counterpoint to neorealist 
approaches to international relations, despite the fact that both research agendas 
employ rational actor assumptions and positivist standards of evidence. 
 Second, liberals note this obsession with parsimony is really most attribut-
able to neo- or structural realists. Classical realists such as Haas Morgenthau and 
Arnold Wolfers examined the role of a multitude of factors at various levels of 
analysis, just as more recent scholars in the classical realist tradition seek to un-
derstand the reciprocal interactive effects of the state and the international system. 
 Finally, the liberal research agenda in recent years has perhaps offered more 
theories and testable hypotheses than any other image of international politics, 
contributing to the ultimate social science goal of cumulative knowledge. In par-
ticular, varying liberal research agendas tend to coalesce around the unifying theme 
of the pacifying effects of democracy, economic interdependence, and international 
institutions. Far from being unrelated research agendas, these three topics reinforce 
one another. Yes, it is admitted, the diversity of approaches under the liberal im-
age is not as neat and streamlined as the realist image with its traditional focus on 
issues of conflict among states. The liberal image consists of a number of different 

Liberals and Their Critics 
163
actors operating within and across state boundaries that makes for complexity, but 
theories of international relations should aspire to deal with such complexity and 
not pretend that it does not exist. How adequate are theories that fail to deal with 
and explain many of the changes that have occurred in the nature of world politics 
over the past half-century? While realism is a useful “first cut” at understanding 
world politics, too much is left out: the role of institutions, transnational relations, 
domestic politics, and ideas.  
The Democratic Peace 
 With the demise of the Soviet Union in the early 1990s, Francis Fukuyama in his 
 End of History stated that liberal democracy had no serious ideological rival and 
hence, it was “the end point of mankind’s ideological evolution” and the “final 
form of human government.”  41  Indeed, democracy seemed to be gaining adherents, 
not only in states of the former Soviet empire in East Europe, but also in areas of 
the Third World where nascent democratic transitions were occurring. Realists, 
to put it mildly, were skeptical, not only doubting how long the expanded zone of 
democratic peace would last in the new Europe, but also pointing to the conflict 
in the Balkans, conflict among a number of African states, India-Pakistan tensions, 
and the gradual rise of China as a global economic, political, and military power. 
 Liberals responded that the democratic zone of peace in Europe is no small 
achievement, and since the 1990s there has been no hint of a possible interstate 
war within Europe. Even if it is subject to debate how much the spread of democ-
racy contributes to the explanation of this situation as opposed to the economic 
interdependence and enticements provided by membership in the European Union, 
the fact remains that realist predictions of an incessant drive for domination and 
the supposed built-in systemic incentives for armed conflict have not threatened the 
European peace. As for the Third World, few liberals have claimed this to be an 
appropriate test bed for democratic peace theory. Indeed, the Third World is more 
often characterized as a zone of conflict where internal conflicts and weak states 
now seem more the norm than interstate conflict.  
Voluntarism
 If realists have been criticized for being excessively pessimistic concerning the hu-
man condition and the ability of individuals to control international events and 
forces, liberals can be criticized for their heavy reliance on the assumption of vol-
untarism, or effective free will. Their emphasis on agency over structure reflects 
the voluntarism in much of liberal theory. Some liberal writings leave one with 
the impression that international harmony can be achieved if only leaders really 
wanted it—that it is a simple matter of human volition, a mere matter of desiring 
cooperation as opposed to competition. Hence, the transformation of the nature of 
world politics is seen to be desirable as well as attainable. Either “bad and ignorant 
leaders” or “bad governments” stand in the way; if they could be educated or re-
moved, the world would be a better place. Once again, the influence of the liberal 
philosophy is evident, and once again, the realist evaluation would be that this view 
of international change and how it can be achieved ignores constraints placed on 

164
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
all leaders and states by the anarchical nature of the international system, the drive 
for relative gains, and the balance of power. Moreover, some realists would argue 
that people are indeed aggressive with a proclivity toward warlike behavior; it is 
part of human nature to behave so. 
 The emphasis on voluntarism is not always acknowledged in liberal writings. 
Nor is it necessarily a function of a philosophical commitment to a belief in free 
will that can influence outcomes. It could also derive from the fact that the focus 
of analysis for many liberals happens to be factors operating at the domestic level 
of analysis, which involves the study of actual institutions, individual actors, and 
collective belief systems held by flesh-and-blood policymakers. When one studies 
real individuals within real institutions, it is obvious that agency matters. World 
politics takes on a human face, understandably resulting in a reliance on the as-
sumption of voluntarism.  
NOTES
 1.   Following Kennzeth Waltz’s typology developed in his early volume  Man, the State and 
War , the first image is an individual (or small-group) level of analysis, the second a focus 
on state and society, the third on the international system as a whole.  
 2.   Theodore J. Lowi,  The End of Liberalism: Ideology, Policy, and the Crisis of Public 
Authority (New York: Norton, 1969), 48 and 71. Subsequent quotes are from David 
Truman,  The Governmental Process (New York: Knopf, 1959), ix, 519–20; Robert 
A. Dahl,  A Preface to Democratic Theory (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1963), 
173; see also Harold D. Lasswell,  Politics: Who Gets What, When, How (New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1936).  
 3.   Ernst B. Haas, “Turbulent Fields and the Theory of Regional Integration,”  International 
Organization, 30, 2 (Spring 1976), 179.  
 4.   See the full argument in James N. Rosenau,  Turbulence in World Politics (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1990).  
 5.   John W. Burton,  World Society (Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press, 
1972); Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye, Jr., eds.  Transnational Relations and 
World Politics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1971). Examples of later 
works in this genre include Margaret E. Keck and Kathryn Sikkink,  Activists beyond 
Borders: Advocacy Networks in International Politics (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1998); and Sanjeev Khagram, James A. Riker, and Kathryn Sikkink, eds.,  Restruc-
turing World Politics: Transnational Movements, Networks, and Norms (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2002).  
 6.   Robert O. Keohane and Joseph S. Nye, Jr.,  Power and Interdependence: World Politics 
in Transition (Boston: Little Brown, 1977), 8.  
 7.   Andreas Hansenclever, Peter Mayer, and Volker Rittberger, “Interests, Power, Knowl-
edge: The Study of International Regimes,”  Mershon International Studies Review 40, 2 
(October 1996): 177–228.  
 8.   Stephen D. Krasner, “Global Communications and National Power: Life on the Pareto 
Frontier,”  World Politics 43 (1991): 363.  
 9.   Peter M. Haas, “Introduction: Epistemic Communities and International Policy Coor-
dination,”  International Organization 46 (1992): 3. Subsequent quote also from this 
article. 
 10.  Friedrich V. Kratochwil and John Gerard Ruggie, “International Organization: A State 
of the Art on an Art of the State,”  International Organization 40 (1986): 764, 766.  

Notes
165
 11.  Robert O. Keohane, “Neoliberal Institutionalism: A Perspective on World Politics,” in 
 International Institutions and State Power: Essays in International Relations Theory, 
ed. Robert O. Keohane (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1989), 3. The rest of this sec-
tion draws on this chapter of Keohane’s collected essays as well as his  After Hegemony: 
Cooperation and Discord in the World Political Economy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1984).  
 12.  Keohane, “Neoliberal Institutionalism: A Perspective on World Politics,” 2.  
 13.  See Judith Goldstein and Robert O. Keohane, eds.,  Ideas and Foreign Policy: Beliefs, 
Institutions, and Political Change (Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1993).  
 14.  Robert O. Keohane,  Power and Governance in a Partially Globalized World (New York 
and London: Routledge, 2002), 258.  
 15.  Ibid., 16, 208, and 245.  
 16.  Ibid., 266 and 246.  
 17.  Ibid., 266.  
 18.   See J. D. Thompson,  Organizations in Action (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1967), 134–35.  
 19.  Richard Rosecrance,  The Rise of the Trading State: Commerce and Conquest in the 
Modern World. (New York: Basic Books, 1986).  
 20.  John Mueller,  Retreat from Doomsday: The Obsolescence of Major War (New York: 
Basic Books, 1989).  
 21.  Stephen G. Brooks,  Producing Security: Multinational Corporations, Globalization, 
and the Changing Calculus of Conflict (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2005, 
2007).  
 22.   Michael W. Doyle, “Liberalism and World Politics,”  American Political Science Review, 
80, 4 (1986): 1151–69. For a survey of the literature, see Edward Mansfield and Brian 
Pollins, “The Study of Interdependence and Conflict: Recent Advances, Open Ques-
tions, and Directions for Future Research,”  Journal of Conflict Resolution 45, 6 (2001): 
834–59. Cf. Larry Diamond,  The Spirit of Democracy: The Struggle to Build Free Societ-
ies Throughout the World (New York: Times Books-Henry Holt, 2008).  
 23.  Edward D. Mansfield and Jack Snyder,  Electing to Fight: Why Emerging Democracies 
Go to War (Boston: MIT Press, 2005).  
 24.  Jack Levy, “The Causes of War: A Review of Theories and Evidence,” in Phillip 
E. Tetlock et al., eds.  Behavior, Society, and Nuclear War, vol. 1 (New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1989), 270.  
   25.  See, for example, David Kinsella, “No Rest for the Democratic Peace,”  American Politi-
cal Science Review, 99, 3 (August 2005): 453–72. 
 26.  See Michael W. Doyle, “One World, Many Peoples: International Justice in John 
 Rawls’s  The Law of Peoples, ”  Perspectives on Politics, 4, 1 (March 2006): 109–20.  
 27.  See Valerie M. Hudson, Derek H. Chollet, and James M. Goldgeier,  Foreign  Policy 
Decision-Making (Revisited) including the original text by Richard C. Snyder, 
H. W. Bruck, and Burton Sapin (New York: Palgrave, 2002).  
 28.  Ibid., 5.  
 29.  Ibid., 7–9.  
 30.   Ibid., 165.  
 31.   Leon Festinger,  Theory of Cognitive Dissonance (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 
1957).  
 32.   Robert Jervis,  Perception and Misperception in International Politics (Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1976); Richard Ned Lebow,  Between Peace and War: The 
Nature of International Crisis (Baltimore MD: The Johns Hopkins University Press, 
1984); see Ole Holsti’s article on crisis decision making in Paul Gordon Lauren,  Di-
plomacy: New Approaches in History, New Approaches in History, Theory and Policy 
(New York, Free Press, 1979).  

166
CHAPTER 3  Liberalism: Interdependence and Global Governance
 33.  Irving Janis,  Victims of Groupthink (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1972).  
 34.  Graham Allison,  Essence of Decision: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis, 2nd ed. 
(New York: Longman, 1971, 1999).  
 35.  Judith Goldstein,  Ideas, Interests, and American Trade Policy (Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1994); Ernst B. Haas,  When Knowledge Is Power: Three Modes of Change in 
International Politics (Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 1990).  
 36.  Dominic Johnson,  Overconfidence and War (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, 
2004).  
 37.  Dominic Johnson and Dominic Tierney,  Failing to Win: Perceptions of Victory and 
Defeat in International Politics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2006).  
 38.  As cited by Robert O. Keohane,  Power and Governance in a Partially Globalized World 
(United Kingdom: Routledge, 2002).  
 39.  Jan Aart Scholte,  Globalisation: A Critical Introduction , 2nd  ed. (New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2005), p. 124.  
 40.  James Brassett and William Smith, “Deliberation and Global Civil Society: Agency, 
Arena, and Affect,”  Review of International Studies , 36 (2010): 413-30; James Bohman, 
 Democracy Across Borders: From Demos to Demoi (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 
2007); John S. Dryzek,  Deliberative Global Politics: Discourse and Democracy in a 
Divided World (Cambridge: Polity Press, 2006).  
 41.  Francis Fukuyama,  The End of History and the Last Man (New York: Free Press, 
1992), xi–xii.  

SE LECTED READI N GS 
Producing Security 
STEPHEN G. BROOKS 
OVERVIEW
 Brooks observes that the issue of the relation between international commerce 
and war and peace goes back several thousands of years. The traditional focus 
and debate has been on economic interdependence defined in terms of trade 
between states. Realists such as Kenneth Waltz debated liberals such as Richard 
Rosecrance on this issue. In an era of economic globalization, however, the key 
focus of analysis should be the impact of the globalization of production, in 
particular the international production strategies of multinational corporations. 
According to Brooks, there are three mechanisms by which the international 
economy can influence security—by changing capabilities, incentives, and the 
nature of the actors. 
 The issue is to what extent the globalization of production acts as a significant 
force for stability among great powers, between great powers and other states, and 
among states with secondary international power capabilities. He directly takes 
on John Mearsheimer’s pessimistic view of international relations among great 
powers.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   What was Alexander Hamilton’s rebuttal to the arguments of Smith, Bentham, Kant, Paine, 
Rousseau, Montesquieu, and Mill that international commerce made war among states more 
costly and hence peace more likely?  
 2.  What is meant by the key concept “globalization of production”?  
 3.   What specifically are the key puzzles associated with shifting capabilities, incentives, and 
nature of the actors?  
 4.   What is the relation between increased geographic dispersion of MNC production and stabil-
ity among great powers? What is the rebuttal posed by Brooks to realist John Mearsheimer’s 
pessimistic assessment of the future of great-power security relations?  
 5.  Does the optimistic view offered by Brooks of relations among great powers extend to state 
interaction among lesser powers? Why or why not?  
From  Producing Security: Multinational Corporations, Globalization, and the Changing Calculus of Conflict  by Stephen 
G. Brooks. Copyright © 2005 by Princeton University Press. Reprinted by permission of Princeton University Press.
167

168
STEPHEN G. BROOKS
 The belief that international commerce can 
strongly shape security relations is reflected not just 
in the writings of scholars over the centuries, but in 
policy discussions and governmental decisions. Over 
the years, the optimistic perspective on commerce 
and security has most strongly and directly shaped 
policy. David Lloyd George, Cordell Hull, Woodrow 
Wilson, Richard Cobden, William Gladstone, and 
Bill Clinton are prominent examples of politicians 
who have advanced policies premised on the no-
tion that international commerce can promote 
peace.  8  As we move into the twenty-first century, 
this view continues to significantly influence impor-
tant aspects of policy. In the United States, the deci-
sion to push for China’s entry into the World Trade 
Organization is the most prominent recent example. 
In his 28 January 2000 State of the Union Address, 
President Bill Clinton exhorted: “Congress should 
support the agreement we negotiated to bring China 
into the WTO, by passing Permanent Normal Trade 
Relations with China as soon as possible . . . [because] 
it will plainly advance the cause of peace in Asia.” 
While the foreign policy approaches of the Clinton 
and George W. Bush administrations differ greatly 
on many issues, a key common theme is the notion 
that promoting economic globalization throughout 
the world can foster a stable security environment.  9  
 Despite the prominence of the view among 
scholars and policymakers that international com-
merce significantly influences security relations, up 
until the 1990s essentially no empirical analysis of 
this issue existed.  10  In the final phase of the Cold War, 
prominent scholars such as Richard Rosecrance and 
Kenneth Waltz continued the centuries-old debate 
on the effects of commerce on peace, but this dis-
cussion was confined to the level of theory.  11  The 
rapidly growing scope of international economic in-
tegration, termed “globalization,” has over the past 
decade led international relations scholars to renew 
their attention to how shifts in the international 
economy affect states’ security behavior. Unlike 
 almost all previous scholarship on this general sub-
ject, the most recent wave of investigations was 
empirically focused.  12  The general finding emerging 
from this literature—that trade linkages between 
states reduce the likelihood of conflict—is impor-
tant in its own right and, more generally, indicates 
that the centuries-old contention that the business 
activities of firms can significantly shape security 
affairs is, in fact, valid.  13  
 Scholars and statesmen have debated the influ-
ence of international commerce on war and peace 
for thousands of years. Around  a.d.  100, Plutarch 
maintained that international commerce brought 
about “cooperation and friendship” and that the 
cessation of commercial exchange would cause 
the life of man to be “savage and destitute.”  1  This 
line of reasoning became particularly prominent 
in the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries with 
the writings of philosophers such as Adam Smith, 
Jeremy Bentham, Immanuel Kant, Thomas Paine, 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Montesquieu, and John 
Stuart Mill.  2  These men were united in their be-
lief that enhanced international commerce made 
war among states more costly and, thus, that “the 
natural effect of commerce is to lead to peace,”  3  as 
Montesquieu maintained in 1748. Many of them 
also believed that commerce was a dynamic force 
having a progressively stronger stabilizing effect 
over time. In the eyes of Kant, “the spirit of com-
merce, which is incompatible with war, sooner or 
later gains the upper hand in every state.”  4  
 This sanguine view of commerce as having 
a strong, positive effect on interstate relations 
has not been universally embraced. Indeed, many 
have argued the opposite is true. Perhaps the 
most prominent early pessimistic statement in 
this regard was advanced by Alexander Hamilton. 
Writing in 1787, he devotes most of Federalist 6 to 
critiquing the notion that the “spirit of commerce 
has a tendency to soften the manners of men and 
to extinguish those inflammable humors which 
have so often kindled into wars.” After running 
through a series of historical examples. Hamilton 
ultimately concludes that numerous wars were 
“founded upon commercial motives” and that 
“spirit of commerce in many instances admin-
istered new incentives” for conflict.  5  Another 
prominent early pessimist is Frederick List, who 
argued during the middle of the nineteenth cen-
tury that reducing participation in international 
commerce is, in the absence of a universal repub-
lic, the surest route to enhancing a state’s secu-
rity.  6  At the dawn of the twentieth century, John 
Hobson famously maintained that the business 
activities of firms led to imperialism; a few years 
later, Lenin then took one step further, emphasiz-
ing that not just imperialism but eventually war 
among capitalist states would be the inevitable 
result of capitalism.  7  

Producing Security 
169
have largely bypassed many others. Specifically, it 
is among the economically most advanced states 
that the geographic dispersion of MNC production 
has been most prominent; the rise of international 
interfirm alliances, for example, is a trend largely 
restricted to North America, Western Europe, and 
Japan. It is also important to recognize that the 
geographic dispersion of MNC production is not 
occurring equally across all industries. . . . [I]nterna-
tionalization strategies have become prominent only 
in certain sectors. 
 The unprecedented nature of the globalization 
of production is a key feature distinguishing it from 
international trade. Many analysts argue that what 
we call economic globalization resembles the inter-
national economy during the “golden age” of capi-
talism from 1870 to 1914. However, this similarity 
is strong only if we treat economic globalization as 
an aggregate; when we break economic globaliza-
tion into its constituent parts, we reach a very differ-
ent answer. The globalization of production clearly 
represents an ongoing qualitative change in the in-
ternational economy; trying to advance the same 
claim about the other two economic globalization 
trends—of international trade and international 
financial markets, respectively—is more problem-
atic. In the end, the geographic dispersion of MNC 
production is the most historically novel aspect of 
contemporary economic globalization. 
 Despite the substantive significance and histori-
cal novelty of the globalization of production, there 
has so far been no systematic empirical analysis of 
its implications for security relations among states. 
The last detailed empirical examination of how in-
ternational production by MNCs can influence se-
curity affairs was written in 1935.  18  A number of 
prominent analysts have recently noted that changes 
in MNC production strategies may have significant 
repercussions for security affairs, but this is not a pri-
mary focus of their analysis, and they do not empiri-
cally evaluate the notions they advance.  19  Because 
systematic data on the geographic dispersion of 
MNC production does not exist, there is a dearth 
of quantitative studies of international conflict that 
use measures of this global production shift.  20  A 
significant literature did develop in the middle and 
late 1980s that analyzed the United States’ increased 
reliance upon foreign suppliers for parts and com-
ponents of military weapons systems.  21  However, 
this literature, as well as the studies following in 
Bringing in the Globalization 
of Production 
 Given the great importance of economic globaliza-
tion in the international environment, it is crucial 
to carefully evaluate its influence on security. The 
recent literature examining how the international 
economy influences security has produced impor-
tant new insights, but it suffers from a major limi-
tation: it neglects the most significant feature of 
today’s global economy. Over the centuries, schol-
ars have generally treated the questions “Does in-
ternational commerce influence security?” and “Do 
trade flows influence security?” as synonymous. 
Not surprisingly, virtually all studies in this recent 
wave of scholarship examine the security repercus-
sions of international trade flows.  14  In the past, such 
an overarching focus on the security implications of 
trade made sense. It no longer does. Until recently, 
trade was “the primary means of organizing inter-
national economic transactions.”  15  Today, however, 
trade is a second-order phenomenon: where and 
how multinational corporations (MNCs) organize 
their production activities is now the key integrating 
force in global commerce.  16  
 MNC international production strategies have 
changed in a variety of fundamental ways over the 
past three decades. These new strategies are char-
acterized by an increased cross-border dispersion 
of production. For this reason, analysts commonly 
use the short-hand term  globalization of produc-
tion as a descriptor of these recent changes in MNC 
production—a practice I will also adopt here.  17  As 
will be shown, MNCs are geographically dispersing 
production activities both internally and externally—
that is, within the firm itself as well as through 
the development of more extensive interfirm link-
ages across borders. More specifically, MNCs have 
greatly enhanced the intrafirm international divi-
sion of the production process through a new role 
for foreign affiliates: at the same time, they have 
pursued deeper relationships with foreign suppliers 
and cooperative partners located abroad through 
international subcontracting and international in-
terfirm alliances. 
 Although analysts use the language of global-
ization in describing these shifts, the geographic 
dispersion of MNC production activities is not 
truly global in scope. These shifts in MNC produc-
tion have had powerful effects on some states, but 

170
STEPHEN G. BROOKS
Analysts agree that going it alone has become harder 
in defense production in recent years.  23  Until now, 
however, we have lacked an understanding of ex-
actly how much more difficult it has become. The 
analysis in this book reveals that the scales have de-
cisively shifted against a strategy of autarkic defense 
production: no state, including the great powers, 
can now effectively remain on the cutting edge in 
military technology if it does not pursue significant 
internationalization in the production of weaponry. 
 Concerning incentives, the key unanswered 
question is whether the geographic dispersion of 
MNC production has changed the economic bene-
fits of conquest. Economic gain has historically been 
a significant motivating force for conflict, and wars 
of conquest unfortunately still occur, as is demon-
strated by Iraq’s 1991 invasion of Kuwait and the 
occupation of western Congo by Uganda, Burundi, 
and Rwanda from 1998 to 2002. Irrespective of the 
motivation for war, the prospects for stability—
that is, peacefulness—will decrease if aggressors are 
able to extract significant economic resources from 
newly occupied territory. The current benchmark 
study of the economic benefits of conquest con-
cludes that conquerors are still in a position to 
effectively extract economic resources from van-
quished wealthy countries.  24  In order to determine 
whether this is truly the case, we need to investi-
gate how recent economic transformations within 
the most advanced countries affect the economic 
benefits of conquest. Until now, this key issue has 
been neglected in the literature. This analysis reveals 
that while conquerors are still in a position to ef-
fectively extract economic resources from a subset 
of wealthy countries, they can no longer do so from 
most. Specifically, I find that the globalization of 
production has greatly reduced the economic ben-
efits of military conquest among the most advanced 
countries. 
 With respect to shifts in the nature of the actors, 
the primary puzzle is whether the geographic disper-
sion of MNC production can reshape security by 
influencing the prospects for regional economic in-
tegration. Because regional integration can alter the 
interests of the group’s respective members, scholars 
conclude that such institutions can play a significant 
role in the development of stable, peaceful security 
relationships.  25  Although this line of argument is 
compelling, a key question remains: under what 
conditions will states with security tensions be able 
to consolidate integration in the first place? All the 
its wake, focuses almost exclusively on the conse-
quences of the globalization of production for U.S. 
defense policy or the structure of the U.S. economy 
rather than upon the repercussions for international 
security more generally. This literature also cen-
ters upon increases in international subcontracting, 
which is only one element of the geographic disper-
sion of MNC production. 
 Empirical analyses of the security repercussions 
of trade flows can no longer eclipse examinations of 
how the globalization of production affects security 
relations. This book is the first systematic study of 
how this unprecedented change in the global econ-
omy influences international security. Since the geo-
graphic dispersion of MNC production is a novel 
and dramatic shift in the international environment, 
it is critical to know how it changes the prospects for 
peace. This analysis shows that the globalization of 
production has led to major changes in the global 
security environment that collectively improve the 
security climate in some regions while decreasing it 
in others.  
The Globalization of Production Leads 
to Changes in Capabilities, Incentives, 
and Actors 
 Within the literature that examines how the interna-
tional economy can influence security, scholars out-
line a wide variety of arguments. In practice, these 
disparate arguments can be boiled down to three 
general mechanisms: the global economy can influ-
ence security by changing capabilities, incentives, 
and the nature of the actors. “Producing Security” 
shows that the globalization of production has re-
shaped the global security environment via each of 
these three general mechanisms. 
 Regarding capabilities, the key puzzle is whether 
the globalization of production has fundamentally 
changed the parameters of weapons production. As 
Richard Bitzinger notes, throughout history, “most 
countries traditionally have preferred to be self-
sufficient in arms production.”  22  The reasons are 
straight-forward: “going it alone” in defense pro-
duction makes it possible to guard against vulner-
ability to supply interruptions and to ensure that 
strategic competitors do not have easy access to 
the same vital military technologies. States continue 
to have a preference for relying on their own re-
sources for weapons production; the key question 
is how capable they are of pursuing this strategy. 

Producing Security 
171
working within every different approach and method 
in the field.  27  This focus is not surprising. Although 
great power war is not an everyday occurrence, it 
is one that holds great peril: in World War II, over 
50 million were killed, and the possibility that the 
nature of the system could be transformed by the 
Axis powers was far from remote. Moreover, the 
mere threat of great power revisionism is grave and 
consequential: the U.S. effort to contain the Soviet 
threat to the system during the Cold War was in-
credibly expensive in economic terms (for decades 
America committed between 5 and 14 percent of its 
GDP to defense spending), and U.S presidents re-
peatedly engaged in brinkmanship that ran the risk 
of escalation to global thermonuclear destruction. 
 Many different factors influence the prospects 
for great power stability.  28  What is crucial is to 
identify which factors are important and whether 
they are likely to have a positive or negative influ-
ence. The findings of this book collectively indicate 
that the globalization of production now acts as a 
force for stability among the great powers. Put most 
precisely, the conclusion of this book is that the in-
creased geographic dispersion of MNC production 
will, ceteris paribus, increase the stability of great 
power relations. 
 Of course, some say that the rise of what we 
now call economic globalization is partly due to the 
“long peace” that emerged among the great powers 
after 1945.  29  This is true. There are many different 
sources of this long peace, which, in turn, provided 
a favorable environment for the onset and accel-
eration of economic globalization. This book is not 
about the causes of the long peace, nor the genesis 
of economic globalization. Instead, the motivation 
for this book is to understand the repercussions of 
the globalization of production for security relations 
throughout the world in recent years and in the 
years to come. With the fading of Cold War security 
structures, a number of prominent analysts now see 
an increased threat of security competition among 
great powers.  30  This is where the geographic disper-
sion of MNC production enters in. As this book 
will show, now that the globalization of production 
is here, it works independently to reinforce stability 
among the great powers in a positive feedback loop 
via a specific set of mechanisms. 
 This analysis, in short, greatly strengthens the 
argument that international commerce now acts as 
a force for peace among the great powers. This 
book’s conclusion—that the production activities 
theory we have indicates that it is the consolida-
tion of deep regional economic integration, and not 
simply the formation of an agreement, that has 
significant positive security repercussions. And yet, 
scholars who study international co-operation gen-
erally agree that states with security tensions will 
be least likely to engage in deep economic coopera-
tion.  26  We need to examine whether the globaliza-
tion of production can exert sufficient pressure to 
induce even those states with a history of secu-
rity rivalry to consolidate regional integration. The 
analysis here shows that it can. I find that this global 
production shift can, under certain conditions, en-
hance the prospects for peace by contributing to the 
consolidation of deep regional economic integration 
among long-standing security rivals. 
 The globalization of production has significant 
ramifications for security affairs by virtue of the fact 
that it has altered the parameters of weapons devel-
opment, the economic benefits of conquest, and the 
prospects for regional economic integration among 
security rivals. These three mechanisms are the focus 
of this book both because of their significance in the 
literature and because they can be directly examined 
empirically. However, these mechanisms are not the 
only means by which the geographic dispersion of 
MNC production can potentially influence security; 
in total, there are five other mechanisms, all of 
which I analyze in this book. . . . [T]hese five other 
mechanisms are all prospective in nature: they have 
the potential to influence security relations in the 
future, but do not appear to have yet played a role. 
The bottom line is that the globalization of produc-
tion has already reshaped the international security 
environment in dramatic ways and may have an 
even greater influence in the years ahead.  
The Globalization of Production 
Acts as a Significant Force for Great 
Power Stability 
 The influence of the globalization of production 
on security is clearest and also most consequential 
with respect to great power relations. A massive 
amount of literature within international relations is 
devoted to examining the most dangerous potential 
outcome in the system: a great power that attempts 
to fundamentally upset the territorial status quo and 
is successful in doing so because the gains of mili-
tary conquest are cumulative. The possibility of this 
outcome has cast a long shadow over researchers 

172
STEPHEN G. BROOKS
vanquish on the battlefield and forcibly occupy.  33  As 
recently as World War II, it appears that great pow-
ers were in a position to conquer other great powers 
and effectively extract economic benefits from occu-
pation.  34  This is no longer the case: a key finding of 
this book is that the globalization of production has 
greatly lowered the economic benefits of conquest 
in the most economically advanced states, and hence 
among all of the current and future great powers. 
This alone significantly undercuts Mearsheimer’s 
pessimistic portrait of great power security relations 
in the years ahead. 
 The reasons why Mearsheimer places great 
stress on the economic benefits of conquest as an in-
fluence on great power stability are, of course, par-
ticular to his specific analysis. However, we need not 
agree with his particular theory of world politics to 
appreciate why the reduction in the economic bene-
fits of conquest among the most advanced countries 
caused by the globalization of production signifi-
cantly enhances stability among the great powers. 
Numerous other scholars employing approaches 
very different from Mearsheimer’s similarly empha-
size the economic benefits of conquest as a key 
influence on great power stability.  35  Irrespective of 
why a state seizes territory beyond its borders, the 
prospects for stability are greatly reduced when a 
great power can use one military conquest as a 
springboard for the next. During World War II, for 
example, the Nazis achieved great initial success and 
were hard to defeat in large part because they were 
able to effectively extract economic resources from 
the territory they occupied; these resources provided 
capacity that the Nazis could use to protect captured 
territory and acquire more. Had the Nazis been un-
able to effectively extract economic resources from 
vanquished territory, then their strategic vulnerabil-
ity would have increased as they extended them-
selves militarily. This example makes it evident why 
a reduction in the economic benefits of conquest 
among the most advanced countries would enhance 
stability among the great powers. 
 Through its influence on the economic benefits 
of conquest, the geographic dispersion of MNC pro-
duction acts as a force for continued peacefulness 
among the great powers. Although significant, this 
is not the only reason why this global production 
shift promotes great power stability. This book’s 
finding that great powers can no longer effectively 
go it alone in defense-related production points in 
the same direction. While the consequences of a 
of MNCs contributes to stability in a way that is 
different from and stronger than trade—undercuts 
those who advance pessimistic projections about the 
great powers in the years ahead. Significantly, these 
analysts all maintain that international commerce 
now provides no reason for optimism about the 
future. The most forceful proponent of this gloomy 
perspective, John Mearsheimer, certainly does rec-
ognize that economic globalization is a significant 
force in world politics that has the potential to dra-
matically influence security affairs, but ultimately 
concludes that it does not reduce the force of his 
pessimistic predictions. Mearsheimer asserts there 
is essentially no difference between the nature and 
extent of international commerce in today’s global 
economy and that of the pre-1914 era; he then rea-
sons that if extensive international commerce did 
not prevent World War I, “a highly interdependent 
world economy does not make great-power war 
more or less likely” and that we ultimately have no 
reason to think that the current wave of economic 
globalization will act as a significant constraint on 
the severity of conflict among the great powers in 
the years ahead.  31  
 Mearsheimer’s treatment of economic global-
ization suffers from the standard problem in the 
security field at large: an overly narrow and static 
conceptualization of international commerce. Trade 
linkages before World War I were very extensive, to 
be sure. But trade comprises only one part of what 
international commerce now consists of, a minority 
portion at that. Before World War I, there was noth-
ing like the geographic dispersion of MNC produc-
tion that exists today. Given that the globalization 
of production is historically novel and is now the 
pivotal driver of international commerce, analyses 
such as Mearsheimer’s that dismiss the current secu-
rity repercussions of economic globalization of par-
allels with pre–World War I trade make no sense. 
Indeed, they are biased. 
 It turns out that once we factor in the globaliza-
tion of production, Mearsheimer’s pessimistic argu-
ment concerning the future of great power security 
relations loses steam. In his analysis, whether sub-
stantial power gains can be accrued through military 
conquest has a fundamental influence on the pros-
pects for great power conflict.  32  Much of the basis 
for Mearsheimer’s overall pessimism is a reflection 
of this in combination with his assessment that great 
power conquerors can, in fact, still effectively ex-
tract the economic wealth of those societies they 

Producing Security 
173
less acute the most dangerous threat in the system. 
Significantly, this is true regardless of what moti-
vates great powers. No matter whether the ultimate 
goal is power, security, prestige, or wealth, the geo-
graphic dispersion of MNC production has struc-
turally shifted the scales against any great power 
that tries to overturn the fundamental nature of the 
system through force. Given that the globalization 
of production is a  major, historically novel shift 
in the international environment, we are fortunate 
that it has a stabilizing influence on great power 
relations.  
Is the Globalization of Production 
Leading to Universal Peace? 
 The view that economic shifts can influence the polit-
ical world is one of the most enduring notions within 
political science and the social sciences more gener-
ally. Although sometimes viewed as being exclusively 
associated with Marxist theory, it is an intellectual 
project of incredible diversity. Unfortunately, many 
analysts go so far as to advance economic determinist 
arguments.  38  A prominent example of this tendency 
with respect to international security is John Stuart 
Mill’s argument in 1848: “It is commerce which is 
rapidly rendering war obsolete, by strengthening and 
multiplying the personal interests which are in natu-
ral opposition to it. . . . [Commerce is] the principal 
guarantee of the peace of the world.”  39  
 Mill’s optimistic forecast that international 
commerce was rendering war obsolete, like many 
similar predictions that followed in its wake, proved 
to be greatly in error.  40  His understanding was not 
simply wrong at the time; it necessarily will always 
be wrong.  41  The simple reason is that international 
commerce is only one of the variables that influences 
the likelihood of war. This book is motivated by 
the need to better understand whether international 
commerce now has a positive or negative influence 
on security relations; in pursuing this goal, I recog-
nize that it does not serve as a master variable. 
 Although the globalization of production does 
not provide any guarantee of peace among the great 
powers, it does act as a force for stability among 
them. This raises a key question: does this global 
production shift have beneficial repercussions for 
security throughout the world or only in certain 
regions? For many, the term  globalization connotes 
a system or process that encompasses all countries 
and industries. As stressed above, the globalization 
change in the benefits of conquest for great power 
stability has received extensive scholarly treatment, 
the potential significance of a shift in the ability 
of states to pursue an autarkic defense production 
strategy has not yet been examined. There is good 
reason for this, since until very recently great pow-
ers retained the ability to be self-sufficient in defense 
production. 
 To put it simply for now, this book’s finding 
that an autarkic defense production strategy has 
been fundamentally undermined augurs well for 
peaceful security relations among the great powers 
for two basic reasons.  36  First, consider what would 
happen if a great power were to go it alone in de-
fense production in the current environment. Any 
state that pursues this course will not have leading-
edge military equipment and will thus be in a weaker 
position to pursue revisionist aims. Modern history 
makes clear the significance of this development: 
the three main revisionist great powers from the 
past 75 years (imperial Japan and Nazi Germany in 
World War II, and the Soviet Union during the Cold 
War) were largely closed off from the international 
economy at the time they challenged the status quo. 
 Second, the finding that states can no longer 
effectively produce leading-edge military technolo-
gies on their own means that any great power that 
makes a fundamental challenge to the territorial 
status quo will be easier to subdue; this is the case 
irrespective of which defense production strategy 
is pursued. The great powers that have made fun-
damental challenges to the status quo over the past 
century all acted largely on their own and provoked 
a counterbalancing coalition that imposed a supply 
cutoff upon them. The problem is that these supply 
cutoffs were far from effective in reducing the ability 
of the revisionist great power to develop and pro-
duce competitive military weaponry.  37  The world 
of today is much less threatening in this regard: the 
globalization of production greatly magnifies the 
degree to which a supply cutoff like those imposed 
in World War II would degrade the military capacity 
of a revisionist great power that acts alone. 
 The marked reduction in the benefits of con-
quest among the most advanced countries and the 
change in the parameters of weapons development 
caused by the globalization of production are both 
stabilizing for security relations among the great 
powers on their own. Of key importance, however, 
is that these changes overlap and reinforce each 
other: . . .   these two shifts in combination make 

174
STEPHEN G. BROOKS
 14.   A partial list of these studies includes Oneal and 
Russett 1997, 1999; Russett and Oneal 2000; Oneal et 
al. 1996. For a full set of citations, see the bibliographies 
in Barbieri and Schneider 1999; McMillan 1997; and 
Mansfield and Pollins 2001.  
 15.   Kobrin 1995, 26.  
 16.   A multinational corporation is a firm that owns, co-
ordinates, or controls value-adding activities in more than 
one country.  
 17.   See, for example, Dunning 1992, 128–32. The “geo-
graphic dispersion of MNC production” is a more ac-
curate, but also more cumbersome, short-hand descriptor 
that I will also sometimes use.  
 18.   See Staley 1935.  
 19.   See, for example, Rosecrance 1999.  
 20.   For useful discussions of the limitations of data on the 
international production activities of MNCs, see OECD: 
Economic Outlook 71, 2002, 159.  
 21.   Much of this literature is discussed in Moran 1990.  
 22.   Bitzinger 1994, 172.  
 23.   See, for example, Moran 1990; Bitzinger 1994.  
 24.   See Liberman 1996.  
 25.   See, for example, Wendt 1994; Deutsch et al. 1957; 
Nye 1971; and Russett and Oneal 2000, chap. 5.  
 26.   See, for example, Grieco, Powell, and Snidal 1993.  
 27.   Mearsheimer 2001; Rosecrance 1999; and Stam and 
Smith 2001 are recent examples.  
 28.   The most significant recent empirical analysis empha-
sizing this point is Bennett and Stam 2003.  
 29.   For this argument, see, for example, Buzan 1984. On 
the long peace, see Gaddis 1987.  
 30.   See Mearsheimer 2001; Kupchan 2002; Waltz 2000; 
and Huntington 1993.  
  31.   See Mearsheimer 2001, 371. This is the same line of 
argument advanced in Waltz 2000; and Kupchan 2002, 
esp. 103. Huntington goes one step further, arguing that 
commerce is now destabilizing among the great powers; 
see Huntington 1993, 25–27.  
  32.   Of the four strategies Mearsheimer identifies for 
states to enhance their power, it is conquest that plays 
by far the most significant role in his account and in the 
historical record: see Mearsheimer 2001, esp. 147–55.  
 33.   Mearsheimer 2001, esp. 148–50.  
 34.   See Liberman 1996, chap. 3.  
 35.   Three of the strongest recent statements in this regard 
are Van Evera 1999, chap. 5; Stam and Smith 2001; and 
Rosecrance 1999, esp. 17, 81.  
 36.   A more detailed version of this argument is presented 
in  chapter  7 Producing Security. 
 37.   For a useful overview, see Mearsheimer 2001, 90–96.  
 38.   Here, economic determinism is taken to mean that 
“the tendencies, forces, and outcomes of economic pro-
cesses exert an independent, determining influence on 
other aspects of social development, such as political or-
ganization and cultural beliefs” (Bimber 1994, 91).  
 39.   Mill 1920, 582.  
of production is not, in fact, ‘global’ but instead 
remains bounded in important respects: it is an 
ongoing process, not an end point.  42  It is, conse-
quently, vital to examine the nature of this pro-
duction change in its current form rather than to 
speculate about some hypothetical future interna-
tional economy that is perfectly globalized.  43  Once 
we do so, it becomes clear that there is no reason 
to expect that the geographic dispersion of MNC 
production will have a uniform effect on security 
relations throughout the world. 
 The unfortunate conclusion of this book is 
that while the geographic dispersion of MNC 
 production is stabilizing among the great powers, 
it will not promote peace elsewhere in the world. 
Indeed, the analysis . . . shows that this global 
 production shift is likely to have a net negative 
influence on security relations among develop-
ing countries. This is partly because developing  
countries have not yet participated in the globaliza-
tion of production to nearly the same extent that 
the great powers have. Far from acting as a general 
force for improved security relations, as some prom-
inent analysts aver is the case, the positive influence 
of the globalization of production, I conclude, will 
be geographically circumscribed for the foreseeable 
future.  
Notes
 1.   Irwin 1996, 11.  
 2.   See the discussion in Silberner 1946; and Doyle 1997, 
chap. 7.  
 3.   Montesquieu 1989, 338.  
 4.   Kant 1957, 32.  
 5.   Hamilton 1961, 56, 57.  
 6.   See Silberner 1946, chaps. 8 and 9.  
 7.   Hobson 1902; and Lenin 1917. 
 8.   See Way 1998, chap. 1.  
 9.   On this point, see Rose 2003.  
 10.  On this point, see, for example, Levy 1989, 261–62.  
 11.  Rosecrance (1986) argues that commerce promotes 
stability, whereas Waltz (1979, esp. 138) advances the 
opposite position. 
 12.   For useful reviews of this recent literature, see 
McMillan 1997; Barbieri and Schneider 1999; and 
Mansfield and Pollins 2001.  
 13.   This is not to say that there is uniform agreement 
concerning how trade linkages influence security behav-
ior. The prevailing view is that higher levels of trade inter-
dependence lower the likelihood of conflict (on this point, 
see, for example, the discussion in Mansfield and Pollins 
2001).  

Producing Security 
175
 Keohane, Robert O., and Joseph S. Nye Jr. 1998. Power 
and Interdependence in the Information Age.  Foreign 
Affairs 77 (5). 
 Kobrin, Stephen. 1995. Regional Integration in a Globally 
Networked Economy.  Transnational Corporations 
4 (2). 
 Kupchan, Charles. 2002.  The End of the American 
Era: U.S. Foreign Policy and the Geopolitics of the 
Twenty-first Century. New York: Knopf. 
 Lenin, Vladimir. 1917.  Imperialism: The Highest Stage of 
Capitalism. New York: International Publishers. 
 Levy, Jack S. 1989. The Causes of War: A Review of Theo-
ries and Evidence. In  Behavior, Society, and Nuclear 
War, edited by P. Tetlock et al. New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Liberman, Peter. 1996.  Does Conquest Pay? The Exploi-
tation of Occupied Industrial Societies. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press. 
 Mansfield, Edward, and Brian Pollins. 2001. The Study 
of Interdependence and Conflict: Recent Advances. 
Open Questions, and Directions for Future Research. 
 Journal of Conflict Resolution 45 (6). 
 McMillan Susan M. 1997. Interdependence and Conflict. 
 Mershon International Studies 41. 
 Mearsheimer, John J. 2001.  The Tragedy of Great Power 
Politics. New York: Norton. 
 Mill, John Stuart. 1920.  Principles of Political Economy. 
London: Longman, Green. 
 Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat. 1989.  The Spirit of the 
Laws. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
 Moran, Theodore H. 1990. The Globalization of Ameri-
ca’s Defense Industries.  International Security 15(1). 
 Nye, Joseph S., Jr. 1971.  Peace in Parts: Integration and 
Conflict in Regional Organization. Boston: Little 
Brown. 
 Ohmae, Kenichi. 1995.  The End of the Nation State: The 
Rise of the Regional Economies. New York: Free 
Press. 
 Oneal, John, France Oneal, Zeev Maoz, and Bruce M. 
Russett. 1996. The Liberal Peace: Interdependence, 
Democracy, and International Conflict, 1950–85. 
 Journal of Peace Research 33 (1). 
 ———. 1999. Assessing the Liberal Peace with Alternative 
Specifications: Trade Still Reduces Conflict.  Journal 
of Peace Research 36 (4). 
 Reich, Robert. 1991.  The Work of Nations. New York: 
Alfred A. Knopf. 
 Rose, Gideon. 2003. Imperialism: The Highest Stage of 
Capitalism.  National Interest, spring. 
 Rosecrance, Richard. 1986.  The Rise of the Trading State.  
New York: Basic Books. 
 ———. 1996. The Rise of the Virtual State.  Foreign Af-
fairs 75 (4). 
 ———. 1999.  The Rise of the Virtual State: Wealth and 
Power in the Coming Century. New York: Basic 
Books. 
 40.   The most famous of these forecasts was advanced by 
Norman Angell; Angell 1910.  
 41.   See the discussion in Keohane and Nye 1998, 81.  
 42.   On this point, see Dicken 1998, 5.  
 43.   Some globalization proponents are more extreme in 
this respect; see, for example, Reich 1991; and Ohmae 
1995. 
References
 Angell, Norman. 1910.  The Great Illusion: A Study of the 
Relationship of Military Power in Nations to Their 
Economic and Social Advantage. London: William 
Henemann. 
 Barbieri, Katherine, and Gerald Snyder. 1999. Globaliza-
tion and Peace: Assessing New Directions in the Study 
of Trade and Conflict.  Journal of Peace Research 36. 
 Bennett, D. Scott, and Allan Stam. 2003.  The Behavioral 
Origins of War. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan 
Press. 
 Bimber, Bruce. 1994. Three Faces of Technological Deter-
minism. In  Does Technology Drive History? edited by 
M. Smith and L. Marx. Cambridge: MIT Press. 
 Bitzinger, Richard A. 1994. The Globalization of the Arms 
Industry: The Next Proliferation Challenge.  Interna-
tional Security 19 (2). 
 Buzan, Barry 1984. Economic Structure and International 
Security: The Limits of the Liberal Case.  International 
Organization, 38. 
 Deutsch, Karl, et al. 1957.  Political Community and the 
North Atlantic Area. Princeton: Princeton University 
Press. 
 Dicken, Peter. 1998.  Global Shift: Transforming the 
World Economy . 3rd ed. New York: Guilford Press. 
 Doyle, Michael W. 1997.  Ways of War and Peace: Real-
ism, Liberalism, and Socialism. New York: Norton. 
 Dunning, John. 1992.  Multinational Enterprises and the 
Global Economy. Reading, Mass.: Addison Wesley. 
 Gaddis, John. 1987.  The Long Peace: Inquiries Into the 
History of the Cold War. New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 Grieco, Joseph, Robert Powell, and Duncan Snidal. 1993. 
The Relative Gains Problem for International Coop-
eration.  American Political Science Review 87. 
 Hamilton, Alexander (Publius). 1961. The Federalist No. 
6 in  The Federalist Papers. 
 Hobson, John. 1965.  Imperialism: A Study. Ann Arbor: 
University of Michigan Press. 
 Huntington, Samuel. 1993. The Clash of Civilizations? 
 Foreign Affairs 72 (3). 
 Irwin, Douglas. 1996.  Against the Tide: An Intellectual 
History of Free Trade. Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press. 
 Kant, Immanuel. 1957.  Perpetual Peace. Translated by 
Lewis White Beck. New York: Bobbs-Merrill. 

176
ROBERT O. KEOHANE
 Waltz, Kenneth N. 1979.  Theory of International Politics. 
Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley. 
 ———. 1993. The Emerging Structure of International 
Politics.  International Security 18. 
 ———. 2000. Globalization and American Power. 
 National Interest, spring. 
 Way, Christopher. 1998. Manchester Revisited: A Theo-
retical and Empirical Evaluation of Commercial Lib-
eralism. Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University. 
 Wendt, Alexander. 1992. Anarchy Is What States Make of 
It: The Social Construction of Power Politics.  Interna-
tional Organization 46. 
 ———. 1994. Collective Identity Formation and the Inter-
national State.  American Political Science Review 88.  
 Russett, Bruce M., and John R Oneal. 2000.  Triangulat-
ing Peace: Democracy, Interdependence, and Interna-
tional Organizations. New York: Norton. 
 Silberner, Edmund. 1946.  The Problem of War in Nine-
teenth Century Economic Thought. Princeton: Prince-
ton University Press. 
 Staley, Eugene. 1935. War and Private Investor. Garden 
City, New York: Doubleday, 1935. 
 Stam, Allan C., and Alastair Smith. 2001. Issues, Stakes, 
and the Nature of War. Paper presented to the Annual 
Meeting of the American Political Science Associa-
tion, San Francisco. 
 Van Evera, Stephen. 1990–91. Primed for Peace: Europe 
after the Cold War.  International Security 15. 
 Vernon, Raymond, and Ethan B. Kapstein. 1991. Na-
tional Needs, Global Resources.  Daedalus 120 (4). 
Beyond the Tragedy of the Commons 
ROBERT O. KEOHANE
 OVERVIEW
 Elinor Ostrom was awarded the Nobel Prize in Economics, a singular achieve-
ment for a political scientist. Her best-known work is  Governing the Commons: 
The Evolution of Institutions for Collective Action (1990). While she utilizes the 
rational-choice approach in her analysis, her work is also known for placing indi-
vidual choice within social and cultural contexts. Her focus of research is on how 
self-governing institutions at the local level come to surmount collective action 
problems to sustain and manage common-pool resources (CPR) such as forests, 
fisheries, water, and farmlands. 
 Robert Keohane argues that the questions posed by Ostrom concerning the 
local commons are equally applicable to the global commons. At both levels of 
analysis common-pool resources are subject to the collective goods challenge—the 
underprovision or overuse of a good as no individual actor independently has an 
interest in preserving it. Keohane is particularly qualified to comment on Ostrom’s 
work given his own efforts in analyzing international collaboration and the fact 
that he coedited a book with her on climate and collection action in the mid-1990s.  
“Beyond the Tragedy of the Commons” by Robert O. Keohane from  Perspectives on Politics , Vol. 8, No. 2, pp. 577–580, 
© 2010 Cambridge Journals, reproduced by permission.

Beyond the Tragedy of the Commons 
177
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   According to Keohane, why is Ostrom’s work even more relevant today than when it was 
published in the 1980s?  
 2.   How does the traditional literature on the local village commons and recent work on the 
earth’s atmosphere parallel and reflect the conceptual and methodological approaches of Keo-
hane’s neoliberal institutionalism as developed in  After Hegemony (1984) and summarized in 
the text?  
 3.   Keohane notes that his own work and the literature on international political economy in 
general stress the value of heterogeneity of actor interests and capabilities in terms of facili-
tating cooperation. As an example he references the literature on hegemonic stability theory. 
Ostrom’s empirical case studies conducted at the local or village level, however, suggest het-
erogeneity of actors’ interests and capabilities inhibits cooperation. What do these different 
perspectives lead Keohane to conclude?  
 4.   Keohane argues that Ostrom’s work on the challenge of heterogeneity in terms of achiev-
ing cooperation among actors is also relevant in terms of global cultural heterogeneity and 
political violence. How can this conceptual point be related to the conflict and tension today 
between segments of Islam and Christianity?  
 As all readers of  Governing the Commons know, 
Elinor Ostrom’s focus in that work is on local com-
munities engaged in activities such as fishing and 
agriculture, and on metropolitan areas such as Los 
Angeles. She is critical of many interventions from 
national and regional authorities as interfering with 
locally organized cooperation, and she hardly men-
tions international issues. Yet I will argue here that 
this book is potentially an important contribution to 
the study of world politics. 
 All life depends on a larger commons: the earth 
and its atmosphere. In the 1980s, when Ostrom 
wrote her great work, human beings were unaware of 
the dangers to the atmosphere posed by climate change; 
most of us now have been exposed to the enormous 
amount of evidence indicating that the earth’s at-
mosphere is becoming warmer as a result of human 
emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse 
gasses.  1  So should we now not be asking the ques-
tions that Ostrom asks about local commons about 
the global commons? Analytically, these questions 
are equally interesting, and in policy terms they 
are important to all human beings and other forms 
of life, rather than just to people in small commu-
nities scattered around the globe. Her work may 
travel even farther—to issues of conflict generated 
by cultural differences—if we take into account its 
arguments about how differences in interests among 
actors can affect cooperation. But we begin with the 
commons questions. 
 What is striking about these commons 
 questions—local and global—is how much analytic 
resemblance they bear to each other. In both cases, 
what is at stake is a common-pool resource (CPR) 
that is subject to underprovision or overuse because 
no individual actor independently has an interest 
in preserving it. This malady of underprovision/
overuse equally afflicts the traditional village com-
mons and the earth’s atmosphere. It should not be 
surprising, therefore, that there is a striking conver-
gence between the literatures in political science that 
focus on these issues, even though they are entirely 
independent of one another in their origins.  2  In 
neither arena—world politics nor local governance 
of CPRs as studied by Ostrom—are there effec-
tive rules enforced hierarchically from above. Yet 
in both arenas, actors—principally states in world 
politics, individuals at local levels—seek to build 
rules that enable them to cooperate, by generating 
incentives to behave in collectively desired ways. 
The global and local literatures both focus on how 
institutions can provide information and reduce 
transaction costs; in both arenas actors rely on reci-
procity to generate incentives, and in both arenas 
credibility is a crucial resource for actors involved 
in bargaining and rule making.  3  
 Comparisons between different literatures deal-
ing with analytically somewhat similar domains may 
be most valuable when they make conflicting argu-
ments. In this brief comment, therefore, I wish to 
focus on the homogeneity or heterogeneity of actor 
 capabilities and  interests. What is the impact on a po-
tentially cooperative system—in which there are po-
tential gains to all participants from cooperation—of 

178
ROBERT O. KEOHANE
cooperation will be nonexistent or minimal, and the 
results will be economically inefficient.  8  Similarly, 
Gary Libecap has studied the common-pool prob-
lem in oil fields. He finds that heterogeneities in 
size of plots, in location relative to the center of the 
pool, and in information inhibit cooperation, as op-
posed to situations in which leases are homogeneous 
and the information available to participants is the 
same.  9  
 These differences in view should make us think 
about the conditions under which heterogeneity or 
homogeneity of interests and capabilities promotes 
cooperation in situations characterized by an ab-
sence of hierarchical rule. 
 Climate change is obviously amenable to 
CPR analysis, since it is a common-pool resource. 
Furthermore, efforts to construct a single integrated 
and comprehensive international regime to limit the 
magnitude of emissions have clearly failed. Instead, 
there is a decentralized “regime complex” for cli-
mate change, which in many ways looks more like 
Ostrom’s decentralized local institutions for the 
commons than like either a national state or a co-
herent, integrated international regime.  10  Ostrom 
and her colleagues have studied how particular 
changes—such as in the need for labor to repair 
irrigation ditches—alter the dynamics of such de-
centralized systems. It would be valuable to do the 
same at the global level. For instance, how would a 
dramatic reduction in the costs of reducing power 
plant emissions affect the complex linkages between 
developed and developing countries created by a 
global cap-and-trade system? And what would be 
the impact of large heterogeneities—in information, 
or in costs—between developed and developing 
countries involved in a system of climate mitigation? 
 In the world of 2010, there is another salient 
problem, farther from Ostrom’s field of study but 
to which its emphasis on heterogeneity is relevant: 
the relationship between cultural heterogeneity and 
political violence. The attacks of 9/11, the wars 
waged by the United States and its allies in Islamic 
countries (Afghanistan and Iraq), and the reports 
of attempted  jihad by American citizens who have 
become radical Islamists, have all focused attention 
on nonstate actors and violence in world politics. 
“Billiard-ball” game-theoretic models with homo-
geneous states as units seem quite irrelevant to these 
issues. In contrast, local CPR models that emphasize 
the conflict-inducing impact of heterogeneity seem 
increasingly relevant. Asymmetries in information, 
heterogeneity of actor capabilities and interests? 
Should we expect more cooperation among similar 
actors, or among different ones? 
 The literature in international economics and 
international political economy stresses the value 
of heterogeneity of interests for cooperation: gains 
from trade. Among self-sufficient small farmers, 
there may be little scope for economic cooperation 
in the form of economic exchange, precisely because 
their interests are so similar. Introduce a railroad 
linked to a city and rural–urban trade will increase 
dramatically, as a result of the complementary in-
terests of producers and purchasers. The political 
economy literature of the 1970s also emphasized the 
value of heterogeneity in capabilities for coopera-
tion. It developed the notion of “hegemonic stabil-
ity theory”: that systems dominated by a hegemon 
would be more peaceful and orderly than those in 
which a balance of power among roughly equal 
great powers prevailed.  4  Although the strong ver-
sion of this view—that hegemony alone is necessary 
or sufficient for order—has been discredited, there 
remains considerable evidence that powerful states, 
with long time horizons, may be particularly willing 
to build institutions for cooperation, on their terms. 
As Lisa L. Martin says, “If a hegemonic state can 
afford to take the long view, the institutions it helps 
create will promote gains from cooperation.”  5  
 So the international relations literature has 
leaned toward the view that at least some types of 
heterogeneity in interests and capabilities generate 
cooperation. Indeed, bargaining linkages may result 
from heterogeneity, as actors seek political gains 
from trade. But the IR literature has never held that 
heterogeneity as such is order-producing: indeed, 
the literature on conflict suggests that certain forms 
of similarities in domestic structure—in particular, 
the presence of democracy in both members of a 
pair of states—facilitate cooperation.  6  The types of 
heterogeneity and issue domains seem to matter.  7  
 Work by Ostrom and other students of small-
scale CPRs, by contrast, stresses how heterogeneity 
 inhibits cooperation. Ostrom has studied irrigation 
systems in Nepal, where there are strong differences 
in interest and in capabilities between farmers at 
the head of the canal and those below them. The 
head-enders have interests in taking water until its 
net marginal productivity is zero, even if it would be 
more valuable to the tail-enders. Unless they need 
the tail-enders (for example, for labor to maintain 
the canals), they will capture the bulk of the water, 

Beyond the Tragedy of the Commons 
179
 Creative political science is not principally 
about applying new techniques—whether borrowed 
from economics, statistics, or other branches of our 
own field—to old problems. More fundamental in-
novations involve thinking in new ways about prob-
lems that have stumped former generations. Ostrom 
has thought in new ways about politics, institutions, 
and cooperation under nonhierarchical conditions. 
It is high time that both investigators working out of 
her tradition, and students of international relations 
in general, paid more attention to the implications 
of her work for the study of world politics. If they 
do, and the results are fruitful, Elinor Ostrom may 
yet be seen as a major theorist, even if implicitly, of 
world politics.  
Notes
 1.   Metz et al. 2007; Stern et al. 2006; Aldy and Stavins 
2007; Aldy and Pizer 2009.  
 2.   Elinor Ostrom and I have made this point in joint 
work, which, however, has not received much attention. 
See Keohane and Ostrom 1995.  
 3.   Keohane 1984;  Governing the Commons. 
 4.   Kindleberger 1973; Krasner 1976.  
 5.   Martin 1995, 75.  
 6.   There is a huge literature on the “democratic peace.” 
See, for instance, Maoz and Russett 1993; Bueno de 
Mesquita et al. 1999.  
 7.   Martin 1995.  
 8.   Ostrom 1995.  
 9.   Libecap 1995: 171–72.  
 10.   Keohane and Victor 2009.  
 11.   For an example of experimental work applied to 
problems of civil war, see Tingley and Walter 2010.  
References
 Aldy, J. E., and W. A. Pizer. 2009.  The Competitive-
ness Impacts of Climate Change Mitigation Policies. 
Arlington, VA: Pew Center on Global Climate Change. 
 Aldy, J. E., and R. N. Stavins. 2007.  Architectures for 
Agreement: Addressing Global Climate Change in the 
Post-Kyoto World. New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce, James D. Morrow, Ran-
dolph M. Siverson, and Alastair Smith. 1999. “An 
Institutional Explanation of the Democratic Peace.” 
 American Political Science Review 93 (December): 
791–807. 
 Keohane, Robert O. 1984.  After Hegemony: Coopera-
tion and Discord in the World Political Economy. 
 Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
a topic addressed by the literature on commons 
 problems, seem particularly intriguing. Asymmetries 
in information can motivate attacks—when the 
 “information” in question concerns holy duties or 
alleged attacks on Islam by Christianity—but can 
also create opportunities for combating terrorism. 
And homogeneity in information— common knowl-
edge among adherents to Islam who are commit-
ted to peaceful coexistence with members of other 
cultures that jihadists are dangerous to themselves 
as well as to peace more generally—could be cru-
cial in generating cooperation in order to control 
organized nonstate violence. It seems to me that we 
could generate some interesting hypotheses about 
the impact of cultural homogeneity and heterogene-
ity from the theories of Ostrom and her colleagues, 
and from experiments or observations informed by 
this literature. 
 Ostrom’s work has been more systematic than 
most of the parallel work in international relations, 
partly because she has studied isolated communities 
in fieldwork, and partly because experimental work 
can model the conditions of individuals in local com-
munities better than the more complex interactions 
between governments, themselves responsible in very 
different ways to their constituencies. But Ostrom 
has, by and large, not been very interested in applying 
her insights to world politics. As a result, there are, 
it seems to me, unexploited opportunities for inves-
tigators who seek to understand such issues as the 
spread and control of international terrorism, or how 
heterogeneities affect responses to climate change. 
 Ostrom has made major contributions to politi-
cal science and to our understanding of cooperation 
and institutions, and it would be unfair to demand 
of her that she extend her vision to world politics. 
But we can ask why none of her students or follow-
ers seems to have had the imagination and boldness 
to think about applying her theory and methods to 
this domain. Experimental work is just beginning 
to make an impact on the study of world poli-
tics; to make more of an impact, it needs to tackle 
important questions and to build on a rich theo-
retical literature as well as experimental method.  11  
Ostrom’s theory, as noted here, builds on a number 
of assumptions—in particular, lack of hierarchy—
that are more applicable to world politics than to 
studying the modern bureaucratic state. It could 
“leap the gap” between local and global without the 
investigators worrying about whether it can “scale 
up” to the national level in between. 

180
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Metz, B., et al. 2007.  Climate Change 2007: Mitigation of 
Climate Change: Contribution of Working Group III 
to the Fourth Assessment Report of the Intergovern-
mental Panel on Climate Change. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press. 
 Ostrom, E. 1995. “Self-organization and Social Capital.” 
 Industrial and Corporate Change 4 (1): 131–59. 
 Stern, N., S. Peters, V. Bakhshi, A. Bowen, C. Cam-
eron, S. Catovsky, D. Crane, S. Cruickshank, S. Dietz, 
N. Edmonson, S.-L. Garbett, L. Hamid, G. Hoff-
man, D. Ingram, B. Jones, N. Patmore, H. Radcliffe, 
R. Sathiyarajah, M. Stock, C. Taylor, T. Vernon, 
H. Wanjie, and D. Zenghelis. 2006.  Stern Review: 
The Economics of Climate Change. London: Her 
Majesty’s Treasury. 
 Tingley, Dustin, and Barbara Walter. 2010. “The Effect 
of Repeated Play on Reputation-Building: An Experi-
mental Approach.” Unpublished paper.  
 Keohane, Robert O., and Elinor Ostrom, eds. 1995.  Local 
Commons and Global Interdependence: Heterogene-
ity and Cooperation in Two Domains. London: Sage. 
 Keohane, Robert O., and David Victor. 2009. “The Re-
gime Complex for Climate Change.” Unpublished 
paper. 
 Kindleberger, Charles P. 1973.  The World in Depression. 
Berkeley: University of California Press. 
 Krasner, Stephen D. 1976. “State Power and the Structure 
of International Trade.”  World Politics 28 (April): 
317–47. 
 Libecap, Gary D. 1995. “The Conditions for Success-
ful Collective Action.”  Chapter  7 in Keohane and 
 Ostrom, 161–90. 
 Maoz, Zeev, and Bruce M. Russett. 1993. “Normative 
and Structural Causes of Democratic Peace, 1946–1986.” 
 American Political Science Review 87 (September): 
 624–38. 
 Martin, Lisa L. 1995. “Heterogeneity, Linkage, and Com-
mons Problems.”  Chapter   4 in Keohane and Ostrom, 
71–91. 
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
j On Transnationalism 
and Interdependence 
 Barney, Darin.  The Network Society . Cambridge, UK: 
Polity, 2004. 
 Burton, John W.  World Society . Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press, 1972. 
 Campbell, John L.  Institutional Change and Global-
ization . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2004. 
 Cerny, Philip G.  Rethinking World Politics: A Theory 
of Transnational Pluralism . New York: Oxford 
University Press, 2010. 
 Della Porta, Donatella, et al.  Globalization from Be-
low: Transnational Activists and Protest Networks . 
Minneapolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 
2006. 
 Ferguson, Yale H., and Richard W. Mansbach.  
A World of Polities: Essays on Global Politics . UK: 
Routledge, 2008. 
 Guidry, John A., Michael D. Kennedy, and Mayer N. 
Zald, eds.  Globalizations and Social Movements: 
Culture, Power, and the Transnational Public 
Sphere . Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
2000. 
 Haar, Edwin van de.  Classical Liberalism and Interna-
tional Relations Theory: Hume, Smith, Mises, and 
Hayek . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2009. 
 Keck, Margaret E., and Kathryn Sikkink.  Activists be-
yond Borders: Advocacy Networks in International 
Politics . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1998. 
 Keohane, Robert O., and Joseph Nye, Jr.  Power and 
Interdependence: World Politics in Transition . 
 Boston: Little, Brown and Company, 1977. 
 Keohane, Robert O., and Joseph S. Nye, Jr., eds.  Trans-
national Relations and World Politics . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 1972. [This first ap-
peared as an entire issue of  International Organiza-
tion XXV, 3 (Summer 1971).] 
 Khagram, Sanjeev, James A. Riker, and Kathryn Sik-
kink, eds.,  Restructuring World Politics: Trans-
national Movements, Networks, and Norms . 
Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 2002. 
 McDonald, Patrick J.  The Invisible Hand of Peace: 
Capitalism, the War Machine, and International 
Relations Theory . New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2009. 
 Rosecrance, Richard.  The Rise of the Trading State: 
Commerce and Conquest in the Modern World . 
New York: Basic Books, 1986. 
 ———.  The Rise of the Virtual State: Wealth and 
Power in the Coming Century . New York: Basic 
Books, 1999. 
 Rosenau, James N.  Distant Proximities: Dynamics Be-
yond Globalization. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2003. 

Suggestions for Further Reading
181
 Glaser, Charles L.  Rational Theory of International 
Politics: The Logic of Competition and Coopera-
tion . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2010. 
 Goldstein, Judith, and Robert O. Keohane, eds.  Ideas 
and Foreign Policy: Beliefs, Institutions and Political 
Change . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1988. 
 Haas, Ernst.  Beyond the Nation-State . Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 1964. 
 ———.  The Uniting of Europe: Political, Social, and 
Economic Forces, 1950–1957 . New ed. South 
Bend, IN: University of Notre Dame Press, 2004 
[first published 1958]). 
 ———.  When Knowledge Is Power: Three Modes of 
Change in International Organization . Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 1990. 
 Haftendorn, Helga, Robert O. Keohane, and Celeste A. 
Wallander, eds.  Imperfect Unions: Security Institu-
tions Over Time and Space . New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1999. 
 Holsti, Kalevi.  Taming the Sovereigns: Institutional 
Change in International Politics . Cambridge: 
 Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Ikenberry, John, and Takashi Inoguchi.  The Uses of 
Institutions: The US, Japan, and Governance in 
East Asia . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
 Isaac, Jeffrey C., Ed. “Beyond the Tragedy of the 
Commons—A Discussion of Governing the Com-
mons: The Evolution of Institutions for Collective 
Action,”  Perspectives on Politics. Vol. 8, No. 2 
(June 2010): 569–93. 
 Katzenstein, Peter, Robert O. Keohane, and Stephen 
Krasner. “International Organization and the Study 
of World Politics.”  International Organization 52, 
4 (Autumn 1998): 645–85. 
 Keohane, Robert. “Global Governance and Demo-
cratic Accountability.” In  Taming Globalization: 
Frontiers of Governance , eds. David Held and 
Mathias Koenig-Archibugi. London: Polity Press, 
2003, 130–59. 
 ———. “Governance in a Partly Globalized World.” 
 American Political Science Review 95, 1 (March 
2001): 1–15. 
 ———. “Institutional Theory in International Rela-
tions.” In  Realism and Institutionalism in Inter-
national Studies , eds. Michael Brecher and Frank 
Harvey. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 
2002. 
 ———.  International Institutions and State Power: 
Essays in International Relations Theory . Boulder, 
CO Westview, 1989. 
 ———.  Turbulence in World Politics . Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 1990. 
 Smith, Jackie, Charles Chatfield, and Ron Pagnucco, 
eds.  Transnational Social Movements and Global 
Politics: Solidarity Beyond the State . Syracuse: Syra-
cuse University Press, 1997. 
 Tarrow, Sidney.  The New Transnational Activism . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005.  
j On International Institutions 
and Organizations 
 Alvarez, José. “International Organizations: Then 
and Now.”  The American Journal of International 
Law 100, 2 (April 2006): 324–47. 
 Axelrod, Robert. “The Emergence of Cooperation among 
Egoists.”  American Political Science Review 75, 
2 (June 1981): 306–18. 
 ———.  The Evolution of Cooperation . New York: 
Basic Books, 1984. 
 Barnett, Michael, and Raymond Duvall.  Power in 
Global Governance . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2005. 
 Botcheva, Liliana, and Lisa L. Martin. “Institutional 
Effects on State Behavior: Convergence and Di-
vergence.”  International Studies Quarterly 45, 1 
(March 2001): 1–26. 
 Braedley, Susan, and Meg Luxton, eds.  Neoliberalism 
and Everyday Life . Montreal: McGill-Queen’s Uni-
versity Press, 2010. 
 Campbell, John L., and Ove K. Pedersen, eds.  The 
Rise of Neoliberalism and Institutional Analysis . 
 Princeton: Princeton University Press, 2001. 
 Colas, Alejandro. “Neoliberalism, Globalization and 
International Relations.” In  Neoliberalism: A Criti-
cal Reader , eds. Alfredo Saad-Filho and Deborah 
Johnston London. Ann Arbor, MI: Pluto Press, 
2005. 
 Fearon, James. “Bargaining, Enforcement, and Inter-
national Cooperation.”  International Organization 
52, 2 (Spring 1998): 269–306. 
 Foot, Rosemary, S. Neil MacFarlane, and Michael 
Mastanduno, eds.  U.S. Hegemony and Interna-
tional Organizations: The United States and Mul-
tilateral Institutions . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2003. 
 Frieden, Jeffrey. “Actors and Preferences in Interna-
tional Relations.” In  Strategic Choice and Interna-
tional Relations , eds. David Lake and Robert Powell. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1999. 

182
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Martin, Lisa, and Robert Keohane. “Institutional 
Theory, Endogeneity, and Delegation.” In  Prog-
ress in International Relations Theory: Appraising 
the Field , eds. Colin Elman and Miriam Elman. 
 Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2003, 71–107. 
 Matthews, John C. “Current Gains and Future Out-
comes: When Cumulative Relative Gains Matter.” 
 International Security 21, 1 (Summer 1996): 112–46. 
 Milner, Helen V. “Globalization, Development, and 
International Institutions: Normative and Positive 
Perspectives” (Review Essay),  Perspectives on Poli-
tics. Vol. 3, No. 4 (December 2005): 833–54. 
 Milner, Helen V., and Andrew Moravcsik, eds.  Power, 
Interdependence, and Nonstate Actors in World 
Politics . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2009. [This is a Festschrift of articles written in his 
honor by former students of Robert Keohane.] 
 Milner, Helen, and B. Peter Rosendorff. “The Optimal 
Design of International Institutions: Why Escape 
Clauses Are Essential.” In  The Rational Design of 
International Institutions , eds. C. Lipson, B. Koremenos, 
and D. Snidal. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2004. 
 Mitrany, David.  A Working Peace System . Chicago: 
Quadrangle Books, 1966. 
 Moravcsik, Andrew. “Taking Preferences Seriously: 
A Liberal Theory of International Relations.”  Inter-
national Organization 51, 4 (Autumn 1997): 513–53. 
 ———.  The Paradox of American Power: Why the 
World’s Only Superpower Can’t Go It Alone . 
 Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2003. 
 Nye, Jr., Joseph.  Soft Power: The Means to Success in 
World Politics . New York: Public Affairs, 2004. 
 Oye, 
Kenneth. 
“Explaining 
Cooperation 
under 
 Anarchy: Hypotheses and Strategies.” In  Coopera-
tion under Anarchy , ed. Kenneth Oye. Princeton, 
NJ: Princeton University Press, 1986. 
 Pahre, Robert, “International Cooperation as Interagency 
Cooperation,”  Perspectives on Politics. Vol. 7, No. 4 
(December 2009). 
 Powell, Robert. “Absolute and Relative Gains in 
International Relations Theory.”  American Po-
litical Science Review 85, 4 (December 1991): 
1303–20. 
 Rochester, Martin. “Coordination Versus Prisoner’s 
Dilemma: Implications for International Coopera-
tion and Regimes.”  American Political Science Re-
view 79, 4 (December 1985): 923–42. 
 ———. “The Rise and Fall of International Organiza-
tion as a Field of Study.”  International Organiza-
tion 40, 4 (Autumn 1986): 773–813. 
 ———. “International Institutions: Two Approaches,” 
 International Studies Quarterly 32, 4 (December 
1988): 379–96. 
 ———.  Power and Governance in a Partially Global-
ized World . London: Routledge, 2002. 
 Keohane, Robert, and Allen Buchanan. “The Legiti-
macy of Global Governance Institutions.”  Ethics 
and International Affairs 20, 4 (December 2006). 
 Keohane, Robert, Helga Haftendorn, and Celeste 
 Wallander, eds.  Imperfect Unions: Security Insti-
tutions Across Time and Space . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 1999. 
 Keohane, Robert, and Lisa Martin. “Institutional The-
ory, Endogeneity and Delegation.” Working Paper 
No. 99-07. Cambridge, MA: Weatherhead Center 
for International Affairs, 1999. 
 Keohane, Robert, and Lisa L. Martin. “The Promise of 
Institutionalist Theory.”  International Security 20, 
1 (Summer 1995): 39–51. 
 Keohane, Robert O., and Helen V. Milner, eds.  Inter-
nationalization and Domestic Politics . New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 Keohane, Robert, and Joseph S. Nye.  Power and Inter-
dependence , 3rd  ed. New York: Pearson Longman, 
1977, 2001. 
 Koremenos, Barbara, Charles Lipson, and Duncan 
 Snidal. “The Rational Design of International 
 Institutions,”  International Organization 55, 4 
 (Autumn 2001): 761–99. 
 Liberman, Peter.  Democratic Commitments: Legis-
latures and International Cooperation . Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2000. 
 ———. “Interests, Power and Multilateralism.”  In-
ternational Organization 46, 4 (Autumn 1992): 
765–92. 
 ———.  International Institutions in the New Global 
Economy . Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar Publish-
ing, 2005. 
 ———. “Trading with the Enemy: Security and Rela-
tive Economic Gains.”  International Security 21, 1 
(Summer 1996): 147–65. 
 Martin, Lisa. “The President and International 
Agreements: Treaties as Signaling Devices.”  Presi-
dential Studies Quarterly 35, 3 (September 2005): 
440–65. 
 Martin, Lisa, and Beth Simmons, eds.  International 
Institutions: An International Organization Reader . 
Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press, 2001. 
 ———. “Theories and Empirical Studies of Interna-
tional Institutions.”  International Organization 52, 
4 (Autumn 1998): 729–57. 

Suggestions for Further Reading
183
 Keohane, Robert. “The Demand for International Re-
gimes.” International Organization, 36, 2 (Spring 
1982): 325–55. 
 Krasner, Stephen.  International Regimes . Ithaca, NY: 
Cornell University Press, 1983. 
 ———. “Regimes and the Limits of Realism: Regimes 
as Autonomous Variables.”  International Organi-
zation 36, 2 (Spring 1982): 497–510. 
 ———. “Structural Causes and Regime Consequences: 
Regimes as Intervening Variables.”  International 
Organization 36, 2 (Spring 1982): 185–205. 
 Levy, Marc, Oran Young, and Michael Zürn. “The 
Study of International Regimes.”  European Journal 
of International Relations 1, 3 (1995): 267–331. 
 Milner, Helen. “International Regimes and World 
Politics: Comments on the Articles by Smouts, de 
Senarclens and Jönsson.”  International Social Sci-
ence Journal 45, 1 (November 1993): 491–97. 
 Milner, Helen, Edward Mansfield, and Peter Rosend-
orff. “Replication, Realism, and Robustness: Ana-
lyzing Political Regimes and International Trade.” 
 American Political Science Review 96, 1 (March 
2002): 167–69. 
 Rittberger, Volker, and Peter Mayer, eds.  Regime The-
ory and International Relations . New York: Oxford 
University Press, 1995. 
 Ruggie, John. “International Regimes, Transactions, 
and Change: Embedded Liberalism in the Postwar 
Economic Order.”  International Organization 36, 
2 (Spring 1982): 379–415. 
 Snidal, Duncan. “Coordination Versus Prisoners’ 
 Dilemma: Implications for International Coopera-
tion and Regimes.”  The American Political Science 
Review 79, 4 (December 1985): 923–42. 
 Spector, Bertram I., and I. William Zartman, Eds. 
 Getting It Done: Post-Agreement Negotiation and 
International Regimes. Washington, D.C.: U.S. In-
stitute for Peace, 2003. 
 Stein, Arthur. “Coordination and Collaboration: Re-
gimes in an Anarchic World.”  International Orga-
nization 36, 2 (Spring 1982): 299–324. 
 Stokke, Olav. “Regimes as Governance Systems.” 
In  Global Governance—Drawing Insights from 
the Environmental Experience , ed. Oran Young. 
 Cambridge: The MIT Press, 1997. 
 Strange, Susan. “Cave! Hic Dragones: A Critique of 
Regime Analysis.”  International Organization 36, 
2 (Spring 1982): 479–96. 
 Young, Oran. “Regime Dynamics: The Rise and Fall of 
International Regimes.”  International Organization 
36, 2 (Spring 1982): 277–97.  
 Ruggie, John. “Multilateralism: The Anatomy of an In-
stitution.”  International Organization  46, 3 (Sum-
mer 1992): 561–98. 
 Simmons, Beth. “Capacity, Commitment, and Com-
pliance: International Institutions and Territorial 
Disputes.”  The Journal of Conflict Resolution 46, 6 
(December 2002): 829–56. 
 Snidal, Duncan. “The Game Theory of International 
Politics.” In  Cooperation Under Anarchy , ed. 
 Kenneth Oye. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1986. 
 Steffek, Jens.  Embedded Liberalism and Its Critics: 
Justifying Global Governance in the American Cen-
tury . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. 
 Wallander, Celeste A., and Robert O. Keohane. “An 
Institutional Approach to Alliance Theory.” Work-
ing Paper No. 95-2. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Uni-
versity Center for International Affairs, 1995.  
j On International Regimes 
 Alter, Karen J., and Sophie Meunier. “Symposium: 
The Politics of International Regime Complexity.” 
 Perspectives on Politics 7, 1 (March 2009): 13–24. 
 Breitmeier, Helmut, Oran Young, and Michael Zurn. 
 Analyzing International Environmental Regimes . 
Cambridge, MA: The MIT Press, 2007. 
 Brooks, Stephen G., and William C. Wohlforth. “In-
ternational Relations Theory and the Case Against 
Unilateralism,”  Perspectives on Politics. Vol. 3, No. 
3 (September 2005): 509–24. 
 Donnelly, Jack. “International Human Rights: A Re-
gime Analysis.”  International Organization 40, 3 
(Summer 1986): 599–642. 
 Haas, Ernst. “Why Collaborate?: Issue-Linkage and 
International Regimes.”  World Politics 32, 3 (April 
1980): 357–405. 
 ———. “Words Can Hurt You; Or, Who Said What 
to Whom about Regimes.”  International Organiza-
tion 36, 2 (Spring 1982): 207–43. 
 Haggard, Stephen, and Beth Simmons. “Theories of In-
ternational Regimes.”  International Organization 41, 
3 (Summer 1987): 491–517. 
 Hasenclever, Andreas, Peter Mayer, and Volker 
 Rittberger.  Theories of International Regimes . New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1997. 
 Helm, Carsten, and Detlef Sprinz. “Measuring the 
Effectiveness of International Environmental Re-
gimes.”  The Journal of Conflict Resolution 44, 5 
(October 2000): 630–52. 

184
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Hughes, Barry B.  International Futures: Choices in 
the Creation of a New World Order . Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1993. 
 Hughes, Barry B., et al.  Reducing Global Poverty . 
Boulder, CO: Paradigm, 2009. 
 Kalb, Don, et al., eds.  The Ends of Globalization: 
Bringing Society Back In . Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 1999. 
 Karns, Margaret P., and Karen A. Mingst.  Interna-
tional Organizations: The Politics and Processes of 
Global Governance , 2nd ed. Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner, 1999. 
 Keohane, Robert O.  Political Influence in the [UN] 
General Assembly . New York: Carnegie Endow-
ment for International Peace, 1966. 
 ———.  Power and Governance in a Partially Global-
ized World . New York: Routledge, 2009. 
 Kumar, Ashwani, and Dirk Messner, eds.  Power Shifts 
and Global Governance: Challenges From South to 
North . London and New York: Anthem Press, 2010. 
 Mattli, Walter, and Ngaire Woods, eds.  The Politics of 
Global Regulation . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2009. 
 Meyer, Mary K., and Elisabeth Prügl.  Gender Politics 
in Global Governance . Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 1999. 
 Milner, Helen V. “Globalization, Development, and 
International Institutions: Normative and Positive 
Perspectives.”  Perspectives on Politics 3, 4 (Decem-
ber 2005): 833–54. 
 Ostrom, Elinor, et al. Review Symposium “Beyond the 
Tragedy of the Commons—A Discussion of Gov-
erning the Commons: The Evolution of Institutions 
for Collective Action.”  Perspectives on Politics 8, 2 
(June 2010): 569–94. 
 Piattoni, Simona.  The Theory of Multi-level Gover-
nance . New York: Oxford University Press, 2010. 
 Schiff, Benjamin J.  Building the International Crimi-
nal Court . New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2008. 
 Slaughter, Anne-Marie.  A New World Order. Princ-
eton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2004. 
 Struett, Michael J.  The Politics of Constructing the 
International Criminal Court: NGOs, Discourse, 
and Agency . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. 
 Steffek, Jens.  Embedded Liberalism and Its Critics: 
Justifying Global Governance in the American Cen-
tury . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2006. 
 Tabb, William.  Economic Governance in the Age of 
Globalization . New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2004. 
j On Global Governance 
 Ba, Alice D., and Matthew J. Hoffmann, eds.  Contend-
ing Perspectives on Global Governance: Coherence, 
Contestation and World Order . New York: Rout-
ledge, 2005. 
 Barnett, Michael, and Raymond Duvall.  Power in 
Global Governance . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2005. 
 Barnett, Michael, and Martha Finnemore.  Rules for 
the World: International Organizations in Global 
Politics . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2004. 
 Barnett, Michael, and Raymond Duvall.  Power in 
Global Governance . Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 2005. 
 Bobrow, Davis B., and Mark A. Boyer.  Defensive In-
ternationalism: Providing Public Goods in an Un-
certain World . Ann Arbor, MI: The University of 
Michigan Press 2005. 
 Brooks, Stephen G. and William C. Wohlforth.  World 
Out of Balance: International Relations and the 
Challenge of American Primacy. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2008. 
 Centeno, Miguel Angel.  Global Capitalism: A Socio-
logical Perspective . Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2010. 
 Colàs, Alejandro.  International Civil Society: Social 
Movements in World Politics. Cambridge, UK: Pol-
ity, 2002. 
 ———. “Neoliberalism, Globalization and Inter-
national Relations.” In  Neoliberalism: A Critical 
Reader . Ed. Saad-Filho, Alfredo and Deborah John-
ston London. Ann Arbor, MI: Pluto Press, 2005. 
 Dickson, Janet R., Barry B. Hughes, and Mahammod 
T. Irfan.  Advancing Global Education . Boulder, 
CO: Paradigm, 2010. 
 Drezner, Daniel W.  All Politics is Global: Explaining 
International Regulatory Regimes. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2007. 
 Feste, Karen.  Intervention: Shaping the Global Order. 
Westport, CT: Praeger, 2003. 
 Goldstein, Judith L., et al., Eds.  Legalization and World 
Politics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2001. 
 Grant, Ruth W., and Robert O. Keohane. “Account-
ability and Abuses of Power in World Politics.” 
 American Political Science Review 99, 1 (February 
2005): 29–43. 
 Held, David, and Mathias Koenig-Archibug, eds. 
 Global Governance and Public Accountability . 
Malden, MA: Blackwell, 2005. 
 Hewson, Martin, and Timothy J. Sinclair, eds.  Ap-
proaches to Global Governance Theory . Albany, 
NY: State University of New York Press, 1999. 

Suggestions for Further Reading
185
Zedillo. New Haven: Yale Center for the Study of 
Globalization, 2005, 19–38. 
 Barbieri, Katherine.  The Liberal Illusion: Does Trade 
Promote Peace? Ann Arbor, MI: University of 
 Michigan Press, 2002. 
 Cederman, Lars-Erik. “Back to Kant: Reinterpreting 
the Democratic Peace as a Macrohistorical Learning 
Process.”  American Political Science Review 95, 1 
(2001): 15–31. 
 Cederman, Lars-Erik, and Rao Mohan. “Explor-
ing the Dynamics of the Democratic Peace.”  The 
Journal of Conflict Resolution 45, 6 (Dec. 2001): 
818–33. 
 Chan, Steve. “In Search of Democratic Peace: Problems 
and Promises.”  Mershon International Studies Re-
view 40, 1 (May 1997): 59–91. 
 Chernoff, Fred. “The Study of Democratic Peace and 
Progress in International Relations.”  International 
Studies Review 6, 1 (Spring 2004): 49–78. 
 Diamond, Larry. “Kant, Liberal Legacies, and For-
eign Affairs.”  Philosophy and Public Affairs 12, 3 
 (Summer 1983): 205–35. 
 ———.  The Spirit of Democracy: The Struggle to Build 
Free Societies Throughout the World . New York: 
Times Books–Henry Holt, 2008. 
 Doyle, Michael. “Liberalism and World Politics.” 
 American Political Science Review 80, 4 (December 
1986): 1151–69. 
 ———. “Symposium: One World, Many Peoples: In-
ternational Justice in John Rawls’s  The Law of 
Peoples ,”  Perspectives on Politics. Vol. 4, No. 1 
(March 2006): 109–20. 
 ———.  Ways of War and Peace . New York: W.W. Norton, 
1997. 
 Farnham, Barbara. “The Theory of Democratic Peace 
and Threat Perception.”  International Studies 
Quarterly 47, 3 (September 2003): 395–415. 
 Gartzke, Erik. “Preferences and the Democratic 
Peace.”  International Studies Quarterly 44, 2 (June 
2000): 191–212. 
 ———. “The Capitalist Peace.”  American Journal of 
Political Science 51, 1 (January 2007): 166–91. 
 Hasenclever, Andreas, and Brigitte Weiffen. “Interna-
tional Institutions Are the Key: A New Perspective 
on the Democratic Peace.”  Review of International 
Studies 32 (2006): 563–85. 
 Henderson, Errol A.  Democracy and War: The End 
of an Illusion? Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2002. 
 Hensel, Paul, Gary Goertz, and Paul Diehl. “The Dem-
ocratic Peace and Rivalries.”  The Journal of Politics  
62, 4 (November 2000): 1173–88. 
 Weiss, Thomas George, and Ramesh Thakur.  Global 
Governance and the UN . Bloomington, IN: Indiana 
University Press, 2010. 
 Wheatley, Steven.  The Democratic Legitimacy of 
Global Governance . Oxford: Hart, 2009. 
 Woodward, Barbara K.  Global Civil Society in In-
ternational Lawmaking and Global Governance: 
Theory and Practice . Leiden and Boston: Martinus 
Nijhoff Publishers, 2010.  
j On Economic Interdependence 
 Barbieri, Katherine, and Gerald Snyder. “Sleeping with 
the Enemy: The Impact of War on Trade.”  Journal 
of Peace Research 36 (1999). 
 Barney, Darin.  The Network Society. Cambridge, UK: 
Polity Press, 2004. 
 Brooks, Stephen.  Producing Security: Multinational 
Corporations, Globalization, and the Changing 
Calculus of Conflict . Princeton: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 2005. 
 Mansfield, Edward, and Brian Pollins. “The Study of 
Interdependence and Conflict: Recent Advances, 
Open Questions, and Directions for Future Re-
search.”  Journal of Conflict Resolution 45, 6 (2001). 
 McMillan, Susan. “Interdependence and Conflict.” 
 Mershon International Studies 41 (1997). 
 Oneal, John, and Bruce M. Russett. “Assessing the 
Liberal Peace with Alternative Specifications: Trade 
Still Reduced Conflict.”  Journal of Peace Research 36, 
4 (1999). 
 ———. “The Classical Liberals Were Right: Democ-
racy, Interdependence, and Conflict, 1950–1985. 
 International Studies Quarterly 41 (1997). 
 Rosecrance, Richard.  The Rise of the Trading State: 
Commerce and Conquest in the Modern World . 
New York: Basic Books, 1986. 
 Symposium on “Producing Security.”  Security Studies 
16, 4 (October–December 2007): 583–649.  
j On Democratic Peace Theory 
 Avant, Deborah. “The Implications of Marketized Se-
curity for IR Theory: The Democratic Peace, Late 
State Building, and the Nature and Frequency of 
Conflict.”  Perspectives on Politics 4, 3 (September 
2006): 507–26. 
 Axelrod, Robert. “Promoting Democracy through 
International Organizations.” In  Reforming the 
United Nations for Peace and Security , ed. Ernesto 

186
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Owen, John. “How Liberalism Produces Democratic 
Peace.”  International Security 19, 2 (Fall 1994): 
87–125. 
 Pevehouse, Jon. “Interdependence Theory and the 
Measurement of International Conflict.”  The Jour-
nal of Politics 66, 1 (February 2004): 247–66. 
 Rasler, Karen, and William Thompson. “Rivalries and 
the Democratic Peace in the Major Power Subsys-
tem.”  Journal of Peace Research 38, 6 (November 
2001): 659–83. 
 Rosato, Sebastian. “Democracies Are Less Warlike 
Than Other Regimes.”  European Journal of In-
ternational Relations 1 (December 1995): 457–79. 
 ———. “The Flawed Logic of Democratic Peace The-
ory.”  The American Political Science Review 97, 4 
(November 2003): 585–602. 
 Rummel, Rudolph. “Libertarianism and Interna-
tional Violence.”  Journal of Conflict Resoluti on 27 
(1983): 27–71. 
 Russett, Bruce. “Bushwhacking the Democratic Peace.” 
International Studies Perspectives 6, 4 (November 
2005): 395–408. 
 ———. “Can a Democratic Peace Be Built?”  Interna-
tional Interactions 18, 3 (Spring 1993): 277–82. 
 ———.  Grasping the Democratic Peace: Principles for 
a Post–Cold War World . Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1993. 
 Russett, Bruce, and John Oneal.  Triangulating Peace: 
Democracy, Interdependence, and International 
Organizations . New York: W. W. Norton and 
Company, 2001. 
 Schultz, Kenneth. “Do Democratic Institutions Con-
strain or Inform? Contrasting Two Institutional 
Perspectives on Democracy and War.”  Interna-
tional Organization 53, 2 (Spring 1999): 233–66. 
 Schweller, Randall. “Domestic Structure and Preven-
tive War: Are Democracies More Pacific?”  World 
Politics 44, 2 (January 1992): 235–69. 
 Silverson, Randolph, and Juliann Emmons. “Birds of a 
Feather: Democratic Political Systems and Alliance 
Choices in the 20th Century.”  Journal of Conflict 
Resolution 35, 2 (June 1991): 285–306. 
 Starr, Harvey. “Democracy and Integration: Why 
Democracies Don’t Fight Each Other.”  Journal of 
Peace Research 34, 2 (May 1997): 153–62. 
 Ward, Michael, and Kristian Gleditsch. “Democra-
tizing for Peace.”  The American Political Science 
Review 92, 1 (March 1998): 51–61. 
 Weitsman, Patricia, and George Shambaugh. “Interna-
tional Systems, Domestic Structures, and Risk.”  Jour-
nal of Peace Research 39, 3 (May 2002): 289–312.  
 Kadera, Kelly, Mark Crescenzi, and Megan Shannon. 
“Democratic Survival, Peace, and War in the In-
ternational System.”  American Journal of Political 
Science 47, 2 (April 2003): 234–47. 
 Kegley, Charles, and Margaret Hermann. “Military 
Intervention and the Democratic Peace.”  Interna-
tional Interactions 21, 1 (1995): 1–21. 
 Lake, David. “Powerful Pacifists: Democratic States 
and War.”  American Political Science Review 86, 1 
(March 1992): 24–37. 
 Linklater, Andrew, ed.  International Relations: Criti-
cal Concepts in Political Science , v. III, section 5. 
London: Routledge, 2000. 
 Lipson, Charles.  Reliable Partners: How Democra-
cies Have Made a Separate Peace. Princeton, NJ: 
 Princeton University Press, 2003. 
 MacMillan, John. “Beyond the Separate Democratic 
Peace.”  Journal of Peace Research 40, 2 (March 
2003): 233–43. 
 Mansfield, Edward, and Jon C. Pevehouse. “Democra-
tization and International Organizations.”  Interna-
tional Organization 60, 1 (Winter 2006): 137. 
 Mansfield, Edward, and Brian Pollins. “The Study of 
Interdependence and Conflict: Recent Advances, 
Open Questions, and Directions for Future Re-
search.”  Journal of Conflict Resolution 45, 6 
(2001): 834–59. 
 Mansfield, Edward, and Jack Snyder. “Democratiza-
tion and the Danger of War.”  International Security 
20, 1 (Summer 1995): 5–38. 
 Mansfield, Edward D., and Jack Snyder.  Electing to 
Fight: Why Emerging Democracies Go to War . 
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2005. 
 McDonald, Patrick J.  The Invisible Hand of Peace: 
Capitalism, the War Machine, and International 
Relations Theory . New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2009. 
 Moaz, Zeev. “The Controversy over the Democratic 
Peace,”  International Security . 22, 1 (Summer 
1997):162–198. 
 Moaz, Zeev, and Bruce Russett. “Normative and Struc-
tural Causes of Democratic Peace, 1946–1986.” 
 American Political Science Review 87, 3 (September 
1993): 624–38. 
 Mousseau, Michael. “The Nexus of Market Society, 
Liberal Preferences, and Democratic Peace: Inter-
disciplinary Theory and Evidence.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 47, 4 (December 2003): 483–510. 
 Oneal, John, and Bruce Russett. “Clear and Clean: The 
Fixed Effects of the Liberal Peace.”  International 
Organization 55, 2 (Spring 2001): 469–85. 

Suggestions for Further Reading
187
 Hill, Christopher.  The Changing Politics of Foreign 
Policy . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. 
 Holsti, Ole.  Crisis, Escalation, and War . Montreal and 
London: McGill-Queen’s University Press, 1972. 
 Holsti, Ole, and James Rosenau. “The Foreign Pol-
icy Beliefs of American Leaders: Some Further 
Thoughts on Theory and Method.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 30, 4 (December 1986): 375–409 
and 473–84. 
 Hudson, Valerie, ed.  Culture and Foreign Policy . 
 Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1997. 
 ———.  Foreign Policy Analysis: Classic and Contem-
porary Theory . Lanham, MD: Rowman and Little-
field, 2006. 
 Ikenberry, John.  American Foreign Policy: Theoretical 
Essays , 4th ed. New York: Longman, 2004. 
 Janis, Irving.  Victims of Groupthink . Boston: Houghton 
Mifflin, 1972. 
 Jervis, Robert.  Perception and Misperception in Inter-
national Politics . Princeton, NJ: Princeton Univer-
sity Press, 1976. 
 Jervis, Robert, Richard Ned Lebow, and Janice Stein. 
 Psychology and Deterrence . Baltimore: Johns 
 Hopkins University Press, 1985. 
 Johnson, Dominic D. P.  Overconfidence and War: The 
Havoc and Glory of Positive Illusions . Cambridge, 
MA: Harvard University Press, 2004. 
 Johnson, Dominic D. P., and Dominic Tierney.  Fail-
ing to Win: Perceptions of Victory and Defeat in 
International Politics . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 2006. 
 Katzenstein, Peter. “‘Walls’ Between ‘Those People’? 
Contrasting Perspectives on World Politics” (APSA 
Presidential Address),  Perspectives on Politics. 8, 1 
(March 2010): 11–25. 
 Lebow, Richard Ned.  Between Peace and War: The 
Nature of International Crisis . Baltimore: Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 1981. 
 Levy, Jack S. “Misperception and the Causes of War.” 
 World Politics 36, 1 (October 1983): 76–99. 
 ———. “Organization Routines and the Causes of 
War.”  International Studies Quarterly 30, 2 (June 
1986): 193–222. 
 ———. “Prospect Theory, Rational Choice, and In-
ternational Relations.”  International Studies Quar-
terly 41, 1 (March 1997): 87–112. 
 Maoz, Zeev. “Framing the National Interest: The Ma-
nipulation of Foreign Policy Decisions in Group 
Settings.”  World Politics  43, 1 (Oct. 1990): 77–110. 
 ———.  National Choices and International Processes . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
j On Bureaucracies and Decision 
Making in Foreign Policy 
 Allison, Graham, and Philip Zelikow.  Essence of Deci-
sion: Explaining the Cuban Missile Crisis , 2nd ed. 
New York: Longman, 1999. 
 Beasley, Ryan, Juliet Kaarbo, Jeffrey Lantis, and 
 Michael Snarr, eds.  Foreign Policy in Comparative 
Perspective: Domestic and International Influences 
on State Behavior . Washington, DC: Congressional 
Quarterly Press, 2001. 
 Bendor, Jonathan. “Rethinking Allison’s Models.” 
 American Political Science Review 86, 2 (June 
1992): 301–22. 
 Berejikian, Jeffrey D.  International Relations Under 
Risk: Framing State Choice. Albany, NY: State Uni-
versity of New York Press, 2004. 
 Bueno de Mesquita, Bruce. “Domestic Politics and In-
ternational Relations.”  International Studies Quar-
terly 46, 1 (March 2002): 1–9. 
 Byman, Daniel L., and Kenneth M. Pollack. “Let Us 
Now Praise Famous Men: Bringing the States-
man Back In.”  International Security 25, 4 (Spring 
2001): 107–46. 
 Clapp, Priscilla, and Morton Halperin.  Bureaucratic 
Politics and Foreign Policy , 2nd ed. Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institute Press, 2007. 
 Drezner, Daniel. “Ideas, Bureaucratic Politics, and the 
Crafting of Foreign Policy.”  American Journal of 
Political Science 44, 3 (October 2000): 733–49. 
 Gallhofer, Irmtraud N., and Willem E. Saris.  Collective 
Choice Processes: A Qualitative and Quantitative 
Analysis of Foreign Policy Decision-making . New 
York: Praeger, 1997, 3–49, 149–96. 
 George, Alexander.  Bridging the Gap: Theory and 
Practice in Foreign Policy . Washington, DC: United 
States Institute of Peace Press, 1993. 
 ———. “The Operational Code: A Neglected Ap-
proach to the Study of Political Leaders and Deci-
sion-Making.”  International Studies Quarterly 13, 
2 (June 1969): 190–222. 
 Foyle, Douglas. “Public Opinion and Foreign Policy: 
Elites Beliefs as a Mediating Variable.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 41, 1 (March 1997): 141–69. 
 Hermann, Margaret, and Charles Hermann. “Who 
Makes Foreign Policy Decisions and How: An 
 Empirical Inquiry.”  International Studies Quarterly 33, 
4 (December 1989): 361–87. 
 Herrick, Christopher, and Patricia McRae.  Issues in 
American Foreign Policy . New York: Longman, 
2002. 

188
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Renshon, Stanley, and Deborah Larson.  Good Judg-
ment in Foreign Policy . Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 2003. 
 Risse-Kappen, Thomas. “Public Opinion, Domes-
tic Structure, and Foreign Policy in Liberal De-
mocracies.”  World Politics 43, 4 (July 1991): 
479–512. 
 Schaffer, Mark, and Scott Crichlow. “The Process-
Outcome Connection in Foreign Policy Deci-
sion Making: A Quantitative Study Building on 
 Groupthink.”  International Studies Quarterly 46, 1 
(March 2002): 45–68. 
 Snyder, Jack.  Myths of Empire: Domestic Politics and 
International Ambition . Ithaca, NY: Cornell Uni-
versity Press, 1991, Ch. 7. 
 Snyder, Richard, H. W. Bruck, and Burton Sapin. 
 Foreign Policy Decision-Making (Revisited). New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2002.  
 Maoz, Zeev, and Ben D. Mor.  Bound by Struggle: 
The Strategic Evolution of Enduring International 
Rivalries . Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan 
Press, 2002, 27–84, 256–88. 
 Milner, Helen.  Interests, Institutions and Infor-
mation: Domestic Politics and International 
 Relations . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1997. 
 Neustadt, Richard, and Ernest May.  Thinking in Time: 
The Uses of History for Decision-Makers . New 
York: Free Press, 1986. 
 Putnam, Robert. “Diplomacy and Domestic Politics: 
The Logic of Two-Level Games.”  International Or-
ganization 42, 3 (Summer 1988): 427–60. 
 Raiffa, Howard.  Negotiation Analysis: The Sci-
ence and Art of Collaborative Decision Making . 
 Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2002, 
3–52. 

 Economic 
Structuralism: Global 
Capitalism and 
Postcolonialism
 MAJOR ACTORS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
 W e have seen how many realists organize their work around the basic question: 
How can stability or order be maintained in an anarchic world? Many liberals 
or neoliberal institutionalists ask how can international collaboration and peace-
ful change be promoted in a world that is increasingly interdependent politically, 
militarily, socially, and economically? Economic structuralism concentrates on the 
broad question of why so many  Third World , capital-poor states in Latin America, 
Africa, and Asia have been unable to develop. The upper classes in these societies 
may have been able to carve out benefits for themselves, but the masses continue to 
live in poverty—their life expectancies cut short as well. 
 For some economic structuralists, this question is part of a larger effort to con-
struct a theory of world capitalist development. Hence, for them, globalization is 
not a new phenomenon but can be traced back several centuries. Given this context, 
we include commentary here on the growing literature on  postcolonialism —a term 
that captures not only the period since the formal end of colonialism following 
World War II, but one that also takes us back to the imperial and colonial experi-
ences that have so many implications for the present day. We have avoided the 
label  Marxism  because there are both Marxists (and neo-Marxists) as well as non-
Marxists who work within what we have chosen to call an economic-structuralist 
image. Indeed, some economic structuralists decidedly avoid Marxian modes of 
analysis. Nevertheless, we observe that whether these scholars identify themselves 
with analyses spawned by the work of Karl Marx or not, all economic structuralists 
draw intellectually from his focus on material structures and exploitative relations 
that in zero-sum fashion benefit some at the expense of many others. 
4
 CHAPTER
189

190
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
 Since the end of the Cold War, there have been decidedly fewer theoretical and 
empirical challenges levied against economic-structuralist approaches to interna-
tional relations theory. Indeed, they tended to be ignored in mainstream literature. 
This may be due in part to the demise of the Soviet Union and other Leninist 
regimes in Eastern Europe, which dampened scholarly interest in this mode of 
scholarly analysis, particularly in the United States where many scholars have an 
ideological aversion to this mode of thought. 
 Marginalization of this IR image is ironic since its proponents observe that the 
 capitalist world-system perspective was quite prescient, anticipating the continual 
unfolding of the logic of capitalism and its inexorable spread to virtually every nook 
and cranny around the globe—the process of globalization understood through 
these economic-structuralist lenses. Hence, we note that economic structuralism 
as an image of international relations or world politics—particularly the capitalist 
world-system approach—remains highly relevant for many scholars. Particularly in 
times of global economic hardship, one witnesses a revival of interest in approaches 
we place under the economic-structuralist umbrella. 
 As an intellectual image informing the development of theory, economic struc-
turalism has always been independent of the rise and fall of particular regimes oc-
curring within a capitalist mode of production. Indeed, from this perspective, the 
still-surviving self-professed communist regimes (China, North Korea, Vietnam, 
and Cuba) are best understood by their different adaptations to domination within 
a capitalist world-system. Finally, in recent years much of the scholarly literature 
and debate dealing with economic, political, and social crises in the developing 
world are cast in the wider net of postcolonial theorizing. As we will see, while this 
literature accommodates economic-structuralist approaches, it has had relatively 
little impact on the debates occurring within mainstream IR journals. 
 Economic structuralists are guided by four key assumptions. First, it is neces-
sary to understand the global context within which states and other entities inter-
act. Economic structuralists argue that to explain behavior at any and all  levels 
of analysis (the individual; group, class, bureaucratic or institutional units; state 
and society as a whole; and between or among states or societies) one must first 
understand the overall  structure of the global system within which such behavior 
takes place. 
 As with structural or neorealists discussed in  Chapter   2 , most economic struc-
turalists believe that the starting point of analysis should be the international or, 
for them, the capitalist world-system. To a large extent, the behavior of individual 
actors is explained by a system that provides both opportunities and constraints. 
The essential difference between structural realists and economic structuralists, 
of course, is focus by the former on structure as the distribution of power among 
states, the latter on global economic structures—whether expressed as North vs. 
South, First vs. Third Worlds,  core vs.  periphery , or capital-owning bourgeois vs. 
toiling (working or peasant) classes. 
 Second, economic structuralists stress the importance of historical analysis in 
comprehending the international system. It is this historical focus that postcolonial 
studies also bring to economic-structuralist understandings. Only by tracing the 
historical evolution of the system is it possible to understand its current structure. 
The key historical factor and defining characteristic of the system as a whole is 

Major Actors and Assumptions 
191
 capitalism . This particular economic system or mode of production works to the 
benefit of some individuals, states, and societies but at the expense of others. Even 
the few remaining socialist states must operate within a capitalist world economy 
that significantly constrains their options. Hence, for economic structuralists, the 
East–West division during the height of the Cold War was not nearly as important 
as the North–South divide and competition among such advanced capitalist states 
as Germany, France, the United Kingdom, Japan, and the United States. 
 Third, economic structuralists assume that particular mechanisms of domina-
tion exist that keep Third World states from developing, contributing to worldwide 
 uneven development . To understand these mechanisms requires an examina-
tion of dependency relations between the “northern” industrialized, capital-rich 
states (principally those in Europe and North America, Japan, Australia and New 
Zealand) and their capital-poorer neighbors in the southern hemisphere (Africa, 
Latin America, Asia, and the Pacific island states). Although most capital-poor 
countries are located south of Europe, North America, and Japan, the North–
South designation is more figurative than geographic since much of Asia lies in 
the Northern Hemisphere as do Central America, the Caribbean, and the northern 
part of South America—not to mention that Australia and New Zealand are in the 
Southern Hemisphere. 
 In economic-structuralist discourse, which we take up later in this chapter, the 
First World or northern, capital-rich countries are often referred to as constituting 
the  core of global capitalism. The Third World or southern, capital-poor countries 
are set at the  periphery of this capitalist world-system, and a residual category is 
reserved for those somewhere in between core and periphery—the  semiperiphery . 
What is most important in economic-structural analyses, however, is the capital 
position that describes the level of economic development or productive capacity a 
country has achieved regardless of its geographic location. 
 For this reason some prefer still to refer to the capital-rich countries as  First 
World and capital poor as Third World. The reference to “third” has its origins 
in French-socialist discourse in the early 1960s that saw the term  Third World as 
capturing the aspirations for a better life where most people live. The concept can 
be traced back to the term  third estate , which broadly referred to the downtrod-
den classes of prerevolutionary eighteenth-century French society. The other two 
estates were the upper rungs of French society—the nobility or aristocracy and the 
clergy. Calling these poor countries “third” world, then, was not intended to be a 
put-down as if somehow they were third rate. To the contrary, that ultimately the 
people will triumph was the hopeful implication of this “Third World” label. 
 Whether core or periphery, North or South, First or Third Worlds as designa-
tions of the structural components of dominance mechanisms, economic-structuralist 
theory also must take account of newly industrializing states like China, South 
Korea, Vietnam, and Thailand that also have accumulated substantial capital, 
adding yet another category to the complexity of uneven development. Quite apart 
from its global position, China has a decidedly uneven development internally 
that combines both First and Third World dimensions in a dual economy. Some 
20–25% of its 1.4 billion people are participants in (and to varying degrees benefi-
ciaries of) economic development, the remaining 75–80% still living in essentially 
Third World circumstances in both the countryside and urban areas of China. 

192
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
 Changes in the global economy since the end of the Cold War have had their 
impact on economic-structuralist analyses, requiring adaptation of concepts and 
terms more readily used in a Cold War world. The demise of Soviet and other 
Leninist regimes and their command economies in eastern Europe at the end of the 
Cold War, coupled with the embrace of capitalist modes of economic development 
by regimes in China and Vietnam, have made the “Second World” designation 
as obsolete as “East vs. West”—both terms now artifacts of the past and thus 
rarely used in discussions about the present-day world order. The term  Second 
World (sometimes called  socialist or  communist ) once captured a large number of 
countries—a category generally separate from those linked within the  dependency 
mechanism in which capital-rich, First World countries and classes in the North 
dominate the capital-poor, Third World countries and classes in the South. 
 Finally, and as should be apparent from the discussion thus far, economic 
structuralists assume that economic or material factors are absolutely critical in 
explaining the evolution and functioning of the international or capitalist world-
system and the relegation of Third World states to a subordinate position. These 
factors have important impact on political, social, cultural, ethnic, and gender is-
sues, which also are captured in the more recent postcolonialism literature. 
 The economic-structuralist approach does share some commonalities with the 
other three images, although differences clearly outweigh any similarities. As noted, 
both economic structuralists and structural realists (neorealists) place greater empha-
sis on the importance of the system level, or world as a whole, in affecting actors’ be-
havior than do liberals and scholars in the English School. But they differ ontologically 
as to how they characterize system-level components. Thus, economic structuralists 
tend to focus on economic structure (e.g., classes or blocs, core vs. periphery, North 
vs. South, etc.) within a capitalist mode of production, while for neorealists structure 
is to be found in the distribution of aggregate power among states (e.g., unipolar, 
bipolar, and multipolar labels for structure). Furthermore, economic structuralists 
are much more likely than realists to emphasize the intimate connection between the 
international or capitalist world-system and domestic politics. State and society are 
never viewed as being encapsulated by a metaphorical hard shell. Class structure, for 
example, transcends the boundaries of states and their component societies. 
 Economic structuralists and liberals share at least three commonalities that can 
be viewed as criticisms of the realist perspective. First, both stress an approach to 
international relations grounded in  political economy . The distinction between high 
politics and low politics (the relative importance of political-military as compared 
to economic factors) is rejected—if not totally reversed for certain economic struc-
turalists. For the economic structuralist, various manifestations of political and 
military power generally reflect the driving force of underlying economic factors. 
Politics depends on economics; it is not an autonomous realm. 
 Second, both economic structuralists and liberals are much more attuned to 
events, processes, institutions, and actors operating both within and between states; 
the impermeable billiard ball (the state as unitary, rational actor common in many 
realist understandings) is broken down into its component parts. Both approaches 
tend to range up and down the levels of analysis and focus on a greater variety of ac-
tors, but economic structuralists place a much greater emphasis on the context (i.e., 
the capitalist nature of the international system) within which these actors operate 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
193
than do liberals. Agency matters to both economic structuralists and liberals. But 
on the whole there is decidedly more voluntarism in liberal understandings, more 
determinism in most economic-structuralist theorizing. 
 Third, both the economic structuralists and those liberals who write in the 
 transnationalist tradition emphasize socioeconomic or welfare issues. A number 
of liberals have a normative commitment to peaceful change. International rela-
tions do not have to be viewed and played as a  zero-sum game with winners 
and losers, but can be seen as a  positive-sum game in which the restructuring of 
interstate relations is achieved through bargaining and compromise, allowing 
all parties to gain. Although economic structuralists are also concerned with the 
welfare of less-developed countries (LDCs), they are not so optimistic about the 
possibility of peaceful change. The hierarchical nature of world politics with South 
subordinated to North and the economic dictates of the capitalist world-system 
make it unlikely that the northern industrialized states will make any meaningful 
concessions to the Third World. Change, peaceful or revolutionary, is problematic 
until the capitalist world-system reaches a point of systemic crisis. In sum, there 
are indeed major differences between economic structuralists and liberals. There 
is also little in common between economic structuralism and the English School—
the latter more of a middle path between realism on the one hand, liberalism and 
idealism on the other. 
 Although the economic structuralists are primarily concerned with the question 
of why the euphemistically termed “developing world” or “emerging economies” 
can’t develop, answering such a query is difficult. How and why did capitalism 
develop in Europe? How did it expand outward to other continents? As an interna-
tional phenomenon, how has capitalism changed over the centuries? What are the 
specific mechanisms of dependency that allow for the maintenance of exploitative 
relations? What are the relations between the elites of the wealthy, capital-rich  cen-
ter countries (the First World) and the elites of the poorer periphery? Is it possible 
for an LDC to break out of a dependent situation? Economic-structuralist answers 
to such questions are addressed in the subsequent pages in this chapter.  
INTELLECTUAL PRECURSORS AND INFLUENCES 
Karl Marx 
 All economic structuralists have been influenced either directly or indirectly by the 
works of Karl Marx (1818–1883). This is certainly not to suggest that all economic 
structuralists are Marxists (any more than alleging that all Marxists accept without 
qualification the sum total of Marx’s efforts). It is simply to acknowledge that they 
all owe an intellectual debt to him in terms of their methods of analysis and certain 
critical insights into the functioning, development, and expansion of the capitalist 
mode of production. Marx focused attention on unequal and exploitative relations 
and thus set an important backdrop or context for scholarship by economic struc-
turalists, whether they be Marxist, neo-Marxist, or non-Marxist in orientation. To 
appreciate Marx as scholar, one does not have to ascribe to the views of Marx as 
revolutionary. Similarly, Marx could claim the title of being the original critical 
theorist. Current work in this genre, however, sharply departs from Marx on racial 

194
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
and religious inequalities—factors important in postcolonialism writings that Marx 
largely overlooked. Marx also did not take up gender, although his colleague and 
collaborator, Friedrich Engels (1820–1895), did portray women as victimized in 
patterns of dominance and exploitation—considerations that figure prominently in 
the postcolonialism literature. 
 Karl Marx’s work concerns humankind’s historical growth process and move-
ment toward final self-realization and fulfillment in a society he called  communist. 
For Marx, history was not so much the story of the rise and fall of particular city-
states, empires, and nation-states as it was the story of  class conflict generated by 
the advance of technology from ancient times to present-day economic moderniza-
tion. Preceded by a  feudal system in the Middle Ages, a change in mode of produc-
tion occurred over time—often accompanied by violence—with market capitalism 
reigning supreme in the nineteenth-century Europe in which Marx lived. Marx 
argued that capitalism—which involves market exchanges, labor as a commodity, 
and the  means of production typically held in private hands—produced particular 
political, social, and cultural effects. Marx’s discussion and analysis of capitalism, 
then, have influenced economic structuralists in at least three ways. 
 First, Marx was concerned with exploitation of the many by the few, in par-
ticular the patterns and mechanisms of exploitation in different modes of economic 
production. He no doubt recognized the historically progressive role played by 
capitalists (the  proletarian revolution would not be possible until after the estab-
lishment of a capitalist system), but his personal sympathies were with the down-
trodden who were alienated from the means of production. 
 Second, according to Marx, capitalism exhibited certain law-like qualities in 
terms of its development and expansion. He viewed capitalism as part of a world 
historical process unfolding dialectically, an economic system riddled with clashing 
contradictions or internal tensions that could be resolved only by a revolutionary 
transformation into a socialist mode of production. While recognizing the impor-
tant role of human agency in moving history forward, he felt that historical eco-
nomic and social realities were paramount in explaining outcomes. As he argued, 
“Men make their own history, but they do not make it just as they please; they do 
not make it under circumstances chosen by themselves, but under circumstances 
directly found, given, and transmitted from the past. The tradition of all dead gen-
erations weighs heavily like a nightmare on the brain of the living.”  1  Not unlike 
many present-day IR theorists, Marx was interested in the interplay or  dialectic 
between agents and structures, in particular the processes by which the former are 
historically constructed. 
 Finally, Marx insisted that a society must be studied in its totality, not 
piecemeal. An analyst must be aware of how various parts of society were inter-
related, including those aspects not so apparent to the casual observer. As Robert 
L. Heilbroner states: “The entire contribution of Marxism to social thought rests 
ultimately on its effort to penetrate the veil of appearances to discover the hidden 
essence of things, the web of relations that is the real ground of reality and not the 
surface manifestations that are its facade.”  2  Put another way, Marx was an intel-
lectual precursor of present-day critical theorists. 
 This perspective has deeply influenced the economic structuralists, some of 
whom earlier in their careers had little use for history and were preoccupied almost 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
195
exclusively with such  units of analysis as states or individuals. As two leading eco-
nomic structuralists have argued: “If there is one thing which distinguishes a world-
system perspective from any other, it is its insistence that the unit of analysis is a 
 world -system defined in terms of  economic processes and links, and not any units 
defined in terms of juridical, political, cultural, geographical, or other criteria.”  3  
Although such units of analysis are not ignored by the economic structuralists, they 
take on connotations different from those of the realist, liberal, or English School 
theorist. The state, for example, is not viewed in terms of its being a sovereign entity 
preoccupied with security concerns. Rather, it derives its significance from the role 
it plays in actively aiding or hindering the capitalist accumulation process. Any one 
particular state is not viewed in isolation but in terms of how it fits into the overall 
global capitalist system. 
 In sum, Marx has influenced contemporary scholars working within the 
 economic-structuralist image by virtue of his emphasis on exploitation, discern-
ible historical patterns of capitalist development and expansion, how change oc-
curs, and the importance of understanding the “big picture” and then asking how 
 individual parts fit into the whole.  
Hobson and Imperialism 
 Marx saw capitalism as a worldwide mode of production. His observations on 
capitalism in the nineteenth century were applied subsequently in various theories 
of  imperialism . Imperialism assumes an international, hierarchical division of labor 
between rich and poor regions of the world, but the relation is not one of mutually 
beneficial  comparative advantage . Rather, it is one of exploitation. 
 Ironically, perhaps one of the most significant theories of imperialism was de-
vised by a non-Marxist, the English economist John A. Hobson (1858–1940). Near 
the turn of the century, Hobson noted that capitalist societies were faced with three 
basic interrelated problems: overproduction, underconsumption by workers and 
other classes, and oversavings on the part of capitalists. As the capitalist owners of 
industry continued to exploit workers and pay the lowest possible wages, profits 
mounted and goods began to pile up. But who was to purchase the excess goods? 
Given the low wages, not the mass of the working class, because members of this 
class did not have sufficient purchasing power. The efficiency of the capitalist mode 
of production resulted, however, in the relentless production of more and more 
goods the society was unable to consume. 
 What could capitalists have done with excess goods and profits, and how could 
they have resolved the problem of underconsumption? Redistribute wealth? Highly 
unlikely. Because capitalist European and North American powers were experienc-
ing overproduction and domestic underconsumption, investment opportunities in 
other developed countries remained limited. 
 The solution reached by capitalists was to invest in what became known as 
Third World countries. The result was imperialism—“the endeavor of the great 
controllers of industry to broaden the channel for the flow of their surplus wealth 
by seeking foreign markets and foreign investments to take off the goods and capi-
tal they cannot sell or use at home.” Hobson argued, however, against “the sup-
posed inevitability of imperial expansion.” He stated that it is “not inherent in the 

196
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
nature of things that we should spend our natural resources on militarism, war, and 
risky, unscrupulous diplomacy, in order to find markets for our goods and surplus 
capital.”  4  Hobson hence rejected the determinism so often found in the work of 
Marxist scholars who write on imperialism. 
 For Hobson, imperialism did not benefit the home country as a whole. Instead, 
selected groups such as industrialists, financiers, and the individuals who staffed 
the colonial empires profited. Furthermore, because the flag followed trade, large 
military expenditures were required to protect the imperialist system. The drive 
for capitalist profits by securing overseas territories led to competition and rivalry 
among European powers. Hence, imperialism was to Hobson a major cause of 
war, and Hobson suggested that capitalists might indeed profit from such conflicts.  
Lenin
 V. I. Lenin’s (1870–1924, born Vladimir Ilyich Ulyanov)  Imperialism: The Highest 
Stage of Capitalism is his most important theoretical work of interest to economic 
structuralists. Writing in the midst of World War I (1916), Lenin developed a 
theory that claimed to explain the necessity for capitalist exploitation of lesser de-
veloped countries and the causes of war among advanced capitalist states. He drew 
heavily upon the works of Hobson and the German Social Democrat, Rudolph 
Hilferding (1877–1941). 
 From Hobson, Lenin accepted the key argument that underconsumption and 
overproduction caused capitalists to scramble for foreign markets beyond Europe 
and to engage in colonialism. From Hilferding, Lenin took the notion that imperial-
ist policies reflected the existence of monopoly and finance capital, or the highest 
stage of capitalism. In other words, capitalism had developed such that oligopolies 
and monopolies controlled the key sectors of the economy, squeezing out or tak-
ing over smaller firms and milking domestic markets dry. The result was a need to 
look elsewhere for investment opportunities. This logically entailed the creation of 
overseas markets. As markets expanded, they required more economic inputs such 
as raw materials, which encouraged the further spread of imperialism to secure 
such resources. 
 Marx expected that rates of profits would decline because of overproduc-
tion and underconsumption. Greater misery for the working class would result 
because more and more people would be out of jobs or receive even less in wages. 
Proletarian, or working-class, consciousness would grow, leading ultimately to 
revolution in all capitalist countries. For Lenin, imperialism explained why Marx’s 
prediction of proletarian revolution in Europe had failed to come about. Economic 
contradictions inherent in the capitalist mode of production still existed, but impe-
rialism allowed capitalists a breathing space. Imperialism provided the European 
working class a taste or small portion of the spoils derived from the exploitation 
of overseas territories—new markets, cheap labor, and natural resources. Their 
benefit at the expense of workers and peasants in the colonies undermined class 
consciousness and thus solidarity with the plight of fellow toilers in these lands. 
 By buying off the European working class in the short term through higher 
wages, imperialism delayed the inevitable revolution. But an important trade-
off was involved. Domestic stability was achieved at the cost of wars among the 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
197
capitalist powers that resulted from the continual struggle for overseas markets. 
Once the globe had been effectively divided up, further expansion could come 
about only at the expense of a capitalist rival. 
 For Lenin, imperialism was therefore driven by economic forces, and it was 
inevitable that such exploitation and eventual conflict would occur. Hence, he dis-
agreed with Hobson and later theorists (e.g., Joseph Schumpeter) who argued that 
other factors such as primitive or irrational instincts or an enjoyment of struggle 
and conquest also played a role in explaining imperialist policies resulting in war-
fare. He also disagreed with writers who argued that imperialism was simply the 
chosen policy of capitalists and hence was subject to change. Lenin rejected this line 
of thinking. For him, imperialism was not a matter of choice but of inevitability. 
The capitalists could not save themselves any other way than to pursue imperialist 
policies. Imperialism was the direct result of the attainment of monopoly capital. 
The resulting competition among states, reflecting the domination of capitalist 
class interests and the differential growth rates of capitalist economies (i.e., uneven 
development), unavoidably led to world wars such as the one being experienced at 
the time of Lenin’s writing. 
 Although Lenin’s theory of imperialism has been subject to a great deal of both 
empirical and conceptual criticism over the years, Lenin was writing not just as a 
theorist, but also as a revolutionary whose writings were designed to mobilize sup-
port for a socialist revolution. He is a prime example of a writer blending theory 
and practice. In combination with his works on the importance of revolutionary 
leadership and organization, Lenin’s  Imperialism has had a great deal of influence 
since his time on revolutionaries throughout the world. 
 Strictly as a theorist, Lenin has particularly influenced the economic-structuralist 
literature with his emphasis on the global nature of capitalism and its inherent 
 exploitation that primarily benefits the  bourgeoisie in advanced capitalist states at 
the expense of poorer countries and their laboring classes. Although there is argu-
ably a good deal of determinism in his theory of imperialism, his work as a revolu-
tionary (like that of Marx) reflected considerable voluntarism in practice. Agency 
mattered to Lenin as was apparent in his call for a “vanguard of the proletariat” 
led by a communist party to push history down its revolutionary path. This was an 
idea he developed not only in theory, but in practice as well. The actions of revo-
lutionaries were at the very least to serve as catalysts to the worldwide proletarian 
revolution whenever the objective conditions of working-class exploitation were 
ripe or had reached their revolutionary stage.  5  
Luxemburg and Revolution vs. Reform 
 Not to be seduced by the appeal of peaceful, gradual change or reformism, Rosa 
Luxemburg (1870–1919) expressed deep commitment to revolution as the only ef-
fective means of transforming society. She wrote as a critic of Eduard Bernstein’s 
(1850–1932) late nineteenth-century German Social Democratic Party politics of 
 reformism . She saw reformism as an abandonment of Marxist principles, however 
helpful such policies might appear to be for the workers in the short run. For his 
part, Leon Trotsky (1879–1940, born Lev Davidovich Bronstein) who, along with 
Lenin, was a key architect of the 1917 Russian revolution, saw transforming society 

198
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
as an ongoing task that only begins with the taking of governmental power. Draw-
ing from both Marx and Engels, Trotsky saw “permanent revolution” as essential 
to removing the bourgeoisie and the vestiges of the old order it leaves behind. 
 In this same genre, Luxemburg argued vociferously the necessity for revolution 
to effect “removal of obstacles that a privileged minority places in the path of social 
progress.” By contrast, she believed that reformism involves compromise with the 
bourgeoisie, strengthening the hand of the capitalist class: “Only the hammer blow 
of revolution, that is to say, the conquest of political power by the proletariat,” 
or working class, “can break down this wall” of opposition posed by capitalists 
to “socialist society.” She also described the negative impact of imperialism on 
colonies.  6  
 The issue of whether the kinds of changes anticipated by many economic 
structuralists can be achieved by reformist tactics or whether they can be achieved 
only through revolutionary violence remains a matter for dispute. Many economic 
structuralists are reform-minded, non-Marxists. Economic structuralists who claim 
to be Marxists are divided. There are reform-minded Marxists in the tradition of 
Eduard Bernstein who are opposed by those who see revolution as the only effective 
means to change the existing world order. Even the latter disagree: When will the 
revolution occur, or when should it occur? Does one wait until objective conditions 
are ripe, or does one take some affirmative action to move the process along? Are 
revolutions inevitable, or must they be made—the subjective component? How 
much is the result of voluntary action, and how much is determined by “historical 
inevitabilities”? The agency-structure, subjective-objective debate is clearly not new 
to economic structuralists. The one point on which these theorists tend to agree, 
however, is the desirability of change from the present unjust order.  7  
Antonio Gramsci 
 The Italian Marxist Antonio Gramsci (1891–1937) departed from more hard-line, 
Marxist-Leninist formulations and offered a volitional approach to both theory 
and practice. Written in prison during the fascist period in Italy under Mussolini, 
his  Prison Notebooks are a rich source of his views. Gramsci’s emphasis on po-
litical voluntarism—the subjective—clearly has roots in his study of Machiavelli, 
who understood the importance of practical action. A key concept in his work 
that influences some present-day economic-structuralist scholarship is the histori-
cal and ideological  bloc , which may well be a  bloc or obstacle to social change, 
thus maintaining a pattern of dominance in society or even on a global scale.  8  We 
note that such blocs are social constructions that serve dominant class interests. 
The historic bloc ( blocco storico ) is an instrument of hegemony. To Gramsci, it is 
decisive, composed as it is of both structures and superstructures, the objective and 
the subjective, respectively. 
 Of particular importance is his argument that this hegemonic position relies 
mainly on consent rather than mere coercion. Dominant classes provide a social 
vision that supposedly is in the interests of all. This vision can be articulated and 
reflected in popular culture, education, literature, and political parties. If subordi-
nate social groups buy into this vision, then the ruling classes will not have to rely 
on coercion to stay in power. Gramsci’s hope was that this dominant ideology or 

Dependency Theorists 
199
social vision could be challenged by elements of civil society by articulating a coun-
terhegemonic vision that would open the way for a postcapitalist future. 
 Gramsci’s influence is apparent in Robert Cox’s (born 1926) extensive work on 
social forces and hegemony, relating as he does ideas to global economic and politi-
cal structures with the goal of avoiding the limitations of state-centric IR theory. 
For Cox, realism and liberalism underestimate the powerful and expansive nature 
of what he terms  world hegemony . At the international or systems level, hegemony 
is not merely an order among states. It is rather an order within a world economy 
with a dominant mode of production that penetrates all countries. Hegemony is 
also evident in the complex of social and political relations that connect the social 
classes of these different countries. World hegemony, therefore, is a combination of 
social structure, economic structure, and political structure. This world hegemony 
is expressed in universal norms, institutions, and other mechanisms that constitute 
general rules of behavior for states as well as transnational, civil-society actors. 
Ultimately these rules support the dominant capitalist mode of production. In 
contrast to the liberal view, international organizations are a mechanism through 
which universal norms of world hegemony are expressed. 
 Similarly, Craig Murphy sees a Gramsci-style, North–South historical  bloc 
composed of an “Atlantic” or “Trilateral” ruling class, some of the subordinate 
classes within advanced industrial states, and a rising governing class in dependent 
Third World states that maintain a collective position of dominance over those 
subordinate to them. The  bloc has many interrelated or interconnected reinforc-
ing faces—economic, political, and cultural—that facilitate maintenance of this 
dominance. As with Cox, he sees the ideas and values institutionalized in interna-
tional organizations as designed to serve identifiable interests in a capitalist, global 
economy.  9  
DEPENDENCY THEORISTS 
ECLA and UNCTAD Arguments 
 Some of the more provocative work in the economic-structuralist tradition was pio-
neered by Latin American scholars in the 1960s and 1970s. Representing various 
branches of the social sciences, they came to be known collectively as dependency 
theorists. Several of these writers were associated in the 1960s with the Economic 
Commission on Latin America (ECLA) and the United Nations Conference on 
Trade and Development (UNCTAD). They were concerned with the important 
problem of explaining why Latin America and other Third World regions were 
not developing as anticipated. North American social science models had predicted 
an economic takeoff for LDCs. What had gone wrong? What explained economic 
stagnation,  balance of payments difficulties, and deteriorating  terms of trade ? Why 
wasn’t the North American–Western European experience being repeated? 
 One response came from mainstream  modernization writers. This moderniza-
tion literature attempted to answer these questions by exploring the difficulties of 
LDCs in moving from “traditional” to “modern” societies. The tradition–modernity 
dichotomy has been used in one form or another by social scientists as a tool of 
analysis since the nineteenth century. The ethos and organization of a traditional 

200
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
society, it is argued, are both a cause and an expression of underdevelopment. The 
cultural values of a traditional society are postulated to be a hindrance to modern-
ization. The LDCs are wedded to their pasts, reflecting a lack of entrepreneurial 
spirit that was found in European society during the rise of capitalism in the six-
teenth century.  10  
 This view of development and underdevelopment as the outcomes of internal 
processes has been criticized on a number of grounds. Two important criticisms 
are, first, that the modernization writers assume that the tradition–modernity 
dichotomy is universally applicable. But is the Latin American experience really 
so similar to the European experience? Are there really no significant historical 
differences between the African and European (or American) experiences? Of 
course there are and they are substantial. Second, the modernization literature 
usually neglects a state’s or a society’s external environment, particularly interna-
tional political and economic factors. Instead, modernization writers have tended 
to focus internally or within particular states or societies, generally ignoring that 
state’s or society’s place in the world capitalist order. Is there any society, even in 
the European historical experience, that is immune to outside influences? Very un-
likely, respond the dependency theorists, who place particular emphasis on Latin 
America’s colonial heritage and a historical legacy of exploitation also experienced 
in Africa. 
 The focus of the ECLA and UNCTAD economists was initially quite narrow. 
They examined the unequal terms of trade between LDCs that exported raw ma-
terials and northern industrialized countries that exported finished manufactured 
goods. They questioned the supposed benefits of free trade. The ECLA at one point 
favored the diversification of exports, advising that LDCs produce goods instead of 
importing them. This policy did not result in the anticipated amount of success and 
in fact increased the influence of foreign multinational corporations brought in to 
facilitate domestic production. 
 Did all countries fail to experience economic growth? No, some economies did 
grow, but growth tended to occur in an LDC only when the developed countries 
had a need for a particular raw material or agricultural product. Because many 
LDCs are dependent on only a few of these commodities for their foreign exchange 
earnings, a drastic decline in the demand for one of them (perhaps caused by a re-
cession in North America) would have a calamitous impact on an LDC’s economy. 
Or, alternatively, a bumper crop in several LDCs heavily dependent on one particu-
lar export (such as coffee or sugar) would also cause prices to fall. 
 The volatility of prices for minerals and agricultural products and the generally 
downward tendency of those prices contrast sharply with more stable and gradu-
ally increasing prices for manufactured items produced by industrial countries. 
Thus, the terms of trade are thought to be stacked against those Third World states 
that export farm products or natural resources.  
Radical Critiques 
 Writers in ECLA and UNCTAD (e.g., Argentine economist Raúl Prebisch, 1901–
1986), although critical of the more conservative views of development, never-
theless tended to restrict their analyses to economic dimensions and to cast their 

Dependency Theorists 
201
arguments in terms of nationalism and the need for state-guided capitalism.  11  Other 
writers, however, more boldly emphasized political and social factors within the 
context of a capitalist economic system that bind Latin America to North America. 
Development, it was argued, is not autonomous. If it occurs at all, it is reflexive—
subject to the vagaries and ups and downs of the world’s advanced economies. 
Choices for Latin American countries are restricted or constrained not only as a 
result of the dictates of capitalism, but also due to supporting political, social, and 
cultural relations. The result is a structure of domination. This multifaceted web of 
dependency reinforces unequal exchange between the northern and southern parts 
of the hemisphere. Opportunities for LDCs are few and far between because LDCs 
are allocated a subordinate role in world capitalism. 
 That various states and societies produce those things of which they are rela-
tively the most efficient producers or sell those items in which they have a com-
parative advantage is seen by dependency theorists as a “one-way advantage.” 
Economic exploitation of LDCs by the industrialized states is not an accident or 
simply an additional means by which these states enrich themselves. Rather, eco-
nomic exploitation is an integral part of the capitalist system and is required to 
keep it functioning. 
 The result is a condition of dependency, succinctly defined as a “situation 
in which a certain number of countries have their economy conditioned by the 
development and expansion of another . . ., placing the dependent countries in 
a backward position exploited by the dominant countries.”  12  The modernization 
experience of a particular society should not be seen in isolation, “but as part of 
the development of an internationalist capitalist system, whose dynamic has a de-
termining influence on the local processes.” As a result, underdevelopment is not “a 
moment in the evolution of a society which has been economically, politically and 
culturally autonomous and isolated.”  13  Instead, Latin American and other Third 
World countries are attempting to develop under historical conditions quite differ-
ent from those of the northern industrialized states. 
 Some economic structuralists use Marxist terminology and Gramscian insights 
to explain this situation of dependency. More important than relations between 
states are transnational class coalitions linking elites in industrially developed 
countries (the center or core) with their counterparts in the South (or periphery). 
This version of class analysis emphasizes how transnational ties within the global 
bourgeois or capitalist class work to the disadvantage of workers and peasants 
in the periphery. The multinational corporation (MNC) and international banks, 
therefore, are viewed from a much different perspective than that found in other 
IR images. 
 To the liberal or English School scholar, MNCs and international banks ap-
pear merely as other, potentially benign, actors in world politics or global society. 
To the realist, they tend to be of secondary importance because of the emphasis on 
the state-as-actor. To the economic structuralist, however, they are central players 
in establishing and maintaining dependency relations. To economic structuralists 
of Marxist persuasion, MNCs and banks are agents  par excellence of the interna-
tional bourgeoisie. They represent two of the critical means by which Third World 
states are maintained in their subordinate position within the world-capitalist 
economy.  

202
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
Domestic Forces 
 Dependency theorists dealt not only with external factors (such as foreign states, 
multinational corporations, international banks, multilateral lending institu-
tions, foreign control of technology, and an international bourgeoisie). They also 
 examined internal constraints on development (such as patterns of land tenure, 
social structures, class alliances, and the role of the state). These internal factors 
tend to reinforce instruments of foreign domination. The inability to break out of 
a dependent situation is often strengthened by citizens of a Latin American country 
who accrue selfish benefits at the expense of the country as a whole. 
 This so-called  comprador class , or national bourgeoisie, aids in the exploita-
tion of its own society. Allied with foreign capitalists, this class and its self-serving 
policies encourage the expansion of social and economic inequality, which may 
take the form of an ever-widening rural–urban gap. Although limited development 
may occur in a few urban centers, the countryside stagnates and is viewed only as a 
provider of cheap labor and raw materials. These exploiters, therefore, have more 
in common with the elites of the center countries than they do with their fellow 
citizens of the periphery. 
 Such arguments are rather sweeping in scope. The importance of internal di-
mensions, however, will vary depending on the particular country under examina-
tion. Class coalitions, for example, will differ and may relate to external actors in 
a variety of ways. As two noted dependency theorists have stated: 
 We conceive the relationship between external and internal forces as forming a 
complex whole whose structural links are not based on mere external forms of 
exploitation and coercion, but are rooted in coincidence of interests between local 
dominant classes and international ones.  14  
 In some cases, this “coincidence of interests” might even involve portions of the 
working class. 
 As a result of the interplay of external and internal factors, the nature of the 
development or underdevelopment of a society will vary. Changes in the interna-
tional economy will affect LDCs in different ways. Dependency theorists, therefore, 
do not claim that economic stagnation in LDCs is always and inevitably the norm. 
They argue, however, that development benefits some at the expense of others, 
increases social inequalities, and leads to greater foreign control over Third World 
economies. 
 The dependency literature had its academic moment in the sun. But the concept 
virtually disappeared in the literature by the 1990s. This was not only a function of 
empirical and theoretical criticism (discussed at the end of this chapter), but many 
governments in Latin America were pursuing free market economic policies with 
at least some degree of initial success. One prominent scholar, Fernando Henrique 
Cardoso (born 1931), even became president of Brazil for eight years—setting aside 
his earlier sociological work on dependency and pursuing in office conservative fis-
cal policies he saw as central to the country’s economic development. In the field 
as a whole, dependency insights and arguments were subsumed under the broader 
concept of the capitalist world-system literature and the even broader postcolonial-
ism research programs.  

The Capitalist World-System 
203
THE CAPITALIST WORLD-SYSTEM 
 The dependency theorists pointed the way for scholars who write from what is 
known as the capitalist world-system perspective. This perspective is also economic 
structuralist, but differs from dependency in two ways. 
 First, advocates of the capitalist world-system perspective not only are con-
cerned with the lack of Third World development, but also wish to understand the 
economic, political, and social development of regions throughout the  entire world. 
Developed and underdeveloped states, winners and losers, are all examined in at-
tempts to explain the global existence of uneven development. 
 Second, the goal is to understand the fate of various parts of the world at 
various times in history within the larger context of a developing world political 
economy. Latin America, for example, is not unique. Its experience is an integral 
part of the capitalist world-system. Third World underdevelopment and exploita-
tion are central to maintaining the present structure of dominance in the capitalist 
world-system. The first priority, therefore, is to understand this global system in 
historical perspective. Only then can the fates of particular societies or regions of 
the globe be understood. 
 The writings of Immanuel Wallerstein (born 1930) represent the most ambi-
tious of economic-structuralist work and have been the catalyst for an extensive 
amount of subsequent research. In attempting to understand the origins and 
dynamics of the modern world economy and the existence of worldwide uneven 
development, he and his followers aspire to no less than a historically based theory 
of global development, which he terms  world-system theory.  15  
 Wallerstein begins by analyzing the emergence of capitalism in Europe, tracing 
its development into a capitalist world-system that contains a  core , a  periphery , and 
a  semiperiphery —a decidedly different understanding of globalization from that 
offered by liberals. The core areas historically have engaged in the most advanced 
economic activities: banking, manufacturing, technologically advanced agriculture, 
and shipbuilding. The periphery has provided raw materials such as minerals and 
timber to fuel the core’s economic expansion. Unskilled labor is repressed, and the 
peripheral countries are denied advanced technology in those areas that might make 
them more competitive with core states. The semiperiphery is involved in a mix of 
production activities, some associated with core areas and others with peripheral 
areas. The semiperiphery also serves a number of other functions such as being an 
outlet for investment when wages in core economies become too high. Over time, 
particular regions of the world may move from one type of status (core, peripheral, 
and semiperipheral) to another. 
 Class structure varies in each zone depending on how the dominant class relates 
to the world economy. Contrary to the liberal economic notion of specialization 
based on comparative advantage, this division of labor requires increases in in-
equality between regions. States in the periphery are weak in that they are unable 
to control their fates, whereas states in the core are economically, politically, and 
militarily dominant. The basic function of the state is to ensure the continuation of 
the capitalist mode of production. 
 Wallerstein’s explanatory goals are breathtaking in scope, and his debt to Marx 
and other economic-structuralist intellectual precursors is evident. He deals with 

204
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
such topics as the cause of war among states and factors leading to the rise and 
fall of core powers. These issues are discussed in the context of the creation and 
expansion of capitalism as a historical world system. The focus is first and fore-
most on economic processes and how they in turn influence political and security 
considerations. 
System
 Wallerstein and other economic structuralists insist that in order to understand the 
development of global economic, political, and social processes, we must keep our 
eyes on the development of capitalism. Capitalism is a system-wide or global phe-
nomenon. We should not concentrate on individual states and national economies 
and then extrapolate from their experiences. Instead, we should examine capital-
ism as an integrated, historically expanding system that transcends any particular 
political or geographic boundaries. 
 By first understanding capitalism as a truly integrated world-system, we 
then can understand better the fate of particular countries. This emphasis on 
the system as the key to understanding may sound familiar. It should. Some 
realists also claim that to develop a true theory of international relations, one 
must give precedence to the system as opposed to focusing on individual states. 
Do economic structuralists operating from the world-system perspective in 
fact share the realist view as to what constitutes the international system? 
There are some interesting parallels, particularly if one closely examines 
Wallerstein’s work. 
 First, some realists acknowledge that Wallerstein is attempting to develop 
a systems-level theory, although he emphasizes economic factors over political 
variables.  16  
 Second, Wallerstein explicitly recognizes the importance of  anarchy , a concept 
of critical importance to many realist writers. Recall that anarchy simply refers to 
the absence of a superordinate or central political authority. Wallerstein notes that 
“the absence of a single political authority makes it impossible for anyone to legis-
late the general will of the world-system and hence to curtail the capitalist mode of 
production.”  17  Anarchy, therefore, is defined in political terms for both Wallerstein 
and those realists who discuss the importance of the absence of any central author-
ity in the world. 
 The implications of anarchy for the realist and economic structuralist are quite 
different, however, as evidenced by the latter part of the quotation: “to curtail 
the capitalist mode of production.” For the realist, anarchy leads one to examine 
international political stability, war, and balance-of-power politics involving ma-
jor states. For the economic structuralist, the economic ramifications of political 
anarchy are paramount. The political anarchy of the interstate system facilitates 
the development and expansion of world capitalism because no single state can 
control the  entire world economy. The result is an economic division of labor 
involving a core, a periphery, and a semiperiphery that is the focal point of economic-
structuralist analysis. Political anarchy becomes a backdrop for an extensive analysis 
of capitalist dynamics. 

The Capitalist World-System 
205
 Finally, Wallerstein addresses the issue of the international distribution of 
capabilities or power. Once again, it would appear that Wallerstein has much in 
common with realists. The following quotation is illustrative: 
 Of course, we shall find on closer inspection that there are periods where one state 
is relatively quite powerful and other periods where power is more diffuse and 
contested, permitting weaker states broader ranges of action. We can talk then of 
the relative tightness or looseness of the world-system as an important variable and 
seek to analyze why this dimension tends to be cyclical in nature, as it seems to have 
been for several hundred years.  18  
 There is, however, a major difference in how realists and Wallerstein use this notion 
of a distribution of capabilities. 
 For Wallerstein, the very existence of a particular distribution of power or 
capabilities cannot be explained without reference to the underlying economic or-
der. In other words, he would argue that realists spend a great deal of time talking 
about the balance of power but that they fail to appreciate that there are important 
economic processes at work that are critical in accounting for the particular distri-
bution of capabilities or balance of power in the first place! 
 In sum, despite sharing a similar systems vocabulary, the use and relative im-
portance of these concepts is quite different. For an economic structuralist such 
as Wallerstein, merely focusing on the distribution of capabilities among states is 
insufficient if one wishes to comprehend fully the nature of the world-system. The 
international system has always been composed of weak and strong political units. 
Differential power alone is not the defining characteristic of the system. Once again, 
what is critical for the Wallersteinian economic structuralist is the fact that the key 
aspect of the system is its capitalist nature, the existence of global class relations, 
and the various functions states and societies perform in the world economy. 
 Capitalism has been the defining attribute of the international system since the 
sixteenth century. It is capitalism that helps to account for a core, a periphery, and 
a semiperiphery. It is capitalism that provides the critical environment in which 
states and classes operate by constraining, shaping, and channeling behavior. Some 
states and classes are rewarded. Others are doomed to play subordinate roles in a 
worldwide division of labor determined by the dictates of capitalism. So, although 
states and politics are certainly important to the economic structuralist, they must 
be analyzed in the context of the capitalist world-system. To Wallerstein and his 
followers, material structure clearly matters more than agency. 
 In a post–Cold War volume, Wallerstein puts the events of 1989 and since 
in historical perspective, taking a long, multi-century view of global capitalism. 
Liberalism—an ideology he identifies as associated with the capitalist world-system—
has served as a “legitimating geoculture.” On North–South relations, he depicts the 
North’s wealth as largely “the result of a transfer of surplus value from the South.” 
Vulnerability in a capitalist world economy comes from “ceaseless accumulation of 
capital” that approaches its limit “to the point where none of the mechanisms for 
restoring the normal functioning of the system can work effectively any longer.” 
Grossly unequal distribution of material gains contributes to multiple strains on the 
system and undermines state structures, notably “their ability to maintain order in a 
world of widespread civil warfare, both global and [at the] state level.”  19  

206
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
Political, Economic, and Social Factors 
 As noted in earlier chapters, realists understand the importance of economic fac-
tors, but they focus on power, the balance of power, and political explanations of 
international relations. Liberals interested in transnationalism emphasize political, 
economic, and social factors, depending on the issue. The English School tends 
to subordinate economic factors to their concern with elaborating the concept of 
“international society.” As noted, economic structuralists tend to stress economic 
factors as underlying or driving politics in a capitalist world economy or system. 
 These are generalizations, and as with all generalizations, they are subject to 
qualification. All economic structuralists emphasize economic factors in their con-
ceptions of the world-system, but the degree of their emphasis varies. There even 
has been recent debate as to whether the capitalist mode of production has been 
overemphasized. At one extreme, there is Wallerstein, who is claimed by critics to 
have reduced the derivation and operation of the state system (or system of states) 
to economics. Other economic structuralists, although accepting the logic of the 
capitalist world-system approach, stress the interdependence of political and eco-
nomic variables. 
 Christopher Chase-Dunn, for example, argues that “the capitalist mode of 
production exhibits a single logic in which both political-military power” and 
exploitative economic processes “play an integrated role.” Patrick McGowan 
states that “distinctions between economic and political processes represent false 
dichotomies. . . . Accumulation, imperialism, and conflict can be considered part 
of a single dynamic whereby a hegemonic core state in an increasingly competi-
tive world-system attempts to ensure its own stability, prosperity, and primacy.”  20  
Political processes, however, are still basically derivative of the world capitalist 
mode of production, or they are placed in the context of economic structures 
and processes. Chase-Dunn, for example, develops the argument that “both the 
attempts and the failures of imperium can be understood as responses to the pres-
sures of uneven development in the world-economy. . . . The interstate system is 
dependent on the institutions and opportunities presented by the world market 
for its survival.”  21  
 Johan Galtung (born 1930) went one step further in his perspective on impe-
rialism, which had a major impact on economic structuralists.  22  In examining the 
mechanisms of imperialism that cause and perpetuate the tremendous inequality 
within and among nations, Galtung parted company with Marx and Lenin in that 
for him, imperialism was not simply an economic relation arising out of capitalism. 
Imperialism is a structural relation of dominance defined in political, economic, 
military, cultural, and communications terms. These types of imperialism have 
to be seen in their totality. It is not enough for international relations scholars to 
be preoccupied with only political and military factors, or economists to restrict 
their focus to economic factors. The entire structure of dominance has to be com-
prehended. The parallels to Gramsci’s perspective are apparent, although Galtung 
does not cite him. 
 Equally important, Galtung argued that one must look  inside societies to un-
derstand the effects of interactions  among them. Imperialism means, for example, 
that elites in center (or core) nations dominate and collaborate with elites in periph-
ery nations to the disadvantage of the majority of people in the latter. This would 

Change and Globalization 
207
be a political effect of imperialism. Economic effects include the production of only 
a few commodities by a periphery state, trade being concentrated with a particular 
center state. Equal emphasis, however, is given to other forms of imperialism.  
CHANGE AND GLOBALIZATION 
 Many international relations scholars are interested in understanding system 
change. A common distinction is between changes  of the system and lesser changes 
 within an existing system that retains its basic characteristics. For economic struc-
turalists, changes within the world-system appear to fall into three categories. First, 
there are changes in the actors’ positions within the capitalist world economy. As 
Wallerstein states: “There is constant and patterned movement between groups of 
economic actors as to who shall occupy various positions in the hierarchy of pro-
duction, profit, and consumption.”  23  The Dutch empire of the seventeenth century, 
for example, gave way to British domination, and eventually the United States rose 
to prominence in the twentieth century. Despite different core powers, however, the 
hierarchical nature of the system remains the same. 
 Second, some scholars identify phases or cycles of capitalist growth and con-
traction that affect all societies. A period of relative social stability and economic 
stagnation precedes twenty or thirty years of rapid economic growth. This is then 
followed by another two or three decades of economic decline, followed again by 
expansion. Overproduction, a key factor discussed by Hobson, is central to the 
interplay of economic, social, and political forces.  24  
 Third, there is what has been termed a  structural transformation of the sys-
tem. This term refers to the historical and geographical expansion of the capitalist 
world-system, incorporating new areas of the globe and nonintegrated sectors of 
the world economy.  25  Although the term  transformation is used, these changes 
could still be viewed as changes within the system because the capitalist mode of 
production, although perhaps changing its character, is still capitalist. In sum, the 
economic-structuralist view of the capitalist world-system is hardly static. The 
world-system is dynamic, reflecting a myriad of activities and changes. 
 But what about changes  of the capitalist system? Is globalization a new trans-
forming force, or is it the mere continuation of long-established capitalist trends? 
World-system theorists point to one major historical transformation occurrence: 
the movement from feudalism to capitalism in sixteenth-century Europe. For 
world-system theorists, therefore, they claim that they have been talking about glo-
balization long before the word was even coined and became popularized. Indeed, 
the process of globalization goes back to the aforementioned sixteenth century and 
the rise of capitalism. Globalization is not just a twentieth and twenty-first century 
phenomenon. 
 What are the chances of going beyond capitalism? Economic structuralists 
are ambivalent on this point. Wallerstein may title one article “The Rise and 
Future Demise of the World Capitalist System,” but he also refers to “The Limited 
Possibilities of Transformation within the Capitalist World Order.” Similarly, in 
the early 1980s, a number of theorists discussed how Eastern European and so-
cialist states might succumb to the powerful forces of the capitalist world-system. 
Their analysis proved accurate.  26  Other economic structuralists point to possible 

208
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
transformational processes that might make significant system change possible. 
Such non-Marxist scholars as Hayward Alker (1937–2007) and Johan Galtung, for 
example, downplayed the notion of constraints that supposedly limit the evolution 
of alternative world orders. Alker saw change occurring through the dialectical 
clash of world forces and different visions of world futures. These contradic-
tory world-order contenders (capitalist power balancing, socialism, collective self- 
reliance, and corporatist authoritarianism) make system transformation possible. 
For his part, Galtung saw the international system as open and subject to change. He 
even speculated on the decline not only of the nation-state, but also of multinational 
corporations and even any world government that may be constructed in the distant 
future.  27  Although neither used the term  globalization , much of what they discussed 
would fall under the common contemporary conceptions of globalization. 
 What role does human volition play in system change? At one extreme, there 
are scholars who apparently see large-scale historical processes as relatively im-
mune from the actions of human beings. A strong dose of determinism seems to be 
reflected in their work. They are challenged by critics who downplay constraints. 
Some of these critics call for revolutions to end capitalist exploitation. They argue 
that despite the “particularity” of Latin America or other Third World regions 
that is emphasized by dependency theorists, these areas remain consistent with the 
patterns of capitalist development discussed by Marx. The “subordinated classes,” 
they claim, have been neglected by some economic structuralists in favor of a focus 
on exchange relations among societies. 
 Such critics state that class contradictions and the intensification of class con-
flict still make possible the type of worker revolution discussed by Marx. Hence, 
these authors have taken the more voluntarist position in a long-standing Marxist 
debate on the potential for revolution in the Third World—that revolutionaries can 
help produce world-system change.  28  Do agents merely have to wait for objective 
conditions to be ripe, perhaps serving as catalysts when they are, or can they do 
something subjectively to effect these conditions? With the collapse of the Soviet 
Union and China’s embrace of capitalism, however, less has been heard from these 
writers in recent years. 
 Some world-system theorists have taken an intermediate position. Powerful 
“structures of domination” are acknowledged, but so also is the permanent struggle 
among classes. As Cardoso stated of dependency theory: “Instead of accepting the 
existence of a determined course in history, there is a return to conceiving of it as an 
open-ended process. Thus, if structures delimit the range of oscillation, the actions 
of humans, as well as their imagination, revive and transfigure these structures and 
may even replace them with others that are not predetermined.” Similarly, Terence 
Hopkins and Immanuel Wallerstein have argued that the study of the capitalist world 
economy is the “theoretical side of the practical work of transforming the modern 
world-system into the socialist world-order that modern social change has made at 
once politically necessary and historically possible.”  29  In this formulation, there is 
room for human political will to effect transformation. Thus, if one accepts economic 
structuralists at their word (and some critics do not), economic-structuralist theory is 
not determinist. It allows for (and even requires) political action. 
 In recent years, a good deal of interesting work has been done under the head-
ing of  neostructuralism . In keeping with the economic-structuralist emphasis, these 

Postcolonialism
209
authors are critical of the realist reliance on the unitary, rational, state-as-actor. 
While they recognize the importance of earlier dependency and world-system 
work, their influences also include Fernand Braudel (1902–1985), Karl Polanyi 
(1886–1964), and Antonio Gramsci. 
 Neostructuralism is interested in understanding how global processes interact 
with other processes of state and social transformation occurring at many other 
levels of analysis of the world-system. The study of international relations, there-
fore, is not limited to foreign policy or patterns of distributions of capabilities, nor 
confined to reducing international relations to economic variables. Given the fact 
that the focus of analysis is on transformative processes, states as well as economic 
and social forces have to be taken into account. A web of relations and forces are 
intricately linked, transcending all levels of analysis. Nevertheless, neostructuralists 
are consistent with the economic-structuralist tradition in that governments play a 
secondary role to socioeconomic structures and forces when it comes to explaining 
world politics.  
POSTCOLONIALISM
 There is a vast, diverse, and ever-expanding literature that falls under the heading 
of “postcolonialism” and effectively subsumes the approaches discussed above. 
As with realism and liberalism, there are divergences in terms of focus and as-
sumptions, leading to lively debates. Nevertheless, to generalize, postcolonialism 
emphasizes an interdisciplinary perspective that encompasses economic, political, 
social, and cultural aspects of decolonization and highlights the importance of race, 
gender, and ethnicity in understanding anticolonial struggles. 
 Furthermore, a good deal of the work is interested in examining the impact of 
decolonization on both the metropolitan (usually Western) and colonized societ-
ies. Hence, under the conceptual umbrella of postcolonialism, one finds not only 
Wallerstein’s capitalist world-system, but also the influence of both critical theory 
and postmodern critique with the latter’s focus on discourse (see  Chapter   7 ). With 
this caution in mind concerning the breadth and diversity of the literature, what 
follows is an attempt to give the reader at least a flavor of the postcolonial per-
spective and its internal debates that encompass academic disciplines ranging from 
history, political science, and economics to sociology, cultural anthropology, and 
linguistics. 
 In terms of historical background, Third World countries at the Bandung 
Conference in Indonesia in 1958 established the nonaligned movement. This was 
followed a decade later in 1966 by the Tricontinental Conference in Havana that 
identified the movement as spanning Latin America, Africa, and Asia. These ac-
tivities provided a foundation for the call for a new international economic order 
(NIEO) in the 1970s—calls for the transfer of technology and capital from North 
to South through aid, investment, debt forgiveness, trade preferences, and the like. 
Later this Third World advocacy took the form of a “postcolonial politics” or 
“grass roots movement to fight a system of injustice and gross material inequality 
that is sustained by powerful local interests and international power structures of 
banks, businesses and investment funds.”  30  

210
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
 One ongoing debate within the literature involves the basic question of defini-
tion of key concepts. This is true of all the theories and images we examine in this 
book. Such concepts as  imperialism ,  colonialism , and certainly  postcolonialism are 
hotly contested and reflect differing theoretical positions and political values. Can 
there be, for example, only “formal” imperialism, meaning a country forfeits its 
sovereignty and is incorporated into an empire? Or can there be “informal” impe-
rialism? If so, is that the same as “neo-colonialism”? What about cases where an 
indigenous elite work with the foreign imperial power to exploit their own people? 
Would this be an example of “internal colonialism”? Can one speak of a postcolo-
nial “hegemonic” power? 
 This latter issue brings in the matter of how to characterize the United States. 
Can and should the United States be viewed as an imperial power? The answer 
depends on how a particular author defines imperialism and associated terms. 
Conventional historians have tended to reinforce the narrative that the United 
States is not an imperial power due to its own historical struggle for independence 
from British colonialism and the supposed resultant anti-imperialist culture. Only 
in the late nineteenth century as in the Spanish-American War (1898) would we 
find a brief imperial turn in American policy, albeit one that would continue in the 
early twentieth century. 
 Not surprisingly many postcolonialist writers view this story merely as myth, 
part of the “American exceptionalism” tale, augmented as well by President 
Woodrow Wilson’s championing of “national self-determination” for oppressed 
peoples after World War I. If anything, American imperialism dates at least from 
the time of the Monroe Doctrine (1823) when hegemony was proclaimed over 
Latin America. The Vietnam War only reinforced this perspective in the minds 
of many postcolonial historians and theorists. Other postcolonial works take a 
different view, simply assigning the United States as an imperial power as part of 
the West in general. U.S. continental expansion and the dealings with indigenous 
Native Americans are often considered a separate phenomenon that may not be 
captured by concepts such as “colonialism” devised to explain the European expe-
rience in Africa, Asia, and the Middle East, but are still part of the imperial project 
engaged in by the United States in its own sphere. 
 While colonialism in terms of the physical occupation of a state is no longer 
the hallmark of the international system, empire and imperialism, postcolonialists 
argue, are alive and well. Hence, while the term  postcolonial presumes going be-
yond the era of “colonialism,” it is not clear what constitutes the temporal dividing 
line. In fact a number of postcolonial theorists question the utility of even trying to 
pinpoint the divide between the colonial and postcolonial eras, instead viewing the 
period from at least the fifteenth century to today as a seamless web of relations be-
tween the West and what has variously been termed the “non-West,” Third World, 
developing world, or the South. 
 In other words, while formal empires may have disintegrated, strategies were 
developed to retain Western power and influence before and during the decoloniza-
tion process and are still in existence today in the postcolonial world. Earlier ap-
proaches designed to maintain power during direct colonial rule (exploiting ethnic 
and racial divisions among subject people, co-opting activists into colonial adminis-
trations, and extending judicious concessions in trade) have been supplemented by 

Postcolonialism
211
more subtle mechanisms of domination ranging from the use of the International 
Monetary Fund and World Bank to the manipulation of language designed to en-
courage “mental colonialism.”  31  
 Put another way, as it is by some, the postcolonial world still exhibits  neo-
colonial forms of cultural, economic, and even political-military dominance over 
these former colonies. Independence has not really brought liberation when former 
colonies are still so linked to the metropole—the seat of power in the former co-
lonial country. Thus, to understand politics in any African country, it remains im-
portant to identify the “former” colonial power, whether Britain, France, Belgium, 
the Netherlands, Spain, or Portugal. Neocolonial patterns of dominance remain 
important in the postcolonial period. One can see this even in trade and other eco-
nomic arrangements the European Union has with former colonies in Africa, the 
Caribbean, and the Pacific (the so-called ACP countries) that keep these states in 
relations that still work to the net advantage of the metropole. 
 An interesting aspect of the postcolonial literature concerns an increased focus 
on the recipients of colonial policies. Early work on imperialism and colonialism 
had a distinct Western focus. Great Britain, in particular, tended to be the favor-
ite object of analysis. Much of the historical work emphasized the motives and 
mechanisms of British imperialism and colonialism and delved deeply into archival 
material. The French experience, particularly in Africa and southeast Asia, has also 
been a wellspring of academic study. It is not surprising that a large number of post-
colonial theorists and historians are also from British and French universities. One 
of the major contributions they have made is to draw attention to the perspectives 
and experiences of those people who were on the receiving end of British, French, 
or other colonial and imperial policies. 
 By giving voice to them (often in creative ways), scholars have highlighted 
what has been obscured in more mainstream work on colonialism: the attempts to 
resist military, political, economic, and cultural repression and oppression. As one 
writer who acknowledges the voices and experiences of the downtrodden puts it: 
“Postcolonialism claims the right of all people on this earth to the same material 
and cultural well-being.” It is the “politics of ‘the subaltern,’ that is, subordinated 
classes and peoples.”  32  
 As noted above, much of the post–World War II work on imperialism such as 
dependency theory was informed by the concepts and arguments of Marx, Lenin, 
and Hobson. Interest in the impact of capitalism on the Third World, however, was 
not limited to Marxists. Some authors pursued detailed case studies of colonial poli-
cies and relations between Great Britain and a single colonized people. Others took 
a more global approach, tracing capitalist development and its global expansion 
over the centuries. Wallerstein’s work is a good example, and the emphasis on eco-
nomic drivers continues to be a primary concern of many postcolonialist theorists. 
 Some theorists within the postcolonial perspective, however, have argued that 
capitalism should not be conflated with imperialism. Older, precapitalist empires 
have existed throughout recorded history, certainly well before the rise of capital-
ism as a mode of production. Whatever the era under investigation, the hallmark of 
all empires is the subjugation of a weaker people. This is true whether the empire 
was Roman, Ottoman, British, or French. Why privilege the capitalism–imperialism 
nexus as opposed to placing it under a broader perspective on imperialism? 

212
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
 But scholars who emphasize the critical role of capitalism in terms of the de-
velopment of the modern world offer the rebuttal that while ancient empires came 
and went, those empires that emerged in conjunction with the rise of capitalism 
exhibited unique characteristics linked to particular intellectual, technological, 
and scientific innovations. These characteristics, often placed under the heading 
of “modernity,” were most evident in what has been termed the New Imperialism 
that emerged in the nineteenth century and is associated with Western Europe 
and eventually the United States. Certainly, weapons technology and firepower 
were critical factors to explain the success of imperialist policies, but so, too, were 
intellectual and ideological claims (“white man’s burden,” social Darwinism) that 
accompanied, were used to justify, and perhaps even motivate imperial policies. 
 Aside from equating capitalist expansion with imperialism, a second point 
made is that a “Eurocentric” analytical perspective tends to restrict capitalism as 
an economic mode of production to Europe. Far from being some sort of European 
miracle, it has been argued that African–Asian market and capitalist practices ex-
isted prior to developments in Europe. India, China, and Japan were as advanced 
as Europe prior to the eighteenth century. As one postcolonialist scholar has 
written: 
 There is something puzzling about the excitement with which European historians 
hail the arrival of cities, trade, regular taxation, standing armies, legal codes, bu-
reaucracies . . . and other common appurtenances of civilized societies as if they 
were unique and self-evident stepping stones to modernity: to the non-European 
they simply indicated that Europe had finally joined the club.  33  
 Many cities in Asia in particular were larger than any eighteenth-century European 
city. There is agreement, however, that with the development of long-distance trad-
ing networks in the late fifteenth century and the beginning of overseas colonization, 
the advantage turned to Europe. This was not a function, it has been argued, of 
European superiority, but rather the coalescing of political, economic, environ-
mental, cultural, and population changes that enabled capitalism and modernity 
to emerge. This facilitated, as it does today, the dominance of the global political 
economy.  34  The most advanced European empires such as France, Holland, and 
Great Britain were either the most economically advanced or most influenced by 
modernity as stimulated by the ideas of the Enlightenment. Spain stagnated in semi-
feudalism and Russia declined to second-tier imperial status.  35  
 A final point of contention within the postcolonial literature in recent years 
involves the concept of  globalization and its relation to imperialism and the post-
colonial era, however defined. For some, globalization is simply a new stage in 
Western imperialism and has deepened racial, class, and gender hierarchies and 
inequalities. There is total rejection of the idea that globalization could be of ben-
efit to any peoples except those in dominant positions of power. Others argue that 
while there might be an increase in economic interdependence, politically the world 
is breaking into blocs characterized by different forms and mutations of capitalism. 
World-system theorists wonder what all the fuss is about. For them, globalization 
is not new but can be traced back to the origins of capitalism. This global world-
system was essentially completed in the twentieth century, but has moved into a 
prolonged period of crisis that in time will bring the system to its end.  

Economic Structuralists and Their Critics 
213
ECONOMIC STRUCTURALISTS AND THEIR CRITICS 
 The economic-structuralist literature has been either subject to a great deal of 
criticism by specialists in international relations and comparative politics or sim-
ply ignored. In particular, the postcolonial literature is rarely even referenced in 
mainstream IR journals. Much of the criticism is harsh, particularly of dependency 
theorists and Immanuel Wallerstein’s ambitious work. While some of this criticism 
undoubtedly reflects divergent ontological and epistemological issues as reflected 
in the positivist-postmodern divide, there is perhaps also an element of ideologi-
cal preference. We first discuss some of the more telling critiques and then present 
rebuttals from economic structuralists.  36  
The Question of Causality 
 Some critics question whether dependency creates and sustains underdevelopment 
(as economic structuralists claim) or whether it is this lesser level of develop-
ment that leads to a situation of dependency. In short, there is no agreement on 
 causality—whether dependency is the  cause of underdevelopment or whether it is 
the  effect of this condition.  
Reliance on Economics 
 Critics have argued that some economic structuralists have reduced the opera-
tion of the international system down to the process of capital accumulation and 
related dynamics. What of other, noneconomic explanations of imperialism and 
relations among states? Are not political and strategic motives equally or even more 
important? For example, how can one account for nineteenth-century European 
states scrambling for economically low-value pieces of terrain such as present-day 
Chad or lifeless Pacific atolls? What was the economic motive? If the competitive 
interstate system is derived from the capitalist mode of production, how does one 
explain similar competitive behavior among political units in pre-capitalist eras 
before the fifteenth century? For example, recall Thucydides’ discussion of the 
Peloponnesian War that lends support to the validity of such notions as anarchy 
and the security dilemma. This suggests the autonomy of the political realm and 
a distinctly political dynamic involving competition among sovereign units well 
before the emergence of a capitalist world-system. 
 The economic variable, critics claim, cannot carry the very great explanatory 
weight assigned to it. Insights generated from the contemplation of international 
relations over the centuries should not be ignored. Structural realists, for example, 
would argue that if anything, it is the international political-security system that 
largely determines the international economic system, not the other way around.  
System Dominance 
 Despite economic-structuralist references to internal factors, it is fair to ask if there 
is an excessive reliance on international economic factors in explaining poverty 
and dependence in the periphery and that domestic variables at the societal level of 
analysis are downplayed. The cruder dependency work, it is argued, is too sweeping 

214
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
in its claims, blaming virtually every Third World political, economic, and social 
problem on the northern industrialized states. Lack of economic growth, social un-
rest, and repressive governments are all laid at the doorstep of the richer capitalist 
countries. Critics see structure as occupying too central a role, effectively margin-
alizing agency in what is essentially a system-dominant, if not system-determined 
theoretical enterprise.  
Theoretical Rigidity 
 The criticism of economics and system dominance as bases for causality logically 
leads to the following: Individual cases are examined solely in terms of general the-
oretical constructs such as the “capitalist world-system.” A society’s experiences 
are reduced to (or explained in terms of) one or two concepts. Major political, eco-
nomic, and social changes all supposedly fall under the general explanatory logic 
of a term such as  dependency. Furthermore, rather than modifying the theories 
or concepts in light of empirical evidence (often supposedly lacking) or questions 
raised by case studies, it is claimed that case studies are used by economic structur-
alists only when they appear to provide evidence to support the line of argument. 
There is no tension between theory and findings, little questioning of the frame-
work, and an unwillingness to consider alternative hypotheses. Such criticisms, of 
course, are also often leveled at work associated with realists and liberals.  
Accounting for Anomalies 
 Economic structuralists have trouble accounting for Third World countries that 
have been relatively successful economically despite their ups and downs: Taiwan, 
Venezuela, Brazil, Singapore, South Korea. In addition, there are the greatest suc-
cess stories of any non-European, non–North American country: Japan and now 
China. What is it about these countries that has allowed them either to escape abject 
poverty or, at least in the case of China, make such amazing strides forward? Nei-
ther are examples of autonomous development. In fact, they seem to have benefited 
greatly from being enmeshed in the global capitalist system. 
 In response, it should be noted that no theory or approach can be expected to 
explain everything. The virtue of good theorizing is that it points out and accounts 
for commonalities, what particular cases have in common. Anomalies are expected 
and do not detract from the utility of the theory if it can be adequately explained 
why a unique case does not fit the general pattern. 
 Critics comment, however, that economic structuralists such as Wallerstein 
simply group all anomalies under the concept of the semiperiphery, a theoretically 
and empirically poorly defined concept. Furthermore, what of the insights of au-
thors who argue that there are certain advantages to backwardness when a state is 
trying to catch up economically with more advanced states? What of the work by 
scholars who emphasize the importance of different types of state structures, po-
litical and social coalitions, and shifting alliances in accounting for the differential 
modernization success of various countries?  37  Such literature is ignored, it is argued, 
because the economic-structuralist perspective refuses to give due consideration to 
domestic factors that are not the result of capitalist dynamics.  

Economic Structuralists and Their Critics 
215
Defining Alternatives and Science as Ideology 
 It is argued that some economic structuralists have done a poor job in defining 
reasonable alternative world futures, let alone strategies, for LDCs to pursue. What 
is meant, for example, by the call for “autonomous development”? Is such a goal 
feasible? How is it to be achieved? Would redistributive policies of government be 
combined with political repression and the abuse of power? 
 Critics also charge that value preferences infuse economic-structuralist 
work. Economic structuralists, however, are not apologetic for their normative 
commitment to fundamental changes in the relations between the North and 
the South. As one noted writer has stated, in analyses of dependency relations 
“there is no presumption of scientific neutrality.” Such works are considered to 
be “more true because they assume that, by discerning which are the historical 
agents capable of propelling a process of transformation . . . , these analyses thus 
grasp the meaning of historical movement and help to negate a given order of 
domination.”  38  
Responses
 Why has the economic-structuralist literature—when it has not been totally 
 ignored—received such a great deal of criticism? Is it simply because it is deserving 
of such critical scrutiny? Three comments are in order. 
 First, it is not surprising that most of the criticism comes from scholars work-
ing within mainstream North American social science. The vocabulary of the 
economic-structuralist literature is alien to many of these scholars. Analyses based 
on Marxian insights and categories are generally viewed with distrust in North 
American universities and often dismissed out of hand. And although some of the 
economic-structuralist work is characterized as being ideological, economic struc-
turalists have similarly surmised that the attacks on them are based less on dispas-
sionate critiques and more on the value preferences of the reviewer. Ideological 
biases are wrapped in the cloak of supposedly objective criticisms. 
 Second, it was pointed out that a number of critics charge that the dependency 
literature in particular has been insufficiently empirical, failing to marshal evidence 
based on the canons of positivist science. Where’s the data, they ask? In fact, it is 
claimed that the empirical testing of selective hypotheses from the dependency lit-
erature indicates that these hypotheses simply do not hold up.  39  
 Dependency theorists respond that such a charge is based on the assumption 
that the rationalist or positivist methods are the only means to comprehend real-
ity. In point of fact, as noted in  Chapter  1 , there are alternative epistemological 
premises or assumptions from which one can start that question the value of formal 
hypothesis testing with its often exclusive focus on what can be measured, counted, 
and added. As one theorist notes: 
 The divergence is not merely methodological-formal. It is, rather, at the very heart 
of studies of dependency. If these studies do in fact have any power of attraction at 
all, it is not merely because they propose a methodology to substitute for a previ-
ously existing paradigm or because they open up a new set of themes. It is princi-
pally because they do this from a  radically critical viewpoint.  40  

216
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
 Even from the perspective of a positivist approach to knowledge, however, a 
 hallmark of much of the world-system literature is its conspicuously empirical, 
cross-national focus. And while much of the broader postcolonial literature does 
not engage in statistical analysis, it does rely heavily on detailed case studies 
 drawing on in-depth archival research. 
 To conclude, judging by the international relations textbooks currently on the 
market in the United States, it is apparent that the economic-structuralist perspec-
tive is not considered mainstream. Realist, liberal, and constructivist perspectives 
dominate the literature, but this certainly does not mean that the economic-struc-
turalist image of international relations is unimportant or undeserving of attention. 
Its contribution to increased understanding of the world around us should not be 
seen only as a function of its degree of popularity at a particular point in time. By 
providing a very different, challenging, and provocative perspective on world poli-
tics, it still remains in our view worthy of attention. This is particularly true as it 
directly addresses the problems faced by the Third World. 
 After all, dominant scientific paradigms or research programs of one particular 
period have a tendency to decay. What is at one time considered to be heretical or 
at the fringes of “normal science” may one day itself become the prevailing ortho-
doxy.  41  At a minimum, the economic-structuralist perspective should encourage 
the student of international relations to analyze critically the realist, liberal, and 
English School rationalist images and the assumptions on which they are based. At 
the maximum, economic-structuralist writers have provided challenging hypoth-
eses and insights concerning the dynamics and development of international rela-
tions and world politics that still constitute an important, if less prominent image.  
NOTES
  1.  Karl Marx, “The Eighteenth Brumaire of Louis Bonaparte” in  The Marx-Engels Reader , 
ed. Robert C. Tucker (New York: Norton, 1972), 436.  
  2.  Robert Heilbroner,  Marxism: For and Against (New York: Norton, 1980), 49. See 
also Andrew Gamble, David Marsh, and Tony Tant, eds.,  Marxism and Social Science 
(Champaign, IL: University of Illinois Press, 1999).  
  3.  Terence K. Hopkins, Immanuel Wallerstein, and Associates, “Patterns of Development 
of the Modern World-System,” in  World-System Analysis: Theory and Methodology , ed. 
Hopkins, Wallerstein, and associates (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1982), 72.  
  4.  John A. Hobson,  Imperialism: A Study (Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1965), 
85–86.  
  5.  For example, see Lenin’s “What Is to Be Done?” in  The Lenin Anthology , ed. Robert 
C. Tucker (New York: Norton, 1975), 12–114. Others who would later write in this 
tradition would argue that revolutionaries play more of a role than mere catalysts. They 
can actually create the conditions for revolution; the “subjective” can create the “objec-
tive.” This is most explicit in the writings, for example, of Che Guevara, although one 
also finds shades of it in Mao Zedong’s writings on guerrilla warfare.  
  6.  Rosa Luxemburg,  Reform or Revolution (New York: Pathfinder Press, 1970, 1973), 72, 29.  
  7.  For important early discussions, see Leon Trotsky,  The Russian Revolution (New York: 
Doubleday, 1959); N. I. Bukharin,  Imperialism and World Economy (New York: Inter-
national Publishers, 1929); and Eduard Bernstein,  Evolutionary Socialism (New York: 
B. W. Huebsch, 1911).  

Notes
217
  8.  See Quintin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell Smith, eds.  Selections from the Prison Note-
books (New York: International Publishers, 1971), especially Part II, ch. 1 on the Mod-
ern Prince, Machiavelli, Marx, voluntarism, and Social Masses, 123–205. On Gramsci, 
see the three-volume set of his  Prison Notebooks , trans. and ed. Joseph A. Buttigieg 
(New York: Columbia University Press, published serially in 1991, 1996, and 2007).  
  9.  Robert W. Cox, “Gramsci, Hegemony, and International Relations” in Robert W. Cox 
and Timothy J. Sinclair,  Approaches to World Order (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1996); Craig Murphy,  International Organization and Industrial Change: 
Global Governance since 1850 (Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press, 1994).  
  10.  The classic statement is found in Max Weber,  The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of 
Capitalism (New York: Scribner’s, 1958).  
  11.  Raúl Prebisch,  Towards a Dynamic Development Policy for Latin America (New York: 
United Nations, 1963).  
  12.  Theotonio dos Santos, “La crisis del desarrollo, las relaciones de dependencia en America 
Latina,” in  La Dependencia politico-economica de America Latina , ed. H. Jaguaribe 
et al. (Mexico, 1970), 180, as cited in J. Samuel Valenzuela and Arturo Valenzu-
ela, “Modernization and Dependency: Alternative Perspectives in the Study of Latin 
 American Underdevelopment,”  Comparative Politics 10, 4 (July 1978): 544.  
  13.  Osvaldo Sunkel, “Big Business and Dependencia: A Latin American View,”  Foreign Af-
fairs 50, 3 (1972): 519–20. Sunkel’s more recent work can be found in several volumes 
coedited by Hettne, Bjorn, Andras Inotai, and Osvaldo Sunkel to include  Globalism and 
the New Regionalism (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2000).  
  14.  Fernando Henrique Cardoso and Enzo Faletto,  Dependency and Development in Latin 
America (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1979), xvi. See Cardoso’s more recent 
 The Accidental President of Brazil: A Memoir (New York: Public Affairs, 2007).  
  15.  Immanuel Wallerstein,  The Modern World-System I: Capitalist Agriculture and the Ori-
gins of the European World-Economy in the Sixteenth Century (New York: Academic 
Press, 1974); and  The Modern World-System II: Mercantilism and the Consolidation of 
the European World-Economy, 1600–1750 (New York: Academic Press, 1980).  
  16.  Kenneth N. Waltz,  Theory of International Politics (Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 
1979), 38.  
  17.  Immanuel Wallerstein,  The Capitalist World-Economy (Cambridge, England:  Cambridge 
University Press, 1979), 69.  
  18.  Ibid., 25.  
  19.  Immanuel Wallerstein,  After Liberalism (New York: New Press, 1995).  
  20.  Christopher Chase-Dunn, “Interstate System and Capitalist World-Economy: One Logic 
or Two?” in  World System Structure: Continuity and Change , ed. W. Ladd Hollist 
and James N. Rosenau (Beverly Hills, CA: Sage Publications, 1981), 31. Cf. the more 
recent Christopher Chase-Dunn and Salvatore J. Babones, eds.  Global Social Change: 
Historical and Comparative Perspectives (Baltimore MD: The Johns Hopkins Univer-
sity Press, 2006); Chase-Dunn and Tom Hall,  Rise and Demise: Comparing World 
Systems  (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997). Patrick J. McGowan with Bohdan 
 Kordan,  “Imperialism in World-System Perspective: Britain 1870–1914,” in  World 
System  Structure , ed. Hollist and Rosenau, 78.  
  21.  Christopher Chase-Dunn, “Interstate System and Capitalist World-Economy,” 50–51.  
  22.  Johan Galtung, “A Structural Theory of Imperialism,”  Journal of Peace Research 2 
(1971): 81–98.  
  23.  Wallerstein,  Capitalist World-Economy , 67. 
  24.  Hopkins and Wallerstein, “Structural Transformations of the World-Economy,” in 
 World-System Analysis , 121–122. For a discussion of cycles, see also Wallerstein,  Mod-
ern World-System II ,  Chapter  1 . 

218
CHAPTER 4  Economic Structuralism: Global Capitalism and Postcolonialism
  25.  Ibid., 123.  
  26.  Immanuel Wallerstein, “The Rise and Future Demise of the World Capitalist System,” 
 Comparative Studies in Society and History 16, 4 (September 1974): 387–415, and his 
“Dependence in an Interdependent World: The Limited Possibilities of Transformation 
Within the Capitalist World Economy,”  African Studies Review 18, 1 (April 1974): 
1–26. Christopher Chase-Dunn, ed.,  Socialist States in the World-System (Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage Publications, 1982).  
  27.  Hayward R. Alker, Jr., “Dialectical Foundations of Global Disparities,” in  World 
 System Structure , eds. Hollist and Rosenau, 80–109; Johan Galtung, “Global Processes 
and the World in the 1980s,” in  World System Structure , eds. Hollist and Rosenau, 
110–138. Chase-Dunn (also in Hollist and Rosenau, 43) states that transformation 
might involve the dissolution of states, the elimination of economic exchanges between 
national  territories, or the creation of a world state.  
  28.  Augustin Cueva, “A Summary of Problems and Perspectives of Dependency Theory,”  Latin 
American Perspectives 3, 4 (Fall 1976): 12–16. On the need to build a revolutionary party, 
see Raul A. Fernandez and Jose F. Ocampo, “The Latin American Revolution: A Theory of 
Imperialism, Not Dependence,”  Latin American Perspectives 1 (Spring 1974): 30–61.  
  29.  Fernando Henrique Cardoso, “The Consumption of Dependency Theory in the United 
States,”  Latin American Research Review 12, 3 (1977): 10–11; Hopkins and Wallerstein, 
 World-System Analysis, 8. 
  30.  Robert J.C. Young,  Postcolonialism: An Historical Introduction (Oxford: Blackwell, 
2001); 17 and 18. Cf. Barbara Bush,  Imperialism and Postcolonialism (Harlow, 
 England: Longman, 2006); Leela Gandhi,  Postcolonial Theory: A Critical Introduction 
(Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 1998).  
  31.  Jurgen Osterhammel,  Colonialism (Princeton and Kingston: Marcus Weiner/Ian Randle, 
1997), 119.  
  32.  Young, 2 and 6.  
  33.  Patricia Crone,  Pre-Industrial Societies: Anatomy of the Pre-modern World (Oxford: 
Blackwell, 1989), 148, as cited by Bush,  Imperialism and Postcolonialism , 80.  
  34.  Kenneth Pomerantz,  The Great Divergence: Europe, China and the Making of the 
 Modern World Economy (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2000), 17–19.  
  35.  Bush,  Imperialism and Postcolonialism , 80.  
  36.  See, for example, Robert A. Packenham,  The Dependency Movement: Scholarship in 
Development Studies (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1992); Andreas Velasco, 
“The Dustbin of History: Dependency Theory,”  Foreign Affairs (November–December 
2002): 44–45; Tony Smith, “The Underdevelopment of Development Literature: The 
Case of Dependency Theory,”  World Politics , 31, 2 (January 1979): 247–88; Daniel 
Garst, “Wallerstein and His Critics,”  Theory and Society , 14, 4 (July 1985): 469–95.  
  37.  See, for example, Alexander Gerschenkron,  Economic Backwardness in Historical Per-
spective (New York: Praeger, 1965); Barrington Moore,  Social Origins of Dictatorship 
and Democracy (Boston: Beacon Press, 1966); Theda Skocpol,  States and Social Revolu-
tions (New York: Cambridge University Press, 1979).  
  38.  Henrique Cardoso, “The Consumption of Dependency Theory,” 16. See also the com-
ments by James A. Caporaso, “Introduction,”  International Organization 32, no. 1 
(Winter 1978): 2–3. A special issue on dependence and dependency. Cf. Cardoso, 
 Fernando and Enzo Faletto.  Dependency and Development in Latin America (Berkeley, 
CA: University of California Press, 1979).  
  39.  Velasco, “The Dustbin of History,” 45.  
  40.  Cardoso, “The Consumption of Dependency Theory,” 16.  
  41.  Thomas S. Kuhn,  The Structure of Scientific Revolutions (Chicago: University of  Chicago 
Press, 1970). 

SE LECTED READI N GS 
The Economic Taproot of Imperialism 
J. A. HOBSON
OVERVIEW
 John Hobson discusses the economic taproot, or driving force, of imperialism. 
Written in 1902, he begins by laying out the case for imperialism as expressed 
by imperialists of his day. A high rate of savings and the power of production 
outstrip consumption. Industrialists and manufacturers therefore seek foreign 
sources of investment and markets in colonies or developing countries to solve 
these problems. He applies this explanation to the United States at the turn of 
the twentieth century. As noted in the text, Hobson’s views had direct influence 
on Lenin and others who would be highly critical of imperialism as an advanced 
stage of capitalism.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  According to Hobson, is the argument made by imperialists concerning the economic factors 
for the imperialism of European states also applicable to the United States?  
 2.  Can the development of trusts and combines avoid imperialism? Why or why not?  
 3.  What is the one possibility he raises at the end of the article as to how imperialist policies 
might be avoided?  
“The Economic Taproot of Imperialism” from  Imperialism by John A. Hobson, 1902, John Nesbit & Co., Ltd, and later 
Allen & Unwin, pp. 71–93.
 No mere array of facts and figures adduced to il-
lustrate the economic nature of the new imperial-
ism will suffice to dispel the popular delusion that 
the use of national force to secure new markets by 
annexing fresh tracts of territory is a sound and a 
necessary policy for an advanced industrial country 
like Great Britain. It has indeed been proved that 
recent annexations of tropical countries, procured 
at great expense, have furnished poor and precari-
ous markets, that our aggregate trade with our co-
lonial possessions is virtually stationary, and that 
our most profitable and progressive trade is with 
rival industrial nations, whose territories we have 
no desire to annex, whose markets we cannot force, 
and whose active antagonism we are provoking by 
our expansive policy. 
 But these arguments are not conclusive. It is 
open to Imperialists to argue thus: “We must have 
markets for our growing manufactures, we must 
have new outlets for the investment of our surplus 
capital and for the energies of the adventurous sur-
plus of our population: such expansion is a neces-
sity of life to a nation with our great and growing 
powers of production. An ever larger share of our 
219

220
J. A. HOBSON
tendency for investors to work towards the political 
annexation of countries which contain their more 
speculative investments is very powerful. Of the 
fact of this pressure of capital there can be no ques-
tion. Large savings are made which cannot find any 
profitable investment in this country; they must find 
employment elsewhere, and it is to the advantage of 
the nation that they should be employed as largely 
as possible in lands where they can be utilized in 
opening up markets for British trade and employ-
ment for British enterprise. 
 “However costly, however perilous, this pro-
cess of imperial expansion may be, it is necessary to 
the continued existence and progress of our nation; 
if we abandoned it we must be content to leave the 
development of the world to other nations, who will 
everywhere cut into our trade, and even impair our 
means of securing the food and raw materials we 
require to support our population. Imperialism is 
thus seen to be, not a choice, but a necessity.” 
 The practical force of this economic argu-
ment in politics is strikingly illustrated by the later 
history of the United States. Here is a country 
which suddenly broke through a conservative pol-
icy, strongly held by both political parties, bound 
up with every popular instinct and tradition, and 
flung itself into a rapid imperial career for which 
it possessed neither the material nor the moral 
equipment, risking the principles and practices 
of liberty and equality by the establishment of 
militarism and the forcible subjugation of peoples 
which it could not safely admit to the condition of 
American citizenship. 
 Was this a mere wild freak of spread-eaglism, 
a burst of political ambition on the part of a na-
tion coming to a sudden realization of its destiny? 
Not at all. The spirit of adventure, the American 
“mission of civilization,” were as forces making 
for Imperialism, clearly subordinate to the driving 
force of the economic factor. The dramatic charac-
ter of the change is due to the unprecedented rapidity 
of the industrial revolution in the United States from 
the eighties onward. During that period the United 
States, with her unrivalled natural resources, her im-
mense resources of skilled and unskilled labour, and 
her genius for invention and organization, devel-
oped the best equipped and most productive manu-
facturing economy the world has yet seen. Fostered 
by rigid protective tariffs, her metal, textile, tool, 
clothing, furniture, and other manufactures shot up 
in a single generation from infancy to full maturity, 
population is devoted to the manufactures and com-
merce of towns, and is thus dependent for life and 
work upon food and raw materials from foreign 
lands. In order to buy and pay for these things we 
must sell our goods abroad. During the first three-
quarters of the nineteenth century we could do so 
without difficulty by a natural expansion of com-
merce with continental nations and our colonies, 
all of which were far behind us in the main arts of 
manufacture and the carrying trades. So long as 
England held a virtual monopoly of the world mar-
kets for certain important classes of manufactured 
goods, Imperialism was unnecessary. After 1870 
this manufacturing and trading supremacy was 
greatly impaired: other nations, especially Germany, 
the United States, and Belgium, advanced with great 
rapidity, and while they have not crushed or even 
stayed the increase of our external trade, their com-
petition made it more and more difficult to dispose 
of the full surplus of our manufactures at a profit. 
The encroachments made by these nations upon our 
old markets, even in our own possessions, made it 
most urgent that we should take energetic means to 
secure new markets. These new markets had to lie in 
hitherto undeveloped countries, chiefly in the trop-
ics, where vast populations lived capable of grow-
ing economic needs which our manufacturers and 
merchants could supply. Our rivals were seizing and 
annexing territories for similar purposes, and when 
they had annexed them closed them to our trade. 
The diplomacy and the arms of Great Britain had to 
be used in order to compel the owners of the new 
markets to deal with us: and experience showed that 
the safest means of securing and developing such 
markets is by establishing ‘protectorates’ or by an-
nexation. The value in 1905 of these markets must 
not be taken as a final test of the economy of such 
a policy; the process of educating civilized needs 
which we can supply is of necessity a gradual one, 
and the cost of such Imperialism must be regarded 
as a capital outlay, the fruits of which posterity 
would reap. The new markets might not be large, 
but they formed serviceable outlets for the overflow 
of our great textile and metal industries, and, when 
the vast Asiatic and African populations of the in-
terior were reached, a rapid expansion of trade was 
expected to result. 
 “Far larger and more important is the pres-
sure of capital for external fields of investment. 
Moreover, while the manufacturer and trader are 
well content to trade with foreign nations, the 

The Economic Taproot of Imperialism 
221
of industry in “trusts,” “combines,” etc. at once 
limits the quantity of capital which can be effectively 
employed and increases the share of profits out of 
which fresh savings and fresh capital will spring. It 
is quite evident that a trust which is motivated by 
cut-throat competition, due to an excess of capital, 
cannot normally find inside the “trusted” industry 
employment for that portion of the profits which 
the trust-makers desire to save and to invest. New 
inventions and other economies of production or 
distribution within the trade may absorb some of 
the new capital, but there are rigid limits to this 
absorption. The trustmaker in oil or sugar must 
find other investments for his savings: if he is early 
in the application of the combination principles to 
his trade, he will naturally apply his surplus capital 
to establish similar combinations in other industries, 
economising capital still further, and rendering it 
ever harder for ordinary saving men to find invest-
ments for their savings. 
 Indeed, the conditions alike of cut-throat com-
petition and of combination attest the congestion 
of capital in the manufacturing industries which 
have entered the machine economy. We are not here 
concerned with any theoretic question as to the pos-
sibility of producing by modern machine methods 
more goods than can find a market. It is sufficient 
to point out that the manufacturing power of a 
country like the United States would grow so fast 
as to exceed the demands of the home market. No 
one acquainted with trade will deny a fact which all 
American economists assert, that this is the condi-
tion which the United States reached at the end of 
the century, so far, as the more developed industries 
are concerned. Her manufactures were saturated 
with capital and could absorb no more. One af-
ter another they sought refuge from the waste of 
competition in “combines” which secure a measure 
of profitable peace by restricting the quantity of 
operative capital. Industrial and financial princes in 
oil, steel, sugar, railroads, banking, etc. were faced 
with the dilemma of either spending more than they 
knew how to spend, or forcing markets outside 
the home area. Two economic courses were open 
to them, both leading towards an abandonment 
of the political isolation of the past and the adop-
tion of imperialist methods in the future. Instead of 
shutting down inferior mills and rigidly restricting 
output to correspond with profitable sales in the 
home markets, they might employ their full produc-
tive power, applying their savings to increase their 
and, having passed through a period of intense com-
petition, attained, under the able control of great 
trust-makers, a power of production greater than 
has been attained in the most advanced industrial 
countries of Europe. 
 An era of cut-throat competition, followed by a 
rapid process of amalgamation, threw an enormous 
quantity of wealth into the hands of a small number 
of captains of industry. No luxury of living to which 
this class could attain kept pace with its rise of in-
come, and a process of automatic saving set in upon 
an unprecedented scale. The investment of these sav-
ings in other industries helped to bring these under 
the same concentrative forces. Thus a great increase 
of savings seeking profitable investment is synchro-
nous with a stricter economy of the use of existing 
capital. No doubt the rapid growth of a population, 
accustomed to a high and an always ascending stan-
dard of comfort, absorbs in the satisfaction of its 
wants a large quantity of new capital. But the actual 
rate of saving, conjoined with a more economical 
application of forms of existing capital, exceeded 
considerably the rise of the national consumption 
of manufactures. The power of production far out-
stripped the actual rate of consumption, and, con-
trary to the older economic theory, was unable to 
force a corresponding increase of consumption by 
lowering prices. 
 This is no mere theory. The history of any of 
the numerous trusts or combinations in the United 
States sets out the facts with complete distinctness. 
In the free competition of manufactures preced-
ing combination the chronic condition is one of 
“overproduction,” in the sense that all the mills or 
factories can only be kept at work by cutting prices 
down towards a point where the weaker competi-
tors are forced to close down, because they cannot 
sell their goods at a price which covers the true 
cost of production. The first result of the successful 
formation of a trust or combine is to close down 
the worse equipped or worse placed mills, and sup-
ply the entire market from the better equipped and 
better placed ones. This course may or may not 
be attended by a rise of price and some restriction 
of consumption: in some cases trusts take most 
of their profits by raising prices, in other cases by 
reducing the costs of production through employ-
ing only the best mills and stopping the waste of 
competition. 
 For the present argument it matters not which 
course is taken; the point is that this concentration 

222
BARBARA BUSH
must not deceive us. It was Messrs. Rockefeller, 
Pierpont Morgan, and their associates who needed 
Imperialism and who fastened it upon the shoul-
ders of the great Republic of the West. They needed 
Imperialism because they desired to use the public 
resources of their country to find profitable em-
ployment for their capital which otherwise would 
be  superfluous. . . . 
 It is this economic condition of affairs that 
forms the taproot of Imperialism. If the consuming 
public in this country raised its standard of con-
sumption to keep pace with every rise of productive 
powers, there could be no excess of goods or capital 
clamorous to use Imperialism in order to find mar-
kets: foreign trade would indeed exist, but there 
would be no difficulty in exchanging a small surplus 
of our manufactures for the food and raw material 
we annually absorbed, and all the savings that we 
made could find employment, if we chose, in home 
industries. . . .  
business capital, and, while still regulating output 
and prices for the home market, may “hustle” for 
foreign markets, dumping down their surplus goods 
at prices which would not be possible save for the 
profitable nature of their home market. So likewise 
they might employ their savings in seeking invest-
ments outside their country, first repaying the capi-
tal borrowed from Great Britain and other countries 
for the early development of their railroads, mines 
and manufactures, and afterwards becoming them-
selves a creditor class to foreign countries. 
 It was this sudden demand for foreign mar-
kets for manufactures and for investment which 
was avowedly responsible for the adoption of 
Imperialism as a political policy and practice by 
the Republican party to which the great indus-
trial and financial chiefs belonged, and which 
belonged to them. The adventurous enthusiasm 
of President Theodore Roosevelt and his “mani-
fest destiny” and “mission of civilization” party 
Culture and Imperialism 
BARBARA BUSH 
OVERVIEW
 The postcolonial literature takes a holistic approach to understanding empires. 
While the imperialism analyzed by Hobson and Lenin may have passed, empire is 
alive and well. So say a diverse set of scholars from various academic disciplines 
who examine empires and imperialism from a combination of economic, social, 
political, and cultural perspectives. While much of IR theorizing emphasizes parsi-
mony in terms of concepts and theories, the postcolonial literature associated with 
history departments is particularly rich in detail and case studies. Bush reflects this 
orientation.  
 While she is very conversant with the economics-inspired work on imperial-
ism, Bush is more interested in postcolonial writings influenced by the so-called 
cultural turn. The importance of understanding the role of cultural in imperial 
relations is principally attributed to the work of Edward Said, particularly his  
From “Culture and Imperialism,” Chapter 4 of  Imperialism and Postcolonialism by Barbara Bush. Copyright © 2006 
Pearson Education Limited. Used by permission.

Culture and Imperialism 
223
Orientalism  (1978) and  Culture and Imperialism  (1993). He was less interested 
in the history of imperialism from the perspective of the European powers and 
more concerned with the narratives of empire in fiction and history and how they 
mutually influenced culture and politics in the metropole and colonies, creating 
a bourgeois imperial culture. The cultural dimension of power harkens back to 
Gramsci’s work. This brief extract, however, also shows the influence of Marx, 
Foucault, and Derrida, all whom are also associated with the critical theory 
 perspective discussed in  Chapter   7 .  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  How has the work of Edward Said on colonizer and colonized changed the analytical frame-
work on the role of culture in postcolonial studies?  
 2.  Why are cultural strategies to legitimate imperial power not restricted to the era of capitalism?  
 3.  What are the limitations of Gramsci’s concept of hegemony as applied to colonial relations?  
 From the early colonial encounters, the nature of 
colonial rule was never static and changed over 
time. Many colonized peoples experienced changes 
in the colonial ruler. Examples here include the 
transfer of the Philippines from Spain to the USA, 
the acquisition of the former German colonies by 
France, Britain and other imperial or sub-imperial 
powers after the First World War. What remained 
constant was the colonial situation, ‘the unchang-
ing complex of rule, exploitation and cultural con-
flict in ethnically heterogeneous political structures 
that had been created by influence from without’ 
(Osterhammel, 1997, pp. 64–5). Imperial admin-
istrations, civilizing missions and cultures of colo-
nialism were shaped by the interactions between 
colonizer and colonized in diverse cultural, political 
and economic contexts. In the early imperial era, 
the Spanish demonstrated almost total indifference 
to the cultures they encountered in Latin America 
and the Philippines (Kamen, 2002) yet they were less 
averse to race-mixing than the French and English 
who, by the early twentieth century, possessed ex-
tensive anthropological and ethnographical knowl-
edge of their colonial subjects. British indirect rule 
effectively resulted in racial segregation and the sub-
tle racism underpinning French policies of assimila-
tion was the focus of Frantz Fanon’s influential 
analysis of the psychological affects of colonialism, 
 Black Skin, White Masks (1952). 
 Before the 1960s, studies of colonial rule fo-
cused on administrative and political systems. 
They were written within the discourses of power 
and contributed to colonial knowledge in help-
ing to manage the colonial subjects. Early chal-
lenges to this genre, emphasizing the importance 
of neglected ‘cultures of colonialism’, came from 
the colonized, for example, Fanon, Albert Memmi 
and Aimé Césaire, who explored what Nandy has 
termed the ‘colonial consciousness of colonizer and 
colonized’ (Nandy, 1983, p. 1). ‘Colonization of 
the personality’, argued Fanon (1952), resulted in 
the internalization and acceptance of the European 
superiority. In the Western academy studies of these 
psycho-social affects of colonialism were pioneered 
by Octave Mannoni in his analysis of the ‘depen-
dency complex’ of the colonized created through 
paternalism (Mannoni, 1956). Presaging future his-
toriographical developments, the sociologist George 
Balandier (1970) argued that previous studies based 
on economics, political administration or race rela-
tions provided only a limited, fragmented view of 
colonial societies. What was needed was a deeper 
understanding of colonial ideologies and a ‘com-
plete conspectus’ of the ‘colonial situation’, pre- and 
post-conquest, that adopted an interdisciplinary 
approach and reconceptualized the relationship 
between colonizer and colonized as dynamic and 
marked by tension and conflict. 
 Since the 1980s, research has questioned the 
dualism that divided colonizer and colonized in 
former studies and focused on the interrelation-
ships. Edward Said (1994) argued that imperialism 
consolidated a mixture of cultures and identities 
on a global scale and imperialism was as much a 

224
BARBARA BUSH
enormous fines for violation. Such visual symbols 
of power affirmed the imperial social structure and 
were calculated to impress the subordinated popu-
lations of the empire. Adoption of Roman culture 
by the local elites, including a villa, strengthened 
pre-conquest social divisions and superiority over 
the masses. Roman culture had less influence in the 
countryside, but peasants did become Romanized 
through the army, the main instrument of expo-
sure to the  dominant culture. Romanization in the 
Western Empire . . . was deep-rooted and long-
lasting but it was less successful in the East, where 
the elites,  influenced by Jewish, Egyptian and evolv-
ing Oriental cultures, were less zealous in embracing 
Roman culture (Garnsey and Saller, 1987, pp. 116–17, 
167–9, 202). 
 In later European empires similar cultural strat-
egies were employed, but modern racial ideologies 
and economic priorities arguably resulted in more 
extensive cultural oppression/suppression. The his-
tories of colonized peoples, argues Cohn (1996), 
were shaped through cultural technologies of domi-
nance. Colonial and imperial domination operated 
through mechanisms of cultural imperialism that 
resulted in cultural oppression, that is, a debasement 
and negation of the values of colonized peoples 
that undermined their cultures. Cultural imperial-
ism was essential to legitimizing colonial rule and 
the racial orders that sustained it, muting the essen-
tially exploitative nature of colonial administration 
and fudging conflicts of interests between colonizer 
and colonized. The concept of cultural imperial-
ism, however, is diffuse and difficult to define. As 
Tomlinson (1991, p. 7) stresses, it is a composite 
of two highly problematic concepts which cannot 
be reduced to a single meaning, but a key feature 
is that: 
 [Cultural imperialism] operated through disrupt-
ing and changing the context within which people 
give meanings to their actions and experiences and 
make sense of their lives. 
 (Thomas, 1994, pp. 2–3)  
 Cultural imperialism involves a dominant power 
imposing aspects of its culture on a society which 
is ‘weaker’ or ‘backward’ in some military, eco-
nomic or technological sense (Meade and Walker 
(eds), 1991, p. 80). Allied to, but not synonymous 
with, cultural hegemony, the concept implies a 
more  conscious process of suppression of inferior 
formative element in development of metropolitan 
cultures as it was for colonized societies. His ideas 
were incorporated into new imperial histories that 
explored the cultures of colonized and colonizers 
and explored how cultural imperialism helped to 
legitimize imperial power. Under the influence of 
the ideas of Marx, Benjamin, Gramsci, Foucault, 
Derrida and Said, colonialism was reconceptualized 
as a ‘metaphor for the subtle relationship between 
power and knowledge . . . culture and control’ 
(Dirks (ed.), 1992, p. 11). New analyses of the na-
ture of colonial rule embraced strategies of power, 
the link between colonialism and identity formation 
of rulers and ruled, and interconnections between 
the public institutions of the colonial state and the 
intimate domestic lives of colonizer and colonized. 
To what extent have these new conceptual frame-
works helped to advance our understanding of the 
relationship between culture and imperialism? 
 Cultural strategies to legitimize imperial power, 
including co-option of local elites, can be traced 
back to earlier empires. Roman emperors lacked 
any grand design to spread the culture of Rome 
but the imperial centre was sustained through 
Romanization, the fusion of imperial and local in-
stitutions and cultures. Roman culture was itself 
a blend of indigenous and foreign elements and 
was receptive to other cultures, especially Greek. 
This given, widespread diffusion of the traditional 
gods of Rome: Jupiter, Juno and Minerva, par-
ticularly under the later emperors, became an essen-
tial element of imperial propaganda and ideology. 
Religious cults and social practices that ‘civilized’ 
Romans regarded as barbarous, such as human sac-
rifice, or that threatened the advance of empire, 
such as customs practiced by the druids of Gaul 
and Britain and the prophetesses of Germany, were 
suppressed (Garnsey and Saller, 1987, pp. 178–81). 
Garnsey and Saller conclude, however, that, in 
the main, Rome’s contact with alien religions was 
marked by peaceful penetration rather than coer-
cion. Roman gods were syncretized with indigenous 
gods: in Britain, for instance, the goddess Minerva 
found local counterparts, such as Sulis, the water 
goddess of Bath (ibid., p. 181). 
 The cultural impact of Rome was, in some ways, 
not dissimilar to that in later empires. Roman  co-
loniae were an extension of Rome, a community 
of Roman citizens. Rank and clothing in the em-
pire were visual symbols of power, as were spa-
tial definitions of seating in amphitheatres, with 

Culture and Imperialism 
225
power, hegemonic ideologies were utilized by the 
state to legitimize, and ensure the continuation of, 
imperial regimes. In India, for instance, the Raj was 
represented as modernizing India, emphasizing the 
weak, ‘backward’ and disunited nature of Indian 
society and the superiority of British institutions and 
legal systems. British rule depended on Indian acqui-
escence to this ideology (Cohn, 1996). 
 Colonizers, argued Chatterjee (1994), were in-
volved in a ‘hegemonic project’ that was powerful 
and long-lasting (p. 79). To be successful, imperial 
hegemony had to come to terms with, incorporate 
and transform the values of the colonized. Direct 
violence, defined as state violence through soldiers 
and policemen, was the exception rather than the 
rule in the history of British imperialism in India 
and Africa. Control was maintained through ‘gentle 
violence’ that changed the ‘day to day reproduction 
of life under colonial rule in the name of civiliza-
tion and reason’ and transformed colonial peoples’ 
consciousness (Engels and Marks, 1994, pp. 1–2). 
Domination, observes Osterhammel (1997), was 
based on the threat of force, but also ‘communi-
cation imperialism’, the collection, processing and 
dissemination of information about colonized soci-
ety by centralized institutions. Important here were 
collaborators, not colonial soldiers or puppet native 
rulers, but ‘semiautonomous agents’, middlemen 
with a foot in both camps, whose interests were 
best served by helping to sustain the colonial state 
(pp. 64–6). 
 Nicholas Dirks, however, has queried the use 
of hegemony in relation to colonial power as it 
implied consent and political participation absent 
in the colonial context (Dirks (ed.), 1992, p. 7). 
Gramsci’s ideas were developed for modern Italian 
society, where there was a substantial civil society 
(interest groups, trade unions, political parties) and 
an educated, literate population facilitating the dis-
semination of hegemonic culture. These aspects of 
modernity were not present in colonial societies, 
or, if emergent, as in the period from 1918 up to 
the end of European empires, were suppressed and/
or steered by the colonial powers in an attempt to 
neutralize the potential danger to the imperial status 
quo. Effectively, hegemony, in metropole and colony 
alike, could never secure complete ideological and 
political control; this was central to Gramsci’s inter-
est in the active resistance of ‘subalterns’ against the 
‘officer’ class. In the colonial context resistance was 
generated through dynamic tensions between the 
cultures. Cultural strategies were more subtle than 
other forms of colonial control, such as policing 
and the law, and had some success, in that the 
colonized internalized inferiority. But cultural op-
pression also fostered resentment and challenges 
to scientific racism and linguistic imperialism were 
vital to psychological survival and resistant political 
action (LaCapra (ed.), 1991; Bush, 1999). 
 The links between culture and imperialism raise 
fundamental questions about the operation of power 
and knowledge in colonial societies, the ways in 
which the values and culture of the dominant power 
are spread at the expense of the dominated, and the 
degree to which colonized subjects were actively en-
gaged in complex cultural choices, interacting with 
the dominant culture although ‘not in conditions 
of their own choosing’ (Tomlinson, 1991, p. 3). 
The ideology and practice of imperialism were the 
domain of powerful groups and vested interests for 
which empire brought tangible benefits. Material 
power was expressed through economic, military 
and technological superiority, but equally important 
was the cultural power of dominant discourses which 
represented colonial subjects in a way that reinforced 
their inferiority, justified imperial rule and secured 
legitimacy for imperialism in both colony and impe-
rial heartland. . . . Cultural power may be  defined as 
the will to dominate and not be dominated, to im-
pose change whilst remaining unchanged (Von Laue, 
1989). It operates at the level of the individual and 
collective consciousness and is transmitted through 
cultural mediums. In Foucaultian analysis culture 
itself becomes a mechanism of repression through the 
operation of powerful discourses. In the colonial con-
text these generate representations of individuals and 
groups which have the power to include and exclude, 
to police and control every area of life, including 
sexuality (Stoler, 1996). 
 Cultural imperialism is thus premised on the 
relationship between knowledge production and 
control and imperial power. Power is maintained 
through hegemonic ideologies (or discourses of 
power), the dominant or ruling set of ideas in a soci-
ety, that worked in the interests of powerful groups in 
metropole and colony. Gramsci defined hegemony as 
‘the predominance, obtained by consent rather than 
force, of one class or group over other classes . . . 
the spontaneous consent of masses to the general 
direction imposed on social life by the dominant . . . 
group’ (Hoare and Newell Smith (eds), 1971, p. 12). 
In conjunction with other, more tangible, forms of 

226
BARBARA BUSH
 Fanon, Frantz.  Black Skin, White Masks (London, Pluto, 
1993, 3 rd  edition, first published 1952; trans. Charles 
Lam Markham) 
 Garnsey, Peter, and Richard Saller.  The Roman Empire: 
Economy, Society and Culture (London, Duckworth, 
1987) 
 Hoare, Q., and Newell Smith, G. (ed. and trans.)  Selection 
from the Prison Notebook of Antonio Gramsci (London, 
Lawrence and Wishart, 1971) 
 Kamen, Henry.  Spain’s Road to Empire: The Making of a 
World Power, 1592–1763 (London: Penguin, 2002) 
 LaCapra, Dominick (ed.)  The Bounds of Race (Ithaca, 
Cornell University Press, 1991) 
 Mannoni, Octave.  Prospero and Caliban: The Psychology 
of Colonization (London, Metheun, 1956) 
 Meade, T., and M. Walker (eds.)  Science, Medicine and 
Cultural Imperialism (London, Macmillan, 1991) 
 Nandy, Ashis.  The Intimate Enemy: Loss and Recovery of 
Self Under Colonialism (Oxford, Oxford University 
Press, 1983) 
 Osterhammel, Jurgen.  Colonialism (Princeton and Kings-
ton, Marcus Wiener/Ian Randle, 1997) 
 Said, Edward.  Culture and Imperialism (London, Vintage, 
1994, 1993) 
 Solar, Ann Laura.  Race and the Education of Desire 
 (Durham, NC, Duke University Press, 1996) 
 Thomas, Nicholas.  Colonialism’s Culture (Cambridge, 
Polity Press, 1994) 
 Tomlinson, John.  Cultural Imperialism: A Critical Intro-
duction (London, Pinter Publishers, 1991) 
 Von Laue, Theodore.  The World Revolution of Westerni-
sation (London, Oxford University Press, 1989)  
hegemonic ideologies of the colonizers, pre-colonial 
cultures and the oppositional discourses of African 
and Asian nationalism. As Daunton and Halpern 
(1999) emphasize, elites are dominant, but rarely 
hegemonic, and autonomous domains for indigenous 
resistance and politics have always existed (p. 10). 
Certainly, we need to query the passivity implied 
in the concept of a monolithic Western cultural 
imperialism and acknowledge the active agency of 
colonized peoples. Autonomous action, however, 
was continuously constrained by powerful cultural 
strategies employed by the colonial governments. 
References
 Balandier, George.  The Sociology of Black Africa (London, 
Deutsch, 1970) 
 Bush, Barbara.  Imperialism, Race and Resistance  (London, 
Routledge, 1999) 
 Chatterjee, Partha. “Was There a Hegemonic Project of 
the Colonial State?” in Dagmar Engels and Shula 
Marks (eds.)  Contesting Colonial Hegemony (Lon-
don and New York, British Academic Press, 1994) 
 Cohn, Bernard.  Colonialism and Its Forms of Knowledge: 
The British in India (New Jersey, Princeton University 
Press, 1996) 
 Daunton, Martin, and Rick Halpern (eds.)  Empire and 
Others (London, UCL Press, 1999) 
 Dirks, Nicholas (ed.)  Colonialism and Culture (Ann 
 Arbor, University of Michigan Press, 1992) 
 Engels, Dagmar, and Shula Marks (eds.)  Contesting 
 Colonial Hegemony (London and New York, British 
Academic Press, 1994) 

The Modern World-System
as a Capitalist World-Economy 
IMMANUEL WALLERSTEIN
OVERVIEW
 The work of Immanuel Wallerstein epitomizes the argument that to understand the 
world today we must look back to at least the sixteenth century and the beginning 
of the capitalist world-economy. This is the key concept in his work. A world-
economy assumes a large geographic zone within which there is a division of labor 
and the significant exchange of goods, capital, and labor. Capitalism is not simply 
producing for sale on the market, earning a profit, or the existence of wage labor. 
For Wallerstein the defining characteristic of a capitalist system is the endless ac-
cumulation of capital. In this article he also introduces the key concepts of core, 
periphery, and unequal exchange. He also discusses the concepts of sexism and 
racism as applied to his world-economy perspective.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  What is the relation between the international system of states and the world-economy?  
 2.  Why does Wallerstein claim a totally free market is not a day-to-day reality?  
 3.  What is meant by  core and  periphery and how do the concepts relate to the concept of  unequal 
exchange ? 
 4.  The various complex relations of the world-economy are beset by two opposite ideological 
themes—universalism on the one hand and racism and sexism on the other. How are they 
interrelated and what is their impact on the efficiency of the world-economy and the ability 
to accumulate capital?  
“The Modern World-System as a Capitalist World-Economy” from  World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction by 
Immanuel Wallerstein, pp. 23–42. Copyright © 2004 Duke University Press. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission 
of the publisher.
 The world in which we are now living, the modern 
world-system, had its origins in the sixteenth cen-
tury. This world-system was then located in only a 
part of the globe, primarily in parts of Europe and the 
Americas. It expanded over time to cover the whole 
globe. It is and has always been a  world-economy. 
It is and has always been a  capitalist world-economy. 
We should begin by explaining what these two terms, 
world-economy and capitalism, denote. It will then 
be easier to appreciate the historical contours of the 
modern world-system—its origins, its geography, its 
temporal development, and its contemporary struc-
tural crisis. 
 What we mean by a world-economy (Braudel’s 
 économie-monde ) is a large geographic zone within 
which there is a division of labor and hence signifi-
cant internal exchange of basic or essential goods as 
well as flows of capital and labor. A defining feature 
of a world-economy is that it is  not bounded by a 
unitary political structure. Rather, there are many 
political units inside the world-economy, loosely 
tied together in our modern world-system in an 
interstate system. And a world-economy contains 
many cultures and groups—practicing many reli-
gions, speaking many languages, differing in their 
everyday patterns. This does not mean that they do 
227

228
IMMANUEL WALLERSTEIN
market (hence minisystems are too narrow for them) 
but they also need a multiplicity of states, so that 
they can gain the advantages of working with states 
but also can circumvent states hostile to their in-
terests in favor of states friendly to their interests. 
Only the existence of a multiplicity of states within 
the overall division of labor assures this possibility. 
 A capitalist world-economy is a collection of 
many institutions, the combination of which ac-
counts for its processes, and all of which are inter-
twined with each other. The basic institutions are the 
market, or rather the markets; the firms that compete 
in the markets; the multiple states, within an inter-
state system; the households; the classes; and the 
status-groups (to use Weber’s term, which some 
people in recent years have renamed the “identities”). 
They are all institutions that have been created within 
the framework of the capitalist world-economy. Of 
course, such institutions have some similarities to 
institutions that existed in prior historical systems to 
which we have given the same or similar names. But 
using the same name to describe institutions located 
in different historical systems quite often confuses 
rather than clarifies analysis. It is better to think of 
the set of institutions of the modern world-system as 
contextually specific to it. 
 Let us start with markets, since these are nor-
mally considered the essential feature of a capitalist 
system. A market is both a concrete local structure in 
which individuals or firms sell and buy goods, and a 
virtual institution across space where the same kind 
of exchange occurs. How large and wide-spread any 
virtual market is depends on the realistic alterna-
tives that sellers and buyers have at a given time. In 
principle, in a capitalist world-economy the virtual 
market exists in the world-economy as a whole. 
But as we shall see, there are often interferences 
with these boundaries, creating narrower and more 
“protected” markets. There are of course separate 
virtual markets for all commodities as well as for 
capital and different kinds of labor. But over time, 
there can also be said to exist a single virtual world 
market for all the factors of production combined, 
despite all the barriers that exist to its free function-
ing. One can think of this complete virtual market as 
a magnet for all producers and buyers, whose pull is 
a constant political factor in the decision-making of 
everyone—the states, the firms, the households, the 
classes, and the status-groups (or identities). This 
complete virtual world market is a reality in that it 
influences all decision making, but it never functions 
not evolve some common cultural patterns, what 
we shall be calling a geoculture. It does mean that 
neither political nor cultural homogeneity is to be 
expected or found in a world-economy. What uni-
fies the structure most is the division of labor which 
is constituted within it. 
 Capitalism is not the mere existence of persons 
or firms producing for sale on the market with the 
intention of obtaining a profit. Such persons or 
firms have existed for thousands of years all across 
the world. Nor is the existence of persons working 
for wages sufficient as a definition. Wage-labor has 
also been known for thousands of years. We are in 
a capitalist system only when the system gives pri-
ority to the  endless accumulation of capital. Using 
such a definition, only the modern world-system 
has been a capitalist system. Endless accumulation 
is a quite simple concept: it means that people and 
firms are accumulating capital in order to accumu-
late still more capital, a process that is continual 
and endless. If we say that a system “gives priority” 
to such endless accumulation, it means that there 
exist structural mechanisms by which those who 
act with other motivations are penalized in some 
way, and are eventually eliminated from the social 
scene, whereas those who act with the appropri-
ate motivations are rewarded and, if successful, 
enriched. 
 A world-economy and a capitalist system go 
together. Since world-economies lack the unifying 
cement of an overall political structure or a homo-
geneous culture, what holds them together is the 
efficacy of the division of labor. And this efficacy is 
a function of the constantly expanding wealth that 
a capitalist system provides. Until modern times, 
the world-economies that had been constructed ei-
ther fell apart or were transformed  manu militari 
into world-empires. Historically, the only world-
economy to have survived for a long time has been 
the modern world-system, and that is because the 
capitalist system took root and became consolidated 
as its defining feature. 
 Conversely, a capitalist system cannot exist 
within any framework except that of a world-
economy. We shall see that a capitalist system 
requires a very special relationship between eco-
nomic producers and the holders of political power. 
If the latter are too strong, as in a world-empire, 
their interests will override those of the economic 
producers, and the endless accumulation of capital 
will cease to be a priority. Capitalists need a large 

 
The Modern World-System as a Capitalist World-Economy 
229
condition sine qua non of the endless accumulation 
of capital. That is what explains the constant process 
of the concentration of capital. 
 To be sure, there is a downside to the growth 
of firms, either horizontally (in the same product), 
vertically (in the different steps in the chain of 
production), or what might be thought of as or-
thogonally (into other products not closely related). 
Size brings down costs through so-called economies 
of scale. But size adds costs of administration and 
coordination, and multiplies the risks of manage-
rial inefficiencies. As a result of this contradiction, 
there has been a repeated zigzag process of firms 
getting larger and then getting smaller. But it has 
not at all been a simple up-and-down cycle. Rather, 
worldwide there has been a secular increase in the 
size of firms, the whole historical process taking 
the form of a ratchet, two steps up then one step 
back, continuously. The size of firms also has direct 
political implications. Large size gives firms more 
political clout but also makes them more vulner-
able to political assault—by their competitors, their 
employees, and their consumers. But here too the 
bottom line is an upward ratchet, toward more 
political influence over time. 
 The axial division of labor of a capitalist world-
economy divides production into core-like products 
and peripheral products. Core-periphery is a rela-
tional concept. What we mean by core-periphery is 
the degree of profitability of the production pro-
cesses. Since profitability is directly related to the de-
gree of monopolization, what we essentially mean by 
core-like production processes is those that are con-
trolled by quasi-monopolies. Peripheral processes 
are then those that are truly competitive. When ex-
change occurs, competitive products are in a weak 
position and quasi- monopolized products are in a 
strong position. As a result, there is a constant flow 
of surplus-value from the producers of peripheral 
products to the producers of core-like products. This 
has been called unequal exchange. 
 To be sure, unequal exchange is not the only 
way of moving accumulated capital from politi-
cally weak regions to politically strong regions. 
There is also plunder, often used extensively dur-
ing the early days of incorporating new regions 
into the world-economy (consider, for example, 
the conquistadores and gold in the Americas). But 
plunder is self-liquidating. It is a case of killing 
the goose that lays the golden eggs. Still, since the 
consequences are middle-term and the advantages 
fully and freely (that is, without interference). The 
totally free market functions as an ideology, a myth, 
and a constraining influence, but never as a day-to-
day reality. 
 One of the reasons it is not a day-to-day reality is 
that a totally free market, were it ever to exist, would 
make impossible the endless accumulation of capital. 
This may seem a paradox because it is surely true 
that capitalism cannot function without markets, and 
it is also true that capitalists regularly say that they 
favor free markets. But capitalists in fact need not 
totally free markets but rather markets that are only 
partially free. The reason is clear. Suppose there re-
ally existed a world market in which all the factors 
of production were totally free, as our textbooks in 
economics usually define this—that is, one in which 
the factors flowed without restriction, in which there 
were a very large number of buyers and a very large 
number of sellers and in which there was perfect 
information (meaning that all sellers and all buyers 
knew the exact state of all costs of production). In 
such a perfect market, it would always be possible 
for the buyers to bargain down the sellers to an ab-
solutely minuscule level of profit (let us think of it as 
a penny) and this low level of profit would make the 
capitalist game entirely uninteresting to producers, 
removing the basic social underpinnings of such a 
system. 
 What sellers always prefer is a monopoly, 
for then they can create a relatively wide margin 
 between the costs of production and the sales price, 
and thus realize high rates of profit. Of course, per-
fect monopolies are extremely difficult to create, 
and rare, but quasi-monopolies are not. What one 
needs most of all is the support of the machinery 
of a relatively strong state, one which can enforce 
a quasi-monopoly. . . . 
 Firms are the main actors in the market. Firms 
are normally the competitors of other firms oper-
ating in the same virtual market. They are also in 
conflict with those firms from whom they purchase 
inputs and those firms to which they sell their prod-
ucts. Fierce intercapitalist rivalry is the name of the 
game. And only the strongest and the most agile 
survive. One must remember that bankruptcy, or ab-
sorption by a more powerful firm, is the daily bread 
of capitalist enterprises. Not all capitalist entrepre-
neurs succeed in accumulating capital. Far from it. 
If they all succeeded, each would be likely to obtain 
very little capital. So, the repeated “failures” of firms 
not only weed out the weak competitors but are a 

230
IMMANUEL WALLERSTEIN
(e.g. aircraft production or genetic engineering) 
which were concentrated in a few countries. There 
have always been new core-like processes to replace 
those which become more competitive and then 
move out of the states in which they were originally 
located. 
 The role of each state is very different vis-à-vis 
productive processes depending on the mix of core-
peripheral processes within it. The strong states, 
which contain a disproportionate share of core-like 
processes, tend to emphasize their role of protecting 
the quasi-monopolies of the core-like processes. The 
very weak states, which contain a disproportion-
ate share of peripheral production processes, are 
usually unable to do very much to affect the axial 
division of labor, and in effect are largely forced to 
accept the lot that has been given them. 
 The semiperipheral states which have a rela-
tively even mix of production processes find them-
selves in the most difficult situation. Under pressure 
from core states and putting pressure on peripheral 
states, their major concern is to keep themselves 
from slipping into the periphery and to do what 
they can to advance themselves toward the core. 
Neither is easy, and both require considerable state 
interference with the world market. These semipe-
ripheral states are the ones that put forward most 
aggressively and most publicly so-called protection-
ist policies. They hope thereby to “protect” their 
production processes from the competition of stron-
ger firms outside, while trying to improve the effi-
ciency of the firms inside so as to compete better in 
the world market. They are eager recipients of the 
relocation of erstwhile leading products, which they 
define these days as achieving “economic develop-
ment.” In this effort, their competition comes not 
from the core states but from other semiperipheral 
states, equally eager to be the recipients of relocation 
which cannot go to all the eager aspirants simulta-
neously and to the same degree. In the beginning of 
the twenty-first century, some obvious countries to 
be labeled semiperipheral are South Korea, Brazil, 
and India—countries with strong enterprises that 
export products (for example, steel, automobiles, 
pharmaceuticals) to peripheral zones, but that also 
regularly relate to core zones as importers of more 
“advanced” products. 
 The normal evolution of the leading industries—
the slow dissolution of the quasi-monopolies—is 
what accounts for the cyclical rhythms of the world-
economy. A major leading industry will be a major 
short-term, there still exists much plunder in the 
modern world-system, although we are often 
“scandalized” when we learn of it. When Enron 
goes bankrupt, after procedures that have moved 
enormous sums into the hands of a few managers, 
that is in fact plunder. When “privatizations” of 
erstwhile state property lead to its being garnered 
by mafia-like businessmen who quickly leave the 
country with destroyed enterprises in their wake, 
that is plunder. Self-liquidating, yes, but only after 
much damage has been done to the world’s produc-
tive system, and indeed to the health of the capital-
ist world-economy. 
 Since quasi-monopolies depend on the patronage 
of strong states, they are largely located—juridically, 
physically, and in terms of ownership—within such 
states. There is therefore a geographical consequence 
of the core-peripheral relationship. Core-like pro-
cesses tend to group themselves in a few states and 
to constitute the bulk of the production activity in 
such states. Peripheral processes tend to be scattered 
among a large number of states and to constitute 
the bulk of the production activity in these states. 
Thus, for shorthand purposes we can talk of core 
states and peripheral states, so long as we remember 
that we are really talking of a relationship between 
production processes. Some states have a near even 
mix of core-like and peripheral products. We may 
call them semiperipheral states. They have, as we 
shall see, special political properties. It is, however, 
not meaningful to speak of semiperipheral produc-
tion processes. 
 Since, as we have seen, quasi-monopolies ex-
haust themselves, what is a core-like process today 
will become a peripheral process tomorrow. The 
economic history of the modern world-system is 
replete with the shift, or downgrading, of prod-
ucts, first to semiperipheral countries, and then to 
peripheral ones. If circa 1800 the production of 
textiles was possibly the preeminent core-like pro-
duction process, by 2000 it was manifestly one of 
the least profitable peripheral production processes. 
In 1800 these textiles were produced primarily in a 
very few countries (notably England and some other 
countries of northwestern Europe); in 2000 textiles 
were produced in virtually every part of the world-
system, especially cheap textiles. The process has 
been repeated with many other products. Think of 
steel, or automobiles, or even computers. This kind 
of shift has no effect on the structure of the system 
itself. In 2000 there were other core-like processes 

 
The Modern World-System as a Capitalist World-Economy 
231
directly to the narrowly defined proper functioning 
of the world-system. 
 The expressions of universalism are manifold. 
If we translate universalism to the level of the firm 
or the school, it means, for example, the assigning 
of persons to positions on the basis of their train-
ing and capacities (a practice otherwise known as 
meritocracy). If we translate it to the level of the 
household, it implies among other things that mar-
riage should be contracted for reasons of “love” but 
not those of wealth or ethnicity or any other general 
particularism. If we translate it to the level of the 
state, it means such rules as universal suffrage and 
equality before the law. We are all familiar with the 
mantras, since they are repeated with some regular-
ity in public discourse. They are supposed to be the 
central focus of our socialization. Of course, we 
know that these mantras are unevenly advocated in 
various locales of the world-system (and we shall 
want to discuss why this is so), and we know that 
they are far from fully observed in practice. But they 
have become the official gospel of modernity. 
 Universalism is a positive norm, which means 
that most people assert their belief in it, and almost 
everyone claims that it is a virtue. Racism and sex-
ism are just the opposite. They too are norms, but 
they are negative norms, in that most people deny 
their belief in them. Almost everyone declares that 
they are vices, yet nonetheless they are norms. What 
is more, the degree to which the negative norms of 
racism and sexism are observed is at least as high 
as, in fact for the most part much higher than, the 
virtuous norm of universalism. This may seem to be 
an anomaly. But it is not. 
 Let us look at what we mean by racism and sex-
ism. Actually these are terms that came into wide-
spread use only in the second half of the twentieth 
century. Racism and sexism are instances of a far 
wider phenomenon that has no convenient name, 
but that might be thought of as anti-universalism, 
or the active institutional discrimination against 
all the persons in a given status-group or identity. 
For each kind of identity, there is a social ranking. 
It can be a crude ranking, with two categories, 
or elaborate, with a whole ladder. But there is 
always a group on top in the ranking, and one or 
several groups at the bottom. These rankings are 
both worldwide and more local, and both kinds of 
ranking have enormous consequences in the lives 
of people and in the operation of the capitalist 
world-economy. 
stimulus to the expansion of the world-economy 
and will result in considerable accumulation of capi-
tal. But it also normally leads to more extensive 
employment in the world-economy, higher wage-
levels, and a general sense of relative prosperity. 
As more and more firms enter the market of the 
erstwhile quasi-monopoly, there will be “overpro-
duction” (that is, too much production for the real 
effective demand at a given time) and consequently 
increased price competition (because of the demand 
squeeze), thus lowering the rates of profit. At some 
point, a buildup of unsold products results, and con-
sequently a slowdown in further production. 
 When this happens, we tend to see a reversal of 
the cyclical curve of the world-economy. We talk of 
stagnation or recession in the world-economy. Rates 
of unemployment rise worldwide. Producers seek 
to reduce costs in order to maintain their share of 
the world market. One of the mechanisms is reloca-
tion of the production processes to zones that have 
historically lower wages, that is, to semiperipheral 
countries. This shift puts pressure on the wage lev-
els in the processes still remaining in core zones, 
and wages there tend to become lower as well. 
Effective demand which was at first lacking because 
of overproduction now becomes lacking because of 
a reduction in earnings of the consumers. In such 
a situation, not all producers necessarily lose out. 
There is obviously acutely increased competition 
among the diluted oligopoly that is now engaged in 
these production processes. They fight each other 
furiously, usually with the aid of their state ma-
chineries. Some states and some producers succeed 
in “exporting unemployment” from one core state 
to the others. Systemically, there is contraction, but 
certain core states and especially certain semiperiph-
eral states may seem to be doing quite well. . . . 
 The complex relationships of the world-economy, 
the firms, the states, the households, and the trans-
household institutions that link members of classes 
and status-groups are beset by two opposite—but 
symbiotic—ideological themes: universalism on the 
one hand and racism and sexism on the other. 
 Universalism is a theme prominently associated 
with the modern world-system. It is in many ways 
one of its boasts. Universalism means in general 
the priority to general rules applying equally to all 
persons, and therefore the rejection of particularis-
tic preferences in most spheres. The only rules that 
are considered permissible within the framework of 
universalism are those which can be shown to apply 

232
IMMANUEL WALLERSTEIN
normally those who control production processes 
push for such universalistic criteria. Of course, 
universalistic criteria arouse resentment when they 
come into operation only after some particularistic 
criterion has been invoked. If the civil service is 
only open to persons of some particular religion 
or ethnicity, then the choice of persons within this 
category may be universalistic but the overall choice 
is not. If universalistic criteria are invoked only at 
the time of choice while ignoring the particularis-
tic criteria by which individuals have access to the 
necessary prior training, again there is resentment. 
When, however, the choice is truly universalistic, 
resentment may still occur because choice involves 
exclusion, and we may get “populist” pressure for 
untested and unranked access to position. Under 
these multiple circumstances, universalistic criteria 
play a major social-psychological role in legitimat-
ing meritocratic allocation. They make those who 
have attained the status of cadre feel justified in 
their advantage and ignore the ways in which the 
so-called universalistic criteria that permitted their 
access were not in fact fully universalistic, or ignore 
the claims of all the others to material benefits given 
primarily to cadres. The norm of universalism is an 
enormous comfort to those who are benefiting from 
the system. It makes them feel they deserve what 
they have. 
 On the other hand, racism, sexism, and other 
anti-universalistic norms perform equally important 
tasks in allocating work, power, and privilege within 
the modern world-system. They seem to imply ex-
clusions from the social arena. Actually they are re-
ally modes of inclusion, but of inclusion at inferior 
ranks. These norms exist to justify the lower rank-
ing, to enforce the lower ranking, and perversely 
even to make it somewhat palatable to those who 
have the lower ranking. Anti-universalistic norms 
are presented as codifications of natural, eternal 
verities not subject to social modification. They are 
presented not merely as cultural verities but, implic-
itly or even explicitly, as biologically rooted necessi-
ties of the functioning of the human animal. 
 They become norms for the state, the work-
place, the social arena. But they also become norms 
into which households are pushed to socialize their 
members, an effort that has been quite successful 
on the whole. They justify the polarization of the 
world-system. Since polarization has been increas-
ing over time, racism, sexism, and other forms of 
anti-universalism have become ever more important, 
 We are all quite familiar with the worldwide 
rankings within the modern world-system: men 
over women, Whites over Blacks (or non-Whites), 
adults over children (or the aged), educated over less 
educated, heterosexuals over gays and lesbians, the 
bourgeois and professionals over workers, urbanites 
over rural dwellers. Ethnic rankings are more local, 
but in every country, there is a dominant ethnicity 
and then the others. Religious rankings vary across 
the world, but in any particular zone everyone is 
aware of what they are. Nationalism often takes 
the form of constructing links between one side of 
each of the antinomies into fused categories, so that, 
for example, one might create the norm that adult 
White heterosexual males of particular ethnicities 
and religions are the only ones who would be con-
sidered “true” nationals. 
 There are several questions which this descrip-
tion brings to our attention. What is the point of pro-
fessing universalism and practicing anti-universalism 
simultaneously? Why should there be so many vari-
eties of anti-universalism? Is this contradictory an-
tinomy a necessary part of the modern world-system? 
Universalism and anti-universalism are in fact both 
operative day to day, but they operate in different 
arenas. Universalism tends to be the operative prin-
ciple most strongly for what we could call the cadres 
of the world-system—neither those who are at the 
very top in terms of power and wealth, nor those who 
provide the large majority of the world’s workers and 
ordinary people in all fields of work and all across 
the world, but rather an in-between group of people 
who have leadership or supervisory roles in various 
institutions. It is a norm that spells out the optimal 
recruitment mode for such technical, professional, 
and scientific personnel. This in-between group may 
be larger or smaller according to a country’s location 
in the world-system and the local political situation. 
The stronger the country’s economic position, the 
larger the group. Whenever universalism loses its 
hold even among the cadres in particular parts of 
the world-system, however, observers tend to see 
dysfunction, and quite immediately there emerge 
 political pressures (both from within the country and 
from the rest of the world) to restore some degree of 
universalistic criteria. 
 There are two quite different reasons for this. 
On the one hand, universalism is believed to ensure 
relatively competent performance and thus make 
for a more efficient world-economy, which in turn 
improves the ability to accumulate capital. Hence, 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
233
the simultaneous existence, propagation, and prac-
tice of both universalism and anti-universalism. This 
antinomic duo is as fundamental to the system as is 
the core-peripheral axial division of labor.  
even though the political struggle against such forms 
of anti-universalism has also become more central to 
the functioning of the world-system. 
 The bottom line is that the modern world-system 
has made as a central, basic feature of its structure 
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
General
 Ayers, Alison J., ed.  Gramsci, Political Economy, and 
International Relations Theory: Modern Princes and 
Naked Emperors. New York: Palgrave  Macmillan, 
2008. 
 Boggs, Carl.  Gramsci’s Marxism . London: Pluto Press, 
1976. 
 Cohen, Benjamin.  The Question of Imperialism . New 
York: Basic Books, 1973. 
 Doyle, Michael W.  Ways of War and Peace . New York: 
W. W. Norton, 1997. [Part Three addresses Marx-
ism, Leninism, and Socialism.] 
 Evans, Peter B.  Embedded Autonomy: States and In-
dustrial Production . Princeton NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1995. 
 Gamble, Andrew, David Marsh, and Tony Tant, eds. 
 Marxism and Social Science . Champaign, IL: Uni-
versity of Illinois Press, 1999. 
 Gill, Stephen.  Gramsci, Historical Materialism and In-
ternational Relations. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1993. 
 ———.  Power and Resistance in the New World Or-
der . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2003. 
 Gilpin, Robert. “Three Models of the Future,”  Interna-
tional Organization , 29, 1 (1975): 37–60. 
 Gramsci, Antonio.  Prison Notebooks , trans. and ed. 
Joseph A. Buttigieg. New York: Columbia Univer-
sity Press, Vol. 1, 1991; Vol. 2, 1996; Vol. 3, 2007. 
 Gramsci, Antonio.  Selections from the Prison Note-
books , ed. Quentin Hoare and Geoffrey Nowell 
Smith. New York: International Publishers, 1971. 
 Heilbroner, Robert.  The Nature and Logic of Capital-
ism . New York: W. W. Norton, 1985. 
 ———.  21st Century Capitalism . New York: W. W. 
Norton, 1993. 
 Hobsbawm, Eric.  On Empire: America, War, and 
Global Supremacy . Pantheon Books, 2008. 
 ———, with David Forgacs, ed.  The Antonio Gramsci 
Reader: Selected Writings 1916–1935 . New York: 
NYU Press, 2000. 
 Holm, Hans-Henrik, and Georg Sorensen.  Whose 
World Order? Uneven Globalization and the End 
of the Cold War . Boulder: Westview, 1995. 
 Jones, Steven J.  Antonio Gramsci . London: Routledge, 
2006. 
 Mittelman, James H.  Whither Globalization? The Vor-
tex of Knowledge and Ideology. New York: Rout-
ledge, 2004. 
 Morton, Adam David.  Unravelling Gramsci: Hege-
mony and Passive Revolution in the Global Political 
Economy . London: Pluto Press, 2007. 
 Murphy, Craig N., ed.  Egalitarian Politics in the Age 
of Globalization . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2002. 
 ———.  Global Institutions, Marginalization and De-
velopment . London: Routledge, 2005. 
 ———.  International Organization and Industrial 
Change . New York: Oxford University Press, 1994. 
 ———.  The United Nations Development Programme: 
A Better Way? Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2006. 
 Murphy, Craig N., and Roger Tooze, eds.  The New In-
ternational Political Economy . Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner, 1991. 
 Pala, Ronen P., and Barry Gills, eds.  Transcending the 
State-Global Divide: A Neostructuralist Agenda in 
International Relations . Boulder, CO: Lynne Ri-
enner, 1994. 
 Rostow, W. W. 1960.  The Stages of Economic Growth, 
a Non-Communist Manifesto . Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 1960. 
 Sahle, Eunice N.  World Orders, Development and 
Transformation. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2010. 
j On Capitalism and the Capitalist 
World-System
 Amin, Samir.  Empire of Chaos. New York: Monthly 
Review Press, 1992. 

234 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Cox, Robert W., and Timothy J. Sinclair.  Approaches 
to World Order . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1996. 
 Evans, Peter.  States Versus Markets in the World System , 
ed. Peter B. Evans. Beverly Hills, CA : Sage, 1985. 
 Frank, André Gunder.  Capitalism and Underdevelop-
ment in Latin America . New York and London: 
Monthly Review Press, 1969. 
 ———. “The Modern World System Revisited: Re-
reading Braudel and Wallerstein.” In  Civilizations 
and World-Systems: Studying World-Historical 
Change , ed. Stephen Sandersons. Walnut Creek, 
CA: AltaMira Press, 1995, 163–94. 
 ———. “A Plea for World System History.”  Journal of 
World History 2, 1 (Winter 1991). 
 ———.  ReORIENT: Global Economy in the Asian 
Age . Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 
1998. 
 ———.  World Accumulation, 1492–1789 . New York: 
Algora Publishing, 2003. 
 Friedmann, Harriet. “Rethinking Capitalism and Hier-
archy.”  Review 13, 2 (Spring 1990): 255–64. 
 Friedmann, Jonathan, and Christopher Chase-Dunn. 
 Hegemonic Decline: Present and Past . Boulder CO: 
Paradigm Publishers, 2005. 
 Galtung, Johan. “A Structural Theory of Imperialism.” 
 Journal of Peace Research , 2 (1971): 81–98. 
 Gasiorowski, Mark. “The Structure of Third World 
Economic Interdependence.”  International Organi-
zation 39, 2 (1985): 331–42. 
 Gill, Stephen, and Isabella Bakker-Power.  Production 
and Social Reproduction: Human In/security in the 
Global Political Economy . New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2004. 
 Goldfrank, Walter L. “Paradigm Regained? The Rules 
of Wallerstein’s World-System Method.”  Journal of 
World-Systems Research 6, 2 (2000): 150–95. 
 Hall, Thomas D. “The World-System Perspective: A 
Small Sample from a Large Universe.”  Sociological 
Inquiry 66, 4 (Fall1996): 440–54. 
 Jaguaribe, Hélio.  Economic & Political Development . 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1968. 
 Klink, Frank F. “Rationalizing Core-Periphery Rela-
tions.”  International Studies Quarterly 34, 2 (June 
1990): 183–209. 
 Morton, Adam David.  Unravelling Gramsci: Hege-
mony and Passive Revolution in the Global Political 
Economy . London: Pluto Press, 2007. 
 Murphy, Craig N. “Freezing the North–South Bloc(k) 
After the East–West Thaw.”  Socialist Review  20, 3 
(July–September 1990): 25–46. 
 Archer, Margaret. “The Dubious Guarantees of Social 
Science: A Reply to Wallerstein.”  International So-
ciology 13, 1 (March 1998): 5–17. 
 Arrighi, Giovanni. “Capitalism and the Modern 
World-System: Rethinking the Nondebates of the 
1970s.”  Review 21, 1 (Winter 1998): 113–29. 
 ———.  The Long 20th Century: Money, Power, and 
the Origins of Our Times (New York: Verso, 1995). 
 Bergesen, Albert.  Studies of the Modern World-System . 
New York: Academic Press, 1980. 
 Boswell, Terry, and Immanuel Wallerstein, eds.  Revo-
lution in the World System . Westport, CT: Green-
wood, 1989. 
 ———.  The Spiral of Capitalism and Socialism: To-
ward Global Democracy . Boulder CO: Lynne 
Rienner Publishers, 2000. 
 Chase-Dunn, Christopher.  Global Formation: Struc-
tures of the World Economy . Oxford, England: 
Blackwell, 1989; rev. ed. Lanham MD: Rowman & 
Littlefield Publishers, 1998. 
 ———. ed.  The Historical Evolution of the Interna-
tional Political Economy. Cheltenham Glos, UK: 
Edward Elgar Publishing, 1995. 
 Chase-Dunn, Christopher, and Salvatore J. Babones, 
eds.  Global Social Change: Historical and Com-
parative Perspectives . Baltimore MD: The Johns 
Hopkins University Press, 2006. 
 Chase-Dunn, Christopher, and Peter Grimes. “World-
Systems Analysis.”  Annual Review of Sociology 21 
(1995): 387–417. 
 Chase-Dunn, Christopher, and Thomas D. Hall, eds. 
 Core-Periphery Relations in Pre-Capitalist Worlds . 
Boulder, CO: Westview, 1991. 
 Chase-Dunn, Christopher, with Charles Tilly and Scott 
McNail, eds.  Rise and Demise: Comparing World 
Systems . Boulder CO: Westview Press, 1997. 
 Chew, Sing C., and Robert A. Denemark, eds.  The Un-
derdevelopment of Development: Essays in Honor 
of André Gunder Frank . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications, 1999. 
 Chirot, Daniel, and Thomas D. Hall. “World-System 
Theory.”  Annual Review of Sociology . 8 (1982): 
81–106. 
 Cox, Robert. “Ideologies and the New International 
Economic Order.”  International Organization 33, 
2 (1979): 257–302. 
 Cox, Robert W.  The Political Economy of a Plural 
World: Critical Reflections on Power, Morals and 
Civilization . London: Taylor & Francis, 2007. 
 ———.  Power, Production, and World Order . New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1987. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
235
 ———.  Historical Capitalism . London: Verso, 1983. 
 ———.  Making Waves: Worldwide Social Movements, 
1750-2005. Boulder, CO: Paradigm, 2008. 
 ———.  The Modern World System I:  Capitalist Ag-
riculture and the Origins of the European World-
Economy in the Sixteenth Century . New York: 
Academic Press, 1974. 
 ———.  The Modern World System II:  Mercantilism 
and the Consolidation of the European World-
Economy, 1600–1750. New York: Academic Press, 
1980. 
 ———.  The Modern World System III:  The Second 
Era of Great Expansion of the Capitalist World-
Economy, 1730–1840s . New York: Academic 
Press, 1988. 
 ———.  The Modern World-System in the Longue Du-
rée. Boulder, CO: Paradigm, 2004. 
 ———.  The Politics of the World-Economy . New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1984. 
 ———. “The Rise and Future Demise of the World 
Capitalist System.”  Comparative Studies in Society 
and History 16, 4 (September 1974): 387–415. 
 ———. “Systeme Mondiale contre Systeme-Monde.” 
 Sociologie et Societe 22, 2 (October 1990). 
 ———.  World-Systems Analysis: An Introduction . 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2004. 
 Walton, John, and Charles Ragin. “Global and Na-
tional Sources of Political Protest: Third World Re-
sponses to the Debt Crisis.”  American Sociological 
Review 55, 6 (December 1990): 876–90. 
 Yo, Alvin.  Social Change and Development: Mod-
ernization, Dependency and World-Systems Theo-
ries . Newbury Park, CA: Sage Library of Social 
Research, 2005.  
j On Dependency 
 Berger, Mark T.  Under Northern Eyes: Latin American 
Studies and U.S. Hegemony in the Americas, 1898–
1990 . Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1995. 
 Caporaso, James. “Dependence, Dependency, and 
Power in the Global System: A Structural and Be-
havioral Analysis,”  International Organization , 32, 
1 (1978): 13–44. 
 ———. “Dependency Theory: Continuities and Dis-
continuities in Development Studies.”  International 
Organization 34, 4 (Autumn 1980): 605–28. [A 
review essay.] 
 ———. “Introduction to the Special Issue of Interna-
tional Organization on Dependence and Dependency 
 Nurkse, R.  Problems of Capital Formation in Underde-
veloped Countries . Oxford: Blackwell, 1953. 
 Pomerantz, Kenneth.  The Great Divergence: Europe, 
China and the Making of the Modern World Econ-
omy . Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2000. 
 Roudometof, Victor, and Roland Robertson. “Glo-
balization, World-System Theory, and the Com-
parative Study of Civilizations: Issues of Theoretical 
Logic in World-Historical Sociology.” In  Civiliza-
tions and World-Systems: Studying World-Historical 
Change , ed. Stephen Sandersons. Walnut Creek, 
CA: AltaMira Press, 1995, 273–300. 
 Schaeffer, Robert K., and Immanuel Wallerstein, eds. 
 War in the World-System . Westport, CT: Green-
wood, 1989. 
 Shannon, Thomas Richard.  An Introduction to the 
World-System Perspective , 2nd ed. Boulder, CO: 
Westview 1989, 1996. 
 Skocpol, Theda. “Wallerstein’s World Capitalist 
System: A Theoretical and Historical Critique.” 
 American Journal of Sociology 82, 5 (March 1977): 
1075–90. 
 Terlouw, C. P. “The Elusive Semiperiphery: A Critical 
Examination of the Concept Semiperiphery.”  Inter-
national Journal of Comparative Sociology 34, 1–2 
(January–April 1993): 87–102. 
 Thompson, William R.  Contending Approaches to 
World System Analysis . Beverly Hills, CA: Sage, 
1983. 
 Van Rossem, Ronan. “The World System Paradigm 
as General Theory of Development: A Cross- 
National Test.”  American Sociological Review 61, 3 
(June1996): 508–27. 
 Wallerstein, Immanuel.  Africa: The Politics of Inde-
pendence and Unity . Lincoln NE: University of Ne-
braska Press, 2005. [Combines earlier works from 
1961, 1967 and 1971.] 
 ———.  After Liberalism . New York: New Press, 1995. 
 ———.  The Capitalist World Economy . Cambridge, 
England: Cambridge University Press, 1979. 
 ———.  The End of the World As We Know It: Social 
Science for the Twenty-First Century . Minneapolis 
MN: University of Minnesota Press, 2001. 
 ———.  The Essential Wallerstein . New York: New 
Press, 2000. 
 ———.  European Universalism: The Rhetoric of 
Power . New York: New Press, 2006. 
 ———.  Geopolitics and Geoculture: Essays on the 
Changing World System . New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 1991. 

236 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Fagen, Richard. “A Funny Thing Happened on the 
Way to the Market: Thoughts on Extending De-
pendency Ideas.”  International Organization 32, 1 
(1978): 287–300. 
 ———. “Studying Latin American Politics: Some 
Implications of a Dependencia Approach.”  Latin 
American Research Review , 12, 3 (1977). 
 Fagen, Richard, Carmen D. Deere, and Jose L. Corag-
gio, eds.  Transition and Development: Problems 
of Third World Socialism . New York: Monthly 
Review Press, 1986. 
 Frank, Andre Gunder.  Capitalism and Underdevelop-
ment in Latin America . London: Penguin, 1971. 
 ———.  Dependent Accumulation and Underdevelop-
ment . London: Macmillan, 1978. 
 Ghosh, B. N.  Dependency Theory Revisited . London: 
Ashgate Publishing, 2001. 
 Grieco, Joseph. “Between Dependency and Autonomy: 
India’s Experience with the International Computer 
Industry.”  International Organization 36, 3 (1982): 
609–32. 
 Halebsky, Sandor, and Richard L. Harris.  Capital, 
Power and Inequality in Latin America . Boulder, 
CO: Westview, 1995. 
 Hettne, Bjorn, Andras Inotai, and Osvaldo Sunkel, eds. 
 Comparing Regionalisms: Implications for Global 
Development . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2000. 
 ———.  Globalism and the New Regionalism . New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2000. 
 ———.  National Perspectives on the New Regional-
ism in the North . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2000. 
 ———.  National Perspectives on the New Regionalism 
in the South . New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2000. 
 ———.  The New Regionalism and the Future of Secu-
rity and Development . New York: Palgrave Mac-
millan, 2000. 
 Kauffman, Robert, Harry Chernotsky, and Daniel 
Geller. “A Preliminary Test of the Theory of Depen-
dency.”  Comparative Politics 7, 3 (1975): 202–330. 
 Klink, Frank. “Rationalizing Core-Periphery Rela-
tions: The Analytical Foundations of Structural In-
equality in World Politics.”  International Studies 
Quarterly 34, 2 (June 1990): 183–209. 
 Larrain, Jorge.  Theories of Development: Capitalism, 
Colonialism and Dependency . Cambridge, UK: Pol-
ity, 1991. 
 Love, Joseph. “The Origins of Dependency Analysis.” 
 Journal of Latin American Studies 22, 1 (1990): 
143–68. 
in the Global System,”  International Organization , 
32, 1 (1978): 1–12. 
 Cardoso, Fernando Henrique.  The Accidental Presi-
dent of Brazil: A Memoir . New York: Public Af-
fairs, 2007. 
 ———. “Associated-Dependent Development.” In  Au-
thoritarian Brazil , ed. Alfred Stepan. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press, 1973. 
 ———. “The Consumption of Dependency Theory in 
the United States.”  Latin American Research Re-
view 12, 3 (1977): 7–24. 
 ———. “Dependency and Development in Latin 
America.”  New Left Review 74 (July–August 
1972): 83–95. 
 ———. “Imperialism and Dependency in Latin Amer-
ica.” In  Structures of Dependency , eds. Frank Bo-
nilla and Robert Girling. Stanford, CA: Stanford 
Institute of Political Studies, 1973. 
 Cardoso, Fernando, and Enzo Faletto.  Dependency 
and Development in Latin America . Berkeley, CA: 
University of California Press, 1979. 
 Chilcote, Ronald. “Theories of Development and 
Underdevelopment.” In  Theories of Comparative 
Politics: In Search of a Paradigm Reconsidered . 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1994. 
 Collier, David. “Timing of Economic Growth and Re-
gime Characteristics in Latin America.”  Compara-
tive Politics 7, 3 (1975): 331–59. 
 dos Santos, Theotonio. “The Structure of Depen-
dence.”  American Economic Review 60, 2 (May 
1970): 231–36. 
 ———. “The Structure of Dependency.” In  The Theo-
retical Evolution of International Political Econ-
omy, eds. George Crane and Abla Amawi. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 1990. 
 ———.  Teoria de la Dependencia . Barcelona, Spain: 
Plaza y Janes, 2003. 
 dos Santos, Theotonio, and Randall Laura. “The Theo-
retical Foundations of the Cardoso Government: A 
New Stage of the Dependency-Theory Debate.”  Latin 
American Perspectives 25, 1 (January 1998): 53–70. 
 Dussel, Enrique, and Yanez Anibal. “Marx’s Economic 
Manuscripts of 1861–63 and the ‘Concept’ of De-
pendency.”  Latin American Perspectives 17, 2, Post-
Marxism, the Left, and Democracy. (Spring, 1990): 
62–101. 
 Duvall, Raymond. “Dependence and Dependencia The-
ory.”  International Organization 31, 1 (1978): 51–78. 
 Evans, Peter.  Dependent Development: The Alliance 
of Multinational, State and Local Capital in Brazil . 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1979. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
237
the Study of Latin American Underdevelopment.” 
 Comparative Politics , 10, 4 (1978): 535–57. 
 Wendt, Alexander, and Michael Barnett. “Dependent 
State Formation and Third World Militarization.” 
 Review of International Studies 19 (1993): 321–47.  
j On Postcolonialism 
 Abernethy, David.  The Dynamics of Global Domi-
nance: European Empires Overseas, 1415–1980. 
New Haven and London: Yale University Press, 
2000. 
 Adam, Ian, and Helen Tiffin, eds.  Past the Last Post: 
Theorizing Post-Colonialism and Post-Modernism. 
Hemel Hempstead: Harvester Wheatsheaf, 1991. 
 Ahmad, Aijaz. “Postcolonialism: What’s in a Name?” 
In  Late Imperial Culture , eds., Roman de la Campa, 
E. Ann Kaplan, and Michael Sprinkler. London: 
Verso, 1995. 
 Alcock, Susan, et al., eds.  Empires: Perspectives from 
Archeology and History. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2002. 
 Birmingham, David.  The Decolonisation of Africa. 
London: UCL Press, 1995. 
 Boahen, A. Adu.  African Perspectives on Colonialism. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1987. 
 Buraway, Michael, et al.  Globalisation and New Iden-
tities: A View From the Middle. Johannesburg: Ja-
cana Media, 2007. 
 Bush, Barbara.  Imperialism and Postcolonialism. Har-
low, England: Longman, 2006. 
 Cain, Peter, and Mark Harrison, eds.  Imperialism: 
Critical Concepts in Historical Studies. London: 
Routledge, 2001. 3 vols. 
 Eschl, C.  Critical Theories, IR and “the Anti-Global-
isation Movement”: The Politics of Global Resis-
tance . London: Routledge, 2005. 
 Gandhi, Leela.  Postcolonial Theory: A Critical Intro-
duction . Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, 
1998. 
 Geeta, Chowdhry, and Sheila Nair.  Power, Postcolo-
nialism, and International Relations: Reading Race, 
Gender, and Class. New York: Routledge, 2002. 
 Gills, Barry, ed.  Globalisation and the Politics of Resis-
tance . London: Taylor and Francis, 1997. 
 Goldberg, David, and Ato Quayson, eds.  Relocating 
Postcolonialism . Oxford: Blackwell, 2002. 
 Hardt, Michael, and Antonio Negri.  Empire. Cam-
bridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2000. 
 Harvey, David.  The New Imperialism . Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2003. 
 ———. “The Rise and Decline of Economic Structur-
alism in Latin America: New Dimensions,”  Latin 
American Research Review 40, 3 (2005): 100–25. 
 Martin-Jones, David. “Peasant Revolutions, Depen-
dencia and Developmental States.” In  The Image 
of China in Western Social and Political Thought. 
New York: Palgrave, 2001. 
 McGowan, Patrick, and Dale Smith. “Economic De-
pendency in Black Africa: An Analysis of Com-
peting Theories.”  International Organization 32, 1 
(1978): 179–235. 
 Moran, Theodore.  Harnessing Foreign Direct Invest-
ment for Development: Policies for Developed and 
Developing Countries . Washington, DC: Center for 
Global Development, 2006. 
 ———. “Multinational Corporations and Depen-
dency, A Dialogue for Dependentistas and Non- 
Dependentistas.”  International Organization , 32, 1 
(1978): 79–100. 
 Packenham, Robert.  The Dependency Movement: 
Scholarship and Politics in Development Stud-
ies . Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1992. 
 Prebisch, Raul. “The Economic Development of Latin 
America and Its Principal Problems.”  Economic 
Bulletin for Latin America , 7, 1962, 1–22. [First 
published by ECLA in Spanish in 1949.] 
 ———.  Towards a Dynamic Development Policy for 
Latin America . New York: United Nations, 1963. 
 Smith, Tony. “The Underdevelopment of Develop-
ment Literature: The Case of Dependency Theory.” 
 World Politics 31, 2 (January 1979): 247–88. 
 Sunkel, Osvaldo. “Big Business and Dependencia.” 
 Foreign Affairs 50 (April 1972): 317–531. 
 ———.  Development from Within: Toward a Neo-
structuralist Approach for Latin America . Boulder, 
CO: Lynne Rienner Publishers, 1993. 
 ———. “National Development Policy and External 
Dependence in Latin America.”  Journal of Develop-
ment Studies 61 (1969): 23–48. 
 Tetreault, Mary Ann, and Charles Frederick Abel, eds. 
 Dependency Theory and the Return of High Poli-
tics . Westport, CT: Greenwood, 1986. 
 Topik, Steven. “Dependency Revisited: Saving the 
Baby from the Bathwater.”  Latin American Per-
spectives 25, 6 (November, 1998), 95–99. 
 Valenzuela, J. Samuel, and Arturo Valenzuela. “Mod-
ernization and Dependency.”  Comparative Politics 
10 (July 1978): 535–57. 
 Valenzuela, J., and Arturo Valenzuela. “Moderniza-
tion and Dependency: Alternative Perspectives in 

238 
Suggestions for Further Reading
Chrisman. New York, London: Harvester Wheat-
sheaf, 1993. 
 Pieterse, Jan Nederveen.  Globalisation and Culture . 
Lanham, MD: Rowan and Littlefield, 2004. 
 Prakash, Gyan, ed.  After Colonialism: Imperial His-
tories and Postcolonial Displacements . Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1995. 
 Robertson, Roland.  Globalisation: Social Theory and 
Global Culture . London: Sage, 1992. 
 Said, Edward.  Culture and Imperialism . London: Vin-
tage, 1994. 
 ———.  Orientalism: Western Conceptions of the Ori-
ent . Harmondsworth: Penguin, 1986, 1979. 
 Spruyt, Hendrik.  Ending Empire: Contested Sover-
eignty and Territorial Partition. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2005. 
 Wolfe, Patrick. “History and Imperialism: A Century of 
Theory, from Marx to Postcolonialism.”  American 
Historical Review 102, 2 (April 1997): 388–420. 
 Young, Robert, and J. C. Young.  Postcolonialsm: An 
Historical Introduction. Oxford: Blackwell, 2001.  
 Held, David, and Anthony McGrew, eds.  The Global 
Transformation Reader . Cambridge: Polity Press, 
2003. 
 Howe, Stephen. “Review Article: When—If Ever—Did 
Empire End? Recent Studies of Imperialism and 
Decolonisation.”  Journal of Contemporary History 
40, 3 (2005): 585–99. 
 Kiely, Ray.  The Clash Of Globalisations: Neo-
Liberalism, The Third Way and Anti-Globalisation. 
Boston: Brill Academic Publishers, 2005. 
 LeSeur, James, ed.  The Decolonisation Reader . Lon-
don: Routledge, 2004. 
 Loomba, Ania.  Colonialism/Postcolonialism . London: 
Routledge, 1998. 
 Marchand, M.  Gender and Global Restructuring: Sight-
ings, Sites, and Resistances. London: Routledge, 2000. 
 McLeod, John.  Beginning Postcolonialism . Manches-
ter: Manchester University Press, 2000. 
 Misha, Vijay, and Bob Hodge. “What is Post(-)colo-
nialism?” In  Colonial Discourse and Postcolonial 
Theory: A Reader , eds., Patrick Williams and Laura 

The English School: 
International
Society and Grotian 
Rationalism
 T
 he primary research task of the English School has been to trace the history 
and development of international society and to uncover its nature and 
functioning. The English School is an interesting blend of realist under-
standings of power and balance of power and the liberal perspective of the ways 
international law, rules, norms, and institutions operate internationally. In terms of 
methodology, it emphasizes a historical sociological approach and, most recently, 
interpretive understandings that reflect deep skepticism about the scientific and 
causal approach to IR theorizing. The English School can be understood, then, 
as a synthesis drawn principally from both classical realist and liberal (as well as 
idealist) understandings—or, as some prefer to put it, a middle path or  via media 
between the two traditions. Hence, perspectives on international politics associated 
with Machiavelli, Hobbes, but particularly Grotius and Kant, have all influenced 
the development of the English School. Even more so than the case with other im-
ages discussed in this book, there is therefore a goodly amount of diversity among 
scholars who associate themselves with the English School. 
 It is interesting to note that, although the formal origins as a “school” were the 
1950s, its obituary as an approach to IR was written by some in the early 1990s. 
But with the end of the Cold War a decade later, the English School’s nuanced 
conceptual eclecticism seemed well suited to an era of change and globalization. As 
Barry Buzan noted a decade ago, the English School is an “underutilized research 
resource. The time is ripe to develop and apply its historicist, constructivist, and 
methodologically pluralist approach to IR.”  1  
MAJOR ACTORS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
 The first assumption underlying the English School image is that the world can 
be understood as an international or anarchical society in which both states and 
non-state actors operate. The emphasis is on the concept of “society,” which real-
ists would tend not to pair with “anarchical.” An anthology of papers published 
in 1968 indicates quite clearly that the frame of reference from the outset was 
239
5
CHAPTER

240
CHAPTER 5  The English School: International Society and Grotian Rationalism
 “international society.”  2  As later succinctly stated by Adam Watson (1914–2007) 
and Hedley Bull (1932–1985), an international society is a 
 group of states (or, more generally, a group of independent political communities) 
which not merely form a system, in the sense that the behavior of each is a neces-
sary factor in the calculations of the others, but also have established by dialogue 
and consent common rules and institutions for the conduct of their relations, and 
recognize their common interest in maintaining these arrangements.  3  
 Although recognizing the importance of the historical existence of an “inter-
national system of states” (as realists frequently use the term), it is the overarching 
term  international society that captures the essence of English School thinking. As 
a result, English School scholars are skeptical of the domestic analogy whereby it 
is assumed that because the international system lacks a common power to keep 
citizens in awe, we cannot speak of an international society but rather only a system 
of states. 
 Second, for the English School the concept of  order in the anarchical society 
plays an important theoretical role. Order, however, results not simply from power 
and the balance of power, but also from the acceptance of rules and institutional 
arrangements that are in the enlightened, rational self-interest of states and other 
actors. Like classical realists, those in the English School understand the importance 
in international affairs of both power—the material component—and ideas, values, 
and norms. The reliance on the tradition of international law is particularly evi-
dent. As noted in  Chapters   2 and   3 , realists, liberals, and neoliberal institutionalists 
often use the concept of “rationality” as an underlying or simplifying assumption 
that contributes to the development of parsimonious theories. “ Rationalist ” in the 
English School, however, has a different meaning. Invoking a tradition associated 
with Grotius—the “father of international law”—English School rationalism refers 
to the rules, laws, and institutional arrangements states have established to provide 
some degree of order to an anarchic international society. Hence, as opposed to the 
realist emphasis defining structure in terms of polarity or the distribution of capa-
bilities, structure is more closely associated with this broadly conceived, rule-based 
institutional framework. 
 Finally, the English School recognizes the importance of Kantian ethical and 
moral understandings, but this is balanced by a pragmatic view of the anarchical 
society as one in which considerations of power and interest remain important. 
The concept of  world society in English School usage is reserved for this Kantian or 
“revolutionist” (some would say utopian) strain of thought—realizing a universal 
cosmopolitanism and thus transforming the world as we know it into a society based 
on norms with broad moral acceptance. This English School usage of world society 
is decidedly different from the liberal view of world or global society. For liberals, 
world society goes beyond international or interstate relations to encompass a com-
plex array of state, non-state, and transnational actors that engage with each other 
globally. Put another way, the concept of international society reflects the Grotian 
rationalist influence so central to the English School, while world society is reserved 
in the English School for the “revolutionist” usage influenced by Kant. 
 In sum, the English School has avoided a parochial perspective on world 
politics. As noted by Martin Wight (1913–1972), all three perspectives—realist 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
241
(international system), rationalist (international society), and revolutionist (world 
society) are important to understanding world politics. The traditions are not like 
“railroad tracks running into infinity.” Rather, “they are streams, with eddies and 
cross-currents, sometimes interlacing and never for long confined to their own river 
bed.”  4  The idea that international system, international society, and world society 
perspectives can all exist simultaneously as understandings of reality and subject 
to analysis is core to the English School—open as it is to a scholarly diversity that 
crosses realist and liberal images as well employing constructivist, critical, and 
other interpretive lenses.  
INTELLECTUAL PRECURSORS AND INFLUENCES 
Grotius
 Hugo Grotius (Huig de Groot, 1583–1645), as noted above and in  Chapters  2 and 
 3 , is the generally recognized “father” of international law and as such he looked 
beyond the power and balance-of-power politics we read in the Florentine Niccolò 
Machiavelli (1469–1527) or the Englishman Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679). The 
norms or rules (many of which have standing as international law and form the “ra-
tional” bases of international or world politics) are observed by states because they 
produce some degree of order or security that is in their enlightened self-interest. 
It is this interest-driven, rule-following dimension that led Martin Wight to adopt 
the term  rationalism , which his follower Hedley Bull later placed in the context of 
a still anarchic, international society of states. 
 Grotius did not ignore power and power politics among states. Indeed, con-
flict among states including the use of force were central to his discussion on the 
 Law of War and Peace ( De jure belli ac pacis ). Similarly, his treatment in other 
works of economic activities to include freedom of navigation on the high seas 
provided the intellectual basis for what would become international commercial 
law. Notwithstanding the independence of sovereign states, it was in their (ratio-
nal) interest to follow rules that set the parameters of international relations in 
peacetime and even provided criteria for resort to (and conduct of) war. The result, 
he hoped, was perhaps to make the use of force somewhat less barbarous than it 
otherwise would be. 
 Both scholar and a very practical man living in the Dutch commercial town 
of Delft, Grotius turned his attention to these concerns—commercial issues and 
matters of war and peace—of governments, trading companies, and businesses of 
newly formed states in his day. Writing with the horrors of the Thirty Years’ War 
in mind, Grotius offered formulations of law drawn from several sources. One can 
see the influence on Grotius of the philosophical and historical legacy of a Roman 
imperial   jus gentium (a law to govern relations among diverse peoples in the ancient 
Roman empire) as well as natural law thinking. 
 Natural law is a philosophical view that claims there are laws inherent in na-
ture that transcend any laws made by mere mortals. Such thinking is closely tied to 
the writings of Augustine, Aquinas, and other Christian writers of the late Roman 
Empire and Middle Ages. Grotius also knew how to make general principles and 
customary practice central to his constructions of legal rules-of-the-road for states 

242
CHAPTER 5  The English School: International Society and Grotian Rationalism
in a newly emerging, state-based European society. Later colonial and imperial 
extension of European states in the eighteenth, nineteenth, and twentieth centuries 
resulted in Grotian conceptions of international law becoming global in the scope 
of their application, particularly as the European construct of the sovereign state 
spread worldwide. 
 Aided by new transportation and communications technologies, territo-
rial states became the principal actors in this new international societal order. 
Following Grotius and other writers, international law developed rapidly in 
 diplomacy. For example, the territorial sea came to be defined by a three-mile limit 
from the shoreline of the coastal state. The reason three miles was chosen was a 
practical one—artillery technology of the time limited the range of a cannonball to 
about three miles, the practical distance that any country could expect to defend 
from the shore without actually going to sea. Principles of  just war (limits on, re-
sort to, and conduct in warfare) developed by Cicero, Augustine, Aquinas, Gentili, 
Vitoria, Suarez, and other philosophers over more than 1,500 years of Western 
civilization now became matters of international law, not just moral preachings. 
Ideas concerning mutual respect for the welfare of foreign diplomats and their 
embassies and consulates also became legal obligations based on the customary 
practice of states.  
Kant
 In contrast to Grotius, with some exceptions founders of the English School 
clearly were not as persuaded by the writings of the East Prussian, Immanuel Kant 
(1724–1804). Martin Wight, for example, made no secret of his characterization of 
Kantians as “revolutionists” who try to substitute moral principle for the realities 
of politics. For his part, Edward Hallett Carr (1892–1982) rejected any Kantian in-
vocation of morality as transforming international relations somehow independent 
of power and interest. Kant’s major influence is most evident in concerns about jus-
tice in international society. This is particularly true with the follow-on generation 
of English School scholars interested in establishing global, cosmopolitan norms in 
a transformed international or, more precisely, world society.  5  
Carr
 Although not a formal member of the “British Committee” that was established in 
the 1950s, E. H. Carr—usually categorized as a classical realist albeit with influ-
ence on liberal thinking as well—is now widely acknowledged as an intellectual 
precursor to the emergence of the English School. For Carr, “the inner meaning of 
the modern international crises” experienced in the interwar period (1919–1939) 
was “the collapse of the whole structure of utopianism based on the concept of the 
harmony of interests.”  6  International politics involves a continuing tension between 
power and interest on the one hand and moral considerations on the other. Thus, 
Carr rejected as utopian the pure idealism of focusing only on moral values and 
trying to exclude power and interest. Similarly, he found unrealistic any so-called 
realism that pretends values somehow can be dropped from the political equation. 
Carr’s observation of the inherent tension in IR between interest and power on 

 
The Divergence of British and American Scholarship  
243
the one hand and moral considerations on the other set the intellectual stage for 
development within the English School for a rationalist middle path. This can be 
traced back to Grotius who falls between the realism of a Machiavelli or Hobbes 
and the idealism (or “revolutionism”) in Kant.  
THE DIVERGENCE OF BRITISH 
AND AMERICAN SCHOLARSHIP 
 How did the English School emerge as having a distinct, societal-based, rationalist 
image of international relations? We begin to find an answer to this question in the 
divergence that took place in the decades following World War II between British 
and American scholarship on politics in general, and international politics in par-
ticular. Still wedded to the strengths to be found in classical understandings and 
more traditional methods of analysis, British scholars did not embrace the behav-
ioral movement that in the 1950s and 1960s was gradually overtaking American 
political science, albeit somewhat more slowly in the IR field. 
 Classical scholarship in both American and British studies of diplomacy and 
international politics—influenced by historically based understandings and draw-
ing as well from philosophy, law, and institutional studies—had indeed been 
challenged by the behavioral movement that emerged in American social sciences 
by the 1930s. This movement gained steam in the years after World War II and 
began establishing a prominent position in the international relations field by 
the 1960s when realism still occupied center stage. Debate in the interwar period 
(1919–1939) and after had occurred between realists who preferred to focus on 
the “realities” of power and interest and those who, given the devastation of 
world war, wished to change this business-as-usual approach by turning to greater 
reliance on international law and institutions as a substitute for the brutality of 
 Realpolitik , or power politics. 
 More troubling for many classically trained scholars was the attempt within 
the behavioral movement to make the social “sciences” more scientific, emulating 
the natural sciences and adopting (or at least trying to adapt) their methodologies 
to include formal hypothesis testing and quantitative methods of analysis. The di-
vergence within Anglo-American scholarship in international relations was clearly 
identified in Hedley Bull’s critique in the late 1960s of the direction American 
scholarship was taking. Indeed, he argued the case for a “classical approach” and 
opposed “the scientific approach [that] has contributed and is likely to contribute 
very little to the theory of international relations.” Moreover, he observed that 
“in so far as it is intended to encroach upon and ultimately displace the classical 
approach, it is positively harmful.”  7  
 In a call for continued reliance on judgment that scholars should bring to the 
theory of international relations, Bull took exception to “confining [our]selves to 
what can be logically or mathematically proved or verified according to strict pro-
cedures.” He was skeptical about “scientific” claims made by Americans wedded 
to these methods: “The practitioners of the scientific approach are unlikely to make 
progress of the sort to which they aspire.” He hastened to add that “where practi-
tioners of the scientific approach have succeeded in casting light upon the subject, 

244
CHAPTER 5  The English School: International Society and Grotian Rationalism
it has been by stepping beyond the bounds of that approach and employing the 
classical method.” In this critique Bull rejected the “construction and manipulation 
of so-called ‘models’” entertained by the “scientific school” and warned against 
the dogmatism that can be found among modelers—“attributing to the model a 
connection with reality it does not have,” sometimes “distorting the model itself by 
importing additional assumptions about the world in the guise of logical axioms.” 
Similarly, he also objected to the work of the scientific school that in some cases he 
found to be “distorted and impoverished by a fetish for measurement.” 
 Still calling for rigor and precision in the theory of international politics, Bull 
found these accommodated readily enough within the classical approach, which 
“should undoubtedly attempt to be scientific in the sense of being a coherent, pre-
cise, and orderly body of knowledge, and in the sense of being consistent with the 
philosophical foundations of modern science.” Offensive to Bull was the arrogance 
of practitioners of the scientific approach who “by cutting themselves off from 
history and philosophy, have deprived themselves of the means of self-criticism.” 
He observed that the consequence is that they “have a view of their subject that is 
callow and brash.” 
 Bull was representing in this discourse not only his own views, but also those 
shared by many of his colleagues in the yet unnamed, still emerging English School. 
His comments were pointedly directed to American scholars and reflective of the 
divergence then well underway between British and American methodological and 
epistemological approaches in the international relations field. The earlier conver-
gence in Anglo-American approaches around history, law, and institutional studies 
was clearly giving way in the United States to positivist, quantitative approaches to 
which Bull was objecting. 
 British scholarship retained traditional approaches in the field even as their 
own “school” substantially developed a societal focus in studying international 
relations and world politics—one that not only found a middle path between real-
ism and idealism as well as between realism and liberalism, but also opened itself 
to both historical sociology and constructivist understandings.  
THE GENESIS OF THE ENGLISH SCHOOL 
 To find the genesis of what would become the English School, our journey actually 
starts in the United States. In 1954 with sponsorship of the Rockefeller Foundation, 
an initiative led by Dean Rusk (1909–1994)—later to be Secretary of State in the 
Kennedy-Johnson administrations—and Kenneth Thompson (born 1921, a student 
and then colleague of Hans Morgenthau) established an American Committee of 
academic and policy-oriented realists.  8  Other members included William T. R. Fox 
(1912–1988), Hans Morgenthau (1904–1980), Reinhold Niebuhr (1892–1971), 
Paul Nitze (1907–2004), Arnold Wolfers (1892–1968)—the senior generation—
and Kenneth Waltz, then about thirty (and one of Fox’s students while at Colum-
bia). Institutionally located in New York at Columbia University, the focus of this 
American Committee was to develop a theory to comprehend, explain, and guide 
the study of international relations and the formulation of foreign policy. Given 
deep divisions among these realists on theory and policy, however, the American 
Committee did not last long. 

The Genesis of the English School 
245
 It was Thompson who reached out across the Atlantic in 1954 to his friend and 
colleague, historian Herbert Butterfield (1900–1979) at Cambridge University, to 
see about forming a parallel group. After considerable discussion, Butterfield 
turned initially to diplomatic historian Desmond Williams (1921–1987). In 1958 
international relations scholar Martin Wight, then in his mid-forties and at the 
London School of Economics (LSE), was invited to join them in forming what 
became the British Committee, locating it at Cambridge. Bringing academics 
and policy-oriented scholars together, other members included Adam Watson 
(1914–2007) from the British Foreign Office, William Armstrong (1915–1980) 
from the Treasury, military historian Michael Howard (born 1922) from the 
University of London (later at Oxford), Donald Mackinnon (1913–1994) of 
Aberdeen University, and Wight’s protégé at the LSE, the Australian Hedley Bull 
(1932–1985), then just twenty-six years of age. 
 Two prominent scholars not invited to join were E. H. Carr (apparently be-
cause, given his stature, it was thought his presence would become too dominant 
a force in the group) and F. H. Hinsley (1918–1998)—whom Adam Watson later 
portrayed as seeing “Europe, and the world, as more of an anarchy and less of a 
society than Bull or myself”). This quote is quite telling, given the direction that 
the British Committee would take in the decades to follow under the successor-
generation leadership of Watson and Bull as well as Bull’s mentee and follower, 
R. J. Vincent (1943–1990). As Tim Dunne comments: “Both [Bull and Vincent] had 
an interest in strategic studies . . . , [B]oth deployed Wight’s three traditions [the 
realism of Machiavelli or Hobbes, the rationalism of Grotius, and the revolution-
ism of Kant] as a means to engage with classical theorists, and most significantly 
of all, they shared a theoretical investigation into the nature of order and justice in 
international society.”  9  
 Viewing international relations and world politics primarily as a society rather 
than a system (the latter characterization then prominent among American schol-
ars to include Kenneth Waltz) became a central understanding within the English 
School. Of course, one can speak in English School parlance of a system of states, 
but any such “system” lacks the bonds, common norms, or cohesion one finds usu-
ally in international society. The interesting question for English School theorists 
is how a system of states can be transformed into an international society and how 
the latter can slip back into a system of states. 
 Hedley Bull followed Wight’s lead in his now classic  The Anarchical Society: 
A Study of Order in World Politics .  10  A central question in Bull’s work is where 
order comes from in such an anarchical international society. Is it from the opera-
tion of power and the balance of power as Hobbesian realists would have it? Or 
does it spring at least as much from the rules or laws that have been constructed in 
international society as Grotian rationalists are prone to claim? Finally, is order to 
be found as Kantian understandings of moral principle that come to be accepted in 
a progressive improvement not only of states themselves, but also in their relations 
with other states? For his part, Bull takes us beyond the realism inherent in Hobbes 
to find in Grotian internationalism the rules or norms that are a source of order 
in international society. Bull thus exemplifies in his rule-oriented construction the 
 via media between the Hobbesian realism of power and balance of power and the 
Kantian idealism of universal moral principle.  

246
CHAPTER 5  The English School: International Society and Grotian Rationalism
LEVELS OF ANALYSIS AND THEORY 
 Given the three key concepts (international system, international society, world 
society), it is not surprising that the primary level of analysis is the global or sys-
tems level. States are the major actors in the international society, even in an era of 
globalization. This is perhaps not surprising as the historical-sociological approach 
emphasized the rise of the European state and societal systems. This development 
led to the spread of Western conceptions such as sovereignty to the rest of the 
world. As we will see below, the expansion of the concept of world society has 
in recent years opened up other units and levels of analysis to include individuals, 
groups, and transnational organizations. 
 Ontological primacy is given to the English School’s conception of international 
society. The impact of constructivism with its emphasis on social relations and the 
agent-structure debate (see  Chapter   6 ) have lent substance and nuance to this schol-
arly orientation. In terms of methodology, the English School generally prefers the 
more “traditional” approaches defended by Bull. These entail developing a set of in-
terrelated concepts and categories to guide research and help structure questions that 
guide scholarly inquiry. The emphasis on historical sociology is also important and 
can be seen as a rebuttal to the apparent ahistoricism of some neorealist conceptions 
of IR. Causal theorizing based on positivism, associated with realism and liberalism 
in particular, found few advocates among the early English School theorists. Yet 
younger scholars have avoided the positivist explanatory versus interpretive under-
standing dichotomy and offered a synthesis of different perspectives and concepts. 
Hence, this chapter is appropriately placed in the middle of this book between 
IR images that, for the most part, have spawned positivist theories and the interpre-
tive understandings that also guide much of contemporary IR theorizing.  
CHANGE
From System to International Society 
 Realists emphasize the continuity of IR throughout history; the insights of Thucy-
dides are as relevant today as in the fifth century  b.c. Liberals have faith that change 
is possible, with much of their work focused on the role of institutions, regimes, and 
norms particularly since the end of World War II. Economic structuralists have a 
normative commitment to change yet are cognizant of the restraints resulting from 
the capitalist world-system. The fact that English School theorists situate their 
work in the context of the realist, rationalist, and revolutionist framework shows 
a sensitivity and recognition of both the possibilities and limitations of change in 
IR and world politics. 
 The interest in applying an historical-sociological approach to the development 
of international society is another indicator of English School interest in under-
standing change. Adam Watson took up the mantle of Martin Wight in conducting 
in-depth studies of the historical development of systems of states. From Hedley 
Bull, he adopted the distinction between a system of states (an impersonal network 
of pressures and interests that bind states together and essentially operates outside 
the will of the members) and a society of states (a set of common rules, institu-
tions, codes of conduct, and values that states agree to be bound by). While realist 

Change
247
writings on systems of states tend to revolve around the issue of power and the 
struggle for power among states, the English School is particularly interested in the 
societal aspects of systems, which includes an emphasis on how authority is devel-
oped and the manner in which practitioners have contributed to the development 
and monitoring of rules of the game. How can we understand the current interna-
tional system and the extent to which it represents an international society unless 
we understand how it came into being? Furthermore, such a historical assessment 
might also provide insight into how the current system may change in the future. 
 Such an investigation requires casting one’s net beyond Europe, which is ex-
actly what Watson does in his  The Evolution of International Society .  11  He investi-
gates ancient state systems such as Sumer, Assyria, Persia, Macedonia, India, China, 
Rome, and Islam as well as the development of the European international society 
through case studies of medieval Europe, Renaissance Italy, the Hapsburg empire, 
the rise of the modern Westphalian commonwealth of states, and the Napoleonic 
empire. Each system varies along a continuum of hegemony or dominance by one 
political entity as opposed to a system characterized by relative autonomy or de-
centralization of power and authority. 
 Such case studies provide insight on the English School’s concern with the condi-
tions for international order—how did these systems regulate their political entities? 
How did the societal aspects of the system develop over time? Can we learn from 
their trial and errors? His analysis therefore takes issue with the realist conception 
of IR being characterized by a repetitive condition of anarchy through recorded 
history, and instead claims that relations among states can be viewed through the 
lens of international societies regulated by rules and practices. These are not based 
on some idealist conception of what the world should be, but rather the result of 
actual experience. By placing the current international system in historical context, 
he raises the question of how permanent it is and how it might change in the future. 
 The English School’s interest in continuity and change in IR can also be stated 
as an interest in the relation between international order and the aspiration for 
human justice. This concern is particularly evident among younger scholars associ-
ated with the English School who have responded to changes in IR since the end 
of the Cold War. While Watson examined the expansion of international society, 
others have studied the phenomenon of failed states and the resultant human cost. 
Contrasting if not clashing views of what constitutes international society from 
the point of view of non-Westerners have also been investigated. Similarly, some 
scholars have joined liberals and constructivists in examining the changing relations 
among state sovereignty, human rights, and the norms of humanitarian interven-
tion. Other research topics that received less attention in the English School such as 
European integration, international political economy, and global environmental 
politics are now being investigated.  12  
From International Society to World Society 
 This renaissance of the English School is remarkable in that its obituary and even 
a call for its disbandment were suggested in the early 1980s.  13  One scholar who is 
responsible for the resurrection and reformulation of the English School approach 
to IR is Barry Buzan. Buzan engaged in one of the most extensive critiques of the 

248
CHAPTER 5  The English School: International Society and Grotian Rationalism
English School as exemplified by Wight, Bull, and Butterfield. He noted internal 
debates, inconsistencies, and conceptual and empirical voids. For Buzan, the rise of 
constructivism deserves credit for reinvigorating the English School’s important yet 
underdeveloped emphasis on the social or societal dimension of IR.  14  
 Buzan notes that the English School actually consists of several complementary 
elements that are not always made explicit in the first generation of theorizing: the 
School as a set of ideas to be found in the minds of statesmen, a set of ideas in the 
minds of political theorists, and a set of externally imposed concepts that define 
material and social structures of the international system. It is the latter that is his 
main concern, particularly the key goal of addressing the conceptually weak con-
cept of world society, the third element of the English School triad. 
 The traditional discussion within the English School was generally limited to 
a debate between a “pluralist” versus a “solidarist” conception of international 
society, a topic of concern to Hedley Bull in particular. The debate centered on the 
actual and potential extent of shared norms, rules, institutions, and international 
law within international society. The pluralist view finds states have relatively little 
in common other than the calculations of interest. This is a “thin morality” in 
which states can agree to a framework of international order that allows for mutu-
ally advantageous cooperation. At best, it is a world of enlightened self-interest in 
which states are most concerned with security and maintaining order under anar-
chy. Practical policies emphasize mutual recognition of sovereignty, diplomacy, and 
maintaining the nonintervention principle in terms of the domestic affairs of states. 
This reflects more of a realist influence. 
 The opposing solidarist view sees the world in cosmopolitan terms, arguing 
international society has a relatively high degree of shared norms, rules, and insti-
tutions among states. This is a “thick morality” with the capacity even to enforce 
universalist ethics. As a result, ideas of individual rights and the extent to which a 
community of humankind exists inevitably enter into consideration. This reflects a 
Kantian influence. Whether viewed as a dichotomy or a spectrum, the traditional 
debate among English School theorists was essentially conducted  within the inter-
national society framework, the flagship concept, as opposed to a realist interna-
tional system or a Kantian-style world society. 
 Buzan’s contribution to reformulating the English School was to argue that the 
world society concept was really more of a set of normative goals for theorists, and 
hence and analytically has remained at the margins. He aimed to correct this by 
examining world society from the perspective of norms and ideas as forms of social 
structure (hence, the interest in constructivism). In other words, his interest is in a 
theory about norms as opposed to normative theory. Such an approach closes the 
gap, discussed above, between the English School view of theory as simply a way 
to organize and structure questions, concepts, and categories systematically and the 
positivist emphasis on causal explanations. 
 Buzan argued that a conceptually robust concept of world society could be-
come the best approach to coming to grips with the phenomenon of globalization, 
a challenge for IR theory in general. The relation between international society and 
world society is not only the biggest weakness of existing English School theory, 
but also where the biggest theoretical if not practical gains can be made. Working 
out the relation between order and a more cosmopolitan culture in “international” 

 
The English School, Liberals, and Social Constructivists  
249
society is one of the unfinished legacies of Bull’s work. A revised English School 
theory, therefore, has potential to improve how globalization is conceptualized, but 
only if world society can be developed as a coherent theoretical concept.  15  
 Buzan argues that the English School’s triad of concepts captures key aspects of 
globalization to include the simultaneous existence of state and non-state systems 
to include transnational actors such as nongovernmental organizations. Just as 
Watson examined the historical relation and transition between systems of states 
and international societies (Hobbes and Grotius, realism and rationalism), the de-
velopment of the world society concept can help us understand the potential and 
obstacles for transitioning to post-Westphalian world politics. Unless the weakness 
of world society as a pillar of English School thought is overcome, further progress 
within the English School is constrained. Constructivist insights and its approach 
to social relations can provide a useful tool. 
 In the process of his ambitious effort to rethink the English School in an era of 
globalization, therefore, Buzan (a) retools the international system, international 
society, and world society triad; (b) reconstructs the pluralist-solidarist debate; 
(c) thinks through the analytical and normative implications of the world society 
concept; and (d) examines the concept of institutions that is the underpinning of 
order in IR. In terms of the final task, he compares and contrasts the English School 
approach to institutions to the ways realists, neoliberal institutionalists, and regime 
theorists deal with the concept.  
THE ENGLISH SCHOOL, LIBERALS, 
AND SOCIAL CONSTRUCTIVISTS 
 Given the English School emphasis on an anarchical or international society, it is 
important to note similarities with liberalism discussed in  Chapter  3 and social 
constructivism in  Chapter  6 . Norms that become established in the form of either 
tacitly accepted understandings or explicitly agreed-upon rules (some of which 
have the binding quality of international law) lie at the foundation of  international 
régimes . For liberals, such régimes consist of voluntarily agreed sets of principles, 
norms, rules, and procedures concerning diverse issues—human rights, war and 
peace, commercial transactions, and the like—and their servicing institutions, both 
governmental and nongovernmental organizations. 
 These régimes and institutions are the outcome of human design efforts over 
centuries of time intended to provide an authoritative basis for regulating or at 
least influencing the behavior of both state and non-state actors. So understood, 
the development of international society can be viewed as a constructivist enter-
prise. As noted in  Chapter   6 , social constructivists portray self-help, power politics, 
sovereignty, and similar concepts as having been socially constructed or having 
evolved under the anarchy of international relations and world politics. They are 
not inevitable or essential attributes of international politics, but rather have been 
socially constructed. The key point is that international relations and world politics 
do not have an independent existence; they are what people make (or have made) 
of them. Ideas, culture, and norms matter and can influence behavior, including the 
creation of multilateral institutions. 

250
CHAPTER 5  The English School: International Society and Grotian Rationalism
 An example of overlapping interest in all three approaches to IR involves hu-
man rights. In the case of English School theorists, it is scholars sympathetic to the 
solidarist perspective who have examined human rights and humanitarian interven-
tion. Similar interest has been expressed with regard to the global environment.  16  
Such concerns to date, however, have reflected more normative aspirations and less 
conceptual and empirical development within the English School.  
THE ENGLISH SCHOOL AND ITS CRITICS 
Methodological Muddle 
 The affinity between aspects of liberalism, constructivism, and the English School 
is reflected in the fact that friendly criticism of the English School has come from 
both liberals and constructivists. Martha Finnemore, for example, has written 
widely on humanitarian intervention from a constructivist perspective. She argues 
that improving the visibility of the English School among American IR academics 
would enrich the latter’s scholarship due to the English School’s historical and nor-
mative orientation. Unfortunately, “the School’s lack of clarity about both method 
and theoretical claims has made it difficult for American scholars to incorporate it 
into their research. . . . For many American scholars, simply figuring out what its 
methods are is a challenge” as “English School authors . . . almost never provide 
systematic discussion about rules of evidence.”  17  
Historical Knowledge 
 As noted, the historical-sociological approach is a hallmark of the English School. 
It is one thing to claim, as do Bull and Watson, that historical knowledge is impor-
tant. But the question is why is this so? Is it because the present and the future are 
part of a historical narrative or story slowly unfolding from time past? Is what we 
observe today in international society grounded in historical developments over 
centuries in time? Or is historical knowledge important because the present and the 
future are similar to the past, all subject to similar types of forces? Or is the past 
a guide to predicting the future? Or an indispensable tool for speculating about 
future options?  18  
Political Economy, the Environment, and Gender 
 The economy and the global environment as integral to international and world 
society was a topic conspicuously absent from the work of early English School 
authors. On the one hand, perhaps they were more concerned with the “high poli-
tics” of diplomacy, collective security, and alliance politics, discounting the salience 
of political-economic and environmental issues. As Barry Buzan has stated: “The 
English school’s founding fathers . . . were too much in thrall to universalist prin-
ciples of order and justice derived from debates in political theory and were too dis-
interested in international political economy.”  19  Although the founders may have 
given less attention to the international economy, the environment, and human 
rights, successor generations in the English School are examining the  possibilities 

The English School and Its Critics 
251
and limitations of integrating such concerns into the English School’s triad and its 
understanding of international society.  20  
 The English School shares with other images presented in this book almost a 
complete lack of knowledge or interest in the feminist gender perspective on IR. 
As Jacqui True argues: “This neglect of gender reveals the concept of international 
society to be neither open nor sufficiently dynamic enough to capture or explain 
the social sources and dimensions of interstate behavior, and world politics more 
broadly.” To do so requires a serious examination of the question: “Where are 
women in international society?”  21  
Conceptual and Philosophical Eclecticism 
 As noted, the English School image of international relations has been influenced 
by works ranging from Hobbes and Machiavelli to Grotius and (to a lesser extent) 
Kant. As such, scholars operating from alternative perspectives of international 
relations can find much with which to identify. Realists can applaud the English 
School recognition of anarchy, just as realists as well as liberals can agree on the 
importance of Grotius to our understanding of international relations. Social 
 constructivists find English School discussions of the evolution of international 
society and the development of norms to be quite compatible with their worldview. 
Alexander Wendt’s description of Lockean culture, discussed in  Chapter  6 , comes 
close to the Grotian rationalist perspective in the English School. Hence, recogni-
tion of diverse traditions of thought can be appealing as there is a bit of something 
for everyone. 
 But such an eclectic intellectual heritage can also lead to criticism. This is 
particularly the case for those positivists who aspire to develop parsimonious, de-
ductively based theories. If one is a structural or neorealist, for example, then the 
English School smorgasbord is unappealing. While they may agree with Hedley 
Bull’s critique of behavioralism, they question to what extent a truly “classical” 
and historical-sociological approach to understanding international relations can 
help in developing new explanatory theories. Even neoliberal institutionalists who 
rely on the rationality assumption in attempting to account for the conditions under 
which institutions can aid international cooperation might find the English School 
and its assumptions too diverse. 
 The fact of the matter, however, is that the English School is attempting to do 
something that is at odds with the warring conceptual camps of IR theory from the 
1960s onward: integration of the field. Positivist and interpretive understandings 
compete. Images clash based upon diverse underlying assumptions. Professors have 
trouble deciding which theories or approaches to emphasize in a ten- to fifteen-
week class, and students have to wrestle with the problem of coming to terms with 
vast amounts of material for upcoming exams. 
 One could argue that this is not a burning issue, and in fact a multiplicity of 
interests, methods, paradigms, images, concepts, and value preferences is actually 
beneficial and should be applauded. Greater unity, it is feared, could result in uni-
formity and the intellectual tyranny of a dominant paradigm or school of thought. 
Hence, from this point of view, eclecticism is to be encouraged, and any signs of 
uniformity regarded with suspicion. 

252
CHAPTER 5  The English School: International Society and Grotian Rationalism
 No one would argue against diversity  per se —it is the lifeblood of scholarly 
enquiry. Seemingly unrelated research may some day come together to help explain 
a significant aspect of international relations. The concern, however, is whether 
“diversity” amounts to no more than multiple parochialisms—closing off and ef-
fectively encapsulating work in separate domains within the field, treating them 
as if they were mutually exclusive. Scholars at times engage in narrowly focused 
research programs that ignore alternative conceptual approaches, develop special-
ized jargon that unintentionally serves to confuse and mystify the uninitiated, and 
unduly restrict their course syllabi to literature that reinforces their own value and 
theoretical preferences. For this reason alone, the English School is a useful antidote 
to such closure.  
NOTES
   1.  Barry Buzan, “The English School: An Underexploited Resource in IR,”  Review of 
 International Studies 27 (2001): 472.  
   2.  See Herbert Butterfield and Martin Wight, eds.  Diplomatic Investigations: Essays in the 
Theory of International Politics (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1968).  
   3.  Hedley Bull and Adam Watson, eds.,  The Expansion of International Society (Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1984), 1.  
   4.  Martin Wight,  International Theory: Three Traditions , eds. Gabriele Wight and Brian 
Porter (Leicester University Press, 1991), 260.  
   5.  See, for example, Andrew Linklater and Hidemi Suganami,  The English School of Inter-
national Relations (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), especially  Chapters  5 
and  7 on cosmopolitanism, the harm principle as a basis for intervention for humani-
tarian reasons, the good international citizen, and the transformation of international 
society. 
   6.  E. H. Carr,  The Twenty Years’ Crisis , 1st ed. (London: Macmillan, 1939), 80, as cited 
by Tim Dunne,  Inventing International Society: A History of the English School (New 
York: Palgrave, 1998), 29.  
   7.  Hedley Bull, “International Theory: The Case for a Classical Approach” in eds. Klaus 
Knorr and James N. Rosenau,  Contending Approaches to International Politics (Prince-
ton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1969), 26. Subsequent quotes are also from this 
article. 
   8.  This section draws on Tim Dunne,  Inventing International Society: A History of the 
English School (London: Macmillan, 1998).  
   9.  Ibid. , 161.  
  10.  Hedley Bull,  The Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World Politics (London: 
 Macmillan, 1977).  
  11.  Adam Watson,  The Evolution of International Society: A Comparative Historical Anal-
ysis (London: Routledge, 1992). See also Barry Buzan and Richard Little,  International 
Systems in World History: Remaking the Study of International Relations (Oxford: 
Oxford University Press, 2000).  
  12.  Linklater and Suganami,  The English School and International Relations , 2.  
  13.  Roy Jones, “The English School of International Relations: A Case for Closure?”  Review 
of International Studies , 7, 1 (1981): 1–13.  
  14.  Barry Buzan,  From International to World Society? English School Theory and the 
 Social Structure of Globalisation (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004).  
  15.  Ibid. , 2. 

Notes
253
  16.  Robert H. Jackson,  The Global Covenant: Human Conduct in a World of States (Ox-
ford: Oxford University Press, 2000); N. J. Wheeler,  Saving Strangers: Humanitarian 
Intervention in International Society (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000); R. J. 
Vincent,  Human Rights and International Relations: Issues and Responses (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1986).  
  17.  Martha Finnemore, “Exporting the English School?”  Review of International Studies 
27, 3 (2001): 509.  
  18.  Andrew Linklater and Hidemi Suganami,  The English School of International Relations: 
A Contemporary Reassessment (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2006), 91.  
  19.  Buzan,  From International to World Society ?, 11.  
  20.  Mathew Paterson, “Global Environmental Governance,” in ed., Alex J. Bellamy,  Inter-
national Society and Its Critics (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005), 162–77.  
  21.  Jacqui True, “Feminism,” in Bellamy, 8.  

S ELEC T ED READING S 
The Law of Nations on War, 
Peace and Freedom of the Seas 
HUGO GROTIUS
OVERVIEW
 The Dutch writer, Huig Cornets de Groot (1583–1645)—more commonly referred 
to by the Latin name,  Grotius —developed the idea of law among nations. The 
achievement earned him recognition among legal scholars as “father of interna-
tional law.” His scholarship also informs an important element of the English 
School perspective on international society. Indeed, the Grotian view of IR is one 
of the states constrained by mutually agreed-upon rules or laws to govern their 
interactions with one another in both war and peace.  
 That international relations ought to be governed by law is a classic statement 
in normative political theory, yet Grotius also recognizes the practical and mutually 
beneficial role that international law can play in interstate relations. In his writ-
ings, Grotius addressed both commerce—so important to his native land—and the 
disruptive impact of wars (particularly those fought seemingly in the absence of 
rules). In 1609 (at age 26), he published his landmark essay “Freedom of the Seas” 
(“Mare Liberum”) and, 16 years later, his three-book treatise on  The Law of War 
and Peace (De Jure Belli ac Pacis). 
We draw excerpts from these works beginning with his earlier concern with 
freedom of the seas, which remains a central tenet in present-day international law 
with application now to air and space. Grotius observes the growth of trade and 
other forms of commerce—a very early phase of what we now call globalization. 
Because Grotius sees trade and commerce as essential to life, in the first passage 
(“Freedom of the Seas”) he argues that the law must allow such activities not 
only within a particular country, but also beyond its borders. International trade 
should be free of restraints, much as it also is supposed to be within a state and 
its society.  
 In the second passage (“War, Peace and the Law of Nations”), he makes the case 
for international law not just in peace, but also in wartime. Grotius initially provides 
historical references concerning the supposed uselessness of law and justice (note the 
The extract from  War, Peace, and the Law of Nations by Hugo Grotius is reprinted by permission of the publisher 
(Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for International Peace [ www.carnegieendowment.org ], pp. 1913–25). The 
passage on Law of the Sea is taken from a translation from the original Latin of the  The Law of War and Peace by Ralph 
Van Deman Magoffin (New York: Oxford University Press, 1916).
254

 
The Law of Nations on War, Peace and Freedom of the Seas  
255
who view this branch of law with contempt as hav-
ing no reality outside of an empty name. On the lips 
of men quite generally is the saying of Euphemus, 
which Thucydides quotes, that in the case of a king 
or imperial city nothing is unjust which is expedient. 
Of like implication is the statement that for those 
whom fortune favors might makes right, and that 
the administration of a state cannot be carried on 
without injustice. 
 Since our discussion concerning law will have 
been undertaken in vain if there is no law, in order 
to open the way for a favorable reception of our 
work and at the same time to fortify it against at-
tacks, this very serious error must be briefly refuted. 
But among the traits characteristic of man is an 
impelling desire for society, that is, for the social 
life—not of any and every sort, but peaceful, and or-
ganized according to the measure of his intelligence, 
with those who are of his own kind; this social trend 
the Stoics called “sociableness.” Stated as a univer-
sal truth, therefore, the assertion that every animal is 
impelled by nature to seek only its own good cannot 
be conceded. . . . 
 This maintenance of the social order, which we 
have roughly sketched, and which is consonant with 
 The municipal law of Rome and of other states has 
been treated by many, who have undertaken to eluci-
date it by means of commentaries or to reduce it to a 
convenient digest. That body of law, however, which 
is concerned with the mutual relations among states 
or rulers of states, whether derived from nature, or es-
tablished by divine ordinances, or having its origin in 
custom and tacit agreement, few have touched upon. 
Up to the present time no one has treated it in a com-
prehensive and systematic manner; yet the welfare 
of mankind demands that this task be accomplished. 
 Cicero justly characterized as of surpassing 
worth a knowledge of treaties of alliance, conven-
tions, and understandings of peoples, kings and 
foreign nations—a knowledge, in short, of the 
whole law of war and peace. And to this knowledge 
Euripides gives the preference over an understand-
ing of things divine and human, for he represents 
Theoclymenus as being thus addressed: 
 For you, who know the fate of men and gods  
What is, what shall be, shameful world it be  
To know not what is just.  
 Such a work is all the more necessary because in 
our day, as in former times, there is no lack of men 
obvious reference to the  Melian Dialogue of Thucydides ). He then makes the case that 
“it is a rule of the law of nature to abide by pacts,” and after discussing municipal law 
he moves to the “great society of states” and the “law of nations.” In both passages 
we add italics to underscore some of the more influential ideas Grotius advances.
 In this regard, we see a glimmer in Grotius of what present-day members of 
the English School characterize as the “society” one finds beyond the boundary of 
a state: “If it be thought that the small society which we call a state cannot exist 
without the application of these principles (and certainly it cannot), why will not 
those same principles be necessary to uphold the social structure of the whole hu-
man race and to maintain the harmony thereof?” He mentions in a quote from the 
Roman poet Virgil “common water” and “common air”—what some present-day 
writers refer to as the international or global commons.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  What arguments does Grotius present that there exists a common law among states that also 
is valid for times of war?  
 2.  Why do you think Grotius states that in writing his treatise he has avoided references to 
“controversies of our own times”?  
 3.  What relevance does the passage on Freedom of the Seas have to regime theory discussed in 
 Chapter   3 ? 
 4.  Do you agree that reference by Grotius not only to rules (and the rule of law) in international 
“society” has influenced thinking within the English School of present-day IR?  

256
HUGO GROTIUS
the other by those upon whom authority had been 
conferred. 
 What is said, therefore, in accordance with the 
view not only of Carneades but also of others, that 
 Expediency is, as it were, the mother  
Of what is just and fair  
 is not true, if we wish to speak accurately. For the 
very nature of man, which even if we had no lack of 
anything would lead us into the mutual relations of 
society, is the mother of the law of nature. But the 
mother of municipal law is that obligation which 
arises from mutual consent; and since this obligation 
derives its force from the law of nature, nature may 
be considered, so to say, the great-grandmother of 
municipal law. 
 The law of nature nevertheless has the rein-
forcement of expediency; for the author of nature 
willed that as individuals we should be weak, and 
should lack many things needed in order to live 
properly, to the end that we might be the more 
constrained to cultivate the social life. But expedi-
ency afforded an opportunity also for municipal 
law, since that kind of association of which we have 
spoken, and subjection to authority, have their roots 
in expediency. From this it follows that those who 
prescribe laws for others in so doing are accustomed 
to have or ought to have some advantage in view. 
 But just as the laws of each state have in view 
the advantage of that state, so by mutual consent it 
has become possible that certain laws should origi-
nate as between all states, or a great many states; 
and it is apparent that the laws thus originating 
had in view the advantage, not of particular states, 
but of the great society of states. And this is what is 
called the law of nations, whenever we distinguish 
that term from the law of nature. 
 There is no state so powerful that it may not 
at some time need the help of others outside itself, 
either for purposes of trade, or even to ward off the 
forces of many foreign nations united against it. In 
consequence we see that even the most powerful 
peoples and sovereigns seek alliances, which are 
quite devoid of significance according to the point of 
view of those who confine law within the boundar-
ies of states. Most true is the saying that all things 
are uncertain the moment men depart from law. 
 If no association of men can be maintained 
without law, as Aristotle showed . . . also that as-
sociation which binds together the human race, or 
binds many nations together, has need of law; this 
human intelligence, is the source of law properly 
so called. To this sphere of law belong the abstain-
ing from that which is another’s, the restoration 
to another of anything of his which we may have, 
together with any gain which we may have received 
from it; the obligation to fulfill promises, the mak-
ing good of a loss incurred through our fault, and 
the inflicting of penalties upon men according to 
their desserts. 
 From this signification of the word “law” there 
has flowed another and more extended meaning. 
Since over other animals man has the advantage 
of possessing not only a strong bent toward social 
life, of which we have spoken, but also a power of 
discrimination which enables him to decide what 
things are agreeable or harmful (as to both things 
present and things to come), and what can lead to 
either alternative, in such things it is meet for the 
nature of man, within the limitations of human in-
telligence, to follow the direction of a well-tempered 
judgment, being neither led astray by fear or the 
allurement of immediate pleasure, nor carried away 
by rash impulse. Whatever is clearly at variance with 
such judgment is understood to be contrary also to 
the law of nature, that is, to the nature of man. . . . 
 Herein, then, is another source of law besides 
the source in nature, that is, the free will of God, to 
which beyond all cavil our reason tells us we must 
render obedience. But the law of nature of which we 
have spoken, comprising alike that which relates to 
the social life of man and that which is so called in a 
larger sense, proceeding as it does from the essential 
traits implanted in man, can nevertheless rightly be 
attributed to God because of his having willed that 
such traits exist in us. In this sense, too, Chrysippus 
and the Stoics used to say that the origin of law 
should be sought in no other source than Jupiter 
himself; and from the name Jupiter the Latin word 
for law ( ius ) was probably derived. . . . 
 Again, since it is a rule of the law of nature 
to abide by pacts (for it was necessary that among 
men there be some method of obligating themselves 
one to another, and no other natural method can 
be imagined), out of this source the bodies of mu-
nicipal law have arisen. For those who had associ-
ated themselves with some group, or had subjected 
themselves to a man or to men, had either expressly 
promised, or from the nature of the transaction 
must be understood impliedly to have promised, 
that they would conform to that which should have 
been determined, in the one case by the majority, in 

 
The Law of Nations on War, Peace and Freedom of the Seas  
257
cause; that he who has taken up arms unjustly rarely 
comes back in safety; that hope is the comrade of a 
good cause; and others of the same purport. 
 No one ought to be disturbed, furthermore, by 
the successful outcome of unjust enterprises. For it 
is enough that the fairness of the cause exerts a cer-
tain influence, even a strong influence upon actions, 
although the effect of that influence, as happens in 
human affairs, is often nullified by the interference 
of other causes. Even for winning friendships, of 
which for many reasons nations as well as individu-
als have need, a reputation for having undertaken 
war not rashly nor unjustly, and of having waged it 
in a manner above reproach, is exceedingly effica-
cious. No one readily allies himself with those in 
whom he believes that there is only a slight regard 
for law, for the right, and for good faith. 
 Fully convinced, by the considerations which I 
have advanced, that there is a common law among 
nations, which is valid alike for war and in war, 
I have had many and weighty reasons for under-
taking to write upon this subject. Throughout the 
Christian world I observed a lack of restraint in 
relation to war, such as even barbarous races should 
be ashamed of; I observed that men rush to arms 
for slight causes, or no cause at all, and that when 
arms have once been taken up there is no longer any 
respect for law, divine or human; it is as if, in accor-
dance with a general decree, frenzy had openly been 
let loose for the committing of all crimes. 
 Confronted with such utter ruthlessness, many 
men who are the very furthest from being bad man, 
have come to the point of forbidding all use of 
arms to the Christian, whose rule of conduct above 
everything else comprises the duty of loving all men. 
To this opinion sometimes John Ferus and my fellow 
countryman Erasmus seem to incline, men who have 
the utmost devotion to peace in both Church and 
State; but their purpose, as I take it, is, when things 
have gone in one direction, to force them in the 
opposite direction, as we are accustomed to do, that 
they may come back to a true middle ground. But 
the very effort of pressing too hard in the opposite 
direction is often so far from being helpful that it 
does harm, because in such arguments the detection 
of what is extreme is easy, and results in weak-
ening the influence of other statements which are 
well within the bounds of truth. For both extremes 
therefore a remedy must be found, that men may 
not believe either that nothing is allowable, or that 
everything is. 
was perceived by him who said that shameful deeds 
ought not to be committed even for the sake of one’s 
country. Aristotle takes sharply to task those who, 
while unwilling to allow anyone to exercise author-
ity over themselves except in accordance with law, 
yet are quite indifferent as to whether foreigners are 
treated according to law or not. . . . 
 Least of all should that be admitted which some 
people imagine, that in war all laws are in abeyance. 
On the contrary war ought not to be undertaken 
except for the enforcement of rights; when once 
undertaken, it should be carried on only within the 
bounds of law and good faith. Demosthenes well 
said that war is directed against those who cannot 
be held in check by judicial processes. For judgments 
are efficacious against those who feel that they are 
too weak to resist; against those who are equally 
strong, or think that they are, wars are undertaken. 
But in order that wars may be justified, they must be 
carried on with not less scrupulousness than judicial 
processes are wont to be. 
 Let the laws be silent, then, in the midst of 
arms, but only the laws of the state, those that the 
courts are concerned with, that are adapted only 
to a state of peace; not those other laws, which are 
of perpetual validity and suited to all times. It was 
exceedingly well said by Dio of Prusa, that between 
enemies written laws, that is, laws of particular 
states, are not in force, but that unwritten laws are 
in force, that is, those which nature prescribes, or 
the agreement of nations has established. This is 
set forth by that ancient formula of the Romans: “I 
think that those things ought to be sought by means 
of a war that is blameless and righteous.” 
 The ancient Romans, were slow in undertak-
ing war, and permitted themselves no license in that 
matter, because they held the view that a war ought 
not to be waged except when free from reproach. 
Camillus said that wars should be carried on justly no 
less than bravely; Scipio Africanus, that the Roman 
people commenced and ended wars justly. In another 
passage you may read: “War has its laws no less 
than peace.” Still another writer admires Fabricius as 
a great man who maintained his probity in war—a 
thing most difficult—and believed that even in rela-
tion to an enemy there is such a thing as wrongdoing. 
 The histories in many a passage reveal how 
great in war is the influence of the consciousness 
that one has justice on his side; they often attribute 
victory chiefly to this cause. Hence the proverbs that 
a soldier’s strength is broken or increased by his 

258
HUGO GROTIUS
 I have refrained from discussing topics which 
belong to another subject, such as those that teach 
what may be advantageous in practice. For such 
topics have their own special field, that of politics, 
which Aristotle rightly treats by itself, without intro-
ducing extraneous matter into it. Bodin, on the con-
trary, mixed up politics with the body of law with 
which we are concerned. In some places nevertheless 
I have made mention of that which is expedient, but 
only in passing, and in order to distinguish it more 
clearly from what is lawful. 
 If anyone thinks that I have had in view any 
controversies of our own times, either those that 
have arisen or those which can be foreseen as likely 
to arise, he will do me an injustice. With all truthful-
ness I aver that, just as mathematicians treat their 
figures as abstracted from bodies, so in treating law 
I have withdrawn my mind from every particular 
fact. . . . 
 I beg and adjure all those into whose hands this 
work shall come, that they assume toward me the 
same liberty which I have assumed in passing upon 
the opinions and writings of others. They who shall 
find me in error will not be more quick to advise me 
than I to avail myself of their advice. 
 And now if anything has here been said by me 
inconsistent with piety, with good morals, with Holy 
Writ, with the concord of the Christian Church, or 
with any aspect of truth, let it be as if unsaid. 
To the Rulers and to the Free and 
Independent Nations of Christendom 
 Now, as there are some things which every man 
enjoys in common with all other men, and as there 
are other things which are distinctly his and belong 
to no one else, just so has nature willed that some 
of the things which she has created for the use of 
mankind remain common to all, and that others 
through the industry and labor of each man become 
his own. Laws moreover were given to cover both 
cases so that all men might use common property 
without prejudice to any one else, and in respect to 
other things so that each man being content with 
what he himself owns might refrain from laying his 
hands on the property of others. . . . 
 There is not one of you who does not openly 
proclaim that every man is entitled to manage and 
dispose of his own property; there is not one of you 
who does not insist that all citizens have equal and 
indiscriminate right to use rivers and public places; 
 At the same time through devotion to study in 
private life I have wished—as the only course now 
open to me, undeservedly forced out from my na-
tive land, which had been graced by so many of my 
labors—to contribute somewhat to the philosophy 
of the law, which previously, in public service, I prac-
ticed with the utmost degree of probity of which I 
was capable. Many heretofore have purposed to give 
to this subject a well-ordered presentation; no one 
has succeeded. And in fact such a result cannot be ac-
complished unless—a point which until now has not 
been sufficiently kept in view—those elements which 
come from positive law are properly separated from 
those which arise from nature. For the principles of 
the law of nature, since they are always the same, 
can easily be brought into a systematic form; but the 
elements of positive law, since they often undergo 
change and are different in different places, are out-
side the domain of systematic treatment, just as other 
notions of particular things are. . . . 
 In order to prove the existence of this law of 
nature, I have, furthermore, availed myself to the 
testimony of philosophers, historians, poets; finally 
also of orators. Not that confidence is to be reposed 
in them without discrimination, for they were ac-
customed to serve the interests of their sect, their 
subject, or their cause. But when many at different 
times and in different places affirm the same thing 
as certain, that ought to be referred to a univer-
sal cause; and this cause, in the lines of inquiry 
which we are following, must be either a correct 
conclusion drawn from the principles of nature, or 
common consent. The former points to the law of 
nature, the latter to the law of nations. 
 The distinction between these kinds of law is 
not to be drawn from the testimonies themselves 
(for writers everywhere confuse the terms law of 
nature and law of nations), but from the character 
of the matter. For whatever cannot be deduced from 
certain principles by a sure process of reasoning, and 
yet is clearly observed everywhere, must have its 
origin in the free will of man. 
 These two kinds of law, therefore, I have always 
particularly sought to distinguish from each other 
and from municipal law. . . . 
 In my work as a whole I have, above all else, 
aimed at three things: to make the reasons for my 
conclusions as evident as possible; to set forth in 
a definite order the matters which needed to be 
treated; and to distinguish clearly between things 
which seemed to be the same and were not. 

 
The Law of Nations on War, Peace and Freedom of the Seas  
259
the regular and the occasional winds which blow 
now from one quarter and now from another, offer 
sufficient proof that Nature has given to all peoples 
a right of access to all other peoples? Seneca thinks 
this is Nature’s greatest service, that by the wind 
she united the widely scattered peoples, and yet did 
so distribute all her products over the earth that 
commercial intercourse was a necessity to mankind. 
Therefore this right belongs equally to all nations. 
Indeed the most famous jurists extend its applica-
tion so far as to deny that any state or any ruler can 
debar foreigners from having access to their subjects 
and trading with them. Hence is derived that law of 
hospitality which is of the highest sanctity; hence the 
complaint of the poet Virgil: 
 “What men, what monsters, what inhuman race,  
 What laws, what barbarous customs of the place,  
 Shut up a desert shore to drowning men,  
 And drive us to the cruel seas again.”  
 And: 
 “To beg what you without your want may  
 spare— 
 The common water, and the common air.”  
 We know that certain wars have arisen over this 
very matter. . . . Victoria holds that the Spaniards 
could have shown just reasons for making war upon 
the Aztecs and the Indians in America, more plau-
sible reasons certainly than were alleged, if they 
really were prevented from traveling or sojourning 
among those peoples, and were denied the right to 
share in those things which by the Law of Nations 
or by Custom are common to all, and finally if they 
were debarred from trade. 
 We read of a similar case in the history of 
Moses, which we find mentioned also in the writ-
ings of Augustine, where the Israelites justly smote 
with the edge of the sword the Amorites because 
they had denied the Israelites an innocent passage 
through their territory, a right which according to 
the Law of Human Society ought in all justice to 
have been allowed. . . . Again, as we read in Tacitus, 
the Germans accused the Romans of ‘preventing 
all intercourse between them and of closing up to 
them the rivers and roads, and almost the very air of 
heaven’. When in days gone by the Christians made 
crusades against the Saracens, no other pretext was 
so welcome or so plausible as that they were denied 
by the infidels free access to the Holy Land. It fol-
lows therefore that the Portuguese, even if they had 
not one of you who does not defend with all his 
might the freedom of travel and of trade. 
 If it be thought that the small society which we 
call a state cannot exist without the application of 
these principles (and certainly it cannot), why will 
not those same principles be necessary to uphold 
the social structure of the whole human race and 
to maintain the harmony thereof? If any one rebels 
against these principles of law and order you are 
justly indignant, and you even decree punishments 
in proportion to the magnitude of the offense, for no 
other reason than that a government cannot be tran-
quil where trespasses of that sort are allowed. If king 
act unjustly and violently against king, and nation 
against nation, such action involves a disturbance of 
the peace of that universal state, and constitutes a 
trespass against the supreme Ruler, does it not? . . . 
 The law by which our case must be decided is 
not difficult to find, seeing that it is the same among 
all nations; and it is easy to understand, seeing that 
it is innate in every individual and implanted in his 
mind. Moreover the law to which we appeal is one 
such as no king ought to deny to his subjects, and 
one no Christian ought to refuse to a non-Christian. 
For it is a law derived from nature, the common 
mother of us all, whose bounty falls on all, and 
whose sway extends over those who rule nations, 
and which is held most sacred by those who are 
most scrupulously just. . . . 
 My intention is to demonstrate briefly and 
clearly that the Dutch—that is to say, the subjects of 
the United Netherlands—have the right to sail to the 
East Indies, as they are now doing, and to engage in 
trade with the people there. I shall base my argument 
on the following most specific and unimpeachable 
axiom of the Law of Nations, called a primary rule 
or first principle, the spirit of which is self-evident 
and immutable, to wit: Every nation is free to travel 
to every other nation, and to trade with it. 
 God Himself says this speaking through the 
voice of nature; and inasmuch as it is not His will to 
have Nature supply every place with all the neces-
saries of life, He ordains that some nations excel in 
one art and others in another. Why is this His will, 
except it be that He wished human friendships to be 
engendered by mutual needs and resources, lest indi-
viduals deeming themselves entirely sufficient unto 
themselves should for that very reason be rendered 
unsociable? . . . 
 Do not the ocean, navigable in every direction 
with which God has encompassed all the earth, and 

260
TIM DUNNE
to be debarred therefrom by the acts of those who 
are sovereigns neither of the nations interested, nor 
of the element over which their connecting high 
road runs? . . .  
been sovereigns in those parts to which the Dutch 
make voyages, would nevertheless be doing them 
an injury if they should forbid them access to those 
places and from trading there. 
 Is it not then an incalculably greater injury for 
nations which desire reciprocal commercial relations 
Inventing International Society 
TIM DUNNE 
OVERVIEW
 The author provides an important institutional history of the English School that 
emerged beginning in the 1950s, but that drew on a centuries-long tradition in 
classical, scholarly thought informed by history, philosophy, and law. Although 
the English School came into being in part as a reaction to claims to scientific 
 preeminence on the other side of the Atlantic—seen by some in the United Kingdom 
as hegemonic, it would be wrong to portray the English School only in this light. 
 Indeed, the international-societal focus in the English School has found for IR a rule-
oriented or rationalist middle path between the material, power-oriented realists 
and the ideationally oriented claims of many liberals. Furthermore, Dunne takes the 
position that the English School actually has more in common with constructivism 
than with positivist approaches to understanding international relations.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  What was the motivation of scholars such as Herbert Butterfield to establish the British Com-
mittee and how did their focus differ from traditional realist thought at the time?  
 2.  What was Hedley Bull’s singular contribution to the work that became known as the English 
School?  
 3.  How does the English School’s view of institutions and cooperation differ from that of 
 neoliberal institutionalists discussed in  Chapter   3 ? 
 4.  According to Dunne, why should the English School be viewed as constructivist?  
From  Inventing International Society by Tim Dunne, copyright © 1998 Palgrave Macmillan, reproduced with permission.
 Perhaps the time is ripe for the enunciation of new 
concepts of universal political organisation which 
would show how Wales, the United Kingdom and 
the European Community could each have some 
world political status while none laid claim to 
exclusive sovereignty. 
 Hedley Bull.   1  

Inventing International Society 
261
faithful than another, but rather, what can we make 
of it? 
I
 The development of the English School begins with 
the work of Carr for the principal reason that he ex-
erted an immense influence over writers like Wight, 
Butterfield, Bull and Vincent. Carr was the provo-
cateur, whose critique of the degeneration of liberal-
ism into complacent and self-interested statism was 
regarded as the point of departure for other writers. 
Apart from broadly agreeing with Carr’s view of the 
breakdown of the inter-war period, Carr’s critique 
of the assumption that there is a latent harmony of 
international interests enabled post-war theorists to 
study International Relations from the basis that 
international society was not a given but had to 
be created. The conscious attempt by Butterfield 
and Wight to bring together a group of scholars to 
engage in a collective enquiry into the morality of 
states is what marked the English School off from 
other traditional realist thought of the time. 
 The need to speak moderation to power was 
what motivated Butterfield to establish the British 
Committee as a vehicle for understanding and ex-
plaining international relations. The family resem-
blances shared by Wight and Butterfield, which 
could be dimly perceived in the 1940s, became in-
stitutionalised in the meetings of the Committee. As 
Michael Howard recalled, it was Martin Wight who 
provided the intellectual leadership in the first phase 
of the Committee’s proceedings. He prompted his 
colleagues to ask fundamental questions about the 
practices of states and the values of civilisations. 
Wight’s own thinking on International Relations 
had shifted considerably by the late 1950s. It is in his 
‘international theory’ lectures that the evolution in 
Wight’s thinking between the original  Power Politics 
and his British Committee work can be discerned. In 
the lectures, Wight convincingly argued that neither 
realism nor idealism was able to capture the experi-
ence of state practice; instead, he invented a third 
position, rationalism, which he compiled from the 
writings and speeches of lawyers, politicians and the 
handful of philosophers who concerned themselves 
with interstate relations. Apart from Hedley Bull, it 
is difficult to know how far other members of the 
Committee positively endorsed Wight’s approach 
or whether they were powerless to resist, lacking 
Wight’s range and depth in the history of ideas. 
 All histories of ideas are open to contestation. 
Methodologically, the temptation is to re-write the 
text, re-interpret the idea, according to current schol-
arly conventions or prevailing political ideologies. 
Whilst recognising the twin dangers of presentism 
and imposing undue coherence upon a particular 
group of thinkers, the book has shown that there 
exists a family resemblance linking the work of 
key thinkers, in British International Relations from 
E. H. Carr to R. J. Vincent. In a loosely Wittgensteinian 
sense, a family resemblance denotes the presence 
of networks of similarities ‘overlapping and criss-
crossing.’  2  The first part of the conclusion retraces 
these similarities and in so doing serves as a précis 
of the ‘story’ of the English School. 
 In contemporary academic International Rela-
tions, those who belong to the tradition are partici-
pating in a much wider-ranging conversation than 
many of their predecessors. As the paragraphs below 
suggest, certain elements of the British Committee 
agenda have fallen by the wayside: few academics 
who identify with the English School today are in-
terested in the processes of diplomacy or the paral-
lels between Newtonian science and the eighteenth 
century balance of power. In their place, we find a 
growing interest in normative questions relating to 
culture, community and identity. The latter stages 
of the conclusion consider the relevance of English 
School thinking to these themes. Although the as-
sessment made below is a broadly favourable one, 
this is not meant to imply a blanket endorsement of 
the School. As I have tried to show at a number of 
points in the text, there are plenty of skeletons in the 
cupboard; none more chilling than Carr’s blindness to 
Stalin’s reign of terror, or more obfuscating than the 
intrusion of Augustinian dogma into Butterfield’s 
thinking. 
 In the course of making an assessment of the 
contribution of the English School, I am aware that 
the terms of reference of the book are shifting from 
one where the author tries to be a critical observer, 
to one where the author becomes an ‘advocate’ (or 
what Quentin Skinner once colourfully described 
as the difference between a ‘recording angel’ and a 
‘hanging judge’). By way of a background justifica-
tion for the advocacy below, I will be deploying 
what I take to be Andrew Linklater’s approach to 
the history of ideas, which rejects the search for 
authenticity in favour of seeking out the normative 
potentiality of a theorist or text. The question, for 
Linklater, is not whether one interpretation is more 

262
TIM DUNNE
imbued with élitist values in a quintessentially 
English institution, which was sheltered from the 
prevailing currents of cultural and technological 
change. This study has suggested we might want 
to draw a different kind of conclusion. The argu-
ment which will be outlined in the final pages of 
the book is that, during the British Committee era, 
the English School found themselves on the ‘right’ 
side of the key debates of their time. And crucially, 
even judged by today’s standards, their approach to 
International Relations remains an important voice 
in the post-positivist dialogue which has, in the last 
decade, proven to be more resilient than other main-
stream theoretical approaches.  4  
 One of the reasons for its resilience is due to the 
distance the English School maintained from policy 
driven agendas. Even during the  Expansion project, 
the most ‘applied’ phase in the series of meetings 
which spanned over two decades, the leaders of the 
group were keenly aware that their comparative 
advantage was in taking a broad brush to the can-
vass of colonialism and decolonisation. However, it 
would be wrong to believe that the principal mem-
bers of the Committee turned their backs on global 
politics all together. Butterfield’s writings on the 
Cold War, for example, reveal a deep unease about 
the crusading ‘moralism’ advocated by the likes of 
John Foster Dulles in the 1950s; similarly, Bull was 
highly critical of the ‘belligerence’ which accompa-
nied the return of moralism in American foreign 
policy in the 1980s.  5  In the spirit of ‘rationalism’, 
Butterfield, Wight and Bull believed that the Soviet 
Union had the right to be treated with the same re-
spect as any other great power; failure in the West 
to advocate co-existence with communism was the 
cause of insecurity rather than a policy of maintain-
ing security.  6  
 Related to the English School’s unease about the 
ideological diplomacy pursued by the U.S. were their 
misgivings about the replacement of the balance of 
power with a ‘balance of terror’. For Butterfield and 
Wight in particular, nuclear weapons overturned 
centuries of accumulated wisdom about the just 
ends and means of the use of force. Wight detected 
that weapons of mass destruction had re-activated 
an interest in doctrines saturated with rationalism 
such as limited war, although the arms race posed 
a dialectical dilemma for rationalism: can one side 
hold on to these principles unless it is confident that 
its adversary shares them?  7  Alongside these Grotian 
influences on their thinking about the Cold War, 
Nevertheless, there was unanimity in the Committee 
as to the need to resist the current wave of scientism 
sweeping all before it in American International 
Relations. 
 Whilst it was Wight’s approach to ‘interna-
tional theory’ which informed the Committee’s un-
derstanding of the task at hand, it was Hedley Bull 
who, more than anyone else, brought to the fore the 
ontological questions about the depth and breadth 
of international society. The most significant of the 
early British Committee meetings examining the na-
ture of international society was in October 1961, 
when Martin Wight presented ‘Western Values in 
International Relations’ and Hedley Bull presented 
‘Society and Anarchy in International Relations’. 
Herbert Butterfield’s painstaking minutes record the 
consensus which had emerged in the early meetings 
around the idea that sovereign states constituted a 
society: ‘Wight and Bull in their respective papers 
were agreed in holding that there is an international 
society; and no one, in the course of the discus-
sion, questioned this view.’  3  The discussion which 
followed the papers by Wight and Bull raised a 
number of fundamental questions about interna-
tional society. Was a common culture a necessary 
condition for the element of society to flourish? Or 
could a rule-governed society be maintained de-
spite the cultural diversity of its participants? Did 
a society of states require leadership by enlightened 
great powers acting in accordance with the balance 
of power? Is a society of states preferable to other 
kinds of world order, such as empire or hegemony? 
Recognising that there could not be purely theoreti-
cal answers to these questions, from 1964 onwards 
the British Committee’s deliberations shifted from 
grand theory to a comparative history of earlier 
states-systems, how they were formed, and the 
means by which they are sustained or transformed. 
In these discussions Wight took the lead, excavating 
new avenues for investigation which others took up 
in the post-Wightean years of the Committee and 
after.  
II
 It would be easy to draw conservative conclusions 
from this particular episode in the discipline’s past. 
Although a case [has been] made in  Chapter   1 for 
disengaging the English School from its cultural 
base, a sociological study of the British Committee 
would no doubt interpret it as an old boys club, 

Inventing International Society 
263
III
 The judgements of Wight, Butterfield, and Bull on 
some of the central questions of their day do not 
seem out of step when measured against a liberal 
or social democratic standard. In the closing para-
graphs below, I will make the related but more 
important claim that the English School finds itself 
on the ‘right’ side of the main cleavages in the dis-
cipline today: first, it operates with a constructivist 
meta-theory; second, its understanding of theory 
is normative all the way down; and third, the 
agenda which has preoccupied the English School 
from the late 1950s onwards remains relevant to 
the theory and practice of international relations 
as the discipline approaches the start of its ninth 
decade. 
 In his famous address to the International Studies 
Association in 1988, Robert Keohane noted that the 
principal rupture in the field was between ‘rational-
ists’ and ‘reflectivists’. What is striking about this 
distinction, and the equally influential distinction by 
Martin Hollis and Steve Smith between ‘explaining’ 
and ‘understanding’, is that the English School was 
excluded from both.  9  According to Keohane, the ra-
tionalist dimension—the mainstream of International 
Relations—represented a merger between neoreal-
ism and neoliberalism. What holds them together 
is principally their common interest in the need to 
‘explain behavioural regularities.’  10  Although Wight 
believed there were patterns in the history of ideas, 
these were of a historicist kind. It was this realisation 
which prompted Keohane to dismiss Wight’s work 
for his neglect of the scientific or behavioural search 
for laws of action.  11  
 A good example of a specific debate in which the 
English School finds itself in opposition to the ‘ratio-
nalists’ is in terms of its critique of neoliberal under-
standings of co-operation. In terms of international 
institutions, there are differences not only in terms 
of what exactly the institutions are but also the part 
the institutions play in international society. For 
English School theorists, institutions are practices 
embedded in the fabric of international society. As 
we have seen with Wight and Bull, the institutions of 
international society have a longer history than the 
proliferating regimes of the late twentieth century; 
moreover, English School scholars equate institu-
tions with practices such as sovereignty, balance of 
power, international law, the diplomatic dialogue, 
and war. In order to understand the institution of 
there was an overlay of religious themes (evident in 
Butterfield’s thinking in particular) about how good 
and evil was a matter for the contest between the city 
of man and the city of God, not East versus West. 
 Hedley Bull’s approach to nuclear weapons 
was free from these other-worldly thoughts. In this 
sense, Bull was more rationalist than Butterfield 
and Wight on the question of the regulation of the 
use of force during the Cold War. His pioneering 
work on arms control in the late 1950s and early 
1960s emphasised a middle way between the strate-
gists gunning for superiority and the disarmers who, 
unwittingly, were jeopardising security. In place of 
these realist and revolutionist approaches, Bull ad-
vocated a policy of limited arms control agreements 
on the condition that these enhanced national and 
international security. Throughout Bull’s writings 
on strategic studies, the term ‘balance’ recurs, as it 
had done in Butterfield’s thinking on structures of 
governance within the state and in the society of 
states. 
 The wind of change sweeping through the in-
ternational system in the post-war period, as the last 
phase of decolonisation gathered apace, was never 
central to the early work of the English School. 
During the 1960s, for example, only Adam Watson 
wrote a number of papers about the experiences 
of ‘new’ states, but these were mostly restricted to 
discussions about the management of the transition 
to independence. We should not infer from this any 
sympathy on their part for the age of empire. From 
the scattered comments of various members of the 
English School, it was clear that they opposed colo-
nial control over the non-European world. In a let-
ter to the  New Statesman , Martin Wight protested 
against Britain’s acquiescence in the annexation of 
Sarawak by Indonesia, calling the episode the ‘most 
repugnant form of imperialism’  8  This anti-colonial 
sentiment received more consideration in his essay 
on ‘Western Values’ which suggested that interven-
tion was legitimate in order to maintain ‘civilised 
standards’, a position which his head of Department 
at the LSE, Charles Manning, rejected for fear that 
this would bring white South African rule to an end. 
On the question of self-government for former co-
lonial territories, as on so many others, Bull aligned 
himself with Wight. Towards the end of his life, 
Bull regarded South Africa as the only case where 
there was a consensus throughout the world on the 
injustice of a state founded on the principle of white 
supremacism.  

264
TIM DUNNE
of ‘reflectivist’. Most writers now take it to include 
feminism (in most of its variants), critical theory, 
post-structuralism, and constructivism. It is in this 
last category that the English School should be situ-
ated, although with one crucial qualification. Before 
outlining the reasons why the English School is 
constructivist,  14  it is worth re-capping the key ele-
ments of constructivism as laid down by Alexander 
Wendt. He defines the project according to three 
claims: ‘first, states are the principal units of analysis 
for international political theory; second, the key 
structures in the state system are inter-subjective 
rather than material; and third, state identities and 
interests are an important part of these social struc-
tures, rather than given exogenously to the system 
by human nature or domestic politics.  15  
 It should be apparent that there is an affinity be-
tween the theoretical core of the English School and 
these primary colours of constructivism. Writers 
like Wight, Bull and Vincent clearly take the state 
as the central actor (even if the great society of hu-
mankind is ultimately the key normative referent). 
Moreover, the identity of states, given by the term 
sovereignty, has no meaning outside of the ideas 
and practices of the society of states where the rules 
of membership and succession are located. For the 
English School, sovereignty and nonintervention are 
constitutive of the society of states; in other words, 
it is sustained by the reproduction of these practices. 
 There is also common ground in conjunction 
with Wendt’s second claim in that, for the English 
School, the notion of a society of states is founded 
precisely on a belief in the power of inter-subjective 
structures such as common rules, values and institu-
tions. Here we see how the English School treats 
practices like war and the balance of power as  ideas , 
unlike consistent realists who predominantly regard 
them as material structures. Moreover, for their ef-
fective operation, the ‘positive’ institutions of inter-
national society, such as diplomacy and law, require 
a highly developed form of what Wight called ‘an 
international social consciousness.’ This was in evi-
dence during long periods of European international 
society, where the needs of the society ‘became im-
printed on the minds of practicing diplomats’.  16  
Bull’s fear was that the cement which held European 
international society together might crack under the 
weight of decolonisation. What is interesting about 
Bull’s thinking on relations between the west and the 
post-colonial world is the way in which, consistent 
with the third claim of constructivism, the newly 
sovereignty, for example, an English School ap-
proach would advocate a historical sociology of the 
term and the meanings given to it by state leaders 
at particular historical junctures. Such an investiga-
tion is not amenable to the ‘neo-neo’ requirement of 
framing testable hypotheses across like cases. 
 The differences between the American and 
British approaches can also be discerned in terms of 
their understanding of how co-operation emerges. 
For neoliberals and (some) neorealists, the specific 
institutional arrangements (or regimes) emerge as a 
response to the co-ordination problem where un-
restrained individualism leads to sub-optimal out-
comes for the players in question. Therefore, the 
task for neoliberals is to show how compliance with 
the rules is maintained by the requisite proportion 
of incentives and sanctions. In short, the crucial con-
tention of the neoliberal model is that co-operation 
can be understood  without recourse to common 
beliefs or shared values.  12  But as Andrew Hurrell 
has noted, a core assumption of Hedley Bull’s is the 
way in which international co-operation is rooted 
in the sense of being bound by inter-subjectively 
created rules.  13  
 The discussions within the British Committee 
on methodology highlighted their opposition to key 
tenets of positivism. International relations were 
not amenable to the search for behavioural laws of 
action, and there was no such thing as value-free 
enquiry in the social world. In place of positivism, 
the English School argued for an interpretive un-
derstanding of international relations; one which 
revealed the contingency (and tragedy) of human 
decision-making, the often irreconcilable meanings 
that different actors give to the same event, and the 
way in which cultural values shape diplomatic and 
political practice. A sense of collective identity and 
legitimacy in European international society cru-
cially shaped the foreign policy of the great powers 
towards the Ottoman ‘other’. In our own century, 
the end of the Cold War was brought about in part 
because the ‘enemy,’ reinvented itself, and in so do-
ing, shifted the boundaries of Europe eastwards and 
prompted western European states to re-calculate 
their interests. 
 Having suggested reasons why the English 
School is incompatible with the rationalists, the 
next move is to consider the location of the School 
on the ‘reflectivist’ (or ‘constructivist’) side of the 
divide. The number of post-positivist positions is 
far greater than Keohane alluded to in his category 

Inventing International Society 
265
communities, who join together to form a ‘practi-
cal association’ in order to facilitate co-operation 
whilst preserving their difference. This should not 
be confused, so the argument runs, with an associa-
tion which engages in universalist practices such as 
setting (and policing) civilised standards of conduct. 
 As a number of theorists have pointed out, 
there is a point at which the neat distinction be-
tween ‘practical’ and ‘purposive’ associations breaks 
down.  17  The society of states since 1945 has engaged 
in an ever-widening normative agenda which has as 
its goal some notion of a ‘good’ which is shared by all 
states and peoples. In their more solidarist moments, 
English School theorists put this idea of a world 
common good at the centre of their enquiries. The 
idea that the international society tradition can offer 
critical openings into theorising a universal moral 
order, has provoked contradictory responses from 
the International Relations community. For critical 
theorists like Ken Booth,  18  the society of states can-
not be an ‘agent’ of emancipation, since it is the nor-
mative structure of international society which is the 
permissive cause of human wrongs in the first place. 
On this reading, the society of states ‘is never to be 
loved, and seldom to be trusted.  19  Nick Wheeler has 
taken up this challenge, arguing convincingly that 
the English School is not complacent about the state. 
The fact that too many states were acting like ‘gang-
sters’, resorting to political violence and repression 
of their own people, rather than ‘guardians’ as plu-
ralism implied, was the reason why Vincent sought 
to modify the ‘morality of states’ model. Pushing 
international society theory in a cosmopolitan direc-
tion, Vincent thought there should be clear limits to 
what practices of ‘diversity’ were permitted. In a soli-
darist world order, the idea of what it means to be 
a sovereign state would change; membership in in-
ternational society would become conditional upon 
satisfying minimum standards of civilised conduct. 
 Other critical theorists have found the English 
School more congenial. Andrew Linklater’s project 
of deepening and widening the sense of commu-
nity in global politics is one which he shares with 
solidarists. Like many other cosmopolitan thinkers, 
Linklater is agnostic about the particular institu-
tional form that the community takes, privileging 
instead the historical and praxeological dynamic of 
moral inclusion and exclusion. In this critical con-
stellation, individuals, bureaucracies, states, inter-
national institutions, NGOs and so on, all have the 
potential to act in inclusive ways. Not only do states 
independent states saw it in their interests to play 
the game of international society. In other words, 
the act of acquiring a sovereign identity generated 
common interests in maintaining the diplomatic dia-
logue and respecting the rights and duties of other 
states (despite the memory of what they regarded as 
their own rights as ‘peoples’ being trampled upon by 
the colonial powers). 
 In addition to the consensus on the institutions 
which sustain international society, there has been 
some progress in delivering justice in terms of hu-
manitarian principles of universal rights and racial 
equality. Bull always doubted whether the current 
structure of sovereign states could deliver both order 
and justice; he felt the Third World was unlikely to 
endorse the  status quo indefinitely, and any attempts 
to institutionalise just change would (in the absence 
of consensus) undermine the basis of international 
order. Bull’s thinking on order and justice, which was 
taken up by Vincent in the late 1980s, makes a signifi-
cant contribution to constructivist thinking. Not only 
do these two authors show how norms are generated, 
and what effect they have on the actors who inter-
pret (and contest) them, the purpose of the English 
School’s theoretical investigations is avowedly nor-
mative. Whilst the prevailing North American strand 
of constructivism has only described norms, the point 
for Vincent was to change them. 
 A further question which has attracted the 
attention of North American constructivists, and 
which the English School has had a significant im-
pact upon, relates to the impact of globalisation on 
regional, cultural and local identities. As one influ-
ential text put it, ‘culture and identity’ are making 
a ‘return’ to International Relations. But the work 
of the British Committee, from Wight’s paper on 
‘Western Values’ to Bull and Watson’s collection, 
 The Expansion of International Society , suggests 
that for the English School, questions of culture and 
identity never went away. What was driving their in-
terest in culture was the question whether the frame-
work of rules set by states to regulate their practices 
could cope with cultural diversity. This acceptance 
of cultural heterogeneity and the attempt to regu-
late diversity is an aspect of English School think-
ing which appeals to communitarians. Writers like 
Terry Nardin in the U.S. endorse the ‘egg box’ view 
of international society, in which the purpose of the 
rules and institutions is to ‘separate and cushion’ a 
plurality of states. This is a useful metaphor because 
it draws our attention to the fragility of political 

266
TIM DUNNE
as Realm of Persuasion’, in Francis A. Beer and Robert 
Hariman (eds),  Post-Realism: The Rhetorical Turn in 
International Relations (East Lansing: Michigan State 
University, 1996), 129–131.  
 9.   Hollis and Smith thought that the hegemony of ‘ex-
planatory’ approaches in International Relations was 
such that they turned to philosophy to furnish examples 
for the category of ‘understanding’. Martin Hollis and 
Steve Smith,  Explaining and Understanding International 
Relations (Oxford: Clarendon, 1990), see especially Ch.4.  
 10.   Robert Keohane,  International Institutions and 
State Power (Boulder, CO: Westview, 1989), 8. Note 
that Keohane’s use of ‘rationalism’ is in sharp contrast 
to Wight’s reading of a rationalist tradition in European 
thinking on international relations. Compare Keohane 
with Andrew Linklater, ‘Rationalism’ in Scott Burchill, 
Andrew Linklater et al.,  Theories of International 
Relations (London: Macmillan, 1996).  
 11.   Robert Keohane, review of Wight,  International Theory 
in American Political Science Review 86 (1992), 1112.  
 12.   Keohane expresses this point clearly: ‘International 
Cooperation does not necessarily depend on altruism, ide-
alism, personal honour, common purposes, internalised 
norms, or a shared belief in a set of values embedded in a 
culture. At various times and places any of these features 
of human motivation may indeed play an important role 
in processes of international cooperation; but coopera-
tion can be understood without reference to any of them.’ 
Keohane,  International Institutions , 159.  
 13.   Note that this view of the English School and the 
‘neo-neos’ as opposed to each other has been challenged 
by Buzan, ‘From International System to International 
Society: Structural Realism and Regime Theory meet the 
English School’,  International Organization 47 (1993), 
350. For an interesting meta-theoretical objection to the 
‘rationalist’ / ‘reflectivist’ synthesis, see Hollis and Smith, 
 Explaining and Understanding . 
 14.   This argument is expounded upon in more depth in 
Timothy Dunne, ‘The Social Construction of International 
Society’,  European Journal of International Relations 1 
(1995).  
 15.   Alexander Wendt, ‘Collective Identity Formation 
and the International State.’  American Political Science 
Review 88 (1994), 385.  
 16.   Herbert Butterfield, ‘Crowe’s Memorandum of 
January 1, 1970’ (July 1960).  
 17.   See, for example,  Understanding International 
Relations . 
 18.   Ken Booth, ‘Human Wrongs and International 
Relations’,  International Affairs 71 (1995), 103–26.  
 19.   This, of course, is an adaptation of David Luban’s 
remark about the state.  
  20.   Andrew Hurrell, ‘Society and Anarchy in the 1990s’ 
in B. A. Roberson (ed.),  The Structure of International 
Society (London: Pinter, 1996).  
have the potential to act as ‘local agents of a world 
common good’, they have considerably more agency 
than most other actors in world politics. Clearly the 
question of the contribution that states can make 
to the transformation of community is one which 
invites a critical international society approach, com-
bining the insights of Bull’s thoughts on alternative 
forms of community, Carr’s understanding of the 
‘scourges’ of economic and social exclusion, Wight’s 
interest in constitutionalism, and Vincent’s attempt 
to modify the principles of international legitimacy 
in accordance with cosmopolitan values. 
 The last decade has shown that the ideas and 
agenda of the English School remain pertinent; in 
some respects, their search for an understanding 
of how the institutions of international society can 
manage the tension between ‘the ethic of difference’ 
and the search for ‘consensus’ on normative issues  20  
has never been more urgent. The next stage of the 
English School needs to build on this normative 
agenda without losing sight of the traditional plu-
ralist contention that theory should build from the 
floor up rather than the ceiling down.  
Notes
 1.   Hedley Bull,  The Anarchical Society (London: 
Macmillan, 1977), 267.  
 2.   Ludwig Wittgenstein,  Philosophical Investigations , 
G.E.M. Anscombe and R. Rhees (Oxford: Blackwell, 
1953), 66–67.  
 3.   “The Meaning of “International Society””, British 
Committee discussion (October 1961), 5–8.  
 4.   Chris Brown,  Understanding International Relations 
(London: Macmillan, 1997), 54.  
 5.   See his ‘The Classical Approach to Arms Control 
Twenty Three Years After’, in Robert O’Neill and David 
N. Schwartz (eds),  Hedley Bull on Arms Control (London: 
Macmillan, 1987), 126.  
 6.   Carr had quite different reasons for being critical 
of the West’s policy towards the Soviet Union; as far as 
he was concerned, communism offered the possibility of 
overcoming the scourges of war and unemployment which 
had been a feature of late capitalism. Hysteria in the 
West was not only illfounded (resting on the assumption 
that ‘our’ form of governance was democratic and ‘their’ 
political system was tyrannical), it was likely to harm the 
prospects for the Soviet Union to build a new society.  
 7.   Martin Wight,  International Theory: The Three 
Traditions (Leicester: Leicester University Press, 1991), 
231.  
 8.   I am grateful to Roger Epp for drawing this to my 
attention. See Epp, ‘Martin Wight: International Relations 

Does Order Exist in World Politics? 
HEDLEY BULL 
OVERVIEW
 As evident in the title of this extract, the late Professor Bull addresses the classic 
question of whether order exists in world politics. He then identifies three tradi-
tions of thought—Hobbesian (or realist), Kantian (or universalist), and Grotian (or 
internationalist)—discussed in the text. Bull’s own work is a blend of the Hobbesian 
and Grotian traditions as order in world politics rests, in his view, on both the bal-
ance of power and agreed-on rules or norms. Hedley Bull’s work and that of his 
predecessor and mentor, Martin Wight, are core to the present-day English School 
that focuses not just on the state system, but also on various aspects of international 
society. More recent work has utilized the Kantian tradition.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  What is Bull’s view on whether or not “order” exists in international relations? How does 
his answer question the sharp distinction neorealists make between the international and 
domestic levels of analysis?  
 2.  In what ways does the Grotian tradition complement and differ from the Hobbesian and 
Kantian traditions?  
 3.  In  Chapter  1 Thomas Walker’s article discussed the dangers of “paradigm mentalities” lead-
ing to scholars not communicating with one another. We also briefly took up the matter at 
the end of this chapter. Bull claims it is possible to blend aspects of the international system, 
international society, and world society perspectives. How successful do you think the English 
School can be in this attempt?  
From “Does Order Exist in World Politics” in Anarchical Society by Hedley Bull. Copyright © 2002 Columbia University 
Press. Reprinted by permission of Columbia University Press and Palgrave Macmillan.
 Order in world politics may one day take the form 
of the maintenance of elementary goals of social life 
in a single world society or great society of all man-
kind. . . . It cannot be seriously argued, however, 
that the society of all mankind is already a going 
concern. In the present phase we are still accustomed 
to thinking of order in world politics as consisting of 
domestic order, or order within states, and interna-
tional order, or order among them. 
 No one would deny that there exists within 
some states a high degree of domestic or municipal 
order. It is, however, often argued that international 
order does not exist, except as an aspiration, and 
that the history of international relations consists 
simply of disorder or strife. To many people the 
idea of international order suggests not anything 
that has occurred in the past, but simply a possible 
or desirable future state of international relations, 
about which we might speculate or which we might 
work to bring about. To those who take this view a 
study of international order suggests simply a design 
for a failure world, in the tradition of Sully, Cruce, 
St. Pierre and other peace theorists. 
 This present study takes as its starting-point the 
proposition that, on the contrary, order is part of 
the historical record of international relations; and 
267

268
HEDLEY BULL
Machiavelli) that the state conducts foreign policy in 
a kind of moral and legal vacuum, or it is held (as 
by Hegel and his successors) that moral behaviour 
for the state in foreign policy lies in its own self-
assertion. The only rules or principles which, for 
those in the Hobbesian tradition, may be said to 
limit or circumscribe the behaviour of states in their 
relations with one another are rules of prudence or 
expediency. Thus agreements may be kept if it is ex-
pedient to keep them, but may be broken if it is not. 
 The Kantian or universalist tradition, at the 
other extreme, takes the essential nature of inter-
national politics to lie not in conflict among states, 
as in the Hobbesian view, but in the transnational 
social bonds that link the individual human be-
ings who are the subjects or citizens of states. The 
dominant theme of international relations, in the 
Kantian view, is only apparently the relationship 
among states, and is really the relationship among 
all men in the community of mankind—which ex-
ists potentially, even if it does not exist actually, 
and which when it comes into being will sweep the 
system of states into limbo.  2  
 Within the community of all mankind, in the 
universalist view, the interests of all men are one and 
the same; international politics, considered from 
this perspective, is not a purely distributive or zero-
sum game, as the Hobbesians maintain, but a purely 
cooperative or non-zero-sum game. Conflicts of in-
terest exist among the ruling cliques of states, but 
this is only at the superficial or transient level of the 
existing system of states; properly understood, the 
interests of all peoples are the same. The particular 
international activity which, in the Kantian view, 
most typifies international activity as a whole is 
the horizontal conflict of ideology that cuts across 
the boundaries of states and divides human society 
into two camps—the trustees of the imminent com-
munity of mankind and those who stand in its way, 
those who are of the true faith and the heretics, the 
liberators and the oppressed. 
 The Kantian or universalist view of interna-
tional morality is that, in contrast to the Hobbesian 
conception, there are moral imperatives in the field 
of international relations limiting the action of 
states, but that these imperatives enjoin not coexis-
tence and cooperation among states but rather the 
overthrow of the system of states and its replace-
ment by a cosmopolitan society. The community of 
mankind, in the Kantian view, is not only the central 
in particular, that modern states have formed, and 
continue to form, not only a system of states but also 
an international society. To establish this proposi-
tion I shall begin by showing first that there has 
always been present, throughout the history of the 
modern states system, an idea of international soci-
ety, proclaimed by philosophers and publicists, and 
present in the rhetoric of the leaders of states. . . . 
The Idea of International Society 
 Throughout the history of the modern states sys-
tem there have been three competing traditions of 
thought: the Hobbesian or realist tradition, which 
views international politics as a state of war; the 
Kantian or universalist tradition, which sees at work 
in international politics a potential community of 
mankind; and the Grotian or internationalist tradi-
tion, which views international politics as taking 
place within an international society.  1  Here I shall 
state what is essential to the Grotian or internation-
alist idea of international society, and what divides 
it from the Hobbesian or realist tradition on the one 
hand, and from the Kantian or universalist tradition 
on the other. Each of these traditional patterns of 
thought embodies a description of the nature of in-
ternational politics and a set of prescriptions about 
international conduct. 
 The Hobbesian tradition describes international 
relations as a state of war of all against all, an arena 
of struggle in which each state is pitted against ev-
ery other. International relations, on the Hobbesian 
view, represent pure conflict between states and 
resemble a game that is wholly distributive or zero-
sum: the interests of each state exclude the interests 
of any other. The particular international activity 
that, on the Hobbesian view, is most typical of in-
ternational activity as a whole, or best provides the 
clue to it, is war itself. Thus peace, on the Hobbesian 
view, is a period of recuperation from the last war 
and preparation for the next. 
 The Hobbesian prescription for international 
conduct is that the state is free to pursue its goals 
in relation to other states without moral or legal re-
strictions of any kind. Ideas of morality and law, in 
this view, are valid only in the context of a society, 
but international life is beyond the bounds of any 
society. If any moral or legal goals are to be pursued 
in international politics, these can only be the moral 
or legal goals of the state itself. Either it is held (as by 

Does Order Exist in World Politics? 
269
 Each of these traditions embodies a great vari-
ety of doctrines about international politics, among 
which there exists only a loose connection. In dif-
ferent periods each pattern of thought appears in 
a different idiom and in relation to different issues 
and preoccupations. This is not the place to explore 
further the connections and distinctions within each 
tradition. Here we have only to take account of the 
fact that the Grotian idea of international society 
has always been present in thought about the states 
system. . . . 
 My contention is that the element of a society 
has always been present, and remains present, in 
the modern international system, although only as 
one of the elements in it, whose survival is some-
times precarious. The modern international system 
in fact reflects all three of the elements singled out, 
respectively, by the Hobbesian, the Kantian, and the 
Grotian traditions: the element of war and struggle 
for power among states, the element of transna-
tional solidarity and conflict, cutting across the divi-
sions among states, and the element of cooperation 
and regulated intercourse among states. In different 
historical phases of the states system, in different 
 geographical theatres of its operation, and in the pol-
icies of different states and statesmen, one of these 
three elements may predominate over the others. . . .  
Notes
 1.   This threefold division derives from Martin Wight. 
The best published account of it is his “Western Values 
in International Relations,” in  Diplomatic Investigations , 
ed. Herbert Butterfield and Martin Wight (London: Allen 
and Unwin, 1967). The division is further discussed in my 
“Martin Wight and the Theory of International Relations. 
The Second Martin Wight Memorial Lecture,”  British 
Journal of International Studies 2, no. 2 (1976).  
 2.   In Kant’s own doctrine there is of course ambiva-
lence as between the universalism of  The Idea of Universal 
History from a Cosmopolitan Point of View (1784) and the 
position taken up in  Perpetual Peace (1795), in which Kant 
accepts the substitute goal of a league of ‘republican’ states.  
 3.   I have myself used the term ‘Grotian’ in two senses: 
(i) as here, to describe the broad doctrine that there is a 
society of states; (ii) to describe the solidarist form of this 
doctrine, which united Grotius himself and the twentieth-
century neo-Grotians, in opposition to the pluralist con-
ception of international society entertained by Vattel and 
later positivist writers. See “The Grotian Conception of 
International Society,” in  Diplomatic Investigations . 
reality in international politics, in the sense that the 
forces able to bring it into being are present; it is 
also the end or object of the highest moral endea-
vour. The rules that sustain coexistence and social 
intercourse among states should be ignored if the 
imperatives of this higher morality require it. Good 
faith with heretics has no meaning, except in terms 
of tactical convenience; between the elect and the 
damned, the liberation and the oppressed, the ques-
tion of mutual acceptance of rights to sovereignty or 
independence does not arise. 
 What has been called the Grotian or interna-
tionalist tradition stands between the realist tradi-
tion and the universalist tradition. The Grotian 
tradition describes international politics in terms 
of a society of states or international society.  3  As 
against the Hobbesian tradition, the Grotians con-
tend that states are not engaged in simple strug-
gle, like gladiators in an arena, but are limited 
in their conflicts with one another by common 
rules and institutions. But as against the Kantian 
or universalist perspective the Grotians accept the 
Hobbesian premise that sovereigns or states are the 
principal reality in international politics; the im-
mediate members of international society are states 
rather than individual human beings. International 
politics, in the Grotian understanding, expresses 
neither complete conflict of interest between states 
nor complete identity of interest; it resembles a 
game that is partly distributive but also partly 
productive. The particular international activity 
which, on the Grotian view, best typifies interna-
tional activity as a whole is neither war between 
states, nor horizontal conflict cutting across the 
boundaries of states, but trade—or, more gener-
ally, economic and social intercourse between one 
country and another. 
 The Grotian prescription for international con-
duct is that all states, in their dealings with one 
another, are bound by the rules and institutions of 
the society they form. As against the view of the 
Hobbesians, states in the Grotian view are bound 
not only by rules of prudence or expediency but 
also by imperatives of morality and law. But, as 
against the view of the universalists, what these im-
peratives enjoin is not the overthrow of the system 
of states and its replacement by a universal com-
munity of mankind, but rather acceptance of the 
requirements of coexistence and cooperation in a 
society of states. 

270 
Suggestions for Further Reading
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
 Adler, Emanuel, and Michael Barnett.  Security Com-
munities . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 1998. 
 Alderson, K., and A. Hurrell, eds.  Hedley Bull on Inter-
national Society . London: Macmillan, 2000. 
 Anderson, Benedict.  Imagined Communities . London: 
Verso, 1983. 
 Armstrong, David. “Law, Justice and the Idea of a 
World Society,”  International Affairs 75, 3 (1999): 
643–53. 
 Bellamy, Alex J, ed.  International Society and Its 
 Critics . Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
 Berkhofer, R. F.  Beyond the Great Story: History as 
Text and Discourse . Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
 University Press, 1995. 
 Best, Geoffrey.  War and Law Since 1945 . Oxford: 
Clarendon Press, 1994. 
 Booth, Ken. “Human Wrongs and International Rela-
tions.”  International Affairs 71 (1995): 103–26. 
 Brown, Chris. “International Political Theory and the 
Idea of World Community.” In  International Rela-
tions Theory Today , eds., Ken Booth and Steve Smith. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995. 
 Bull, Hedley.  The Anarchical Society. A Study of Order 
in World Politics . London: Macmillan, 1977. 
 ———. “The Grotian Conception of International 
Society.” British Committee paper. April 1962. 
Later published in  Diplomatic Investigations , eds., 
 Herbert Butterfield and Martin Wight. London: 
 Allen and Unwin, 1966. 
 ———. “The Importance of Grotius in the Study of 
International Relations.” In  Hugo Grotius and In-
ternational Relations , eds., Hedley Bull, Benedict 
Kingsbury, and Adam Roberts. Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1990: 65–93. 
 ———. “International Law and International Order.” 
 International Organization 26 (1972): 583–88. 
 ———. “International Relations as an Academic Pursuit.” 
In  Hedley Bull on International Society , eds., K. Alderson 
and A. Hurre. Basingstoke: Macmillan, 2000. 
 ———. “International Theory: The Case for a Classical 
Approach.” In  Contending Approaches to Inter-
national Politics , eds. Klaus Knorr and James N. 
Rosenau. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1969: 20–38. Also published in  World Politics 3 
(1966): 361–77. 
 ———. “International Theory and International Soci-
ety: The Viability of the Middle Way.”  Review of 
International Studies 21, 2 (1995): 183–96. 
 ———, ed.  Intervention in World Politics . Oxford, 
UK: Clarendon Press, 1984. 
 ———. “Introduction: Martin Wight and the Study 
of International Relations.” In  Systems of States , 
ed., M. Wight. Leicester, UK: Leicester University 
Press, 1977. 
 ———. “Kissinger: The Primacy of Geopolitics.”  Inter-
national Affairs 56 (1980): 484–87. 
 ———. “Martin Wight and the Theory of IR.”  Brit-
ish Journal of International Studies 2, 2 (1976): 
101–16. 
 ———. “Society and Anarchy in International Rela-
tions.” British Committee paper. October 1961. 
Later published in  Diplomatic Investigations , eds., 
Herbert Butterfield and Martin Wight. London: 
 Allen and Unwin, 1966. (Also in Alderson and 
 Hurrell, eds., 2000.) 
 ———. “The State’s Positive Role in World Affairs.” 
 Dædalus 108, 4 (1979): 111–23. 
 ———. “The Twenty Years’ Crisis Thirty Years On.” 
 International Journal 42 (1969): 626–38. 
 Bull, Hedley, and Adam Watson, eds.  The Expansion 
of International Society . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 1984. 
 Burton, John W.  International Relations: A General 
Theory . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1965. [Usually not considered formally to be part of 
the English School, his work nevertheless is consis-
tent with both the societal and historical approaches 
prominent within the English School.] 
 ———.  Systems, States, Diplomacy and Rules . Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 1968. 
 ———.  World Society . Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1972. 
 Butler, Peter F. “The Individual and International Re-
lations.” In  The Community of States: A Study in 
International Political Theory , ed., James Mayall. 
London: George Allen & Unwin, 1982. 
 Butterfield, Herbert.  Christianity and History . London: 
George Bell, 1949. 
 ———.  History and Human Relations . London: 
 Collins, 1951. 
 ———. “Morality and an International Order.” In 
 The  Aberystwyth Papers: International Politics, 
1919–1969 , ed., Brian Porter. London: Oxford 
 University Press, 1972. 
 ———. “The Scientific versus the Moralistic Approach 
in International Affairs.”  International Affairs 27 
(1951): 411–22. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
271
 ———.  What Is History? 2nd ed. London: Penguin, 
1987. 
 Clark, Ann Marie. “Non-Governmental Organizations 
and Their Influence on International Society.”  Jour-
nal of International Affairs 48, 2 (1995) 507–25. 
 Clark, Ian.  Legitimacy in International Society . 
 Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
 ———. “Traditions of Thought and Classical Theories 
of International Relations.” In  Classical Theories 
of International Relations , eds., Ian Clark and Iver 
B. Neumann. London, Macmillan, 1–19. 
 Cox, Michael, Tim Dunne, and Ken Booth, eds. 
 Empires, Systems and States: Great Transformations 
in International Politics. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 2001. 
 Cronin, Bruce. “The Two Faces of the UN.”  Global 
Governance 8, 1 (2002): 53–71. 
 Cutler, Claire A. “The ‘Grotian Tradition’ in Interna-
tional Relations.”  Review of International Studies 
17, 1 (1991): 41–65. 
 Deudney, Daniel. “The Philadelphia System: Sover-
eignty, Arms Control and Balance of Power in the 
American State Union 1787–1861.”  International 
Organization 49, 2 (1995): 191–228. 
 Donelan, Michael. “A Community of Mankind.” In 
 The Community of States: A Study in International 
Political Theory , ed. James Mayall. London: George 
Allen & Unwin, 1982. 
 Donnelly, Jack. “Human Rights: A New Standard of 
Civilization?”  International Affairs 74, 1 (1998): 
1–23. 
 Dunne, Tim.  Inventing International Society: A His-
tory of the English School . London, Macmillan, 
1998. [See detailed chapters on E. H. Carr, Martin 
Wight, Herbert Butterfield, Hedley Bull, R. J. Vincent, 
and the origins of the English School.] 
 Dunne, Tim, and Nicholas Wheeler. “Hedley 
Bull’s Pluralism of the Intellect and Solidarism 
of the Will.”  International Affairs 72, 1 (1996): 
91–107. 
 Epp, Roger. “The English School on the Frontiers of 
International Relations.”  Review of International 
Studies 24, Special Issue (1998); and  The Eighty 
Years Crisis: International Relations 1919–1999 , 
eds., T. Dunne, M. Cox, and K. Booth. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 Finnemore, Martha. “Exporting the English School.” 
 Review of International Studies 27, 3 (2001): 509–13. 
 Gonzales-Pelaez, A.  Human Rights and World 
Trade: Hunger in International Society. London: 
Routledge, 2005. 
 ———.  Statecraft of Machiavelli . London: Macmillan, 
1940. 
 Butterfield, Herbert, and Martin Wight, eds.  Diplo-
matic Investigations . London, Allen and Unwin, 
1966; and Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1968. 
 Buzan, Barry. “From International System to Inter-
national Society: Structural Realism and Regime 
Theory Meet in the English School.”  International 
Organization 47 (1993): 327–52. 
 ———.  From International to World Society? English 
School Theory and the Social Structure of Globalisa-
tion . Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 ———. “International Society and International Secu-
rity.” In  International Society After the Cold War , 
eds., Rick Fawn and Jeremy Larkin. London: Mac-
millan, 1996. 
 ———. “The Timeless Wisdom of Realism?” In  Inter-
national Theory: Positivism and Beyond , eds., Steve 
Smith, Ken Booth, and M. Zalewski. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 ———.  The United States and the Great Powers: 
World Politics in the Twenty-First Century . Cam-
bridge, UK: Polity, 2004. 
 Buzan, Barry, and Ana Gonzales-Pelaez, eds.  Interna-
tional Society and the Middle East: English School 
Theory at the Regional Level . New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2009. 
 Buzan, Barry, and Richard Little. “The Idea of 
 International System: Theory Meets History.” 
 International Political Science Review 15, 3 (1994), 
231–56. 
 ———.  International Systems in World History: 
 Remaking the Study of International Relations . 
Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2000. 
 ———. “Reconceptualizing Anarchy: Structural Real-
ism Meets World History.”  European Journal of 
International Relations 2, 4 (1996): 403–38. 
 Buzan, Barry, and Ole Waever.  Regions and Powers: 
The Structure of International Security . Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 2003. 
 Carr, E. H.  Conditions of Peace . London: Macmillan, 
1942. 
 ———. “The Moral Foundations for World Order.” 
In  Foundations for World Order , eds., E. L. Wood-
ward et al. Denver CO: University of Denver (Social 
Science Foundation), 1949. 
 ———.  Nationalism and After . London: Macmillan, 
1945. 
 ———.  The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–39 . London: 
Macmillan, 1939, 1946. 

272 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 ———. “The Equality of States: Contemporary Mani-
festations of an Ancient Doctrine.”  Review of Inter-
national Studies 18, 4 (1992): 377–91. 
 ———. “International Society.”  British Journal of In-
ternational Studies 4, 2 (1978): 91–106. 
 ———.  Sovereign Statehood: The Basis of Interna-
tional Society . London: Allen and Unwin, 1986. 
 ———. “System or Society.”  Review of International 
Studies 19, 3 (1993): 269–88. 
 Keck, Margaret E., and Kathryn Sikkink.  Activists 
Beyond Borders: Advocacy Networks in Inter-
national Politics . Ithaca, NY: Cornell University 
Press, 1998. 
 Keene, Edward.  Beyond the Anarchical Society: Gro-
tius, Colonialism and Order in World Politics . 
Cambridge, Cambridge University Press, 2002. [See 
Chs. 1–2.] 
 Linklater, Andrew. “Citizenship and Sovereignty in 
the Post-Westphalian State.”  European Journal of 
International Relations 2 (1996): 77–103. 
 ———. “The English School.” In S. Burchill, A. Linklater, 
et al.  Theories of International Relations . London: 
Macmillan, 2001. 
 ———. “Rationalism.” In  Theories of International 
Relations , 2nd ed., eds., Scott Burchill et al. New York: 
Palgrave, 2001: 103–28. 
 ———.  The Transformation of Political Community . 
Cambridge, UK: Polity Press, 1998. 
 ———. “What Is a Good International Citizen?”  In 
Ethics and Foreign Policy , ed., P. Keal. Canberra: 
Allen & Unwin, 1992. 
 Linklater, Andrew, and Hidemi Suganami.  The English 
School of International Relations: A Contemporary 
Reassessment . Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2006. 
 Lipschutz, Ronnie D. “Reconstructing World Politics: 
The Emergence of Global Civil Society.” In  Interna-
tional Society After the Cold War , eds., Rick Fawn 
and Jeremy Larkin. Basingstoke, UK: Macmillan, 
1996. 
 Little, Richard. “The English School’s Contribution 
to the Study of International Relations.”  European 
Journal of International Relations 6, 3 (2000): 
395–422. 
 ———. “International System, From International 
to World Society: A Re-evaluation of the English 
School.” In  International Society and the Devel-
opment of International Relations Theory , ed., 
B. A. Roberson. London: Pinter, 1998. 
 ———. “Neorealism and the English School: A Method-
ological, Ontological and Theoretical Reassessment.” 
 Hall, Ian. “Challenge and Response: The Lasting En-
gagement of Arnold J. Toynbee and Martin Wight.” 
 International Relations 17, 3 (2003): 389–404. 
 Halliday, Fred. “International Society as Homogene-
ity: Burke, Marx, Fukuyama.”  Millennium 21, 3 
(1992): 435–61. 
 Harris, Ian. “Order and Justice in the Anarchical So-
ciety.”  International Affairs 69, 4 (1993): 725–41. 
 Hill, Chris. “World Opinion and the Empire of Cir-
cumstance.”  International Affairs 72, 1 (1996): 
109–31. 
 Hobden, Stephen, and John M. Hobson, eds.  His-
torical Sociology of International Relations . Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
 Holsti, K. J. “America Meets the ‘English School’: 
State Interests in International Society,” Mershon 
International Studies Review 41 (1997): 275–80. 
 Hurrell, Andrew. “International Society and the Study 
of Regimes: A Reflective Approach.” In  Regime 
Theory and International Relations , ed., Volker 
Rittberger. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1993. 
 ———. “Society and Anarchy in the 1990s.” In  In-
ternational Society and the Development of Inter-
national Relations Theory , ed., B. A. Roberson. 
London: Pinter, 1998. 
 ———. “Keeping History, Law and Political Philoso-
phy Firmly within the English School.”  Review of 
International Studies 27, 3 (2001): 489–94. 
 ———. “Order and Justice in International Relations: 
What Is at Stake?” In  Order and Justice in Interna-
tional Relations , eds., Rosemary Foot, John Gaddis, 
and Andrew Hurrell. Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2003. 
 Ikenberry, John. “Constitutional Politics in Interna-
tional Relations.”  European Journal of Interna-
tional Relations 4, 2 (1998): 147–77. 
 Jackson, Robert H.  The Global Covenant: Human 
Conduct in a World of States . Oxford: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 2000. 
 ———. “Pluralism in International Political Theory.” 
 Review of International Studies 18 (1992): 271–81. 
 ———. “The Political Theory of International Soci-
ety.” In  International Relations Theory Today , eds., 
Ken Booth and Steve Smith. Cambridge, UK: Polity 
Press, 1995. 
 ———.  Quasi-States: Sovereignty, International Rela-
tions and the Third World . Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1990. 
 James, Alan, ed.  The Bases of International Order: 
Essays in Honour of C. A. W. Manning . London: 
Oxford University Press, 1973. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
273
 ———. “The Place of Theory in the Practice of Human 
Rights.” In  Two Worlds of International Relations , 
eds., Christopher Hill and P. Beshoff. London: 
Routledge, 1994. 
 ———. “Western Conceptions of a Universal Moral 
Order.”  British Journal of International Studies 4 
(1978): 20–46. 
 Waever, Ole. “Europe’s Three Empires: A Watsonian 
Interpretation of Post-Wall European Security.” 
In  International Society After the Cold War , eds., 
Rick Fawn and Jeremy Larkin. London: Macmillan, 
1996. [See 202–6.] 
 ———. “International Society—Theoretical Prom-
ises Unfulfilled?”  Cooperation and Conflict 27, 1 
(1992): 97–128. 
 Walker, R. B. J.  Inside/Outside: International Relations 
as Political Theory . Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1993. 
 Watson, Adam.  The Evolution of International Society . 
London: Routledge, 1992. 
 ———. “Foreword: Forum on the English School.” 
 Review of International Studies 27, 3 (2001): 467–70. 
 ———. “Hedley Bull, State Systems and International 
Studies.”  Review of International Studies 13, 22 
(1987): 147–53. 
 ———.  Hegemony and History . New York: Routledge, 
2007. 
 ———.  The Limits of Independence: Relations Between 
States in the Modern World . London: Routledge, 
1997. 
 ———. “Systems of States.”  Review of International 
Studies 16, 2 (1990): 99–109. 
 Wheeler, Nicholas J. “Pluralist and Solidarist Concep-
tions of International Society: Bull and Vincent on 
Humanitarian Intervention.”  Millennium: Journal 
of International Studies 21, 3 (1992): 463–89. 
 ———.  Saving Strangers: Humanitarian Intervention 
in International Society . Oxford: Oxford University 
Press, 2000. 
 Wheeler, Nicholas J., and Tim Dunne. “Good Citi-
zenship: A Third Way for British Foreign Policy.” 
 International Affairs 74, 4 (1998): 847–70. 
 ———. “Hedley Bull and the Idea of a Universal Moral 
Community: Fictional, Primordial or Imagined?” In 
 International Society and the Development of In-
ternational Relations Theory , ed., B. A. Roberson. 
London: Pinter, 1998. 
 ———. “Hedley Bull’s Pluralism of the Intellect and 
Solidarism of the Will.”  International Affairs 72 
(1996): 91–108. 
 European Journal of International Relations 1, 
1 (1995): 9–34. 
 Manning, Charles A. W.  The Nature of International 
Society [London School of Economics, 1962], 2nd 
ed. London: Macmillan, 1975. 
 Miller, J. D. B., and R. J. Vincent, eds.  Order and 
Violence: Hedley Bull and International Relations . 
Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1990. 
 Mayall, James.  World Politics: Progress and Its Limits . 
Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2000. 
 Navari, Cornelia, ed.  Theorising International Society: 
English School Method . New York: Palgrave 
 Macmillan, 2009. 
 Neumann, Iver B. “The English School and the Prac-
tices of World Society.”  Review of International 
Studies 27, 3 (2001): 503–7. 
 Osiander, A.  The State System of Europe 1640–1990: 
Peacemaking and the Conditions of International 
Stability. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1994. 
 Roberts, Adam. “Humanitarian War: Military Inter-
vention and Human Rights.”  International Affairs 
69, 3 (1993): 429–49. 
 Suganami, Hidemi. “C. A. W. Manning and the Study 
of International Relations.”  Review of International 
Studies 27, 1 (2001): 91–107. 
 ———. “The International Society Perspective on 
World Politics Reconsidered.”  International Rela-
tions of the Asia-Pacific 2, 1 (2002): 1–28. 
 Thomas, Scott M. “Taking Religious and Cultural Plu-
ralism Seriously: The Global Resurgence of Religion 
and the Transformation of International Society.” 
 Millennium 29, 3 (2000): 815–41. 
 Thompson, K. W. “Idealism and Realism: Beyond.” 
 British Journal of International Studies 3 (1977): 
159–80. 
 Vincent, R. J. “Edmund Burke and the Theory of 
International Relations.”  Review of International 
Studies 10 (1984): 205–18. 
 ———. “The Factor of Culture in the Global Inter-
national Order.”  Yearbook of World Affairs 34 
(1980): 252–64. 
 ———. “Hedley Bull and Order in International Poli-
tics.”  Millennium 17, 2 (1988): 195–213. 
 ———. “The Hobbesean Tradition in Twentieth 
Century International Thought.”  Millennium 10 
(1981): 91–101. 
 ———.  Human Rights and International Relations . 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1986. 
 ———.  Nonintervention and International Order . 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1974. 

274 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 ———.  Systems of States . ed., Hedley Bull. Leicester: 
Leicester University Press, 1977. 
 ———. “Western Values in International Relations.” 
British Committee paper (October 1961). Later 
published in  Diplomatic Investigations , eds., Her-
bert Butterfield and Martin Wight. London: Allen 
and Unwin, 1966. 
 Wight, Gabriele, and Brian Porter, eds.  International 
Theory: The Three Traditions . London: Leicester 
University Press, 1991.  
 Wight, Gabriele, and Brian Porter, eds.  International 
Theory: The Three Traditions . London: Leicester 
University Press, 1991. 
 Wight, Martin. “An Anatomy of International 
Thought.”  Review of International Studies 13 
(1987 [1960]): 221–7. 
 ———.  International Theory: The Three Traditions , 
eds., Brian Porter and Gabriele Wight. Leicester: 
Leicester University Press/Royal Institute of Inter-
national Affairs, 1991. 

Interpretive
Understandings
PART
II

This page intentionally left blank 

CHAPTER 
Constructivist
Understandings
 I
 n recent years constructivism (or, more precisely, social constructivism) has 
provided a provocative, intriguing, and fruitful approach to our understanding 
of international politics. It is fair to say that it ranks among the top three per-
spectives on international politics, joining realism and liberalism. Constructivism 
does not claim to offer a global or worldwide vision of IR as do the  images we have 
identified in the previous chapters. What it offers instead is an approach to inter-
pretive understanding that already has had major impact on theorizing throughout 
the IR field. 
 As we will see, constructivism has a number of important intellectual pre-
cursors and influences. But its gradual rise in importance in IR was also due to 
unforeseen events in the 1980s and 1990s. The Cold War (roughly 1946–1991) 
involving the Soviet Union, the United States, and their respective allies and ideo-
logical partners seemed destined to go on forever. Who was a friend and who was 
an enemy in a world divided between liberal and communist (or socialist) states 
was particularly clear-cut. IR theorists simply failed to anticipate the peaceful end 
of the Soviet Union and the collapse of its empire. 
 Realist power-transition theory might have expected an eventual clash between 
the superpowers, but not the internal collapse of one of the rivals. Within a few 
years the traditional enemy of the West was gone. While theory does not aim at 
making specific point predictions, surely there should have been greater theoretical 
anticipation of this momentous process. At the same time, there was a noticeable 
decline in state sovereignty as military intervention and normative justification 
on humanitarian grounds became evident. Globalization—the intensification of 
economic, political, social, and cultural relations across borders—also tended to 
raise doubts about the explanatory power of existing theories and approaches. 
Economic-structuralist theories that relied on Marxist concepts also suffered in 
academe at a time when liberal democracy and capitalist precepts seemed increas-
ingly to hold sway around the world. 
 What began in the early 1980s as a constructivist critique of realism and lib-
eralism has dramatically expanded into a robust research program and significant 
277
6

278
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
force in empirical research pursued via a diversity of approaches. Yet what they all 
have in common is an interpretive understanding of observed phenomena, opening 
us to the subjective dimensions of not only knowing, but also creating the world of 
which we are so intregral a part. At its core, social constructivism, as the term im-
plies, relates to the irreducibly intersubjective dimension of human action to include 
what we consider to be knowledge and reality, with the assumption that the objects 
of our knowledge are not independent of our interpretations. Constructivists are 
particularly interested in the key concepts of norms, rules, and identities and how 
they affect the conception of ourselves and how we relate to the world. 
 Constructivism can be seen as a middle ground or bridge between other con-
ceptual approaches to IR discussed in this book. On one end of the spectrum are the 
positivist, often material-based images in realist and liberal theories that emphasize 
explanation based on natural science criteria. To explain the actions of actors, it 
is assumed that rational choices are made among alternatives by evaluating their 
likely consequences in terms of objectives being sought. Ideas may matter, but in 
many of these theories they are secondary to (or reflections of) materially oriented 
interests. Although many constructivists utilize empirical data and some embrace 
positivist scientific standards for testing hypotheses, their conception of what con-
stitutes explanation very often differs. The English School has, perhaps, the closest 
affinity to constructivism, which is apparent in the School’s emphasis on norms and 
the importance of history as well as its application of the concept of “society” to 
international relations. 
 At the other end of the spectrum are the more radical postmodern, poststruc-
turalist, and some feminist interpretivists whose sociology of knowledge in its 
more extreme expression comes close to arguing that only ideas matter, science is 
merely power disguised as knowledge, and explanation in the realist and liberal 
sense is virtually impossible. Yet, as we will see, one can make the case that they 
are close cousins of constructivism due to the emphasis on the power of ideas and 
the importance of interpretive understandings of “the world out there.” Given the 
assertion that there are fundamental differences between causal and intrepretive un-
derstandings of the world, however, it makes sense to emphasize constructivism’s 
key ontological and epistemological assumptions. 
MAJOR ACTORS AND ASSUMPTIONS 
 First, constructivism seeks to problematize the identities and interests of states. This 
is in contrast to neorealists and neoliberals who come close to believing identities 
and interests are givens. Constructivists are not only interested in the state as agent 
or actor, but also transnational organizations and international organizations. They 
emphasize the importance of subjective and intersubjective exchanges and actions 
taken by human beings as agents of these state and non-state organizational entities. 
 Second, constructivists view international structure in terms of a social struc-
ture infused with ideational factors to include norms, rules, and law. This structure 
can influence the identities and interests of agents, as well as international outcomes 
in such areas as humanitarian interventions and taboos on the use of weapons of 
mass destruction. This emphasis on the social dimension of structure is in contrast 
to the neorealist and neoliberal, which is, by contrast, heavily materialist. 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
279
 Third, constructivism, as the term implies, views the world as a project always 
under construction, a case of becoming as opposed to being. This is in contrast 
to the much more restricted view of change on the part of realists and even many 
liberals and economic structuralists. 
 Finally, constructivists have done hard thinking on ontological and epistemo-
logical issues. Such debate and discussion are a far cry from most causal theoriz-
ing where positivist premises lead theorists confidently to seek as objective an 
explanation of reality as possible, somehow minimizing the subjective part of our 
understanding. Given the subjectivity of human beings, constructivists underscore 
the impossibility of pure objectivity. 
 Constructivists do not reject the scientific method nor deny that explanation 
in IR is possible. But, as noted in  Chapter   1 , instead of adopting only the causal-
explanation approach that tends to be dominated by covering law accounts 
grounded in theories that presume instrumentally rational behavior on the part 
of actors, many constructivists also look to models of value-rational behavior. 
This involves focusing on the ontological orientations and epistemological prefer-
ences they bring to their research as well as the normative concerns and principled 
beliefs of actors or agents. Doing so often results in rich historical and empirical 
analysis, explaining an event or outcome by detailing the impact of such factors 
and how they influence the construction and changes of interests and identities 
over time.  
INTELLECTUAL PRECURSORS AND INFLUENCES 
 The philosophical and sociological foundations of constructivism are deep, consist-
ing of centuries of intellectual development. For our purposes we will limit the dis-
cussion to several key scholars who have directly influenced current constructivist 
works. The importance of these scholars is evident in that other approaches to IR 
also draw from the wellspring of their insights. 
Kant
 We discuss in the next chapter intellectual contributions by the German phi-
losopher Immanuel Kant (1724–1804) to the later development of phenomenol-
ogy—how human consciousness affects our understandings of what we observe 
or appears to us. The objects and occurrences we observe are  phenomena, which 
Kant distinguishes from what he calls  noumena —the unknowable essence of ob-
jects as things in themselves, quite apart from how we may see them or how they 
may appear. 
 His followers, the neo-Kantians of the late-nineteenth and early-twentieth 
centuries, transferred this perspective from nature to culture and social relations. 
The net effect was to set the social sciences apart from the natural sciences. Our 
knowledge—what we think we “know”—flows from our subjectivity, imposing 
our mental frameworks not just on nature, but also on the social world of which we 
are so integral a part. It’s one thing to observe phenomena in nature around us. It is 
quite another, as human beings, to be very much a part of—not separate from—the 
social world we are observing. 

280
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
 Constructivists and others who follow this line of thinking not surprisingly are 
highly skeptical of the idea that the epistemological and methodological standards 
of the natural sciences can be directly applied to IR or other social-science inquiry. 
We take in what appears to us, but then probe to discover what we can about 
the underlying essence of what we observe. Knowing is indeed a highly subjective 
endeavor. We also establish shared knowledge or understandings of nature or the 
world “out there” with others when we engage intersubjectively with them. Hence, 
constructivists see individuals (and states) as essentially social beings enmeshed in 
an interactive normative context, which influences who they are and how they see 
others. 
 Although Kant did not take the argument to these lengths, much less to the so-
cial sciences, his original insights on the subjectivity of knowledge—his distinction 
between the phenomena we observe and the inner essence of these objects—has had 
a profound impact on phenomenologists and on those who extended his claims to 
the social sciences—a set of intellectual understandings from which constructivists 
also draw. 
Locke
 The English theorist John Locke (1632–1704) has influenced constructivist views 
on the nature of anarchy. He argued that before society is formed one may be at 
peace in a state of nature or move from it to a state of war and back again; a state 
of nature is not necessarily a state of war. It bears repeating—Locke does not see 
the anarchic state of nature—“want of a common judge,” government or central 
authority—as necessarily warlike. In this Locke clearly opposes the view taken 
earlier by Thomas Hobbes (1588–1679) who portrays the state of nature as per-
petually in a state of war—either actively engaging in fighting or always on guard, 
preparing for the fight. 
 Locke posited that a social contract among individuals establishes domestic 
society. This coming together by contract or agreement and his argument that 
a state of nature is not necessarily warlike are what capture the interest of some 
social constructivists. What Locke applied to the domestic level of analysis, Alex-
ander Wendt and other social constructivists have applied to IR. States and the 
relations established among them are constituted by a Lockean, social-contract 
or rule-oriented culture—not a Hobbesian, dog-eat-dog, jungle-like one as many 
realists assume. Hence, to constructivists the realist view of anarchy is not the only 
way to conceptualize a world without legitimate centralized authority; there can be 
multiple types of anarchy. It is not a state of nature without rules. 
 The Lockean culture, then, is one of rivalry, not enmity as Hobbists would have 
it. The concept of sovereignty, for example, involves a shared expectation concern-
ing the rules of the game in the relations among states. These shared expectations 
are the result of interactions, a socialization and internalization of norms or agreed 
rules that mitigate the danger of IR becoming nothing more than a Hobbesian 
“war of all against all.” States, therefore, may reach agreements with one another 
to maintain the peace, whether they remain in a Lockean state of nature or leave it 
by forming a more peaceful international community as envisioned by Immanuel 
Kant or those following his lead.  

Intersubjectivity
281
Durkheim
 Emile Durkheim (1858–1917) has been cited by neorealists as an inspiration for the 
idea that structure (in this case, the international system) shapes and constrains rela-
tions among the units. But Durkheim also engaged in a series of empirical studies to 
explain how various social outcomes—such as individual feelings of social estrange-
ment and suicide rates—were influenced by different bonds within social orders. He 
claimed, for example, that the lower incidence of suicide rates in rural areas of France 
during the Industrial Revolution was due to the strong moral and social bonds of 
their more traditional communities in the French countryside. The important point in 
terms of constructivism is that forms of sociality—the nature of relations and interac-
tions among actors—have causal impact. Durkheim believed these relations cannot 
be reduced just to material factors. Of equal importance, Durkheim stated that like 
material reality, ideational factors can be studied scientifically. Thus, constructivist 
scholars are prone to argue that the tenets of positivism are not inherently antithetical 
to their interpretive approach to understanding IR.  
Weber
 As noted in  Chapter   1 and discussed in the next chapter as well, the German Max 
Weber (1864–1920) has influenced both causal and interpretive understanding ap-
proaches to IR. Causal models often assume that behavior is instrumentally rational 
and designed to achieve specific goals that may conflict with other actors’ goals. This 
is a starting point for many realists and liberals interested in developing explana-
tory theory. But Weber also developed the idea that human actions can be value-
driven—a value rationality in which choices follow from beliefs or commitments 
often rooted in moral, ethical, religious or cultural understandings. This is not any 
less “rational” than behavior that follows an instrumental approach of maximizing 
gains or minimizing losses. As Weber argued: “We are  cultural beings endowed with 
the capacity and the will to take a deliberate attitude toward the world and to lend it 
 significance. ”  1  This ability of actors to interpret the meaning and significance of their 
social actions differentiates the social from the natural sciences. Furthermore, Weber 
argued that ideas also can play a normative role that goes beyond the narrow end 
of maximizing utility. Both Durkheim and Weber argued that the critical ties that 
bind individuals to groups are ideational, and such ideas are subject to investigation 
by social-scientific methods. 
 We now turn to examining key building blocks or concepts of the constructivist 
approach to understanding IR. The intellectual debt to foundational work by Kant, 
Locke, Durkheim, and Weber will become apparent.  
INTERSUBJECTIVITY
 Central to constructivism is the understanding that international politics is guided by 
intersubjectively shared and institutionalized norms, rules, ideas, beliefs, and values 
held by actors (or agents).  Intersubjective by definition means shared by people—
defined by their person-to-person, self-other exchanges—the ideational component 
of IR not simply being the sum total of the beliefs of individuals.  Institutionalized 

282
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
means these collective ideas are established or constituted in the social world as 
 structures or institutions, practices, and identities. These shared norms and rules set 
expectations about how the world works and what constitutes legitimate behavior. 
Although there are differences of opinion among them, all constructivists at a mini-
mum hold that normative or ideational factors or structures are at least as (and likely 
more) important than  material structures represented as power-based or composed 
of such elements as economic production or manufacturing output, population size, 
the armed forces, technology, weapons systems, and geographic factors that are 
themselves subject to interpretation. 
 To neorealists, economic structuralists, and many liberals, the material consti-
tutes the baseline, and ideas tend to be derivative. In their ideal or pure form, neoreal-
ist explanations portray material objects—power defined as material capabilities—as 
having decisive impact on outcomes unmediated by the ideas people have concern-
ing these objects. Classical realists, by contrast, incorporate international norms or 
rules in their analyses as do scholars in the English School. Such ideational factors, 
however, are discounted by neorealists who see them as variables dependent on the 
preferences of powerful states rather than having an impact independent of the in-
ternational distribution of power among states. As noted in  Chapter   2 , for example, 
neorealists such as Kenneth Waltz and John Mearsheimer see the distribution of 
material capabilities or power as key to understanding the conduct of states in IR. In 
 Chapter   3 , we discussed neoliberalism and its focus on institutions as exemplified in 
work by Robert Keohane and also Judith Goldstein. While they understand the im-
portance of ideas, material interests remain an important part of explaining outcomes 
driven by actors who make cost-benefit calculations either within or outside institu-
tional settings. In sum, constructivists claim that commitment to materially based 
understandings found in much realist, liberal, and economic-structuralist theorizing 
does not grant ideas the important standing they warrant as an independent variable 
or factor that shapes IR patterns and outcomes. 
 To make these complex ideas easier to grasp, let’s provide three examples to 
clarify the constructivist emphasis on intersubjectively shared and institutionalized 
norms and rules. First, we take up the social construction of the concept of  sover-
eignty , which consists of a set of rules or standards of behavior providing guidance 
for states interacting with one another. Specifically, sovereign states came to claim 
under international law a right to complete jurisdiction over their own territories (the 
internal or domestic dimension); hence, the development of the international norm 
prescribing noninterference in the internal affairs of other states. Second, states claim 
a right to be independent or autonomous in the conduct of their foreign relations 
(the external or international dimension). To constructivists, therefore, sovereignty is 
not simply a property of individual states, but rather an intersubjectively shared and 
socially constructed institution or normative structure among states. 
 The Peace of Augsburg (1555) and the Peace of Westphalia (1648) marked the 
emergence of sovereignty among the German and other states as a convenient norm 
that effectively placed authority in ruling princes, dukes, and kings of the day. Even 
though practice among them preceded the formalization of sovereignty—respecting 
the prerogatives of other sovereign states—the new norm in time became globalized 
in both its domestic and external dimensions. Sovereignty came to be expressed 
through rules of behavior exemplified by diplomatic practices. These practices 

Intersubjectivity
283
reflected mutual understandings about providing order in the international arena, 
stabilizing actors’ expectations, and managing power relations. Similarly, the devel-
opment of the norm of territorial integrity helped reinforce the norm of sovereignty 
by acknowledging the socially constructed sanctity of state boundaries. 
 Of course, the internal dimension of sovereignty—noninterference in a state’s 
internal affairs—has been violated many times over the centuries as when one 
country invades another or otherwise intervenes in its domestic politics or other 
matters. But the  claim to being sovereign in both its internal and external dimen-
sions has remained. In fact, violations of sovereignty when recognized as such do 
not extinguish the norm, its legitimacy often underscored by the victims of its viola-
tion. Estonia, Latvia, and Lithuania were incorporated by force within the Soviet 
Union in 1940, but the  idea that they were still sovereign states was kept alive. This 
contributed directly to these Baltic states reemerging at the end of the Cold War. 
 This intersubjective consensus on the sovereign rights of states, however, has 
weakened somewhat as another consensus gradually has emerged: growing interna-
tional support for human rights and a sense that there is a collective responsibility 
to do something about human rights violations. This idea of universal human rights 
and attendant responsibilities has encouraged and justified military intervention for 
humanitarian purposes to include cases in which states violate the human rights 
of minority groups or even their own citizens. Prohibitions against genocide—the 
slaughter of people because of their racial, ethnic, or other identity—and the inhu-
mane treatment or torture of captive human beings are vivid examples of widely 
accepted, intersubjective, socially constructed norms that also have eroded claims 
to state sovereignty. If states decide that acts of genocide or other inhumane acts 
demand international diplomatic or armed intervention in the domestic affairs of 
states, such actions run counter to rights claimed by sovereign states to exercise 
complete internal jurisdiction over their own territories. 
 Where the states in question have no particular strategic or economic value to the 
great powers, it is hard for realists to explain efforts by them to curb human rights 
violations when no apparent material interests are at stake. But from a constructivist 
perspective, the normative context has shifted over the decades since 1945 as human 
rights have been accepted gradually as widely held norms. Indeed, concern for human 
rights has had a broad pattern of effect in shaping many states’ conceptions of inter-
est. Put another way, commitment to human rights as an idea matters.  2  
 A second example is also drawn from human rights. Consider how slavery 
and the slave trade were once accepted practice in international relations. From the 
standpoint of the United States and many European countries, slavery was consid-
ered an economic imperative—an institution of critical importance to the economic 
interests of the slave-trading states (and their slave owners) as late as the eighteenth 
and well into the nineteenth centuries. This intersubjective consensus gradually 
broke down. Domestic and internationally accepted norms against such exploitation 
of fellow human beings were slow in development, but by the late nineteenth century 
finally became part of the fabric of rules prohibiting such violations of human rights. 
Various forms of human bondage persist to the present day, but social constructiv-
ists note that global and national norms now make such practices not only morally 
illegitimate, but also illegal. As social constructions, intersubjective norms and the 
laws or rules associated with them can (and do) change, however slowly. 

284
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
 A third example relates to norms concerning the legitimacy of warfare. Con-
sider that in the first half of the twentieth century European states were engaged in 
two major world wars, supposedly in defense of their respective national interests. 
But now at least Western Europe has created what amounts to a zone of peace 
in which it is hard to imagine that for centuries Germany and France had been 
bitter rivals resorting to the use of force against each other in major wars. How 
could a realist explain these developments? From a constructivist perspective, an 
intersubjective consensus has emerged among elites, citizens, governments, and 
nongovernmental organizations that force is no longer the appropriate way to 
resolve differences. Peace as a value and a normative commitment to maintain it 
multilaterally has an impact on how states define their interests. 3 
 The reference to Europe is an appropriate segue to the constructivist recog-
nition that intersubjective understandings can vary across regions and also over 
time. Hence, constructivist research programs often attempt to understand how 
these shifts in collective meanings occur through detailed empirical research and 
rich description. How have actors viewed existing normative structures and rules 
of behavior? How have alternative understandings been devised and propagated 
through not only state bureaucracies, but also international organizations, trans-
national nongovernmental organizations, and advocacy networks? 
 For example, the post–Cold War decline of communist ideology left intact the 
current globalized market system and its associated liberal financial institutions, 
norms, and rules by which state and non-state actors operate. The global financial 
crisis that began in 2008 alerted constructivists to the possible weakening of this 
intersubjective, capitalist consensus, thus opening the door for states and non-state 
actors to begin modifying, adapting, or constructing alternatives to the  status quo. 
To reiterate, these and other ideas about international relations in global society do 
not exist somehow in nature. Instead they are of human origin or, in the language 
of social constructivists, they are constituted or socially constructed.  
STRUCTURE, RULES, AND NORMS 
 Constructivists define  structure in terms of social relationships and shared mean-
ings, differing on the component elements and their relative importance. These 
elements may include clusters of rules, norms, principled beliefs, shared knowledge, 
practices, and even material elements. Material resources, however, acquire mean-
ing for human action only through the structure of shared knowledge in which they 
are embedded. International politics may be seen as anarchic, but the structure is 
essentially defined in cultural or ideational rather than in realist, essentially material 
terms. A security dilemma may exist among states, but this dilemma is viewed as 
an ideational social structure composed of intersubjective understandings in which 
states are prone to make worst-case assumptions about one another’s intentions. 
 Beyond self-help, states may seek allies or coalition partners. In constructivist 
terms, the “Cold War” can be understood as incorporating a social structure 
of  intersubjectively shared knowledge and meanings that governed the relations 
among the United States, the Soviet Union, and their respective allies. As tentative 
steps toward reassurance were made by the Soviet Union in the mid-1980s and were 
reciprocated by the United States, the structure of shared knowledge or meanings 

Structure, Rules, and Norms 
285
began to change. As in occasional periods of détente (relaxation of tensions), in the 
immediate aftermath of the Cold War they stopped acting strictly on the basis of 
a structure of shared knowledge that emphasized egoistic identities and self-help, 
shifting for a time from zero-sum (one side’s gain, the other’s loss) to more positive-
sum understandings (seeking mutual gains). Constructivists, therefore, can agree 
with realists that the world can be a nasty and violent place, but they take issue 
with the realist explanation and offer an alternative perspective that emphasizes the 
importance of subjective and intersubjective understandings. 
 If anarchy is socially constructed and given meaning by actors, IR is not 
doomed to take place in a Hobbesian world of constant strife. By examining in 
detail the historical context within which such structures arise, constructivists at-
tempt to explain how and why particular practices become relatively fixed in some 
cases, but fluid and subject to change or decay in others. Rules and meanings of 
expected behavior that reflect mutual, intersubjective understandings provide order 
to international politics, stabilize actors’ expectations, and help to manage relations 
among actors. 
 Generally accepted diplomatic practices are one example. When such ideational 
structures persist and become institutionalized or routinized over time, they gain 
causal and normative force, leading to patterns of behavior that can be analyzed 
empirically. These structures can either facilitate or serve as obstacles to courses of 
action states choose to follow. To recognize that structures can and have changed 
over time, however, is no guarantee that these social constructions necessarily will 
be changed in the future. Changing structures affecting states, for example, involves 
altering an existing set of mutually reinforcing expectations. 
 This conception of structure has come to be applied by constructivists in a 
number of ways at different levels of analysis from the global to regional or issue-
specific international regimes. These ideational structures can impact the behavior 
of both state and non-state actors at least as much as the materially based power or 
class structures one finds respectively in realist and economic-structuralist thought. 
Rules
 Let’s delve more deeply into one characterization or component of structure: rules. 
Constructivists make a distinction between  constitutive and  regulative rules and in 
so doing contrast their approach to IR with that of neorealists and neoliberals. An 
illustration might be useful. The act of driving cars or other vehicles existed prior to 
establishing the socially accepted rule in the United States and most other countries 
that one should drive on the right-hand side of the road and as you enter a traffic 
circle keep to the right. 4 Or in Britain, Japan, and several other countries, a left-
hand rule applies. Such rules, whether right- or left-oriented, were instituted due to 
increased traffic and the possibility of accidents. As examples of  regulative rules, 
they are formulated to regulate an existing activity—driving cars. Other regulative 
rules are soon added to include issuing licenses, setting speed limits, yielding at 
intersections, etc. 
 Contrast this illustration with that of chess. It was not a matter of people push-
ing bits of wood around the board and bumping into one another that created the 
need for regulative rules. Rather, the rules of chess create the  very possibility of 

286
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
playing chess in the first place: “The rules are constitutive of chess in the sense that 
playing chess is constituted in part by acting according to the rules.” Regulative 
rules are designed to have a causal effect, such as getting people to drive on the 
right- or left-hand side of the road. “In contrast constitutive rules define the set of 
practices that make up any particular consciously organized social activity—that is 
to say, they specify  what counts as that activity.”  5  
 These two illustrations make the constructivist point that the epistemology or 
ways of knowing present in neorealism, for example, lack this concept of constitu-
tive rules. For them, it is a world of antecedent or preexisting actors and their rela-
tions in an anarchic world. The role of theory is basically to explain their conduct 
or behavior within a system essentially not of their making. Stated another way, 
constructivists claim that neorealists tend to focus on things as they are or have 
come to be, thus failing to explain the origins of states or the system of states that 
figure so prominently in their analyses. 
 John Ruggie argues that the very concept of the modern state was only pos-
sible when a new rule for differentiating the components of the emerging European 
system replaced the medieval system of overlapping jurisdictions and authorities 
claimed by popes, kings, fedual lords, and trading associations. He examines not 
only material but also ideational factors that produced the concept of exclusive 
territoriality that serves as the constitutive rule defining the modern state system.  6  
Constitutive rules are logically prior to what is the focus of most realist and liberal 
theorists who tend to take as a given the existence of the state and non-state actors 
engaged in international politics.  
Norms
 Norms are generally accepted values that define standards of appropriate behavior 
for agents (actors) with a given identity. Following from the discussion above, in 
situations where norms operate like rules that define the identity of an actor, they 
are said to have “constitutive effects” that “specify what actions will cause relevant 
others to recognize a particular identity.” In other situations, norms operate as 
standards “that specify the proper enactment of an already defined identity. In such 
instances norms have ‘regulative’ effects that specify standards of proper behavior.” 
Norms, therefore, either define (constitute) identities or prescribe (regulate) behav-
ior, or they do both. 7 
 How norms are developed is an important research interest of constructivists. 
They can be international or domestic in their origin. When norms take the form 
of principled beliefs (such as support for decolonization, end of apartheid, human 
rights, emergence of taboos on certain types of weapons, prohibiting bribery of 
government officials as the means to secure contracts, etc.), they can lead in certain 
circumstances to states redefining their interests and even sense of self (identity) as 
well as influencing international outcomes. The impact of these beliefs can be fa-
cilitated by transnational networks of non-state actors. Ongoing empirical research 
also has examined norms governing the conduct of interstate war and humanitarian 
intervention and the situations under which norms are violated. While repeated vio-
lation of international norms on the part of states can erode or eventually invalidate 
norms, occasional violations usually do not. 8 

Identity
287
AGENTS
 The constitutive logic is played out in the important constructivist ontological as-
sumption concerning the relations between structures and  agents . Constructivists 
do not privilege any particular agent, actor, or  unit of analysis . The agents may be 
states, but also non-state actors to include individuals or groups as well as social 
movements, corporations, international organizations, nongovernmental advocacy 
groups, or classes. 9 All such non-state agents have the potential to influence the 
creation of international norms, identities, and the behavior of states, just as states 
can similarly impact non-state agents. 
 As noted above, structure (social relations and shared meanings) can have a 
constitutive—not just a regulative effect—on actors. Structure can encourage ac-
tors or agents to redefine their interests and identities in an ongoing socialization 
process. Thus, unlike neorealism and neoliberalism that tend to hold interest and 
identities constant in order to isolate the causal factors related respectively to power 
among states and the dynamics within and between international institutions, con-
structivism is interested in how ideational structures actually shape the way actors 
define themselves and relate to other actors. 
 Of equal importance, these actors or agents have an impact on structures and 
how they are altered and produced. Hence—and this is the key point—agents (ac-
tors) and structures  mutually constitute one another. Structures are not objects that 
simply influence actors in a unidirectional manner. As difficult as it may be, agents 
have the ability to change structures and escape from situations that encourage 
and replicate, for example, conflictual practices such as war. There is a reciprocal 
relation between agency and structure. The Hobbesian international system of a 
perpetual war of all against all or the pessimistic Thucydidean view of interstate 
war is not necessarily an inevitable state of affairs endlessly replicated through the 
ages, but rather a socially constructed structure developed over time. Due to the 
logic of mutual constitution, states may change the rules of the game and escape 
into a more Lockean (or even Kantian) culture of agreed rules (or accepted norms) 
to guide the conduct of international politics. Conversely, a community of peaceful 
states can degenerate into a more Hobbesian world marked by conflict; change is 
not necessarily always positive.  
IDENTITY
 Identities are relatively stable, role-specific understandings and expectations about 
one’s self that are acquired by interacting with or defining the self in relation to 
an “other”—in constructivist terms a structure composed of social relationships, 
shared meanings, rules, norms, and practices. Due to this conception of interaction, 
identity breaks down the realist and liberal dichotomy between the systemic and 
state levels of analysis and provides a broader perspective on the mutual constitu-
tion of state and system or agent and structure, respectively. 
 At the level of the individual, human consciousness is important—the “self” 
that interprets (and thus constitutes the “other” outside oneself), much as the 
“other” outside the self gives meaning or identity to the self. For example, the 
respective identities of professor and student make sense within the context and 

288
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
interaction of a classroom setting; the identities are mutually constituted. But over 
time these identities can change. For example, the student goes to graduate school 
and eventually becomes a professor herself and rejoins her  alma mater as a faculty 
member. The student-professor identities evolve into one of colleagues. 
 In terms of IR, the dominant intersubjective understanding and social relation-
ship of the Soviet Union and the United States during the Cold War was that of 
enemies. Being anti-Soviet and anticommunist was a critical element of how Ameri-
cans tended to identify themselves and their role in the world. It also provided the 
framework through which Americans viewed with suspicion and interpreted all 
Soviet actions. As this social relationship changed in the late 1980s and early 1990s 
when communist regimes collapsed, the part of American identity associated with 
anticommunism also began to change. As a result, the U.S. definition of interna-
tional threats and national interests began to shift as well. 
 How can one recognize the existence of a particular identity? First, one would 
look for habitual actions consistent with this identity and interpretations such as 
U.S. attempts during the Cold War to block the expansion of Soviet influence in the 
Third World and Western Europe. Such actions are often referred to as  practices . 
Second, one would monitor the  discourse or combination of language and tech-
niques employed to maintain these practices (such as diplomatic language empha-
sizing constructive engagement, balance of power, the use of force, and deterrence). 
 Identities can change over time and across contexts. Hence, identities are not 
immutable characteristics of either individuals, groups, states, or whatever agent 
one is examining. Identities are produced and are not givens, any more than a 
state’s interests are. The empirical-research task for constructivists, therefore, is to 
explore how interaction and context influence the development of the meaning of 
self—whether “self” is at the level of individual decisionmaker, decisionmakers as 
a group, a nongovernmental organization, or conceptualized as an aggregate ap-
plying to the state, nation, or society as a whole. Interactions, such as those during 
the Cold War, may bolster, undermine, or even change these identities resulting in 
either positive or negative outcomes. 
 Influences on identities can stem from any number of sources. Domestic or 
 endogeneous sources may include broad cultural aspects of a society or military 
doctrine resulting from the internal distribution of political power. Identity could 
also be influenced by race, gender, nationality, religions, or ideologies. External or 
 exogeneous sources can include such international norms as  multilateralism that 
may contribute to defining a country’s identity and the role it assumes in relations 
with other countries. Principled beliefs such as the moral illegitimacy of slavery 
and commitment to human rights are additional examples. Empirical studies have 
examined the development of a collective identity during the Cold War among 
members of the western North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), which was 
created in 1949 to keep the U.S. institutionally committed to European defense; 
counter the perceived Soviet threat; and provide a democratic institutional context 
for a newly restored, non-threatening German federal republic. Or as British dip-
lomat Lord Ismay, the first NATO Secretary General, put it rather undiplomati-
cally: to keep the Americans in, the Russians out, and the Germans down! Indeed, 
subjectivity has different sides—positive or negative, influenced as it is by different 
interpretive understandings, in this case by British (and his own) experiences in 

Logic of Appropriateness 
289
the two twentieth-century world wars. Beyond work on organizations like NATO, 
other studies have examined identity creation and transformation in the case of al-
liances in the Middle East, and shifts in identity in Japan, Germany, and the Soviet 
Union or now, the Russian Federation. 10 
 The construction of identity, therefore, is not limited to perceptions of another 
actor being friend or foe. Note that the idea of mutual constitution of states and 
structures goes beyond simply recognizing that there is interaction between them. 
All images and approaches to IR discuss the impact of interactions. The point is 
that while the interactions of states contribute to the construction of the norms, 
shared meanings, and institutions of IR, they in turn also influence the identity and 
behavior of states (and, of course, human agents who represent them). Through this 
reciprocal process, both can be redefined.  
LOGIC OF APPROPRIATENESS 
 Identities, rules, and norms come together in the constructivist concept of the  logic 
of appropriateness . In the IR literature, a distinction is made between consequence-
based and rule-based action. The former sees actions as driven by actors rationally 
rank-ordering their preferences or interests, while being aware that other actors are 
doing the same. In other words, the actions of actors (individuals, organizations, or 
states) are driven by the calculation of consequences measured against prior prefer-
ences. Neorealists and neoliberals exemplify this approach. 
 What is missing in the logic of consequences is an appreciation of how norms, 
rules, and shared understandings of legitimate behavior can also shape actors’ 
behaviors. The logic of appropriateness assumes human actors follow norms and 
rules that associate particular identities to particular situations. Stated another 
way, action is associated more with identities informed by norms and rules than 
just with narrow understandings of self-interest. As noted by March and Olsen: 
“As a cognitive matter, appropriate action is action that is essential to a particular 
conception of self. As an ethical matter, appropriate action is action that is virtuous. 
We ‘explain’ foreign policy as the application of rules associated with particular 
identities to particular situations.” 11 In terms of IR, the identity perspective sees 
actors as acting in accordance with legitimated rules and norms that are socially 
constructed. IR is portrayed at least potentially as a community of rule followers 
tied to one another through intersubjective understandings, sociocultural ties, and 
a sense of belonging. 
 If identities are associated with and influenced by current standards of “ap-
propriateness,” then how does change in terms of international norms come about? 
One way is when norm “entrepreneurs” emerge who can create alternative norms 
or frames of reference. The challenge is that in promoting a new norm, it is done 
within the current standards of appropriateness defined by existing norms. To 
overcome the constraint imposed by an existing normative framework, norm en-
trepreneurs and activists may have to act explicitly  inappropriately , given existing 
generally accepted norms. 
 For example, suffragettes positing alternative norms as to what constituted 
women’s interests chained themselves to fences, engaged in hunger strikes, dam-
aged property, and refused to pay taxes. In the case of IR, norm entrepreneurs 

290
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
such as Greenpeace, Amnesty International, Transparency International, and other 
transnational advocacy networks as well as those operating within U.N. or other 
international organizations have made advocacy arguments often with strong 
moral content concerning the environment, human rights, illicit business practices, 
and other topical concerns. Redefining what is appropriate—changing prevailing 
norms as to what is acceptable—takes time, commitment, and sustained effort by 
advocates whether in governmental or non-governmental roles.  
INTERESTS
 Constructivists claim that the interests of actors (what realists and liberals have 
tended to take for granted as givens) are constructed and subject to change by the 
actors themselves as they interact with others. The constructivist take on interests 
is best understood in contrast to other approaches. 
 The concept of national interest has long been a central focus in the study of 
international relations. Particularly for realists, the specific goals of states vary, 
but all states have an interest in survival, wealth, security, and enough power to 
secure those interests. The origins of these interests are exogeneous (external) to 
any state as a result of the condition of international anarchy and the security 
dilemma states face. While a realist may agree that these are indeed  ideas about 
basic needs, they are still materially grounded, primary interests that drive state 
behavior, influenced as well by relative circumstances—the situation a state is in 
compared to other states. 
 Constructivists would argue, however, that interests and understandings of op-
portunities and threats are highly subjective. Consider, for example, a popular con-
structivist example: How can some 500 nuclear weapons of the United Kingdom be 
less threatening (or even nonthreatening) to the interests of the United States than 
a small number of North Korean or Iranian nuclear weapons? Obviously, North 
Korean and Iranian words and deeds have led the United States to view these coun-
tries as hostile and thus threats to its interests. Here is where a constructivist would 
argue that American leaders are responding to the  social dimension of relations be-
tween the United States and other countries, rather than merely to capabilities—the 
material nuclear hardware they may possess or seek to acquire. 
 These social relations are not fixed in stone for all time, but the American 
national interest cannot be ascertained without considering them. Yes, the United 
States has an interest in deterring or containing North Korea and Iran because of 
perceived hostility (the same holds true for North Korean and Iranian perceptions 
of the United States). By contrast, the United States has no apparent interest in 
containing the United Kingdom, given the more positive, non-threatening pattern 
of relations between the two countries. The importance of this bilateral, essentially 
social relationship is augmented by international norms and how a state conceives 
of its identity. All such factors influence a state’s definition of its particular national 
interests. 
 The historical construction of national interests is a primary research interest 
of such constructivists as Martha Finnemore and Jutta Weldes. 12 Finnemore has 
documented successive waves in the diffusion of cultural norms among states. 
While these states may be very different in terms of their circumstances and role in 

 
The Diversity of Social Constructivist Thought  
291
the international system, they still tend to express identical preferences for national 
policies and the creation of similar bureaucratic structures. Constructivists also see 
the concept of security to be historically conditioned by social interaction rather 
than an objective calculation determined by the distribution of military capabilities. 
Canada, for example, does not fear invasion or feel its security threatened by the 
United States despite geographic proximity and the overwhelming superiority of 
American military capabilities. Subjectivity matters in the understandings Canadi-
ans have of their interests and the threats or opportunities facing them.  
THE DIVERSITY OF SOCIAL 
CONSTRUCTIVIST THOUGHT 
 There is substantial diversity in constructivist thought that has made providing an 
overview of key concepts and assumptions related to constructivism particularly 
challenging. Definitions and their application to research questions and case studies 
can vary from scholar to scholar. Indeed, as we will see, much of the criticism of 
constructivism comes from within the constructivist camp itself. Although Alexan-
der Wendt’s work on constructivism warrants the attention we will be giving to it, 
we note important (and early) contributions by others who also have pursued this 
line of inquiry. 
 In the 1970s well before the constructivist label came into use, Ernst Haas, 
John Ruggie, and others were working in this vineyard. Although their work then 
and since has been identified for the most part as being based on the assumptions 
of the liberal image, Ruggie has observed that “in those days [the 1970s] we were 
all constructivists, but didn’t know it!” 13 Reflecting “on the role of ideas in the 
heads of actors,” Haas came to see not just ideas as such, but ideas grounded in 
interests as motive forces in international politics: “Ideas have very often acted as 
the switches and channeled the dynamics of the interests.” 14 Indeed, while many 
scholars brought such interpretive understandings to their work in earlier decades, 
the language and label of social constructivism have only come into common use 
in IR since the late 1980s. 
Schools of Thought 
 Influences on the role of ideas drawn from both Durkheim and Weber inform what 
Ruggie refers to as a “neoclassical” constructivism still within explanatory social 
science. He personally has subscribed to this perspective along with Nicholas Onuf, 
Friedrich Kratochwil, Emanuel Adler, Martha Finnemore, Peter Katzenstein, the 
late Ernst Haas, and feminist scholars like Jean Elshtain. While their theorizing in-
corporates values, norms, and other ideational factors, they do not reject the canons 
of science, standards, and methodologies for testing hypotheses or propositions. 
 Nicholas Onuf’s path-breaking  World of Our Making (1989) in particular set 
the stage for the important role constructivism has continued to play in interna-
tional relations theory. Onuf’s observation that “people make society and society 
makes people” 15 is core to constructivist understanding precisely because humans 
are social beings—we would not be human but for our social relations. Thus, 

292
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
 human agency matters and our theories should address the choices agents make. 
The structure or “social arrangement” of society within which they operate is given 
by its rules and institutions. Just as these rules and institutions are made by human 
agency, they also provide the basis and context for agents to act. To Onuf, use of 
the term  institutions is not restricted to bricks-and-mortar organizations, but rather 
may refer to such concepts as balance of power, spheres of influence, treaties, and 
international regimes. As with domestic societies, international society is itself “a 
complex institution within which many other related institutions are to be found.” 
 Friedrich Kratochwil and Emanuel Adler also underscore the importance of 
rules and norms in constructivist understandings. Kratochwil comments: “Norms 
not only establish certain games and enable the players to pursue their goals within 
them, they also establish inter-subjective meanings that allow the actors to direct 
their actions towards each other, communicate with each other, appraise the qual-
ity of their actions, criticize claims and justify choices.” 16 Emphasis is placed on the 
shared understandings that provide the context for political interactions. 
 Adler emphasizes “the role of identities, norms and causal understandings in 
the constitution of national interests.” Taking the broad view, he identifies con-
structivism as “a social theory about the role of knowledge and knowledgeable 
agents in the constitution of social reality.” The goal is advancing understandings 
of “the role of inter-subjectivity and social context, the co-constitution of agent 
and structure, and the rule-governed nature of society.” Adler comments that “con-
structivism sees the world as a project under construction, as  becoming rather than 
 being [emphasis added].” 17 
 “Postmodern” constructivism is a second category or school of constructivist 
thought. Ruggie identifies this with the works of David Campbell, James DerDerian, 
R. B. J. Walker, and such feminist scholars as Spike Peterson. Postmodernist con-
structivism, in contrast to neoclassical constructivism, rejects the conventional 
epistemology of social science. It emphasizes instead the linguistic construction of 
subjects, resulting in “discursive practices” constituting the ontological or founda-
tional units of reality and analysis. (We discuss postmodernism in  Chapter  7 as a 
different category of interpretive understanding, but one which also has had influ-
ence within the constructivist camp.) 
 Finally, Ruggie places Alexander Wendt along with Roy Bhashkar and David 
Dessler in a “naturalistic” constructivism category between the other two. As 
with the neoclassical approach, it approaches IR as part of the social sciences, and 
emphasizes the intersubjective aspects or structures of social life. These ideational 
structures usually exist independently of human thought and interaction and can, 
therefore, be treated as nonobservables, much like physical nonobservables (e.g., 
subatomic particles) that underlie what we observe in nature. Following Alexander 
Wendt, we probe deeply in the human psyche to find the ideational core underlying 
the subjectivity and intersubjectivity that define understanding.  
Levels of Analysis 
 Aside from categorizing constructivism by schools of thought, another way to cut 
into the literature is by levels of analysis. While committed to the basics of con-
structivism (agents, structures, identities, norms, etc.), research designs vary in their 

Wendt’s “Naturalist” Constructivism 
293
emphasis. One scholar has characterized these as systemic, unit-level, and holistic 
constructivisms. 18 The systemic level follows the third image perspective presented 
by Kenneth Waltz (see the reading appended to  Chapter  2 ). The focus is on the 
interaction of unitary state actors at the system level with domestic politics for the 
most part ignored. It is the interaction and relation of actors to one another that 
matter. Much of Alexander Wendt’s work exemplifies a similar systemic form of 
constructivism that focuses on the interactions of states and the cultures of rules 
and norms that have been constructed to guide them. 
 Unit-level constructivism takes the opposite approach, emphasizing the rela-
tion between domestic legal and social norms on the one hand, and the identities 
and interests of states on the other. Peter Katzenstein’s work on the national secu-
rity policies of Germany and Japan is an example. 19 The puzzle he hopes to solve 
is why two states that both experienced military defeat in World War II, foreign 
occupation, economic and democratic development ended up adopting different 
domestic and external national security policies. Constitutive national, social, and 
legal norms are critical to understanding this outcome. 
 Finally, as the name suggests, holistic constructivists aim to bridge the classic 
international-domestic divide. Factors at these two levels of analysis are two faces 
of a single social and political order. The primary concern tends to be on the dy-
namics of global change such as John Ruggie’s work on the rise of sovereign states 
out of European feudalism and Friedrich Kratochwil’s theorizing on the end of the 
Cold War.  
WENDT’S “NATURALIST” CONSTRUCTIVISM 
 It was in Alexander Wendt’s now-classic essay “Anarchy Is What States Make of 
It” that he made the claim that self-help and power politics are socially constructed 
under anarchy. 20 Over the years he has continued to elaborate, refine, and defend 
his arguments. During a period when many IR scholars have attempted to apply 
constructivist concepts to empirically based case studies, Wendt has exhibited a 
distinct philosophic turn in his writings. 
 His most complete statement on social constructivism is to be found in his 
book  Social Theory of International Politics. Wendt’s interpretive approach to IR 
is quite clear. For him, the challenge we have as subjective creatures is finding a 
correct understanding of the world around us in which we are so integral a part. We 
use science as far as it will take us, fully knowing that we may not get it right. We 
assume an objective world out there, but are always constrained in our search for 
reality by our own subjectivities as human beings—a problem identified by Wendt 
as affected by the ontologies we have and the epistemologies we are prone to adopt. 
Nevertheless, Wendt is not a pessimist: While we may not have unmediated access 
to the world, we can still make great strides in understanding how it works, yet be 
humble about the truth claims we assert. 
 For Wendt the two basic tenets of constructivism are: “(1) that the structures 
of human association are determined primarily by shared ideas rather than material 
forces, and (2) that the identities and interests of purposive actors are constructed 
by these shared ideas rather than given by nature.” 21 His ontology of international 
relations therefore is  social —”that it is through ideas that states ultimately relate 

294
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
to one another” and it is “these ideas [that] help define who and what states are.” 22 
It is not a coincidence that the title of his book parallels that of Kenneth Waltz’s 
 Theory of International Politics. 
 Wendt sees the identity of the self as a function of the other, so it is that  agency 
and  structure are mutually constituted—in effect shaping one another. Put another 
way, states (more precisely, people acting for states) over time have constituted 
the international or global culture of generally accepted norms and concepts that 
have legitimacy as part of international relations. This ideational structure, in 
turn, constitutes and sustains the states in the system or society of states they have 
constructed. States continue to reinforce or support existing norms, adapt them, or 
constitute new ones that reflect changing circumstances or new points of consensus 
(such as the norm against slavery, the slave trade, and other forms of human traf-
ficking). And so this reciprocal process continues. 
 It should be noted, however, that as opposed to postmodern constructivists, 
Wendt does not completely reject the materially based structure used in neoreal-
ist theorizing (the distribution of capabilities or power among states), but rather 
incorporates it and redefines it in his conception of social structure. He observes, 
however, that “the character of international life is determined by the beliefs and 
expectations that states have about each other, and these are constituted largely by 
social rather than material structures.” 
 Wendt sees the ideational—a culture of generally accepted norms and other 
values that have been constructed under anarchy—as the fabric of system structure. 
It is, however, not that material power and interests are unimportant to Wendt, 
“but rather that their meaning and effects depend upon the social structure of the 
system, and specifically on which of the three ‘cultures’ of anarchy is dominant”—
Hobbesian, Lockean, or Kantian. 23 In other words, instead of a single anarchy and 
a singular logic, there are different understandings of anarchy. Going beyond the 
Hobbesian anarchy as “state of war” of all against all, for Wendt a Lockean culture 
is one of rivalry but guided by mutually agreed rules, and a Kantian culture is one 
of a community of accepted norms. The amount of war and conflict is conditioned 
by the type of anarchy in existence. All these social structures have three elements: 
material resources and, more important, shared knowledge (ideas), and human 
practices. 
 States (and other actors) as agents can shape the world within which they are 
immersed and not just be prisoners of the  status quo. Anarchy need not be the 
dog-eat-dog, jungle-like Hobbesian world as portrayed by many realists in which, 
drawing from Thucydides, the strong do what they will and the weak do what 
they must. Wendt sees agreed rules and institutions as giving the systemic culture 
of international relations today a Lockean character (a perspective drawn from 
the social-contract writings of John Locke, 1632–1704). Although Wendt rejects 
any claims to inevitability, he is optimistic that the international culture can grow 
beyond current common understandings of the rules that states and other agents 
follow in their relations with each other. 
 Wendt addresses the important interrelations among ideas, material factors, 
and social interaction. He agonizes over the essence of the mind-body relation and 
the issue of consciousness. His interest is in how ideational and material factors 
interact in nature as a whole, human beings and social relationships in particular. 

Wendt’s “Naturalist” Constructivism 
295
Is the material prior to the ideational as realists and other “physicalists” claim? 
After all, isn’t the source of ideas the human brain—a material entity? Wendt ob-
jects to contemporary thinking about the mind that is dominated by the materialist 
worldview of classical physics and the assumption that ultimately reality is purely 
material. 
 He raises what he himself terms a heretical thought: Why do we have to assume 
that contemporary social science and its conceptualization of the relation of mind 
(ideas) to body (the material world) must be compatible with classical physics? 
What if consciousness is instead viewed as a quantum mechanical phenomenon, 
the domain of the subatomic physics of particles and waves? From this perspective, 
human beings are in effect walking wave particles, not classical material objects. 24 
Just as physicists have pondered over the question of whether the character of light 
is particle (and thus material) or waves of energy (analogous to the ideational in 
the social sciences), Wendt asks if we can assume there is an ideational-material 
composite in the social sciences similar to the wave-particle relation posited in the 
natural sciences. These two interactive factors in physics are encapsulated by the 
term  quantum. 
 Consciousness—to Wendt “the basis of social life” 25 —is the core concept in 
much theorizing about interpretive understanding. And as noted it is understood 
by him as “a macroscopic quantum mechanical phenomenon.” It is incorrect to 
view matter as purely material or inanimate; it is both “material and phenomenal, 
outside and inside.” As Wendt summarizes his ontological position: “Matter . . . is 
an active, ‘minded’ phenomenon, not the inert, mindless substance of materialism.” 
To him “the mind-body problem is a fundamental problem of  social science, not 
just neuroscience.” 
 The material and the ideational, then, are bound together in human conscious-
ness. It is not as if consciousness is external to or separate from human actions, but 
is integrally a part of them. To rational-choice theorists and others who discount 
subjective experiences and other aspects of consciousness, “human beings are noth-
ing but sophisticated information-processing machines.” He laments this purging 
of subjectivity from social science, observing that in this “rationalist” position there 
is “an implicit materialism telling us that consciousness is epiphenomenal”—that 
it is secondary and thus not causal. Put another way, in physicalist understandings 
the material determines the ideational, not the other way around. 
 Wendt explicitly rejects this physicalist understanding that all materialists 
share—“a belief that in the end it’s ‘matter all the way down.’” 26 Because human 
consciousness effectively drops out of this materialist equation, Wendt finds the 
physicalist approach unacceptable. Indeed, Wendt finds many similarities between 
the social lives of human beings and the unpredictability or uncertainty one finds 
in the subatomic or quantum world. He refers to a “quantum consciousness” and 
a “participatory epistemology” as defining the social context in which human be-
ings act. 27 
 We have come a long way from the initial formulations of social constructiv-
ism. Wendt does not resolve the dialectic between the ideational and material, any 
more than physicists have found a new particle-wave synthesis. For Wendt it may 
be enough merely to posit the material-ideational dualism in the form of a quantum 
found naturally in human beings. His critics will be quick to note the  reductionism 

296
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
inherent in Wendt’s mind-body formulation—trying to go ever deeper within the 
human psyche (effectively, they’ll say, to brain waves or the synapse between nerve 
endings) to depict the relation between the ideational and the material. 
 Some of a positivist bent also object to Wendt’s  metaphysics —his character-
ization of the ideational metaphorically as a “wave” lacking the materiality of 
particles, thus coming close to identifying a life force or spirit. In such matters 
conventional or positivist science is silent, leaving such speculations to theologians. 
Finally, still others will find fault with Wendt’s metaphorical use of  quantum , 
borrowed from subatomic physics as if it were analogous to a similar structure in 
human beings (and presumably other forms of life, although Wendt does not so 
extend his argument). 
 Aside from his earlier analysis of the agent-structure issue and the investigation 
of the relations among mind, body, and consciousness, Wendt also grapples with 
other dualisms or dialectics that challenge theoretical work in the entire IR field. Is 
there a synthesis to be found (or should we learn to live with the tensions) between 
(1) positivism and interpretivism—objective science and human self-understanding; 
(2) rationalism and constructivism; and (3) idealism and realism—ideas and the 
material world? 
 What is interesting is that Wendt does not see a necessary contradiction be-
tween science or positivism and interpretive understanding, rejecting the either/
or position. In so doing he draws criticism from causal and interpretive theorists 
alike. Wendt believes one can be informed by (and thus compatible with) the other 
unless we build them as straw men—constructing them as if they were mutually 
exclusive. Wendt’s positivism is a broad “commitment to  science, understood as 
a method for gaining knowledge about the world out there.” He therefore sees 
positivism with a lowercase or “small  p. ” What he rejects is a certain kind of 
positivism (capitalized  P ) when it is treated as “a particular  philosophy of science” 
that “privileges Humean causation, lawlike generalizations, deductive theory” and 
the like. 28  
 According to Wendt, the “Cartesian worldview” one finds in positivism makes 
several assumptions to include: 
 1.  Reality out there is not part of you or me in here, which means we must 
distinguish between subject and object;  
 2.  We can acquire knowledge of external reality through the scientific method;  
 3.  Success depends on maintaining a distinction between fact and value; and  
 4.  Mind and matter are distinct, irreducible substances.  
 These assumptions are the foundation of a “classical worldview”: 
 1.  The elementary units of reality are physical objects (materialism);  
 2.  Larger objects can be reduced to smaller ones (reductionism);  
 3.  Objects behave in lawlike ways (determinism);  
 4.  Causation is mechanical and local (mechanism); and  
 5.  Objects exist independent of the subjects who observe them—(a claim to 
objectivism).  
 What this classical worldview lacks is a place for human consciousness—the basis 
for an interpretivist understanding. What Wendt tries to do, then, is to  combine a 

Constructivists and Their Critics 
297
positivist epistemology with an interpretivist ontology. To him, there is a comple-
mentarity between positivism and interpretivism. We need not be forced to choose 
“between a positivism in which consciousness makes no difference and an interpre-
tivism in which it has no naturalistic basis.”  29  
CONSTRUCTIVIST AFFINITIES 
IN THE BROADER IR FIELD 
 In sum, constructivism shares at least one characteristic with realism and liberalism: 
All are rather broad tents within which numerous perspectives and theories can be 
found. One finds constructivist understandings not only in some critical theory and 
postmodernist interpretations, but they also are present in feminist scholarship. 
We also can see constructivist currents in the English School’s “Grotian” focus on 
rules and law in international society to include an emphasis on historical sociology 
(how these ideational factors emerged over time, which also dovetails nicely with 
constructivist understandings of how structures come to be). 
 Constructivism also shares affinities with some liberals who emphasize the role 
of ideas, learning, and shared expectations in the construction of regime theory. 
We would even argue that some classical realists have a constructivist flavor in 
their work when they have a more voluntarist (rather than determinist) take on 
such matters as the historical development of balance of power. As realist Hans 
Morgenthau stated: “The confidence in the stability of the modern state system . . . 
derives . . . not from the balance of power, but [rather] from a number of elements, 
intellectual and moral in nature, upon which both the balance of power and the 
stability of the modern state repose.” The balance of power in the nineteenth cen-
tury was embedded in this moral and intellectual climate [read “structure”] that 
resulted in “temperate and undecisive contests.”  30  One could even argue that given 
Thucydides’ emphasis on the power of rhetoric to shift Athenian conceptions of 
interest, he also has some affinities with constructivism. Yet the realist and liberal 
emphasis on asocial actors primarily concerned with material interests ultimately 
separates them from constructivist understandings. 
 Constructivist interpretations are not as prevalent or as well developed in 
 economic-structuralist work and the associated literature. That said, Antonio 
Gramsci developed the concept of the historical and ideological  bloc , an obstacle to 
social change that maintains a pattern of dominance in society or even on a global 
scale. We note that such blocs are social constructions that economic structuralists 
see as serving dominant class interests that go well beyond the boundaries of par-
ticular states and their societies.  
CONSTRUCTIVISTS AND THEIR CRITICS 
Liberal and Realist Critiques 
 Given the fact that early constructivist work consisted of a critique of the episte-
mological and ontological assumptions of neorealism and neoliberalism, it is not 
surprising that there was a response. An initial sympathetic take on interpretive un-
derstandings came from Robert Keohane in 1989. In contrasting his own  neoliberal 

298
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
institutionalism approach to that of what he terms the “reflective school,” he stated 
that a research program is lacking in the latter. Until that is achieved, and it can 
be shown via empirical studies that it can “illuminate important issues in world 
politics, they will remain on the margins of the field, largely invisible to the pre-
ponderance of empirical researchers.” These reflective approaches (what we call 
interpretive understandings), he argued, had been adept at pointing out the limita-
tions of rational actor and game-theoretic approaches to international institutions, 
rather than developing theories of their own.  31  
 Five years later, the neorealist John Mearsheimer took on not only con-
structivism, but also other interpretive understandings of IR as they gained in 
prominence.  32  (Wendt’s rebuttal is one of the Selected Readings at the end of this 
chapter.) Mearsheimer argued it is one thing to criticize hegemonic research pro-
grams like realism with its pessimistic view on the possibility of peaceful change. 
But the problem with social constructivism, critical theory, and postmodernism is 
that they have little say on the feasibility of the international system evolving into 
a more peaceful world, the mechanisms as to how this would even occur, little em-
pirical support for their assertions, and even an inability to explain why particular 
discourses rise and fall. Supposed examples of more communitarian systems such 
as the feudal era are subject to dispute as are claims that the end of the Cold War 
illustrates the eroding explanatory power of anarchy and the self-help nature of 
the international system. 
 A great deal has changed in recent years on the application of constructivist 
concepts to IR issues, which has reduced the saliency of the Keohane and 
Mearsheimer critiques. Numerous empirical case studies have been based upon 
constructivist concepts while remaining cognizant of the contribution of causal 
theorizing generally associated with positivism.  33  But the bottom line is that in-
terpretive understandings and realist and liberal approaches to IR still stand in 
contrast to each other due to basic underlying epistemological and ontological 
differences. This was particularly evident a decade ago when constructivists point-
edly noted the weaknesses of neoliberal and neorealist theorizing on international 
organizations based upon assumptions of instrumental rationality being at odds 
with subjective or social insights generated by sociological approaches favored 
by constructivists.  34  Whether or not synthesis occurs between constructivism and 
any of the four images we identify in this volume, we do see the latter as enriched 
by the interpretive understanding constructivists bring to their diverse research 
programs.  
Debates within Constructivism and Postmodern Challenges 
 The most fruitful debates concerning the promise and limitations of constructivism 
as an approach to IR have really come from within the constructivist camp itself. 
It is difficult, for example, to get a handle on exactly who is a constructivist and 
what they have in common beyond the assumptions outlined at the beginning of 
the chapter. Is constructivism a middle path between causal theory and postmod-
ernism? Or does it also include postmodernism? If so, there is a great difference 
between an Alexander Wendt who accepts a positivist epistemology (in the broad 

Constructivists and Their Critics 
299
sense of a commitment to science as a way to gain knowledge of the world out 
there) and treats states as actors or people with intentions, and a postmodernist 
such as Andreas Behnke who claims Wendt is not really that far removed from 
Kenneth Waltz’s neorealism.  35  
 Such “family” disagreements stem from a number of sources. For example, 
for analytic purposes should the state as agent be a given? Should scientific 
methods be used? A positivist epistemology would maintain that a socially con-
structed international system contains patterns that are subject to generalization 
and falsifiable hypotheses. Alexander Wendt, Martha Finnemore, and Michael 
Barnett fall into this camp. A postmodernist, by contrast, might ask if such work 
is really all that different from the methodological and epistemological conven-
tions of realism and liberalism. What about the role of ethics? Can the “is” be 
distinguished from the “ought”? Postmodern constructivists are decidedly skep-
tical about such distinctions. Is anarchy a fundamental organizing principle of 
the international system? Or does enough authority (or legitimated power) exist 
in international organizations, international law, and even firms and other non-
governmental organizations to ask whether the world is really as anarchic as it is 
usually portrayed? 
 The debate on the relation between agency and structure as sources of change in 
international politics—an ongoing discourse conducted throughout the 1990s that 
continues to the present—remains unresolved. How important is agency—whether 
states or non-state actors including human beings are acting for them or in their 
own right? How important is structure—the external or exogenous factors that 
facilitate or constrain agents? What impact do agents have on these structures that, 
after all, are of human construction or subject to interpretation by human beings? 
 The agent-structure debate has moved on from a clash between neorealists 
and neoliberals on the one hand and constructivists on the other. Others have 
joined in the fight from postmodern or post-structuralist, critical ranks. As noted 
by Emanuel Adler, the latter argue that “what matters is neither structures nor 
agents, but the role of discursive practices.” Social “realities” are a function of 
linguistic construction, our understanding of cultural meanings found in language 
interactions, and the verbal and non-verbal communications we employ.  36  As a 
result, Adler doubts whether the agent-structure debate will ever be fully resolved. 
He states, however, that we are nevertheless left with a much better understand-
ing of how agents and structures relate in the theoretical formulations offered by 
constructivists. 
 In sum, constructivism continues to be a leading perspective on IR. It has 
evolved from a critique of realism and liberalism to a research program that has 
provided important insights into world politics. In the process, it has caused other 
perspectives or approaches to take into account constructivist concepts and argu-
ments. What constructivism offers is not yet another global image of international 
relations or world politics as realism, liberalism, economic structuralism, and the 
English School do, but rather an interpretive lens or understanding not confined 
to a particular image. As with other interpretive understandings discussed in 
 Chapters 7 and 8—critical theory, postmodernism, and feminism—constructivists 
can find a place within any of the four IR images we identify.  

300
CHAPTER 6  Constructivist Understandings
NOTES
  1.  Max Weber,  Methodology of the Social Sciences, Edward Shils and H.A. Finch, trans. 
(Glencoe, IL: Free Press, 1941), 81.  
  2.  See the article by Martha Finnemore at the end of this chapter.  
  3.  See Emanuel Adler and Michael Barnett,  Security Communities (New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2002).  
  4.  John Gerard Ruggie,  Constructing the World Polity (London: Routledge, 1998).  
  5.  Ibid. , 22. For more on the causal-constitutive distinction made by constructivists, see 
David Dessler and John Owen, “Constructivism and the Problem of Explanation: 
A Review Article,”  Perspectives on Politics 3, 3 (September 2005): 597–610.  
  6.  Ibid. , 25–26.  
  7.  Peter Katzenstein,  The Culture of National Security: Norms and Identity in Interna-
tional Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996), 5.  
  8.  V. P. Shannon, “Norms Are What States Make of Them: The Political Psychology of 
Norm Violation,”  International Studies Quarterly, 44 (2000): 293–316.  
  9.  For a constructivist argument that international organizations, for example, can be 
treated as autonomous actors, see Michael N. Barnett and Martha Finnemore, “The 
Politics, Power and Pathologies of International Organizations,”  International Organi-
zations 53, 4 (Autumn 1999): 699–732.  
  10.  See the articles in Peter J. Katzenstein, ed.,  The Culture of National Security: Norms and 
Identity in World Politics (New York: Columbia University Press, 1996).  
  11.  James G. March and Johan P. Olsen, “The Institutional Dynamics of International 
 Political Orders,”  International Organization 52, 4 (Autumn 1998): 951.  
  12.  Martha Finnemore,  National Interests in International Society (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
 University Press, 1996); Jutta Weldes,  Constructing National Interests: The United States 
and the Cuban Missile Crisis (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999).  
  13.  Annual Meeting, American Political Science Association, Philadelphia, August–September 
2003. Cf. Ruggie,  Constructing the World Polity, 19 and 35.  
  14.  Ernst B. Haas,  Nationalism, Liberalism, and Progress, vol. 1 (Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
 University Press, 1997), 2–3.  
  15.  This quote and subsequent citations in this paragraph are taken from Nicholas Onuf, 
“Constructivism: A User’s Manual” in  International Relations in a Constructed World, 
eds., Vendulka Kubálková, Nicholas Onuf, and Paul Kowert (London and Armonk, NY: 
M.E. Sharpe, 1998), 58–78.  
  16.  Friedrich Kratochwil, “The Embarrassment of Changes: Neo-realism as the Science of 
Realpolitik Without Politics,”  Review of International Studies, 19 (1993), 75–76.  
  17.  See Emanuel Adler, “Constructivism and International Relations,” in  Handbook of 
International Relations, eds., Walter Carlsnaes, Thomas Risse, and Beth A. Simmons 
(London: Routledge, 2002), 95–114.  
  18.  We refer here to insights offered in Christian Reus-Smit, “Constructivism,” in  Theories 
of International Relations, 3rd ed., eds., Scott Burchill, et al. (New York: Palgrave 
 Macmillan, 2005), 199–201.  
  19.  Peter Katzenstein,  Tamed Power: Germany in Europe (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 
1999);  Cultural Norms and National Security: Police and Military in Postwar Japan 
(Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996).  
  20.  Alexander Wendt, “Anarchy Is What States Make of It: The Social Construction of 
Power Politics,”  International Organization 46, 2 (Spring 1992) 391–425.  
  21.  Alexander Wendt,  Social Theory of International Politics (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1999), 1.  
  22.  Ibid. , 372 

Notes
301
  23.  Ibid. , 20. The three cultures are discussed in detail in  Chapter  6 of  Social Theory. 
  24.  Alexander Wendt, “Social Theory as Cartesian Science,” in  Constructivism and Inter-
national Relations: Alexander Wendt and His Critics, eds., Stefano Guzzini and Anna 
Leander (London and New York: Routledge, 2006), 183.  
  25.  Ibid. , 184. Subsequent quotes are from, respectively, pages 183, 195, and 185.  
  26.  Ibid. , 185.  
  27.  Ibid. , 205.  
  28.  Ibid. , 214.  
  29.  Ibid. , 188, 190, 214.  
  30.  Hans J. Morgenthau,  Politics Among Nations: The Struggle for Power and Peace, 4th ed. 
(New York: Alfred Knopf, 1967), 211, 213.  
  31.  Robert O. Keohane, “International Institutions: Two Approaches,”  International Insti-
tutions and State Power (Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1989). Quotes from p. 173.  
  32.  John J. Mearsheimer, “The False Promise of International Institutions,”  International 
Security 19, 3 (Winter 1994/95): 5–49. See also the 2000 article by Dale Copeland, “The 
Constructivist Challenge to Structural Realism: A Review Essay,” in  Constructivism and 
International Relations, eds., Stefano Guzzini and Anna Leander (London: Routledge, 
2006), 1–20.  
  33.  See, for example, Michael Struett,  The Politics of Constructing the International Criminal 
Court: NGOs, Discourse, and Agency (New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008); Edward 
Keene, “A Case Study of the Construction of International Hierarchy: British Treaty-
Making Against the Slave Trade in the Early Nineteenth Century,”  International Orga-
nization, 61 (Spring 2007): 311–39; Judith Kelley, “Assessing the Complex Evolution 
of Norms: The Rise of International Election Monitoring,”  International Organization, 
62 (Spring 2008): 221–55; Emanuel Adler, “The Spread of Security Communities: Com-
munities of Practice, Self-Restraint, and NATO’s Post–Cold War Transformation,” 
 European Journal of International Relations, 14, 2 (2008): 195–230; Neta Crawford, 
 Argument and Change in World Politics: Ethics, Decolonization, and Humanitarian 
Intervention (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2002) . 
  34.  Martha Finnemore and Stephen J. Trope, “Alternatives to ‘Legalization’: Richer Views of 
Law and Politics,”  International Organization 55, 3 (Summer 2001): 743–58; Alexander 
Wendt, “Driving with the Rearview Mirror: On the Rational Science of Institutional 
Design,”  International Organization 55, 4 (Autumn 2001): 1019–49; and Michael N. 
Barnett and Martha Finnemore, “The Politics, Power and Pathologies of International 
Organizations,”  International Organizations 53, 4 (Autumn 1999): 699–732.  
  35.  Andreas Behnke, “Grand Theory in the Age of Its Impossibility,” in Stefano Guzzini and 
Anna Leander, 49.  
  36.  Emanuel Adler, “Constructivism and International Relations,” in  Handbook of Interna-
tional Relations, eds., Walter Carlsnaes, Thomas Risse, and Beth A. Simmons (London: 
Routledge, 2002), 104. Adler’s references are to Roxanne L. Doty, “Aporia: A Critical 
Exploration of the Agent-Structure Problematique in International Relations Theory,” 
 European Journal of International Relations 3, 3 (1997): 365–92; and to Hidemi Suga-
nimi, “Agents, Structures, Narratives,”  European Journal of International Relations 5, 
3 (1999): 365–86.  

S ELEC T ED READING S 
Constructing International Politics 
ALEXANDER WENDT
OVERVIEW
 In this response to critiques of neoliberal institutionalism and various forms of in-
terpretive understanding by John Mearsheimer, a structural realist, the author uses 
the occasion to lay out succinctly his own constructivist approach to the IR field. 
Note that the term  critical IR theory  is used to capture postmodernists, construc-
tivists, feminists, and neo-Marxists; we use the term in a more limited sense. Also 
note that Wendt actually shares a number of realist assumptions, a perspective over 
which many constructivists would part company. Wendt also observes the need for 
dialogue across IR subfields, an issue address in the reading by Thomas Walker in 
 Chapter  1 . 
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   According to Wendt, what basic assumptions do realists and constructivists have in common? 
How do they differ in terms of their view of structure?  
 2.  On the issue of epistemology, do constructivists claim there can be objective knowledge of 
structures?  
 3.  What is Wendt’s rebuttal to Mearsheimer’s claim that realists are focused on a theory of war 
and critical theorists (including constructivists) a theory of peace?  
 4.  Can a “structure of shared knowledge” easily be changed? How does the example of former 
Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev relate to this question?  
Alexander Wendt, “Constructing International Politics,”  International Security , 20: 1 (Summer 1995), pp. 71–81. 
 Copyright © 1995 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. Used 
by permission.
302
 John J. Mearsheimer’s “The False Promise of Inter-
national Institutions”  1  is welcome particularly in two 
respects. First, it is the most systematic attempt to 
date by a neorealist to address critical international 
relations (IR) theory.  2  Second, it reminds neoliberals 
and critical theorists, normally locked in their own 
tug-of-war, that they have a common, non-realist 
interest in the institutional bases of  international 
life.  3  “False Promise” is likely, therefore, to spur 
productive discussions on all sides. 
 Unfortunately, it will be hard for most criti-
cal theorists to take seriously a discussion of their 
research program so full of conflations, half-truths, 
and misunderstandings. However, to some extent 
misunderstanding is inevitable when anthropologists 
from one culture first explore another. A  dialogue 

Constructing International Politics 
303
to neorealism is that it is not structural enough: that 
adopting the individualistic metaphors of micro-
economics restricts the effects of structures to state 
behavior, ignoring how they might also constitute 
state identities and interests.  6  Constructivists think 
that state interests are in important part constructed 
by systemic structures, not exogenous to them; this 
leads to a sociological rather than micro-economic 
structuralism. 
 Where neorealist and constructivist structural-
isms really differ, however, is in their assumptions 
about what structure is made of. Neorealists think 
it is made only of a distribution of material capa-
bilities, whereas constructivists think it is also made 
of social relationships. Social structures have three 
elements: shared knowledge, material resources, and 
practices.  7  
 First, social structures are defined, in part, by 
shared understandings, expectations, or knowledge. 
These constitute the actors in a situation and the 
nature of their relationships, whether cooperative 
or conflictual. A  security dilemma, for example, is a 
social structure composed of intersubjective under-
standings in which states are so distrustful that they 
make worst-case assumptions about each others’ 
intentions, and as a result define their interests in 
self-help terms. A  security community is a different 
social structure, one composed of shared knowledge 
in which states trust one another to resolve disputes 
without war.  8  This dependence of social structure 
on ideas is the sense in which constructivism has 
an idealist (or “idea-ist”) view of structure. What 
makes these ideas (and thus structure) “social,” 
however, is their intersubjective quality. In other 
words, sociality (in contrast to “materiality,” in the 
sense of brute physical capabilities), is about shared 
knowledge. 
 Second, social structures include material re-
sources like gold and tanks. In contrast to neo-
realists’ desocialized view of such capabilities, 
constructivists argue that material resources only 
acquire meaning for human action through the 
structure of shared knowledge in which they are 
embedded.  9  For example, 500 British nuclear weap-
ons are less threatening to the United States than 
5 North Korean nuclear weapons, because the British 
are friends of the United States and the North 
Koreans are not, and amity or enmity is a func-
tion of shared understandings. As students of world 
politics, neorealists would probably not disagree, 
but as theorists the example poses a big problem, 
between these two cultures is overdue, and “False 
Promise” is a good beginning. 
 Critical IR “theory,” however, is not a single 
theory. It is a family of theories that includes post-
modernists (Ashley, Walker), constructivists (Adler, 
Kratochwil, Ruggie, and now Katzenstein), neo-
Marxists (Cox, Gill), feminists (Peterson,  Sylvester), 
and others. What unites them is a concern with how 
world politics is “socially constructed,”  4  which 
involves two basic claims: that the fundamental 
structures of international politics are social rather 
than strictly material (a claim that opposes materi-
alism), and that these structures shape actors’ iden-
tities and interests, rather than just their behavior 
(a claim that opposes rationalism). However, hav-
ing these two claims in common no more makes 
critical theory a single theory than does the fact 
that neorealism and neoliberalism both use game 
theory makes them a single theory. Some critical 
theorists are statists and some are not; some believe 
in science and some do not; some are optimists 
and some pessimists; some stress process and some 
structure.  5  Thus, in my reply I speak only for my-
self as a “constructivist,” hoping that other critical 
theorists may agree with much of what I say. I 
address four issues: assumptions, objective knowl-
edge, explaining war and peace, and policymakers’ 
responsibilities. 
 For their exceptionally detailed and helpful com-
ments I am grateful to Mike Barnett, Mlada Bu-
kovansky, Bud Duvall, Peter Katzenstein, Mark 
Laffey, David Lumsdaine, Sylvia Maxfield, Nina 
Tannenwald, Jutta Weldes, and the members of 
the Yale IR Reading Group.  
Assumptions
 I share all five of Mearsheimer’s “realist” assump-
tions (p. 10): that international politics is anarchic, 
and that states have offensive capabilities, cannot 
be 100 percent certain about others’ intentions, 
wish to survive, and are rational. We even share two 
more: a commitment to states as units of analysis, 
and to the importance of systemic or “third image” 
theorizing. 
 The last bears emphasis, for in juxtaposing 
“structure” to “discourse” and in emphasizing 
the role of individuals in “critical theory” (p. 40), 
Mearsheimer obscures the fact that constructivists 
are structuralists. Indeed, one of our main objections 

304
ALEXANDER WENDT
Objectivity
 Mearsheimer suggests that critical theorists do not 
believe that there is an objective world out there 
about which we can have knowledge (pp. 41ff). This 
is not the case. There are two issues here, ontologi-
cal and epistemological. 
 The ontological issue is whether social struc-
tures have an objective existence, which I addressed 
above. Social structures are collective phenomena 
that confront individuals as externally existing so-
cial facts. The Cold War was just as real for me as it 
was for Mearsheimer. 
 The epistemological issue is whether we can 
have objective knowledge of these structures. Here 
Mearsheimer ignores a key distinction between 
modern and postmodern critical theorists. The 
latter are indeed skeptical about the possibility of 
objective knowledge, although in their empirical 
work even they attend to evidence and inference. 
Constructivists, however, are modernists who fully 
endorse the scientific project of falsifying theories 
against evidence. In an article cited by Mearsheimer, 
I advocated a scientific-realist approach to social 
inquiry, which takes a very pro-science line.  11  And 
despite his claims, there is now a substantial body 
of constructivist empirical work that embodies a 
wholly conventional epistemology.  12  
 Mearsheimer is right, however, that critical 
theorists do not think we can make a clean distinc-
tion between subject and object. Then again, almost 
all philosophers of science today reject such a naive 
epistemology. All observation is theory- laden in the 
sense that what we see is mediated by our existing 
theories, and to that extent knowledge is inherently 
problematic. But this does not mean that observa-
tion, let alone reality, is theory- determined. The 
world is still out there constraining our beliefs, and 
may punish us for incorrect ones. Montezuma had 
a theory that the Spanish were gods, but it was 
wrong, with disastrous consequences. We do not 
have unmediated access to the world, but this does 
not preclude understanding how it works.  
Explaining War and Peace 
 Mearsheimer frames the debate between realists and 
critical theorists as one between a theory of war and 
a theory of peace. This is a fundamental mistake. So-
cial construction talk is like game theory talk: ana-
lytically neutral between conflict and  cooperation.  13  
since it completely eludes their materialist defini-
tion of structure. Material capabilities as such ex-
plain nothing; their effects presuppose structures of 
shared knowledge, which vary and which are not 
reducible to capabilities. Constructivism is therefore 
compatible with changes in material power affecting 
social relations (cf. Mearsheimer, p. 43), as long as 
those effects can be shown to presuppose still deeper 
social relations. 
 Third, social structures exist, not in actors’ 
heads nor in material capabilities, but in practices. 
Social structure exists only in process. The Cold 
War was a structure of shared knowledge that gov-
erned great power relations for forty years, but once 
they stopped acting on this basis, it was “over.” 
 In sum, social structures are real and objec-
tive, not “just talk.” But this objectivity depends 
on shared knowledge, and in that sense social life 
is “ideas all the way down” (until you get to biol-
ogy and natural resources). Thus, to ask “when do 
ideas, as opposed to power and interest, matter?” 
is to ask the wrong question. Ideas always matter, 
since power and interest do not have effects apart 
from the shared knowledge that constitutes them 
as such.  10  The real question, as Mearsheimer notes 
(p. 42), is why does one social structure exist, like 
self-help (in which power and self-interest determine 
behavior), rather than another, like collective secu-
rity (in which they do not). 
 The explanatory as opposed to normative char-
acter of this question bears emphasis. Constructiv-
ists have a normative interest in promoting social 
change, but they pursue this by trying to explain 
how seemingly natural social structures, like self-
help or the Cold War, are effects of practice (this is 
the “critical” side of critical theory). This makes me 
wonder about Mearsheimer’s repeated references 
(I count fourteen) to critical theorists’ “goals,” 
“aims,” and “hopes” to make peace and love pre-
vail on Earth. Even if we all had such hopes (which 
I doubt), and even if these were ethically wrong 
(though Mearsheimer seems to endorse them; p. 40), 
they are beside the point in evaluating critical theo-
ries of world politics. If critical theories fail, this 
will be because they do not explain how the world 
works, not because of their values. Emphasizing the 
latter recalls the old realist tactic of portraying op-
ponents as utopians more concerned with how the 
world ought to be than how it is. Critical theorists 
have normative commitments, just as neorealists do, 
but we are also simply trying to explain the world.  

Constructing International Politics 
305
embedded, by a logic of reciprocity. If they milita-
rize, others will be threatened and arm themselves, 
creating security dilemmas in terms of which they 
will define egoistic identities and interests. But if they 
engage in policies of reassurance, as the Soviets did 
in the late 1980s, this will have a different effect on 
the structure of shared knowledge, moving it toward 
a security community. The depth of interdependence 
is a factor here, as is the role of revisionist states, 
whose actions are likely to be especially threaten-
ing. However, on the structural side, the ability of 
revisionist states to create a war of all against all 
depends on the structure of shared knowledge into 
which they enter. If past interactions have created a 
structure in which status quo states are divided or 
naive, revisionists will prosper and the system will 
tend toward a Hobbesian world in which power 
and self-interest rule. In contrast, if past interactions 
have created a structure in which status quo states 
trust and identify with each other, predators are 
more likely to face collective security responses like 
the Gulf War.  19   History matters.  Security dilemmas 
are not acts of God: they are effects of practice. This 
does not mean that once created they can necessarily 
be escaped (they are, after all, “dilemmas”), but it 
puts the causal locus in the right place. 
 Contrast this explanation of power politics 
with the “poverty of neorealism.”  20  Mearsheimer 
thinks it significant that in anarchy, states cannot 
be 100 percent certain that others will not attack. 
Yet even in domestic society, I cannot be certain 
that I will be safe walking to class. There are no 
guarantees in life, domestic or international, but the 
fact that in anarchy war is possible does not mean 
“it may at any moment occur.”  21  Indeed, it may be 
quite unlikely, as it is in most interactions today. 
Possibility is not probability. Anarchy as such is not 
a structural cause of anything. What matters is its 
social structure, which varies across anarchies. An 
anarchy of friends differs from one of enemies, one 
of self-help from one of collective security, and these 
are all constituted by structures of shared knowl-
edge. Mearsheimer does not provide an argument 
for why this is wrong; he simply asserts that it is. 
 Other realist explanations for power politics 
fare somewhat better. Although neorealists want to 
eschew arguments from human nature, even they 
would agree that to the extent human-beings-in-
groups are prone to fear and competition, it may 
predispose them to war.  22  However, this factor 
faces countervailing dynamics of interdependence 
Critical theory does not predict peace.  14  War no 
more disproves critical theory than peace disproves 
realism. The confusion stems from conflating de-
scription and explanation. 
 The descriptive issue is the extent to which 
states engage in practices of  realpolitik (warfare, 
balancing, relative-gains seeking) versus accepting 
the rule of law and institutional constraints on their 
autonomy. States sometimes do engage in power poli-
tics, but this hardly describes all of the past 1300 years, 
and even less today, when most states follow most 
international law most of the time,  15  and when war 
and security dilemmas are the exception rather than 
the rule, Great Powers no longer tend to conquer 
small ones, and free trade is expanding rather than 
contracting.  16  The relative frequency of  realpolitik, 
however, has nothing to do with “realism.” Realism 
should be seen as an explanation of  realpolitik, not 
a description of it. Conflating the two makes it im-
possible to tell how well the one explains the other, 
and leads to the tautology that war makes realism 
true. Realism does not have a monopoly on the ugly 
and brutal side of international life. Even if we agree 
on a  realpolitik description, we can reject a realist 
explanation. 
 The explanatory issue is  why states engage 
in war or peace. Mearsheimer’s portrayal of con-
structivist “causal logic” on this issue is about 30 
percent right. The logic has two elements, struc-
ture and agency. On the one hand, constructivist 
theorizing tries to show how the social structure 
of a system makes actions possible by constitut-
ing  actors with certain identities and interests, and 
material capabilities with certain meanings. Missing 
from Mearsheimer’s account is the constructivist 
emphasis on how agency and interaction produce 
and  reproduce structures of shared knowledge 
over time. Since it is not possible here to discuss 
the various  dynamics through which this process 
takes place,  17  let me illustrate instead. And since 
Mearsheimer does not offer a neorealist explanation 
for inter-state cooperation, conceding that terrain 
to institutionalists, let me focus on the “hard case” 
of why states sometimes get into security dilemmas 
and war, that is, why they sometimes engage in 
 realpolitik behavior. 
 In “Anarchy Is What States Make of It” I argued 
that such behavior is a self-fulfilling prophecy,  18  and 
that this is due to both agency and social structure. 
Thus, on the agency side, what states do to each 
other affects the social structure in which they are 

306
ALEXANDER WENDT
 Neorealists’ growing reliance on social factors 
to do their explanatory work suggests that if ever 
there were a candidate for a degenerating research 
program in IR theory, this is it.  26  The progressive re-
sponse (in the Lakatosian sense) would be to return 
to realism’s materialist roots by showing that the 
background understandings that give capabilities 
meaning are caused by still deeper material condi-
tions, or that capabilities have intrinsic meaning 
that cannot be ignored. To show that the mate-
rial base determines international superstructure, in 
other words, realists should be purging their theory 
of social content, not adding it as they are doing.  27  
And anti-realists, in turn, should be trying to show 
how the causal powers of material facts presuppose 
social content, not trying to show that institutions 
explain additional variance beyond that explained 
by the distribution of power and interest, as if the 
latter were a privileged pre-social baseline.  
Responsibility
 An important virtue of “False Promise” is that it links 
neorealism and its rivals to the ethical responsibilities 
of foreign policymakers. These responsibilities depend 
in part on how much it is possible to change the 
structure of shared knowledge within anarchy. If such 
change is impossible, then Mearsheimer is right that 
it would be irresponsible for those charged with na-
tional security to pursue it. On the other hand, if it is 
possible, then it would be irresponsible to pursue poli-
cies that perpetuate destructive old orders, especially 
if we care about the well-being of future generations. 
 To say that structures are socially constructed is 
no guarantee that they can be changed.  28  Sometimes 
social structures so constrain action that transfor-
mative strategies are impossible. This goes back to 
the collective nature of social structures; structural 
change depends on changing a system of expecta-
tions that may be mutually reinforcing. A key is-
sue in determining policymakers’ responsibilities, 
therefore, is how much “slack” a social structure 
contains. Neorealists think there is little slack in 
the system, and thus states that deviate from power 
politics will get punished or killed by the “logic” of 
anarchy. Institutionalists think such dangers have 
been greatly reduced by institutions such as sover-
eignty and the democratic peace, and that there is 
therefore more possibility for peaceful change. 
 The example of Gorbachev is instructive in this 
respect, since the Cold War was a highly conflictual 
and collective identity formation, which sometimes 
overcome it. The distribution of material capabili-
ties also matters, especially if offense is dominant, 
and military build-ups will of course concern other 
states. Again, however, the meaning of power de-
pends on the underlying structure of shared knowl-
edge. A British buildup will be less threatening to the 
United States than a North Korean one, and build-
ups are less likely to occur in a security community 
than in a security dilemma. 
 In order to get from anarchy and material forces 
to power politics and war, therefore, neorealists 
have been forced to make additional,  ad hoc as-
sumptions about the social structure of the interna-
tional system. We see this in Mearsheimer’s interest 
in “hyper-nationalism,” Stephen Walt’s emphasis 
on ideology in the “balance of threat,” Randall 
Schweller’s focus on the status quo-revisionist dis-
tinction and, as I argued in my “Anarchy” piece, 
in Waltz’s assumption that anarchies are self-help 
systems.  23  Incorporating these assumptions gener-
ates more explanatory power, but how? In these 
cases the crucial causal work is done by social, not 
material, factors. This is the core of a constructivist 
view of structure, not a neorealist one. 
 The problem becomes even more acute when 
neorealists try to explain the relative absence of 
inter-state war in today’s world. If anarchy is so 
determining, why are there not more Bosnias? Why 
are weak states not getting killed off left and right? 
It stretches credulity to think that the peace be-
tween Norway and Sweden, or the United States and 
Canada, or Nigeria and Benin are all due to material 
balancing. Mearsheimer says cooperation is possible 
when core interests are not threatened (p. 25), and 
that “some states are especially friendly for histori-
cal or ideological reasons” (p. 31). But this totally 
begs the question of why in an ostensibly “realist” 
world states do not find their interests continually 
threatened by others, and the question of how they 
might become friends. Perhaps Mearsheimer would 
say that most states today are status quo and sov-
ereign.  24  But again this begs the question. What is 
sovereignty if not an institution of mutual recogni-
tion and non-intervention? And is not being “status 
quo” related to the internalization of this institu-
tion in state interests? David Strang has argued that 
those states recognized as sovereign have better sur-
vival prospects in anarchy than those that are not.  25  
Far from challenging this argument, Mearsheimer 
presupposes it. 

Constructing International Politics 
307
 2.   Other efforts include Robert Gilpin, “The Richness 
of the Tradition of Political Realism,”  International Or-
ganization, 38, 2 (Spring 1984), 287–304, and Markus 
Fischer, “Feudal Europe, 800–1300,”  International Or-
ganization, 46, 2 (Spring 1992), 427–466.  
 3.   On neoliberalism and critical theory, see Robert 
Keohane, “International Institutions: Two Approaches,” 
 International Studies Quarterly, 32, 4 (December 1988), 
379–396, and Wendt, “Collective Identity Formation and 
the International State,”  American Political Science Re-
view, 88, 2 (June 1994), 384–396. Mearsheimer treats 
collective security as a third form of institutionalism, but 
this is unwarranted. Collective security is an approach to 
international order, arguable on either neoliberal or criti-
cal grounds, not a form of institutional analysis.  
 4.   This makes them all “constructivist” in a broad 
sense, but as the critical literature has evolved, this term 
has become applied to one particular school.  
 5.   These are far more than differences of “emphasis,” as 
suggested by Mearsheimer’s disclaimer, note 127.  
 6.   “Constitute” is an important term in critical theory, 
with a special meaning that is not captured by related 
terms like “comprise,” “consist of,” or “cause.” To say 
that “X [for example, a social structure] constitutes Y [for 
example, an agent],” is to say that the properties of those 
agents are made possible by, and would not exist in the ab-
sence of, the structure by which they are “constituted.” A 
constitutive relationship establishes a conceptually neces-
sary or logical connection between X and Y, in contrast to 
the contingent connection between independently existing 
entities that is established by causal relationships. 
 The identity-behavior distinction is partly captured by 
Robert Powell’s distinction between preferences over out-
comes and preferences over strategies; Robert Powell, “An-
archy in International Relations Theory,”  International 
Organization, 48, 2 (Spring 1994), 313–344. The main 
exception to the mainstream neglect of structural effects 
on state identity is Kenneth Waltz’s argument that anarchy 
produces “like units”; Kenneth Waltz,  Theory of Interna-
tional Politics (Reading, Mass.: Addison-Wesley, 1979), 
74–77. Constructivists think there are more possibilities 
than this; see Alexander Wendt, “Anarchy Is What States 
Make of It: The Social Construction of Power Politics,” 
 International Organization, 46, 2 (Spring 1992), 391–425.  
 7.   What follows could also serve as a rough definition 
of “discourse.”  
 8.   See Karl Deutsch et al.,  Political Community and 
the North Atlantic Area (Princeton: Princeton University 
Press, 1957).  
 9.   For a good general discussion of this point, see Doug-
las Porpora, “Cultural Rules and Material Relations,” 
 Sociological Theory, 11, 2 (July 1993), 212–229.  
 10.   On the social content of interests, see Roy D’ 
D’Andrade and Claudia Strauss, eds.,  Human Motives 
and Cultural Models (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992).  
social structure. I agree with Mearsheimer (p. 46) 
that Soviet nuclear forces gave Gorbachev a margin 
of safety for his policies. Yet someone else in his 
place might have found a more aggressive solution 
to a decline in power. What is so important about 
the Gorbachev regime is that it had the courage to 
see how the Soviets’ own practices sustained the 
Cold War, and to undertake a reassessment of West-
ern intentions. This is exactly what a constructivist 
would do, but not a neorealist, who would eschew 
attention to such social factors as naive and as mere 
superstructure. Indeed, what is so striking about 
neorealism is its total neglect of the explanatory 
role of state practice.  29  It does not seem to matter 
what states do: Brezhnev, Gorbachev, Zhirinovsky, 
what difference does it make? The logic of anarchy 
will always bring us back to square one. This is 
a disturbing attitude if  realpolitik causes the very 
conditions to which it is a response; to the extent 
that realism counsels  realpolitik, therefore, it is part 
of the problem. Mearsheimer says critical theorists 
are “intolerant” of realists for this reason (p. 42). 
The ironies of this suggestion aside, what matters 
is getting policymakers to accept responsibility for 
solving conflicts rather than simply managing or 
exploiting them. If neorealism can move us in that 
direction, then it should, but as I see it, neorealist 
ethics come down to “ sauve qui peut. ” 
 To analyze the social construction of international 
politics is to analyze how processes of interaction pro-
duce and reproduce the social structures—cooperative 
or conflictual—that shape actors’ identities and inter-
ests and the significance of their material contexts. 
It is opposed to two rivals: the materialist view, of 
which neorealism is one expression, that material 
forces  per se determine international life, and the 
rational choice–theoretic view that interaction does 
not change identities and interests. Mearsheimer’s 
essay is an important opening to the comparative 
evaluation of these hypotheses. But neorealists will 
contribute nothing further to the debate so long as 
they think that constructivists are subversive utopians 
who do not believe in a real world and who expect 
peace in our time.  
Notes
 1.   John J. Mearsheimer, “The False Promise of Interna-
tional Institutions,”  International Security, 19, 3 (Winter 
1994/95). Subsequent references appear in parentheses in 
the text.  

308
ALEXANDER WENDT
 19.   On the role of collective identity in facilitating collec-
tive security, see Wendt, “Collective Identity Formation.”  
 20.   Richard Ashley, “The Poverty of Neorealism,”  Inter-
national Organization, 38, 2 (Spring 1984), 225–286.  
 21.   Kenneth Waltz,  Man, the State, and War (New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1959), 232.  
 22.   For a good argument to this effect, see Jonathan Mer-
cer, “Anarchy and Identity,”  International Organization, 
49, 2 (Spring 1995).  
 23.   John J. Mearsheimer, “Back to the Future,”  Inter-
national Security, 15, 1 (Summer 1990), 5–56; Stephen 
Walt,  The Origins of Alliances (Ithaca: Cornell University 
Press, 1987); Randall Schweller, “Tripolarity and the Sec-
ond World War,”  International Studies Quarterly, 37, 1 
(March 1993), 73–103; and Wendt, “Anarchy Is What 
States Make of It.”  
 24.   Mearsheimer and Waltz both assume sovereignty, 
without acknowledging its institutional character; see 
Mearsheimer, “False Promise,” 11, and Waltz,  Theory of 
International Politics, 95–96.  
 25.   David Strang, “Anomaly and Commonplace in Eu-
ropean Political Expansion,”  International Organization, 
45, 2 (Spring 1991), 143–162.  
 26.   “Degenerating” problem shifts are adjustments to a 
theory that are  ad hoc, while “progressive” shifts are those 
that have a principled basis in their hard core assumptions. 
See Imre Lakatos, “Falsification and the Methodology of 
Scientific Research Programmes,” in Lakatos and Alan 
Musgrave, eds.,  Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1970), 91–196.  
 27.   The significance of Dan Deudney’s work lies partly in 
his appreciation of this point; see Dan Deudney, “Dividing 
Realism: Structural Realism versus Security Materialism 
on Nuclear Security and Proliferation,”  Security Studies, 
1, 2 and 3 (1993) 7–37.  
 28.   Hence,  contra Mearsheimer, there is nothing prob-
lematic about the fact that critical theorists do not make 
predictions about the future. What happens in the future 
depends on what actors do with the structures they have 
made in the past.  
 29.   This is not true of classical realists; for a sympa-
thetic discussion of the latter from a critical standpoint, 
see Richard Ashley, “Political Realism and Human Inter-
ests,”  International Studies Quarterly, 25, 2 (June 1981), 
204–237.  
 11.  See Alexander Wendt, “The Agent-Structure Problem 
in International Relations Theory,”  International Orga-
nization, 41, 3 (Summer 1987), 335–370; and, for fuller 
discussion, Jan Shapiro and Alexander Wendt, “The Dif-
ference That Realism Makes,”  Politics and Society, 20, 2 
(June 1992), 197–223.  
 12.  See, among others Michael Barnett, “Institutions, 
Roles, and Disorder,”  International Studies Quarterly, 37, 
3 (September 1993), 271–296; David Lumsdaine,  Moral 
Vision in International Politics (Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 1993); Samuel Barkin and Bruce Cronin, 
“The State and the Nation,”  International Organization, 
48, No. 1 (Winter 1994), 107–130; Rey Koslowski and 
Friedrich Kratochwil, “Understanding Change in Interna-
tional Politics,”  International Organization, 48, 2 (Spring 
1994), 215–248; Thomas Biersteker and Cynthia Weber 
eds.,  State Sovereignty as Social Construct (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press 1996); and Peter Katzenstein, 
ed.,  The Culture of National Security (Columbia Univer-
sity Press, 1996).  
 13.  On the social basis of conflict, see Georg Simmel, 
 Conflict and the Web of Group Affiliations (Glencoe, III.: 
Free Press, 1955). This is also why I prefer to avoid the 
term “institutionalism,” since it associates sociality with 
peace and cooperation.  
 14.  Fischer’s suggestion that critical theory predicts co-
operation in feudal Europe is based on a failure to un-
derstand the full implications of this point; see Fischer, 
“Feudal Europe, 800–1300.”  
 15.  See Louis Henkin,  How Nations Behave (New York: 
Council on Foreign Relations, 1979), 47.  
 16.   On the inadequacy of “realist” descriptions of in-
ternational politics, see Paul Schroeder, “Historical Real-
ity vs. Neo-realist Theory,”  International Security, 19, 1 
(Summer 1994), 108–148.  
 17.  For a start, see Alexander Wendt, “Collective Identity 
Formation,” and Emanuel Adler, “Cognitive Evolution,” 
in Emanuel Adler and Beverly Crawford, eds.,  Progress in 
Postwar International Relations (New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1991), 43–88. The best introduction to 
processes of social construction remains Peter Berger and 
Thomas Luckmann,  The Social Construction of Reality 
(New York: Anchor Books, 1966).  
 18.  A similar argument is developed in John Vasquez, 
 The War Puzzle (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
1993).  

Constructing Norms of Humanitarian 
Intervention
MARTHA FINNEMORE
OVERVIEW
 Finnemore argues that realist and liberal theories have not provided good explana-
tions for the increase in humanitarian interventions since the end of the Cold War 
by states to protect citizens other than their own. National interest does not seem 
to be the driving factor. Finnemore argues that one must consider the changing nor-
mative context within which such interventions occur. Attention to international 
norms and the way they structure interests in coordinated ways across the inter-
national system is the key research task. This article is a good example of taking 
some key constructivist concepts and assumptions and applying them to empirical 
case studies.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   Humanitarian military interventions have occurred in some states with no apparent geostrate-
gic or economic interests to the intervening states. What explanatory problem does this pose 
for realist and liberal theories?  
 2.  According to Finnemore, why is the normative context important for understanding this pat-
tern of humanitarian intervention? How does this relate to actors’ interests?  
 3.  Why do liberal explanations emphasizing the promotion of democracy, like realist explana-
tions, fall short of the evidence provided in the case studies cited?  
 4.  What is the relationship among norms, interests, and actions?  
From “Constructing Norms of Humanitarian Intervention” by Martha Finnemore in  The Culture of National Security , 
ed. Peter Katzenstein. Copyright © 1996 Columbia University Press. Reprinted by permission of the publisher.
 Since the end of the Cold War, states have increas-
ingly come under pressure to intervene militarily 
and, in fact,  have intervened militarily to protect 
citizens other than their own from humanitarian di-
sasters. Recent efforts to enforce protected areas for 
Kurds and no-fly zones over Shiites in Iraq, efforts 
to alleviate starvation and establish some kind of po-
litical order in Somalia, the huge UN military effort 
to disarm parties and rebuild a state in Cambodia, 
and to some extent even the military actions to bring 
humanitarian relief in Bosnia are all instances of 
military action whose primary goal is not territorial 
or strategic but humanitarian. 
 Realist and liberal theories do not provide good 
explanations for this behavior. The interests that 
these theories impute to states are geostrategic and/
or economic, yet many or most of these interven-
tions occur in states of negligible geostrategic or 
economic importance to the interveners. Thus, no 
obvious national interest is at stake for the states 
bearing the burden of the military intervention in 
most if not all of the these cases. Somalia is perhaps 
309

310
MARTHA FINNEMORE
establishes the norms explanation as plausible. The 
failure of alternative explanations to account for 
changing patterns of intervention behavior increases 
the credibility of the norms approach. I conclude 
with a discussion of ways to move beyond this plau-
sibility probe. 
 The analysis proceeds in five parts. The first 
shows that realist and liberal approaches to in-
ternational politics do not explain humanitarian 
intervention as a practice, much less change in that 
practice over time, because of their exogenous and 
static treatment of interests. A constructivist ap-
proach that attends to the role of international 
norms can remedy this by allowing us to prob-
lematize interests and their change over time. The 
next section examines humanitarian action in the 
nineteenth century. It shows that humanitarian ac-
tion and even intervention on behalf of Christians 
being threatened or mistreated by the Ottoman 
Turks were carried out occasionally throughout 
the nineteenth century. However, only Christians 
appear to be deserving targets of humanitarian in-
tervention; mistreatment of other groups does not 
evoke similar concern. 
 The third section investigates the expansion of 
this definition of “humanity” by examining efforts 
to abolish slavery, the slave trade, and colonization. 
Protection of nonwhite non-Christians did become 
a motivation for military action by states, especially 
Great Britain, in the early nineteenth century, when 
efforts to stop the slave trade began in earnest. But 
the scope of this humanitarian action was limited. 
Britain acted to stop commerce in slaves on the high 
seas; she did not intervene militarily to protect them 
inside other states or to abolish slavery as a domes-
tic institution of property rights. It was not until 
decolonization that this redefinition of “humanity” 
in more universal terms (not just Christians, not just 
whites) was consolidated. 
 The fourth section briefly reviews humani-
tarian intervention as a state practice since 1945, 
paying particular attention to the multilateral and 
institutional requirements that have evolved for 
 humanitarian intervention. Contemporary multi-
lateralism differs qualitatively from previous modes 
of joint state action and has important implications 
for the planning and execution of humanitarian 
 interventions. The essay concludes by outlining 
questions about the role and origins of norms that 
are not treated here but could be addressed in future 
research. 
the clearest example of military action undertaken 
in a state of little or no strategic or economic im-
portance to the principal intervener. Similarly, the 
states that played central roles in the UN military 
action in Cambodia were, with the exception of 
China, not states that had any obvious geostrategic 
interests there by 1989; China, which did have a 
geostragetic interest, bore little of the burden of 
intervening. Realism and liberalism offer powerful 
explanations for the Persian Gulf war but have little 
to say about the extension of that war to Kurdish 
and Shiite protection through the enforcement of 
UN Resolution 688. The United States, France, and 
Britain have been allowing abuse of the Kurds for 
centuries. Why they should start caring about them 
now is not clear. 
 The recent pattern of humanitarian interven-
tions raises the issue of what interests intervening 
states could possibly be pursuing. In most of these 
cases, the intervention targets are insignificant by 
any usual measure of geostrategic or economic inter-
est. Why, then, do states intervene? 
 This essay argues that the pattern of inter-
vention cannot be understood apart from the 
changing normative context in which it occurs. 
Normative context is important because it shapes 
conceptions of interest. Standard analytic assump-
tions about states and other actors pursuing their 
interests tend to leave the sources of interests 
vague or unspecified. The contention here is that 
international normative context shapes the inter-
ests of international actors and does so in both 
systematic and systemic ways. Unlike psychologi-
cal variables that operate at the individual level, 
norms can be systemic-level variables in both ori-
gin and effects.  1  Because they are inter-subjective, 
rather than merely subjective, widely held norms 
are not idiosyncratic in their effects. Instead, they 
leave broad patterns of the sort that social science 
strives to explain. 
 In this essay I examine the role of humanitarian 
norms in shaping patterns of humanitarian mili-
tary intervention over the past 150 years.  2  I show 
that shifts in intervention behavior correspond with 
changes in normative standards articulated by states 
concerning appropriate ends and means of military 
intervention. Specifically, normative understandings 
about which human beings merit military protection 
and about the way in which such protection must 
be implemented have changed, and state behavior 
has changed accordingly. This broad correlation 

 
Constructing Norms of Humanitarian Intervention 
311
But such arguments also run afoul of the evidence. 
The U.S. consistently refused to take on the state-
building and democratization mission in Somalia 
that liberal arguments would have expected to be at 
the heart of U.S. efforts. Similarly, the UN stopped 
short of authorizing an overthrow of Saddam Hus-
sein in Iraq even when it was militarily possible and 
supported by many in the U.S. armed forces. The 
UN, and especially the U.S., have emphasized the 
humanitarian rather than the democratizing nature 
of these interventions, both rhetorically and in their 
actions on the ground. 
 None of these realist or liberal approaches pro-
vides an answer to the question, What interests are 
intervening states pursuing? In part this is a problem 
of theoretical focus. Realism and most liberals do 
not investigate interests; they assume them. Inter-
ests are givens in these approaches and need to be 
specified before analysis can begin. In this case, 
however, the problem is also substantive. The geo-
strategic and economic interests specified by these 
approaches appear to be wrong. 
 Investigating interests requires a different kind 
of theoretical approach. Attention to international 
norms and the way they structure interests in coor-
dinated ways across the international system pro-
vides such an approach. Further, a norms approach 
addresses an issue obscured by approaches that treat 
interests exogenously: it focuses attention on the 
ways in which interests change. Since norms are so-
cially constructed, they evolve with changes in social 
interaction. Understanding this normative evolution 
and the changing interests it creates is a major focus 
of a constructivist research program and of this 
analysis. 
 A constructivist approach does not deny that 
power and interest are important. They are. Rather, 
it asks a different and prior set of questions; it asks 
what interests  are, and it investigates the ends to 
which and the means by which power will be used. 
The answers to these questions are not simply id-
iosyncratic and unique to each actor. The social 
nature of international politics creates normative 
understandings among actors that, in turn, coor-
dinate values, expectations, and behavior. Because 
norms make similar behavioral claims on dissimilar 
actors, they create coordinated patterns of behavior 
that we can study and about which we can theorize.  3  
 Before beginning the analysis, let me clarify the 
relationship postulated here among norms, inter-
ests, and actions. In this essay I understand norms 
Using Norms to Understand 
International Politics 
 Humanitarian intervention looks odd from con-
ventional perspectives on international political 
behavior because it does not conform to the con-
ceptions of interest that they specify. Realists would 
expect to see some geostrategic or political advan-
tage to be gained by intervening states. Neoliberals 
might emphasize economic or trade advantages for 
interveners. 
 As I discussed in the introduction, it is difficult 
to identify the advantage for the intervener in most 
post-1989 cases. The 1989 U.S. action in Somalia 
is a clear case of intervention without obvious in-
terests. Economically Somalia was insignificant to 
the United States. Security interests are also hard to 
find. The U.S. had voluntarily given up its base at 
Berbera in Somalia because advances in communi-
cations and aircraft technology made it obsolete for 
the communications and refueling purposes it once 
served. Further, the U.S. intervention in that country 
was not carried out in a way that would have fur-
thered strategic interests. If the U.S. had truly had 
designs on Somalia, it should have welcomed the 
role of disarming the clans. It did not. The U.S. re-
sisted UN pressures to “pacify” the country as part 
of its mission. In fact, U.S. officials were clearly and 
consistently interested not in controlling any part of 
Somalia but in getting out of the country as soon as 
possible—sooner, indeed, than the UN would have 
liked. The fact that some administration officials 
opposed the Somalia intervention on precisely the 
grounds that no vital U.S. interest was involved 
underscores the realists’ problem. 
 Intervention to reconstruct Cambodia presents 
similar anomalies. The country is economically in-
significant to the intereveners and, with the end of 
the Cold War, was strategically significant to none 
of the five on the UN Security Council except China, 
which bore very little of the intervention burden. 
Indeed, U.S. involvement appears to have been mo-
tivated by domestic opposition to the return of the 
Khmer Rouge on moral grounds—another anomaly 
for these approaches—rather than by geopolitical or 
economic interests. 
 Liberals of a more classical and Kantian type 
might argue that these interventions have been mo-
tivated by an interest in promoting democracy and 
liberal values. After all, the UN’s political blue-
print for reconstructing these states is a liberal one. 

312
MARTHA FINNEMORE
and standards of right conduct that they themselves 
articulate. But they do not always—or even often—
do so. Aggregate behavior over long periods shows 
patterns that correspond to notions of right conduct 
over time. As shared understandings about who is 
“human” and about how intervention to protect 
those people must be carried out change, behavior 
shifts accordingly in ways not correlated with stan-
dard conceptions of interests. 
 We can investigate these changes by comparing 
humanitarian intervention practice in the nineteenth 
century with that of the twentieth century. The 
analysis is instructive in a number of ways. First, 
the analysis shows that humanitarian justifications 
for state action and state use of force are not new. 
 Second, the analysis shows that while humani-
tarian justifications for action have been important 
for centuries, the content and application of those 
justifications have changed over time. Specifically, 
states’ perceptions of  which human beings merit 
intervention has changed. I treat this not as a change 
of  identity, but as a change of  identification. Non-
white non-Christians always knew they were human. 
What changed was perceptions of Europeans about 
them. People in Western states began to identify 
with non-Western populations during the twentieth 
century, with profound political consequences, for 
humanitarian intervention, among other things. Per-
haps one could argue that the identity of the West-
ern states changed, but I am not sure how one would 
characterize or operationalize such a change. Cer-
tainly Western states have not taken on an identity 
of “humanitarian state.” Far too many inhumane 
acts have been committed by these states in this 
century to make such a characterization credible—
nor do Western states themselves proclaim any such 
identity. Besides, these states were “humanitarian” 
on their own terms in the nineteenth century. What 
has changed is not the fact of the humanitarian be-
havior but its focus. Identification emphasizes the 
affective relationships between actors rather than 
the characteristics of a single actor.  5  Further, identi-
fication is an ordinal concept, allowing for degrees 
of affect as well as changes in the focus of affect. 
Identification—of Western Europeans with Greeks 
and of Russians with their fellow Slavs—existed 
in the nineteenth century. The task is to explain 
how and why this identification expanded to other 
groups. 
 Third, the analysis highlights contestation over 
these normative justifications and links it to change. 
to shape interests and interests to shape action. Nei-
ther connection is determinative. Factors other than 
norms may shape interests, and certainly no single 
norm or norm set is likely to shape a state’s inter-
ests on any given issue. In turn, factors other than 
state interests, most obviously power constraints, 
shape behavior and outcomes. Thus, the connection 
assumed here between norms and action is one in 
which norms create permissive conditions for action 
but do not determine action. Changing norms may 
change state interests and create new interests (in 
this case, interests in protecting non-European non-
Christians and in doing so multilaterally through an 
international organization). But the fact that states 
are now interested in these issues does not guarantee 
pursuit of these interests over all others on all occa-
sions. New or changed norms enable new or differ-
ent behaviors; they do not ensure such behaviors. 
 I should also offer a rationale for examining jus-
tifications for intervention as an indicator of norms 
and norm change. The conventional wisdom is that 
justifications are mere fig leaves behind which states 
hide their less savory and more self-interested rea-
sons for actions. Motivation is what matters; justifi-
cation is not important. 
 It is true that justification does not equal moti-
vation. Humanitarian justifications have been used 
to disguise baser motives in more than one interven-
tion. More frequently, motives for intervention are 
mixed; humanitarian motives may be genuine but 
may be only one part of a larger constellation of 
motivations driving state action.  4  Untangling precise 
motivations for intervention is difficult and would 
be impossible in an essay of this length and histori-
cal breadth. 
 The focus here is justification, and for the pur-
poses of this study justification  is important be-
cause it speaks directly to normative context. When 
states justify their interventions, they are drawing 
on and articulating shared values and expectations 
held by other decision makers and other publics 
in other states. It is literally an attempt to connect 
one’s actions to standards of justice or, perhaps 
more generically, to standards of appropriate and 
acceptable behavior. Thus through an examination 
of justifications we can begin to piece together what 
those internationally held standards are and how 
they may change over time. 
 My aim here is to establish the plausibility and 
utility of norms as an explanation for international 
behavior. States may violate international norms 

 
Constructing Norms of Humanitarian Intervention 
313
of these norms or norm-bundles in international or-
ganizations (such as the UN) further increases the 
power and elaboration of the normative claims. . . .  
Multilateral Intervention 
in Humanitarian Disasters 
 To be legitimate, humanitarian intervention must be 
multilateral. The Cold War made such multilateral 
efforts politically difficult to orchestrate, but since 
1989 several large-scale interventions have been 
carried out claiming humanitarian justifications as 
their primary raison d’être. All have been multilat-
eral. Most visible among these have been: 
 j  the U.S., British, and French efforts to protect 
Kurdish and Shite populations inside Iraq 
following the Gulf War;  
 j  the UNTAC mission to end civil war and 
reestablish a democratic political order in 
Cambodia;  
 j  the large-scale UN effort to end starvation and 
construct a democratic state in Somalia; and  
 j  current, albeit limited, efforts by UN and 
NATO troops to protect civilian, especially 
Muslim, populations from primarily Serbian 
forces in Bosnia.  
 While these efforts have attracted varying 
amounts of criticism concerning their effectiveness, 
they have received little or no criticism of their legiti-
macy. Further, and unlike their nineteenth- century 
counterparts, all have been organized through stand-
ing international organizations—most often the 
United Nations. Indeed, the UN charter has pro-
vided the framework in which much of the nor-
mative contestation over intervention practices has 
occurred since 1945. Specifically, the charter en-
shrines two principles that at times, and perhaps 
increasingly, conflict. On the one hand, article 2 
enshrines states’ sovereign rights as the organizing 
principle of the international system. The corollary 
for intervention is a near absolute rule of noninter-
vention. On the other hand, article 1 of the charter 
emphasizes promoting respect for human rights and 
justice as a fundamental mission of the organization, 
and subsequent UN actions (adoption of the Uni-
versal Declaration of Human Rights, among them) 
have strengthened these claims. Gross humanitarian 
abuses by states against their own citizens of the 
kinds discussed in this essay bring these two central 
principles into conflict. 
Ironically, while norms are inherently consensual 
(they exist only as convergent expectations or in-
ter-subjective understandings), they evolve in part 
through challenges to that consensus. Some chal-
lenges succeed, some fail. The analysis traces the 
challenges posed by humanitarian claims, noting 
where they succeed and where they have failed. 
It also points to instances of continued contesta-
tion, even over norms that appear to be gaining 
wider acceptance. Humanitarian norms have risen 
in prominence, but their acceptance is still limited 
and contested; certainly there are many forms of in-
tervention, particularly unilateral intervention, that 
apparently cannot be justified even by humanitarian 
norms. 
 Fourth, the analysis relates evolving humanitar-
ian intervention norms to other normative changes 
over the past century. When humanitarian interven-
tion is viewed in a broader normative context, it 
becomes clear that changes in this particular norm 
are only one manifestation of the changes in a larger 
set of humanitarian norms that have become more 
visible and more powerful in the past fifty or one 
hundred years. Particularly prominent among these 
changing norms are the norms of decolonization 
and self-determination, which involved a redefini-
tion and universalization of “humanity” for Eu-
ropeans that changed the evolution of sovereignty 
and of humanitarian discourse (both of which are 
essential components of humanitarian intervention). 
Thus mutually reinforcing and consistent norms ap-
pear to strengthen each other; success in one area 
(such as decolonization) strengthens and legitimates 
claims in logically and morally related norms (such 
as human rights and humanitarian intervention). 
The relationship identified between decolonization 
and humanitarian intervention suggests the impor-
tance of viewing norms not as individual “things” 
floating atomistically in some international social 
space but rather as part of a highly structured social 
context. It may make more sense to think of a fabric 
of interlocking and interwoven norms rather than 
individual norms of this or that—as current schol-
arship, my own included, has been inclined to do.  6  
 Finally, the analysis emphasizes the structuring 
and organization of the international normative con-
text. Examination of humanitarian norms and inter-
vention suggests that norm institutionalization, by 
which I mean the way norms become embedded in 
international organizations and institutions, is criti-
cal to patterns of norm evolution.  Institutionalization 

314
MARTHA FINNEMORE
multilateral only in the sense that more than one 
state had forces in the area at the same time. There 
was little joint planning and no integration of forces 
from different states. By contrast, contemporary 
multilateralism requires extensive joint planning 
and force integration. UN norms require that inter-
vening forces be composed not just of troops from 
more than one state but of troops from disinterested 
states, preferably not great powers—precisely the 
opposite nineteenth-century multilateral practice. 
 Contemporary multilateralism is political and 
normative, not strategic. It is shaped by shared no-
tions about when the use of force is legitimate and 
appropriate. Contemporary legitimacy criteria for 
the use of force, in turn, derive from these shared 
principles, articulated most often through the UN, 
about consultation and coordination with other 
states before acting and about multinational com-
position of forces. U.S. interventions in Somalia and 
Haiti were not made multilateral because the U.S. 
needed the involvement of other states for military 
or strategic reasons. The U.S. was capable of sup-
plying the forces necessary and, in fact, did supply 
the lion’s share of the forces. No other great power 
was particularly worried about U.S. opportunism 
in these areas, and so none joined the action for 
surveillance reasons. These interventions were mul-
tilateral for political and normative reasons. For 
these operations to be legitimate and politically ac-
ceptable, the U.S. needed UN authorization and 
international participation. Whereas Russia, France, 
and Britain tolerated each other’s presence in the 
operation to save Christians from the infidel Turk, 
the U.S. had to beg other states to join it for a hu-
manitarian operation in Haiti. 
 Multilateral norms create political benefits for 
conformance and costs for nonconforming action. 
They create, in part, the structure of incentives fac-
ing states. Realists or neoliberal institutionalists 
might argue that in the contemporary world, mul-
tilateral behavior is efficient and unproblematically 
self-interested because multilateralism helps to gen-
erate political support both domestically and inter-
nationally for intervention. But this argument only 
begs the question,  Why is multilateralism necessary 
to generate political support? It was not necessary 
in the nineteenth century. Indeed, multilateralism as 
currently practiced was inconceivable in the nine-
teenth century. As was discussed earlier, there is 
nothing about the logic of multilateralism itself that 
makes it clearly superior to unilateral action. Each 
 The humanitarian intervention norms that have 
evolved within these conflicting principles appear to 
allow intervention in cases of humanitarian disaster 
and abuse, but with at least two caveats. First, they 
are permissive norms only. They do not require 
intervention, as the cases of Burundi, Sudan, and 
other states make clear. Second, they place strict 
requirements on the ways in which intervention, if 
employed, may be carried out: Humanitarian inter-
vention must be multilateral if states are to accept it 
as legitimate and genuinely humanitarian. Further, 
it must be organized under UN auspices or with 
explicit UN consent. If at all possible, the interven-
tion force should be composed according to UN 
procedures, meaning that intervening forces must 
include some number of troops from “disinterested” 
states, usually midlevel powers outside the region of 
conflict—another dimension of multilateralism not 
found in nineteenth-century practice. 
 Contemporary multilateralism thus differs 
from the multilateral action of the nineteenth cen-
tury. The latter was what John Ruggie might call 
“quantitative” multilateralism and only thinly so.  7  
Nineteenth-century multilateralism was strategic. 
States intervened together to keep an eye on each 
other and discourage adventurism or exploitation 
of the situation for nonhumanitarian gains. Multi-
lateralism was driven by shared fears and perceived 
threats, not by shared norms and principles. States 
did not even coordinate and collaborate extensively 
to achieve their goals. Military deployments in the 
nineteenth century may have been contemporane-
ous, but they were largely separate; there was virtu-
ally no joint planning or coordination of operations. 
This follows logically from the nature of multilater-
alism, since strategic surveillance of one’s partners 
is not a shared goal but a private one. 
 Recent interventions exhibit much more of what 
Ruggie calls the “qualitative dimension” of multilat-
eralism. They are organized according to and in 
defense of “generalized principles” of international 
responsibility and the use of military force, many of 
which are codified in the United Nations charter, 
declarations, and standard operating procedures. 
These emphasize international responsibilities for 
ensuring human rights and justice and dictate ap-
propriate means of intervening, such as the neces-
sity of obtaining Security Council authorization for 
action. The difference between contemporary and 
nineteenth-century multilateralism also appears at 
the operational level. The Greek intervention was 

 
Constructing Norms of Humanitarian Intervention 
315
Bulgaria in the 1870s; France was similarly allowed 
to intervene unilaterally, with no companion force 
to guard against adventurism. These claims were 
not contested, much less rejected, by other states, 
as the claims of India, Tanzania, and Vietnam were 
(or would have been, had they made such claims) a 
century later, despite the fact that Russia, at least, 
had nonhumanitarian motives to intervene. By the 
twentieth century, not only does multilateralism ap-
pear to be necessary to claim humanitarian justifi-
cations but sanction by the United Nations or some 
other formal organization is also required. The U.S., 
Britain, and France, for example, went out of their 
way to find authority in UN resolutions for their 
protection of Kurds in Iraq. 
 The foregoing account also illustrates that 
these changes have come about through continual 
contestation over norms related to humanitar-
ian intervention. The abolition of slavery, of the 
slave trade, and of colonization were all highly 
visible, often very violent, international contests 
about norms. Over time some norms won, others 
lost. The result was that by the second half of the 
twentieth century norms about who was “human” 
had changed, expanding the population deserv-
ing of humanitarian protection. At the same time 
norms about multilateral action had been strength-
ened, making multilateralism not just attractive but 
 imperative. 
 Finally, I have argued here that the interna-
tional normative fabric has become increasingly 
institutionalized in formal international organiza-
tions, particularly the United Nations. As recent 
action in Iraq suggests, action in concert with others 
is not enough to confer legitimacy on intervention 
actions. States also actively seek authorization from 
the United Nations and restrain their actions to con-
form to that authorization (as the U.S. did in not go-
ing to Baghdad during the Gulf war).  8  International 
organizations such as the UN play an important role 
in both arbitrating normative claims and structuring 
the normative discourse over colonialism, sover-
eignty, and humanitarian issues.  9  
 Changes in norms create only permissive condi-
tions for changes in international political behavior. 
One important task of future research will be to define 
more specifically the conditions under which certain 
kinds of norms might prevail or fail in influencing 
action. A related task will be to clarify the mecha-
nisms whereby norms are created, changed, and ex-
ercise their influence. I have suggested a few of these 
has advantages and costs to states, and the costs of 
multilateral intervention have become abundamly 
clear in recent UN operations. One testament to 
the power of these multilateral norms is that states 
adhere to them even when they know that doing 
so compromises the effectiveness of the mission. 
Criticisms of the UN’s ineffectiveness for military 
operations are widespread. The fact that UN in-
volvement continues to be an essential feature of 
these operations despite the UN’s apparent lack of 
military competence underscores the power of mul-
tilateral norms. 
 Realist and neoliberal approaches cannot ad-
dress changing requirements for political legitimacy 
like those reflected in changing multilateral prac-
tice any more than they can explain the “interest” 
prompting humanitarian intervention and its change 
over time. A century ago, protecting nonwhite non-
Christians was not an “interest” of Western states, 
certainly not one that could prompt the deployment 
of troops. Similarly, a century ago states saw no 
interest in multilateral authorization, coordination, 
force integration, and use of troops from “disin-
terested” states. The argument of this essay is that 
these interests and incentives have been constituted 
socially through state practice and the evolution of 
shared norms by which states act. Humanitarian 
intervention is not new. It has, however, changed 
over time in some systemic and important ways. 
First, the definition of who qualifies as human and 
therefore as deserving of humanitarian protection 
by foreign governments has changed. Whereas in 
the nineteenth century European Christians were 
the sole focus of humanitarian intervention, this 
focus has been expanded and universalized such that 
by the late twentieth century all human beings are 
treated as equally deserving in the international nor-
mative discourse. In fact, states are very sensitive to 
charges that they are “normatively backward” and 
still privately harbor distinctions. When Boutros 
Boutros-Ghali, shortly after becoming secretary-
general, charged that powerful states were attend-
ing to disasters in white, European Bosnia at the 
expense of nonwhite, African Somalia, the U.S. and 
other states became defensive, refocused attention, 
and ultimately launched a full-scale intervention in 
the latter but not the former. 
 Second, while humanitarian intervention in the 
nineteenth century was frequently multilateral, it 
was not necessarily so. Russia, for example, claimed 
humanitarian justifications for its intervention in 

316 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 4.   The U.S. intervention in Grenada is one such case, in 
which humanitarian justifications were offered (and widely 
rejected) for action of doubtful humanitarian  motivation.  
 5.   Obviously, single-actor characteristics may be de-
fined in relation to or by comparison with those of others, 
but identification makes affective relationship central in 
ways that identity does not.  
 6.   The intellectual orientation of the regime literature 
probably had much to do with this atomized treatment of 
norms. Norms were incorporated as a definitional part of 
regimes, but regimes were always conceived of as pertain-
ing to individual issue areas. Scholars wrote about norms 
pertaining to specific issues without addressing either the 
larger context in which these norms exist or the ways in 
which they may be related one to another.  
 7.   John G. Ruggie, “Multilateralism: The Anatomy of 
an Institution,” in Ruggie.  Multilateralism Matters (New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1993), 6.  
 8.   Inis Claude’s classic discussion of this collective legiti-
mation function of the UN is well worth a second reading 
in the current political environment; see Inis L. Claude Jr., 
“Collective Legitimization as a Political Function of the 
United Nations,”  International Organization 20, no. 3 
(Summer 1966): 367–79.  
 9.   For more on the role of IOS in creating and dis-
seminating norms, see Martha Finnemore, “International 
Organizations as Teachers of Norms: The United Na-
tions Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization 
and Science Policy,”  International Organization 47, no. 4 
(Autumn 1993): 599–628.  
here—public opinion, the media, international insti-
tutions. More detailed study of individual cases is 
needed to clarify the role of each of these mechanisms. 
Finally, the way in which normative claims are related 
to power capabilities deserves attention. The tradi-
tional Gramscian view would argue that these are 
coterminous; the international normative structure is 
created by and serves the most powerful. Humani-
tarian action generally, and humanitarian interven-
tion specifically, do not obviously serve the powerful. 
The expansion of humanitarian intervention practices 
since the last century suggests that the relationship 
between norms and power may not be so simple.  
Notes
 1.   One could have subsystemic normative contexts 
as well.  
 2.   The term  military intervention in this essay refers 
to the deploying of military forces by a foreign power or 
powers for the purpose of controlling domestic policies 
or political arrangements in the target state in ways that 
clearly violate sovereignty.  Humanitarian intervention is 
used to mean military intervention with the goal of pro-
tecting the lives and welfare of foreign civilians.  
 3.   For a more extended discussion, see Martha 
Finnemore,  Defining National Interests in International 
Society (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 1996), ch. 1.  
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
 Abdelai, Rawi, Yoshiko Herrera, Alastair Johnston, 
and Rose McDermott. “Identity as a Variable.” 
 Perspectives on Politics 4, 4 (December 2006): 
695–711. 
 Acharya, Amitav. “How Ideas Spread: Whose Norms 
Matter? Norm Localization and Institutional 
Change in Asian Regionalism.”  International Orga-
nization 58, 2 (Spring 2004): 239–75. 
 ———.  Constructing a Security Community in South-
east Asia. London: Routledge, 2001. 
 Adler, Emanuel.  Communitarian International Rela-
tions. The Epistemic Foundations of International 
Relations. London: Routledge, 2005. 
 ———. “Constructivism and International Relations.” 
In  Handbook of International Relations, eds., Walter 
Carlsnaes and Thomas Risse. London: Sage, 2002. 
 ———. “Seizing the Middle Ground.”  European 
Journal of International Relations 3, 3 (September 
1997): 319–63. 
 ———. “The Spread of Security Communities: Com-
munities of Practice, Self-Restraint, and NATO’s 
Post-Cold War Transformation.”  European Jour-
nal of International Relations 14, 2 (June 2008): 
195–230. 
 Adler, Emanuel, and Michael Barnett.  Security Com-
munities. New York: Cambridge University Press, 
2002. 
 Adler, Emanuel, and Steven Bernstein. “Knowledge in 
Power: The Epistemic Construction of Global Gov-
ernance.” In  Power and Global Governance, eds., 
Michael Barnett and Raymond Duvall. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
 Albert, Mathias, Lars-Erik Cederman, and Alexander 
Wendt, eds.  New Systems Theories of World Poli-
tics. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Barkin, J. Samuel.  Realist Constructivism: Rethinking 
 International Relations Theory. New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2010. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
317
and the Study of the European Union.” Special issue 
of  Comparative Political Studies 36, 1–2 (February/ 
March 2003): 7–40. 
 Cardenas, Sonia. “Norm Collision: Explaining the Ef-
fects of International Human Rights Pressure on 
State Behavior.”  International Studies Review 6, 2 
(June 2004): 213–32. 
 Cederman, Lars-Erik.  Emergent Actors in World Poli-
tics: How States and Nations Develop and Dissolve. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1997. 
 ———, and Christopher Daase. “Endogenizing Cor-
porate Identities: The Next Step in Constructivist IR 
Theory.”  European Journal of International Rela-
tions 9, 1 (March 2003): 5–35. 
 Chayes, Abram, and Antonia Chayes.  The New Sover-
eignty: Compliance with International Regulatory 
Agreements. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 1995. 
 Checkel, Jeffrey. “Constructivism and EU Politics.” In 
 Handbook of European Union Politics, eds., Knud 
Jorgensen, Mark Pollack, and Ben Rosamond. 
London: Sage, 2007. 
 ———. “Going ‘Native’ in Europe? Theorizing Social 
Interaction in European Institutions.”  Comparative 
Political Studies 36, 1–2 (2003): 209–31. 
 ———.  Ideas and International Political Change: 
Soviet/Russian Behavior and the End of the Cold War. 
New Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1997. 
 ———.  International Institutions and Socialization in 
Europe. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2007. 
 ———. “Social Constructivisms in Global and Euro-
pean Politics: A Review Essay.”  Review of Interna-
tional Studies 3, 2 (2004): 229–44. 
 ———. “Why Comply? Social Learning and European 
Identity Change.”  International Organization 55, 3 
(Summer 2001): 553–88. 
 Chernoff, Fred. “Attacking the Scientific Approach: 
Interpretive Constructivism, Poststructuralism and 
Critical Theory.” In  Theory and Metatheory in 
International Relations, ed., Fred Chernoff. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
 Clark, Ian.  Legitimacy in International Society. 
 Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
 Crawford, Neta.  Argument and Change in World 
Politics: Ethics, Decolonization, and Humanitar-
ian Intervention. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002 . 
 Cronin, Bruce.  Cooperation under Anarchy: Transna-
tional Identity and the Evolution of Cooperation. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1999. 
 Barkin, J. Samuel. “Realist Constructivism and Realist-
Constructivisms.”  International Studies Review 6, 2 
(June 2004): 348–52. 
 Barkin, J. Samuel, and Bruce Cronin. “The State and 
the Nation: Changing Norms and the Rules of Sov-
ereignty in International Relations.”  International 
Organization 48, 1 (Winter 1994): 107–30. 
 Barnett, Michael. “Authority, Intervention, and the 
Outer Limits of International Relations Theory.” 
In  Intervention and Transnationalism in Africa: 
Global-Local Networks of Power, eds., Thomas 
Callaghy, Roland Kassimir, and Robert Latham. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
 ———. “Social Constructivism.” In  The Globaliza-
tion of World Politics: An Introduction to Interna-
tional Relations, 3rd ed., eds., John Baylis and Steve 
Smith. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
 Barnett, Michael N., and Martha Finnemore. “The 
Politics, Power and Pathologies of International 
Organizations.”  International Organizations 53, 4 
(Autumn 1999): 699–732. 
 ———.  Rules for the World: International Organiza-
tions in Global Politics. New York: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 2004. 
 Behr, Hartmut.  A History of International Politics 
Theory: Ontologies of the International . New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Bially Mattern, Janice. “Power in Realist-Constructivist 
Research.”  International Studies Review 6, 2 (June 
2004): 343–46. 
 Biersteker, Thomas, and Cynthia Weber.  State Sover-
eignty as Social Construct. Cambridge: Cambridge 
University Press, 1996. 
 Brglez, Milan. “Reconsidering Wendt’s Metatheory: 
Blending Scientific Realism with Social Constructiv-
ism.”  Journal of International Relations and Devel-
opment 4, 4 (December 2001): 339–62. 
 Brubaker, Rogers, and Frederick Copper. “Beyond 
Identity.”  Theory and Society 29, 1 (2000): 1–47. 
 Bukovansky, Mlada.  Legitimacy and Power Politics: 
The American and French Revolutions in Interna-
tional Political Culture. Princeton: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2002. 
 Burch, Kurt. “Changing the Rules: Reconceiving 
Change in the Westphalian System.”  International 
Studies Review 2, 2 (Summer 2000): 181–210. 
 Buzan, Barry, and Ole Waever.  Regions and Powers: 
The Structure of International Security. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Caporaso, James, Jeffrey Checkel, and Joseph Jupille. “In-
tegrating Institutions: Rationalism,  Constructivism 

318 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Flockhart, Trine.  Socializing Democratic Norms: 
The Role of International Organizations for the 
 Construction of Europe. New York: Palgrave 
 Macmillan, 2005. 
 Florini, Ann. “The Evolution of International Norms.” 
 International Studies Quarterly 40, 3 (September 
1996): 363–89. 
 Flynn, Gregory, and Henry Farrell. “Piecing Together 
the Democratic Peace: The CSCE, Norms, and 
the ‘Construction’ of Security in Post-Cold War 
 Europe.”  International Organization 53, 3  (Summer 
1999): 505–35. 
 Giddens, Anthony.  The Constitution of Society. Berkeley: 
University of California Press, 1984. 
 Griffiths, Martin, and Terry O’Callaghan. “Con-
structivism.” In  International Relations: The Key 
 Concepts. New York: Routledge, 2002. 
 Gurowitz, Amy. “The Diffusion of International 
Norms: Why Identity Matters.”  International 
 Politics 43, 3 (July 2006): 305–41. 
 Guzzini, Stefano. “A Reconstruction of Constructivism 
in International Relations.”  European Journal of 
International Relations 6, 2 (2000): 147–82. 
 ———, and Anna Leander, eds.  Constructivism and 
International Relations. London and New York: 
Routledge, 2006. 
 ———. “A Social Theory for International Relations: 
An Appraisal of Alexander Wendt’s Disciplinary 
and Theoretical Synthesis.”  Journal of International 
Relations and Development 4, 4 (2001): 316–38. 
 Haas, Ernst B.  When Knowledge Is Power: Three Mod-
els of Change in International Organizations. Santa 
Barbara, CA: University of California Press, 1990. 
 Hemmer, Christopher, and Peter Katzenstein. “Why 
Is There No NATO in Asia? Collective Identity, 
Regionalism, and the Origins of Multilateralism.” 
 International Organization 56, 3 (Summer 2002): 
575–607. 
 Hopf, Ted. “The Promise of Constructivism in In-
ternational Relations.”  International Security 23, 
1(1998): 170–200. 
 ———.  Social Construction of International Politics: 
Identities and Foreign Policies, Moscow, 1955 and 
1999. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002. 
 Inayatullah, Naeem.  International Relations and the 
Problem of Difference. New York: Routledge, 
2004. 
 Jörgens, Helge. “Governance by Diffusion—Implementing 
Global Norms through Cross-National Imitation 
and Learning.” In  Governance for Sustainable 
Development. The Challenge of Adapting Form 
 Dessler, David. “Constructivism within a Positivist So-
cial Science.”  Review of International Studies  25, 1 
(January 1999): 123–37. 
 Dessler, David, and John Owen. “Constructivism and 
the Problem of Explanation: A Review Article.”  Per-
spectives on Politics 3, 3 (September 2005): 597–610. 
 Deutsch, Karl, Sydney Burrell, and Robert Kann.  Po-
litical Community and the North Atlantic Area: 
International Organization in the Light of Histori-
cal Experience. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1957. 
 Doty, Roxanne. “Aporia: A Critical Exploration of the 
Agent-Structure Problematique in International Re-
lations Theory.”  European Journal of International 
Relations 3, 3 (1997): 365–92. 
 ———. “Desires All the Way Down.”  Review of In-
ternational Studies 26, 1 (January 2000): 137–39. 
 Dunne, Tim. “The Social Construction of International 
Society.”  European Journal of International Rela-
tions 1, 3 (September 1995): 367–89. 
 Farrell, Theo. “Constructivist Security Studies: Portrait 
of a Research Program.”  International Studies Re-
view 4, 1 (Spring 2002): 49–72. 
 Fearon, James, and Alexander Wendt. “Rationalism v. 
Constructivism: A Skeptical View.” In  Handbook 
of International Relations, eds., Walter Carlsnaes, 
Thomas Risse, and Beth Simmons. London: Sage, 
2002. 
 Fearon, James, and David D. Laitin. “Violence and the 
Social Construction of Ethnic Identity.”  Interna-
tional Organization 54, 4 (Autumn 2000): 845–77. 
 Fierke, Karin, and Knud Jorgensen, eds.  Constructing 
International Relations: The Next Generation. Ar-
monk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2001. 
 Finnemore, Martha. “Constructing Norms of Humani-
tarian Intervention.” In  The Culture of National 
Security: Norms and Identity in World Politics, ed., 
Peter Katzenstein. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1996. 
 ———.  National Interests in International Society. 
Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1996. 
 ———. “Paradoxes in Humanitarian Intervention.” 
Paper Presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Political Science Association, Philadelphia, 
August 31, 2006. 
 ———.  The Purpose of Intervention: Changing Beliefs 
about the Use of Force. Ithaca, NY: Cornell Univer-
sity Press, 2003. 
 ———, and Kathryn Sikkink. “International Norm 
Dynamics and Political Change.”  International 
 Organization 52, 4 (Autumn 1998): 887–917. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
319
 Lebow, Richard Ned.  A Cultural Theory of Interna-
tional Relations. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2008. 
 Lebow, Richard Ned.  The Tragic Vision of Politics. 
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2003. 
 Legro, Jeffrey. “Whence American Internationalism.” 
 International Organization 54, 2 (Spring 2000): 
253–89. 
 ———. “Which Norms Matter? Revisiting the ‘Fail-
ure’ of Internationalism.”  International Organiza-
tion 51, 1 (Winter 1997): 31. 
 March, James G., and Johan P. Olsen. “The Institu-
tional Dynamics of International Political Orders. 
 International Organization 52, 4 (Autumn 1998): 
943–69. 
 Mercer, Jonathan. “Anarchy and Identity.”  Interna-
tional Organization 49, 2 (Spring 1995): 229–52. 
 Meyer, Mary. “Negotiating International Norms: The 
Inter-American Commission of Women and the 
Convention on Violence against Women.”  Aggres-
sive Behavior 24, 2 (1998): 135–42. 
 Modelski, George. “Is World Politics Evolutionary 
Learning?”  International Organization 44, 1(Win-
ter 1990): 1–24. 
 Morgan, Roger. “A European ‘Society of States’—but 
Only States of Mind?”  International Affairs 76, 3 
(July 2000): 559–74. 
 Nadelman, Ethan. “Global Prohibition Regimes: The 
Evolution of Norms in International Society.”  In-
ternational Organization 44, 4 (Autumn 1990): 
479–526. 
 Onuf, Nicholas. “Constructivism: A User’s Manual.” 
In  International Relations in a Constructed World, 
eds., Vendulka Kubálková, Nicholas Onuf, and 
Paul Kowert, London and Armonk, NY: M.E. 
Sharpe, 1998, 58–78. 
 ———. “Institutions, Intentions, and International 
Relations.”  Review of International Studies 28, 2 
(April 2002): 211–28. 
 ———.  World of Our Making: Rules and Rule 
in Social Theory and International Relations. 
 Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina 
Press, 1989. 
 Park, Susan. “Norms and International Relations The-
orizing Norm Diffusion within International Orga-
nizations.”  International Politics 43, 3 (July 2006): 
342–61. 
 Parsons, Craig. “Showing Ideas as Causes: The Origins 
of the European Union.”  International Organiza-
tion 56, 1 (Winter 2002): 47–84. 
to Function, ed., William Lafferty. Cheltenham: 
 Edward Elgar, 2004. 
 Kacowicz, Arie Marcelo.  The Impact of Norms in 
International Society: The Latin American Experi-
ence, 1881–2001.  Notre Dame: University of Notre 
Dame Press, 2005. 
 Katzenstein, Peter.  The Culture of National Security: 
Norms and Identity in International Politics. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1996. 
 ———, and Nobuo Okawara. “Japan’s National Secu-
rity: Structures, Norms, and Policies.”  International 
Security 17, 4 (Spring 1993): 84–118. 
 Keohane, Robert. “International Institutions: Two 
 Approaches.”  International Studies Quarterly 32, 
4 (1988): 379–96. 
 Khagram, Sanjeev, James Riker, and Kathryn Sikkink, 
eds.  Restructuring World Politics: Transnational 
Social Movements, Networks, and Norms. Ann 
 Arbor: University of Minnesota Press, 2002. 
 Kowert, Paul, and Jeffrey Legro. “Norms, Identity, and 
Their Limits.” In  The Culture of National Security: 
Norms and Identity in International Politics, ed., 
Peter Katzenstein. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1996. 
 Klotz, Audie, and Cecelia Lynch.  Strategies for 
 Research in Constructivist International Relations. 
Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 2007. 
 Koslowski, Rey. “A Constructivist Approach to Under-
standing the European Union as a Federal Polity.” 
 Journal of European Public Policy 6, 4 (1999): 
561–78. 
 Kratochwil, Friedrich. “The Force of Prescriptions.” 
 International Organization 38, 4 (Autumn 1984): 
685–708. 
 ———. “Politics, Norms and Peaceful Change: Two 
Moves to Institutions.” In  International Organi-
zation and Global Governance: A Reader, eds., 
 Friedrich Kratochwil and Edward Mansfield. New 
York: Longman, 2006. 
 ———.  Rules, Norms, and Decisions. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1991. 
 ———, and Edward Mansfield, eds.  International 
Organization and Global Governance. New York: 
Pearson/Longman, 2006. 
 ———, and John Ruggie. “International Organiza-
tion: A State of the Art on the Art of the State.” 
 International Organization 40, 4 (Autumn 1986): 
753–76. 
 Kubálková, Vendulka, Nicholas Onuf, and Paul Kow-
ert, eds.  International Relations in a Constructed 
World. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1998. 

320 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Shannon, Vaughn. “Norms Are What States Make of 
Them: The Political Psychology of Norm Viola-
tion.”  International Studies Quarterly 44, 2 (June 
2000): 293–316. 
 Sikkink, Kathryn. “Codes of Conduct for Transna-
tional Corporations: The Case of the WHO/UNICEF 
Code.”  International Organization 40, 4 (Autumn 
1986): 815–40. 
 Simmons, Beth, Frank Dobbin, and Geoffrey Gar-
rett. “Introduction: The International Diffusion of 
 Liberalism.”  International Organization 60, 4 (Fall 
2006): 781–810. 
 Smith, Steve. “Social Constructivisms and European 
Studies: A Reflectivist Critique.”  Journal of Euro-
pean Public Policy 6, 4 (1999): 682–91. 
 ———. “Wendt’s World.”  Review of International 
Studies 26, 1 (2000): 151–63. 
 ———, Ken Booth, and Marysia Zalewski, eds. 
 International Theory :  Positivism and Beyond. Cam-
bridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 Snyder, Jack. “Anarchy and Culture: Insights from the 
Anthropology of War.”  International Organization 
56, 1 (Winter 2002): 7–45. 
 Spruyt, Hendrik. “The End of Empire and the Exten-
sion of the Westphalian System: The Normative 
Basis of the Modern State Order.”  International 
Studies Review 2, 2 (Summer 2000): 65–92. 
 Sterling-Folker, Jennifer. “Competing Paradigms or 
Birds of a Feather? Constructivism and Neoliberal 
Institutionalism Compared.”  International Studies 
Quarterly 44, 1 (March 2000): 97–119. 
 Suganami, Hidemi. “Alexander Wendt and the English 
School.”  Journal of International Relations and 
 Development 4, 4 (2001): 403–23. 
 ———. “On Wendt’s Philosophy: A Critique,”  Review 
of International Studies 28, 1 (2002): 23–37. 
 Thomas, Daniel. “Bumerangs and Superpowers: In-
ternational Norms, Transnational Networks and 
U.S. Foreign Policy.”  Cambridge Review of Interna-
tional Affairs 15, 1 (April 2002): 25–44. 
 Thomson, Janice. “State Practices, International 
Norms, and the Decline of Mercenarism.”  Inter-
national Studies Quarterly 34, 1 (March 1990): 
23–48. 
 Van Kersbergen, Kees, and Bertjan Verbeek. “The 
Politics of International Norms: Subsidiarity and 
the Imperfect Competence Regime of the European 
Union.”  European Journal of International Rela-
tions 13, 1 (2007): 217–38. 
 Verdirame, Guglielmo. “Testing the Effectiveness of 
International Norms: UN Humanitarian Assistance 
 Patrick, Stewart. “Evolution of International Norms: 
Choice, Learning, Power, and Identity.” In 
 Evolutionary Interpretations of World Politics, ed., 
 William R. Thompson. New York: Routledge, 2001. 
 Payne, Rodger, and Nayef Samhat.  Democratizing 
Global Politics: Discourse Norms, International 
Regimes, and Political Community. New York: 
State University of New York Press, 2004. 
 Pettman, Ralph.  Commonsense Constructivism, or 
The Making of World Affairs. Armonk, NY: M.E. 
Sharpe, 2000. 
 Price, Richard, and Christian Reus-Smit. “Dangerous 
Liaisons? Critical International Theory and Con-
structivism.”  European Journal of International 
Relations 4, 3 (1998): 259–94. 
 Raymond, Gregory A. “Problems and Prospects in the 
Study of International Norms.”  Mershon Interna-
tional Studies Review 4, 2 (November 1997): 205–45. 
 Reus-Smit, Christian. “The Constitutional Structure of 
International Society and the Nature of Fundamen-
tal Institutions.”  International Organization 51, 4 
(Autumn 1997): 555–89. 
 ———. “Constructivism.” In  Theories of International 
Relations, eds., Scott Burchill and Andrew Linklater. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1996, 2001. 
 ———.  The Moral Purpose of the State: Culture, 
 Social Identity, and Institutional Rationality in 
 International Relations. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1999. 
 Risse, Thomas. “Let’s Argue!: Communicative Action 
in World Politics.”  International Organization 54, 
1 (Winter 2000): 1–39. 
 Ruggie, John G.  Constructing the World Polity: Essays 
on International Institutionalization. New York: 
Routledge, 1998. 
 ———. “Territoriality and Beyond: Problematizing 
Modernity in International Relations.”  Interna-
tional Organization 47, 1 (1993): 139–74. 
 ———. “What Makes the World Hang Together? 
Neo-Utilitarianism and the Social Constructivist 
Challenge.”  International Organization 52, 4 
 (Autumn 1998): 855–85. 
 Saideman, Stephen. “Conclusion: Thinking Theoreti-
cally about Identity and Foreign Policy.” In  Identity 
and Foreign Policy in the Middle East, eds., Shibley 
Telhami and Michael Barnett. New York: Cornell 
University Press, 2002. 
 Santa-Cruz, Arturo.  International Election Monitor-
ing, Sovereignty, and the Western Hemisphere Idea: 
The Emergence of an International Norm. New 
York: Routledge, 2005. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
321
 ———. “On the Via Media: A Response to the Crit-
ics.”  Review of International Studies 26, 1 (2000): 
165–80. 
 ———. “Social Theory as Cartesian Science: An Auto-
critique from a Quantum Perspective.” In  Construc-
tivism and International Relations, eds., Stefano 
Guzzini and Anna Leander. London and New York: 
Routledge: 2006. 
 ———.  Social Theory of International Politics.  London: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 ———. “The State as Person in International The-
ory.”  Review of International Studies 30, 2 (2004): 
289–316. 
 ———. “Why a World State Is Inevitable.”  European 
Journal of International Relations 9, 4 (2003): 
491–542. 
 ———, and Daniel Friedheim. “Hierarchy under Anar-
chy: Informal Empire and the East German State.” 
 International Organization 49, 4 (Autumn 1995): 
689–721. 
 Wight, Colin.  Agents, Structures and International 
Relations :  Politics as Ontology. Cambridge, UK: 
Cambridge University Press, 2006. 
 ———. “They Shoot Dead Horses Don’t They: Locat-
ing Agency in the Agent-Structure Problematique.” 
 European Journal of International Relations 5, 1 
(1999): 109–42. 
 Winch, Peter.  The Idea of a Social Science. London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1958. 
 Zaum, Dominique.  The Sovereignty Paradox: The 
Norms and Politics of International Statebuilding. 
New York: Oxford University Press, 2007. 
 Zehfuss, Maja.  Constructivism in International Rela-
tions: The Politics of Reality. London: Cambridge 
University Press, 2002.  
and Sexual Apartheid in Afghanistan.”  Human 
Rights Quarterly 3, 3 (August 2001): 733–68. 
 Walker, R. B. J.  Inside/Outside: International Rela-
tions as Political Theory. Cambridge, UK: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1993. 
 Walsh, James. “National Preferences and International 
Institutions: Evidence from European Monetary In-
tegration.”  International Studies Quarterly 45, 1 
(March 2001): 59–80. 
 Weldes, Jutta.  Constructing National Interests: The 
United States and the Cuban Missile Crisis. Minne-
apolis: University of Minnesota Press, 1999. 
 Wendt, Alexander. “The Agent-Structure Problem in 
International Relations Theory.”  International Or-
ganization 41, 3(1987): 335–70. 
 ———. “Anarchy Is What States Make of It.”  Interna-
tional Organization 46, 2 (1992): 391–425. 
 ———. “Collective Identity Formation and the Inter-
national State.”  American Political Science Review 
88, 2 (1994): 384–96. 
 ———. “Constructing International Politics.”  Interna-
tional Security 20, 1 (Summer 1995): 71–81. 
 ———. “Driving with the Rearview Mirror: On the 
Rational Science of Institutional Design.”  Interna-
tional Organization 55, 4 (2001): 1019–49. 
 ———. “Identity and Structural Change in Interna-
tional Politics.” In  The Return of Culture and Iden-
tity in IR Theory, eds., Yosef Lapid and Friedrich 
Kratochwil. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1996, 
47–64. 
 ———. “Levels of Analysis vs. Agents and Structures.” 
 Review of International Studies 18, 2 (1992): 181–85. 
 ———. “On Constitution and Causation in Interna-
tional Relations.”  Review of International Studies 
24, 5 (1998): 101–17. 

CHAPTER
7
Positivism, Critical 
Theory, and Postmodern 
Understandings
 W
 e undertake in this chapter a discussion of the vigorous critiques of 
mainstream positivist international relations theorizing by  critical theo-
rists  and  postmodernists  (or  post-structuralists ). As in the previous 
chapter on constructivism, a similar critique that relies on interpretive understand-
ing made by feminists is presented in  Chapter   8 . Scholars associated with critical 
theory and postmodernism have been referred to generically as postpositivists or 
post- structuralists. Such terminology, however, can be misleading. Although their 
critiques underscore the subjectivity of human inquiry and reject notions of pure 
objectivity or value-free science they associate with positivism, many critical theo-
rists (as with constructivists and feminists) have not bolted completely from science 
 per se as is evident by their use of empirical evidence in case studies. 
 For its part, science is open to scholarship that incorporates interpretive 
understandings along with the canons of logic and evidence that are central to 
positivism. Furthermore, the line between critical theory and postmodernism is 
a thin one, some scholars crossing over from one side to the other. Linguistic 
analysis in postmodern studies, for example, has a clear place in critical theory 
that scrutinizes “cover stories” and unpacks or deconstructs the language used and 
roles played by those in positions of power. We represent this boundary, then, as a 
permeable or dotted line between critical theorists who have not made as radical a 
departure from the positivist mainstream as most postmodern (or post-structural) 
scholars have. 
 What we observe in IR and the other social (as in the natural) sciences is 
heavily influenced by the interpretive understandings we have of the concepts we 
employ. Many (though not all) of these critiques or interpretive understandings are 
informed by  phenomenology —a subjective or interpretive understanding in human 
consciousness of what we observe or think we see in the world around us. Before 
addressing these critiques of mainstream IR scholarship, however, we need first to 
322

Positivism
323
specify further what we mean by positivist, scientific, or “modern” approaches to 
theory building in IR that go beyond the brief summary in  Chapter   1 . This also en-
tails a summary of intellectual precursors. Without such background, it is difficult 
to understand the arguments of critical theorists and postmodernists. In essence, 
these approaches are primarily concerned with critiquing the mainstream literature 
discussed in Part One of this book. 
POSITIVISM
 Positivism involves a commitment to a unified view of science—a belief that it is 
possible to adapt the epistemologies and methodologies of the natural sciences to 
explain the social world, which includes international relations. Positivists believe 
that objective knowledge of the world is possible and, hence, have a faith and com-
mitment to the Enlightenment’s rationalist tradition. 
 We find in the writings of the Frenchman René Descartes (1596–1650) a key 
contribution to mathematics and the rational bases of modern science. Quarrels 
between rationalists like Descartes who emphasized the logic to be found in the 
canons of  deduction and empiricists who made  inductive inferences from what they 
observed ultimately was resolved in a new rational-empirical synthesis that remains 
at the core of positivism—a “scientific” approach to knowing. 
 It was the Scottish writer David Hume (1711–1776) who objected to causal 
inferences being drawn too readily. A skeptic at heart, Hume recognized that cau-
sality is itself not directly observable but merely a construct used by human beings 
to make what they observe around them understandable or even predictable. To 
Hume, causality is no more than an inference human beings draw from the conjunc-
tion of impressions about the things we observe. For example, when we perceive 
that some factor or event (X) precedes another (Y), our minds may be prone to 
think that X is the cause of Y. 
 Consistent with Hume and also influenced by the positivism of the French phi-
losopher Auguste Comte (1798–1857), John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) developed 
formal canons of induction that allow both natural and social scientists to arrive at 
causal truth claims by applying systematically one or another of a series of specified 
tests or methods to observed phenomena. 
 MILL’S CANONS OF CAUSALITY 
 John Stuart Mill’s understandings of causality underlie the application of 
the “scientific” method to the testing of hypotheses in the social sciences 
in general, IR in particular. Using one or another of these canons of induc-
tion leads us to infer a causal relation between an independent variable 
(X) and the dependent variable (Y) it purportedly explains: 
 Inductive Canon No. 1:   the method of agreement —X is always pres-
ent whenever Y is also present. Hypothetical example: when in our 
research we always see an arms race (X) having begun prior to the 
outbreak of war (Y).  

324
CHAPTER 7  Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings
 Inductive Canon No. 2:  the method of difference —X is always absent 
whenever Y is also absent. Hypothetical example: when in our research 
we observe no arms races in prolonged periods of peace marked by the 
absence of war.  
 Inductive Canon No. 3:  the joint method of agreement and difference —
when X and Y are both present in one set but not in another, as in 
controlled experiments when X is put in one experiment to see if Y 
appears, but X is omitted from the other experiment in the expectation 
that Y will not appear. Hypothetical example: when in two separately 
controlled experimental simulations, an arms race is introduced in one 
simulation, but not in the other—the former results in the outbreak of 
war, but the latter simulation remains without war.  
 Inductive Canon No. 4:   the method of concomitant variation —when 
X and Y both vary in relation to one another either in the same or 
opposite directions. In other words, a positive or direct relation—as 
X increases (or decreases), Y also increases (or decreases). Or a nega-
tive or inverse relation—as X increases, Y decreases, or as X decreases, 
Y increases. Hypothetical example: when in our research we assemble 
all the cases we identify of arms races and all the cases of the outbreak 
of war, we find a direct   correlation  between the two—the  more  arms 
racing occurs, the  more  wars tend to break out. If, by contrast, we 
were to find an inverse correlation (rather unlikely in this example), 
then we would observe that the  more  arms racing occurs, the  lesser  the 
frequency of war breaking out.  
 Inductive Canon No. 5:  the method of residues —as when, in a statistical 
analysis of the percentage of explained and unexplained variance, a 
certain independent variable (X) or certain independent variables (X1, 
X2, etc.) have been identified as accounting for some of the variations 
in Y , the remaining variation can be accounted for as due to other 
independent variables present even if they have not been identified as 
such. Hypothetical example: when in our research arms races account 
for much, but not all of the cases in which wars break out, we conclude 
that other factors we may or may not be able to identify account for the 
rest of the explanation.  
 Positivists identify one or another of these causal sequences in the hypotheses 
or causal models they test empirically. For example, if X is present, then (one 
tends to find) Y directly or inversely following variations in X. We find different 
combinations of cause-effect sequences in the often complex causal models con-
structed by positivist theorists. Some factors that must be present to effect a certain 
outcome are referred to as  necessary , but they may not be  sufficient to have this 
effect. Theorists wedded to a positivist epistemology try to identify conditions or 
factors— variables or constants—that are  necessary or  sufficient to produce ex-
pected effects or outcomes. [Adapted from A. James Gregor,  Metapolitics: A Brief 
Inquiry into the Conceptual Language of Political Science (New York: Free Press, 
1971), 146–50.] 

Positivism
325
 CAUSE-EFFECT RELATIONS 
 We also can identify five different patterns of cause-effect relations em-
ployed in positivist theorizing: 
 1.  There can be, as we have discussed, a single causal or independent 
variable X that can be used to explain or predict an effect on another variable 
Y that depends causally upon or reacts to variations in X:  
 X 
  Y. 
 Hypothetical example: When our hypothesis holds that international tensions 
(X) are causally related to the outbreak of war (Y).  
 2.  Sometimes an intervening variable Z comes between the independent 
variable X and the dependent variable Y, moderating or altering the effect 
X otherwise would have had on Y: X 
 Z 
 Y. Hypothetical example: 
When our hypothesis holds that international tensions (X) that can lead to 
war are exacerbated when policy elites (Z) with a militant orientation come to 
power or, conversely, reduced when peace-prone policy elites oriented toward 
conflict resolution take office, the former are more likely to go to war (Y) than 
the latter. The intervening variable—whether war- or peace-oriented policy 
elites come to power—matters causally.  
 3.  In other cases the independent variable X is itself the result of (or 
caused by) some third variable Z in what effectively is a “developmental 
 sequence”: Z 
 X 
 Y. Hypothetical example: In this case, our hypoth-
esis holds that whether war- or peace-oriented elites (Z) come to power has a 
causal effect on the level of international tensions causally related to the out-
break of war (war-oriented policy elites tending to increase tensions leading 
to war and peace-oriented elites tending to reduce tensions or create a climate 
more propitious to peace).  
 4.  Sometimes we see dual or double causes as when X and Z are both 
causally related to Y, still the dependent variable:  
 X 
   
       Y 
   
 Z 
 Hypothetical example: In this case our hypothesis holds that international 
tensions (X) and orientations of policy elites in power (Z) separately are 
causally related to war (Y)—thus international tensions can cause war or 
policy elites on their own choose to go to war quite apart from whether the 
climate of relations (X) is one of high or reduced tensions. An extension of 
double cause is the case of  multiple  causation involving three or more inde-
pendent variables identified in this case as causally related to the outbreak 
of war.  

326
CHAPTER 7  Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings
 5.  Looking to the outcome side,  dual  or double  effect occurs when X is 
causal to both Y and Z:  
       Y 
    
 X 
    
       Z 
 Hypothetical example: In this case our hypothesis holds that the climate 
of relations or level of international tensions (X) may produce a greater or 
lesser likelihood of going to war (Y) and, at the same time, influence whether 
war-like or peace-oriented policy elites (Z) come to power. As with multiple 
causation, we also can extend this reasoning to cases of multiple effects in-
volving three or more dependent variables. Dual or multiple effect is also the 
“spurious correlation” case in which the apparent association or correlation 
between Y and Z is due only to the fact both are affected causally by the 
same variable X—variations in Y (likelihood of the outbreak of war) and Z 
(orientations of policy elites toward war or peace) are each due to variations 
in X (international tensions). [We draw these cause-effect relations, from 
Hayward R. Alker, Jr.,  Mathematics and Politics  (New York: Macmillan, 
1965) as presented in Ted Robert Gurr,  Politimetrics  (Englewood Cliffs, NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1972), 167.]  
 Given such causal understandings in models and associated hypoth-
eses, positivists then turn to operationalizing their variables—putting them 
in measurable form or constructing data-based indicators that allow the 
researcher to test these cause-effect propositions empirically. Evidentiary 
tests—whether quantitative or nonquantitative—are used to confirm hypoth-
eses with some degree of confidence, refute them, or consider the empirical 
tests inconclusive, thus calling for more data gathering and further tests. This 
approach to testing truth claims captures the essence of what is commonly 
referred to as  scientific method.  
 The epistemological empiricism adopted by scholars in the “Vienna circle” 
of the 1930s took a somewhat extreme rationalist, scientific form called   logical 
 positivism —the pursuit of a pure science that was supposed to separate fact 
from value and achieve the precision of mathematics. Among members of the 
Vienna circle were such luminaries as Moritz Schlick (1882–1936), Otto Neur-
ath (1882–1945), and Rudolf Carnap (1891–1970). They were also influenced 
by the earlier work of their contemporary, Ludwig Wittgenstein (1889–1951), 
whose  Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (1921) related the thought and ideas 
we have to the words we use, focusing on the necessary logic and precision of 
language applied to observations about the world. Following Wittgenstein, the 
Vienna circle and its followers sought both logical precision and clarity in sci-
entific language. 
 In the mid-1930s, Karl Popper (1902–1994) addressed empirical tests of 
 hypotheses drawn from theories. To “prove” empirically that a certain hypothesis 
or universal proposition is true is virtually impossible since to do so in an absolute 

Positivism
327
sense would mean submitting it to an infinite number of tests in space and time. 
Popper argued that to be scientific, claims or propositions have to be stated in 
falsifiable form. Falsifiability means simply that if a proposition is false, it must 
be possible empirically to show that it is false. With varying degrees of confidence 
based on logical consistency and available evidence, one can accept a falsifiable 
proposition as possibly true at least until, by experiment or other scientific means, 
one actually shows it to be false. 
 In the post–World War II period, a broad, somewhat watered-down applica-
tion of positivist premises to the social sciences—an approach that also included 
incorporation of statistical methodologies and the use of mathematical equations to 
specify causal relations among variables—reflected a critical reaction to this “mod-
ernist” epistemology. Taking various critiques into account, refinement of positivist 
epistemology continued during the 1950s and 1960s. Carl Hempel (1905–1997), 
for example, set forth a deductive-nomological schema for scientific explanation. 
Hempel applied this formalized deductive approach in the formulation of both 
universal and probabilistic law-like statements. This covering law approach to 
theory is still the preferred choice of many scholars working within the positivist 
framework. 
 Thomas S. Kuhn’s (1922–1996) effort in his identification of “scientific revolu-
tions” focused on the natural sciences, but it has perhaps had even greater impact 
on understanding in the social sciences.  1  Arguing that  paradigms, or frameworks of 
understanding, influence the way we observe and make sense of the world around 
us, Kuhn was criticized for his alleged  relativism —a direct challenge to the positiv-
ist school. To some of his opponents, knowledge was understood to be empirically 
grounded and not so arbitrary as to be based on such pre-existing or newly discov-
ered frameworks of understanding. 
 To be fair, Kuhn did not reject empirically based claims as such. He argued 
only that when theories and component concepts associated with a particular para-
digm are challenged empirically or theoretically, holders of this paradigm may be 
forced through some modification to accommodate the new finding or insight or 
give way to a new paradigm. Thus, the Ptolomeic idea of the Earth as center of the 
universe—an understanding also closely tied to and reinforcing certain underlying 
religious beliefs—was toppled by the Copernican revolution in human understand-
ing of the heavens, a paradigm shift developed further from the empirical observa-
tions of Galileo. A highly complex, Earth-centric, Ptolomeic astronomy—still used 
in celestial navigation (Ptolomy a Roman residing in Egypt, 90–186 A.D.)—was 
 replaced by a vision offered in 1512 by Copernicus (1473–1543) and later by 
 Galileo (1554–1642)—that portrayed the Earth as merely one among a number of 
planets revolving around the Sun—the solar system. 
 Similarly, it was Albert Einstein’s (1879–1955) theory of relativity that chal-
lenged Isaac Newton’s (1642–1727) understanding of gravity and the laws of 
motion, effectively reducing the Newtonian mechanics paradigm to Earth-based, 
observable laws. These laws were not as directly applicable either to the macro-
universal domain of astrophysics or to the micro-domain concerning motion of 
subatomic particles in quantum mechanics. Of course, even these new paradigms 
have remained subject to challenge in an eternally skeptical, scientific approach to 
knowledge. 

328
CHAPTER 7  Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings
 There is substantial debate within the social sciences generally, and in particu-
lar fields such as international relations, as to whether these fields are developed 
sufficiently to justify identification of paradigms. Setting this issue aside, the im-
portant point in Kuhn’s thesis is that knowledge, even in the natural sciences, is 
grounded in human understanding in the form of paradigms that influence observa-
tion and the construction of concepts and theories. At least as much or even more 
so, such interpretive understanding or agreed meaning would seem to apply to the 
social sciences that deal with human behavior in all its forms. 
 Although Kuhn’s work received criticism from positivists, by no means did he 
abandon scientific premises. That’s why we represent his argument as coming from 
within the scientific or positivist community. There is no rejection of science  per se, 
but his work on paradigms has influenced or is similar to much of the thinking we 
place under the interpretive-understanding umbrella. 
 The same is the case with Stephen Toulmin (1922–2009), who argued the 
lenses or “spectacles” one wears affect science and scientific progress in the con-
tinuing quest to make the world around us more intelligible.  2  Accordingly, we 
need to scrutinize closely and critically the principal images that currently inform 
much international relations theory. Although Toulmin’s critique occurs within 
the positivist, natural science discourse, he takes a stand against any claim to the 
idea that work in the sciences can ever be value free. Instead, we need to be more 
humble in developing our understandings, taking explicitly into account as best 
we can the subjective dimensions that influence our inquiries. Critical scrutiny of 
our work by others not wedded to our projects is a safety valve institutionalized 
in scientific discourse. This discourse helps to keep us from errors to be found in 
the logic of the arguments we make or the evidence we use to buttress our truth 
claims. 
 For his part, Imre Lakatos (1922–1974) preferred to see the pursuit of science 
not as a series of paradigmatic revolutions, but rather in more positive terms as in 
the spawning of multiple research programs and the ensuing competition among 
them.  3  Progress in IR from this perspective is facilitated by the development of re-
search programs comparable in durability to those in the natural sciences. Changes 
in research programs occur only in the fullness of time, often many years after 
initial challenges to theories within its scope. One falsification is not enough. The 
bases for such a research-program change do not become established overnight, but 
rather as part of a progressive process over time.  
INTELLECTUAL PRECURSORS: 
PHENOMENOLOGY AND HERMENEUTICS 
 Contemporary critiques of mainstream theorizing in IR and the other social sci-
ences reflect to a greater or lesser degree the influence of  phenomenology. It is, as 
noted above, a philosophical understanding that leads one to reject claims to know-
ing any “objective” reality independent of the human consciousness that, after all, 
gives meaning to the world around us. Interpretation is central to what we see—a 
reflective, intuitive process by which we gain understanding. We find the influence 
of phenomenology not just in critical theory and postmodernism, but also in the 

 
Intellectual Precursors: Phenomenology and Hermeneutics  
329
 interpretive understandings of constructivism discussed in  Chapter   6 and in femi-
nist scholarship we take up in  Chapter  8 . 
 Phenomenology responds to what is really a very old philosophical question. 
It was, after all, Plato (c. 427–347 B.C.) who raised the problem of distinguishing 
between appearances and underlying realities—the ideal forms, essence, or spirit 
that lies beyond our senses or world of appearances. In the Platonic understanding 
“knowledge has for its natural object the real—to know the truth about reality.”  4  
There is a unity to be found in knowledge between an object we observe and its 
underlying essence or form. Something may appear to be beautiful, for example, 
but it is the underlying idea or “essential form of beauty” that makes it appear to 
us as such. Realizing an underlying form of justice in Plato’s ideal republic is an 
aim or challenge not just within state and domestic society, but also by extension 
to international relations. This concern for justice continues to resonate today, 
particularly among critical theorists. 
 In his  Critique of Pure Reason , published in 1781, Immanuel Kant (1724–
1804) takes up this question or distinction between appearance and reality. Kant 
calls the objects we observe  phenomena , which he distinguishes from the abstract 
 noumena —the unknowable essence of objects as things in themselves, quite apart 
from how we may see them or how they may appear.  5  Georg W. F. Hegel (1770–
1831) in his  Phenomenology of Spirit (1807) accepted Kant’s claim that we cannot 
know the “in-itself”—this inner essence of what we observe. Hegel explored the 
ways and means by which we can unify the objective (the “in-itself” or “what some-
thing actually is”) with the subjective (the “for-itself or “what we understand it to 
be”) in our consciousness of ourselves and the world around us that we experience. 
How are we to unify what actually  is (the objective—the “in-itself”) with what we 
observe or experience in our consciousness (the subjective—the “for-itself”)? How 
can we know “what truth is . . . if consciousness [is] still filled and weighed down 
with . . . so-called natural representations, thoughts, and opinions?” We seek to 
get beyond these prior perspectives or illusions and focus instead on the phenom-
ena themselves—what Hegel called following the phenomenological path. To him, 
we try to grasp or understand the essence or “spirit” underlying appearances: 
“Through an exhaustive experience [in the subjective or conscious] ‘of itself’” (the 
phenomenological path we follow), we can in principle attain “the knowledge of 
what it [the phenomenon] is in itself.”  6  
 More easily said than done! As with Kant, phenomenologists following the leads 
of Edmund Husserl (1859–1938) and his student Martin Heidegger (1889–1976) 
disputed Hegel’s claim that such reality can be uncovered so decisively. Phenom-
enologists following Husserl have engaged in reflective study of phenomena in an 
effort to approach knowledge of underlying realities in developing what we in this 
volume, following Weber, prefer to call interpretive understandings. In our reflec-
tions about what we observe, we try to identify the meanings or essence of what we 
experience. For his part, Heidegger focused not only on the objects we experience, 
but also on the sense of our own being and what we understand to be the essence 
of things in general—our ontology in relation to the world we experience. Although 
Heidegger denied being an existentialist, Husserl’s influence was reflected in the 
 existentialism found particularly in French literary and philosophical circles—
among others, Jean-Paul Sartre (1905–1980) was directly influenced by Husserl. 

330
CHAPTER 7  Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings
 In sum, phenomenology leads one not to take things as they may at first  appear 
(or have been made to appear). We probe for what underlies or stands behind ap-
pearances. We take “a close look at certain phenomena specifically considered in 
isolation from current or dominant theories of explanation” that may cloud or 
bias our vision. More to the point, we include “all phenomena of experience” and 
exclude all “metaphysical and reality judgments.”  7  
 The language scientists use is a major research concern of postmodernists 
in particular.  Hermeneutics directly challenges positivism, arguing that social 
facts are constituted and given meaning by the structures of language and that 
consciousness can be studied only as mediated by language. Language is what 
gives material conditions meaning for humans. Hermeneutic approaches seek 
to understand or recover the meanings common to actors by interpreting the 
self-understanding of actors. This is in contrast to the positivist explanation of 
independent causal processes. Luminaries include Martin Heidegger and Ludwig 
Wittgenstein in his later work. Indeed, Wittgenstein’s  Philosophical Investigations 
(1953) paints a picture more prone to coping with ambiguities that come from the 
context of language use. 
 We will withhold until later in the chapter discussion of German and French 
continental European perspectives that have also had an impact on the IR field: 
(a) Jürgen Habermas (born 1929) and his associates in what is commonly referred 
to as the Frankfurt School of critical theory and (b) influences on postmodern-
ism such as Friedrich Nietzsche (1844–1900) and an updating of his ideas by 
postmodernist French scholars Michel Foucault (1926–1984), Jacques Derrida 
(1930–2004), and Jean-François Lyotard (1924–1998). 
 To summarize the postmodern and critical-theory critique, positivism has been 
under assault for its attempts to separate facts from values, to define and opera-
tionalize value-neutral concepts into precisely and accurately measurable variables, 
and to test truth claims in the form of hypotheses drawn from or integral to theo-
ries. Whether using quantitative or statistical methods or such nonquantitative (or 
“qualitative”) methods as case and comparative-case studies, those who have tried 
to be scientific have been criticized for ignoring or taking insufficient account of the 
personal or human dimension of scholarship. 
 Human consciousness and the inherent subjectivity of human beings matter. As 
essentially subjective creatures, we are not really able to separate ourselves from the 
world we are observing. We are part of it. Even if human agency does not impact 
the “laws” that govern the natural world, what we say and do has effects in the 
social world. Thus, we are hampered by an inability to be completely independent 
of the phenomena we are observing, however hard we may try to be objective. Our 
inherent subjectivity just gets in the way. 
 This happens even in the natural sciences when the concepts we develop and 
use often have their origins as metaphors drawn from human experiences. Thus, 
physicists speak of “particles” or “waves” of light—references that evoke seashore 
imagery. That there are “black holes” in outer space is yet another example of the 
human side grappling with meaning in the natural sciences, describing extraterres-
trial phenomena with Earth-bound vocabularies. We leave to others to determine 
whether such metaphors are apt or whether they mislead us. What interests us here 
is simply to recognize that positivist science—whether dealing with natural or social 

Critical Theory: Major Assumptions 
331
phenomena—cannot escape human subjectivity. Put another way, complete value-
free science is just not possible. 
 Of the two, postmodernists are the more skeptical of “scientific” truth claims 
that are so dependent on the meanings we assign to the concepts we employ. In the 
extreme, some postmodernists see knowledge in entirely relativist terms. Critical 
theorists, by contrast, tend not to abandon science, but try merely to expose ideo-
logical claims often masquerading as theories with “scientific” bases of support—
false pretenses used to legitimate self-serving practices. Indeed, critical theorists 
search for the ways and means by which the powerful attempt to legitimate their 
often exploitative positions of dominance—their self-serving manipulation of ideas 
or meanings in theories others are led to believe have scientific  underpinnings.  
CRITICAL THEORY: MAJOR ASSUMPTIONS 
 While IR scholars who are self-proclaimed critical theorists may have their differ-
ences, they would agree on the following assumptions. First, the study of IR should 
be about emancipatory politics. Whatever knowledge critical theory may generate, it 
is geared toward social and political transformation. To achieve this transformation, 
the first step is the critical scrutiny of the current understanding of international 
politics, to understand and explain the existing realities of IR and how they devel-
oped over time. To avoid mere idealism—“this is what the world should be”—IR 
scholars must explain and criticize the current political order in terms of the prin-
ciples embedded in political institutions and cultural practices. Work done on the 
comparative historical sociology of states illustrates the use of empirical evidence.  8  
 The concept of emancipation is particularly important, and can be traced back 
to the Enlightenment and particularly the work of Immanuel Kant. Kant, among 
other things, was interested in how competitive power relations among states could 
be transformed into a more cosmopolitan order of perpetual peace. 
 Emancipation consists of an essentially negative conception of freedom that 
emphasizes removing repressive constraints or relations of domination. Simply put, 
critical theorists are interested in the relation between power and freedom. Influ-
enced intellectually by Karl Marx, many critical theorists draw from his analysis of 
human inequality and his normative goal of eliminating exploitation. 
 The theme of emancipation is a primary concern among those who identify 
with the “Frankfurt School,” which is in some respects an outgrowth of the criti-
cal work of an earlier generation within this school of thought that included The-
odor Adorno (1903–1969), Max Horkheimer (1895–1973), and Herbert Marcuse 
(1898–1979). The Frankfurt School essentially turned a Marxist critique of politi-
cal economy into a critique of ideology. 
 The development of critical theory has included rather diverse philosophical 
influences: escaping from ideological constraints, as in the revolutionary spirit of 
Rousseau; searching for universal moral principles with the universality of appli-
cation found in Kant; identifying the oppression of class or other socioeconomic 
structures observed by Marx; understanding the role of human psychologies in re-
lationships of dominance drawn from the work of Freud; and rejecting determinism 
in favor of a more Gramsci-style Marxism that adopts a normative, but practical 
approach to challenging and overthrowing structures of domination. 

332
CHAPTER 7  Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings
 From the beginning, the Frankfurt School and its current best-known theoreti-
cian, Jürgen Habermas, have taken seriously Karl Marx’s assertion that heretofore 
philosophers had only interpreted the world, but the point was to change it. Nor-
mative and ethical concerns cannot or should not be separated from our theories 
of international relations, but should be embedded in them. Instead of using our 
reason for technical, instrumental means to maintain the stability of society, the 
larger questions that animated ancient Greek scholars such as Plato need to be seri-
ously addressed: What is the good and just society? 
 Systematic investigation of the existing order includes criticism, which, in turn, 
supports practical political theory that can map routes to societal and political trans-
formation. For critical international relations theorists, the good society is a just 
and democratic order that should be extended beyond the state to the international 
domain in the creation of a cosmopolitan community. Simply put, critical theorists 
are on the voluntarist extreme end of the voluntarism-determinism continuum, see-
ing great transformative potential residing in those able to see through ideological 
and other ideational masks that disguise or obscure unjust, exploitative realities. 
 Andrew Linklater, for example, analyzes what he terms a “triple transfor-
mation” required to undermine the relations among sovereignty, territory, and 
national conceptions of citizenship. These transformations involve widespread 
recognition (1) that certain moral, political, and legal principles need to be univer-
salized; (2) that material inequality must be reduced; and (3) that there is need for 
respect for ethnic, cultural, and gender differences.  9  
 Second, critical theorists have investigated the relation between knowledge 
and interest. Knowledge seeking is inherently political. Detached theorizing is an 
impossibility and a sham. As Robert Cox succinctly stated: “Theory is always for 
someone and for some purpose.”  10  With theories being embedded in social and 
political life, critical theory examines the purposes served by particular theories. 
Some critical theorists argue that beliefs held by many positivist scholars neces-
sarily bias their truth claims and may well be part of global ideological schemes 
to legitimate particular world orders. In supporting an alleged agenda of domi-
nation, it may be convenient to advance ideologies often masquerading as scien-
tifically based theories. One of the tasks of critical theorists is to unmask such 
deceptions, probe for deeper understandings or meanings, and expose the class 
or elite interests these ideologies or alleged theories are designed to serve. As for 
themselves, critical theorists believe in putting their cards on the table by being 
“self-reflective.” 
 Third, and following from the above, critical IR theorists have scrutinized the 
work of realists and liberals in particular. This even applies to the supposed found-
ing fathers of realism. It has been argued, for example, that Thucydides’ concern 
with language and practices (as evident in the numerous dialogues he reconstructs 
in his  History of the Peloponnesian War ) can be viewed as the beginning of critical 
theory. Far from being driven by events outside their control (anarchy, distribution 
of capabilities, or balance of power), individuals are the conscious initiators of the 
events described. Similarly, it has been suggested that Machiavelli is really an inter-
pretive theorist due to his sensitivity to the historical context of political action. At 
the time he was writing, the modern nation-state was just emerging as a new form 
of political community in the shadow of Christian universalism. With the  political 

Postmodernism: Major Assumptions 
333
world in flux, Machiavelli did not immediately reject the established Christian 
temporal understanding for a new form of realist universalism.  11  
 According to critical theorists, both realism and liberalism claim to be problem-
solving, technical approaches to IR. As a result, there is a built-in bias toward stabil-
ity and maintaining the  status quo of international politics. Their work essentially 
provides answers on how to manage IR and keep the international system within 
stable bounds and avoid disruption. They are not revolutionaries. Transforming IR 
for the betterment of the vast majority of humanity is supposedly not the goal of 
these realist and liberal rationalists. 
 In the IR theories they examine, a major goal of critical theorists is to uncover 
underlying power and other motives these theories allegedly advance. Not surpris-
ingly, much of their critique about the IR mainstream has been directed particularly 
toward realists and neorealists whose theories knowingly or unknowingly give 
legitimacy to states and relations among them. To some critical theorists, these are 
not really theories. They are instead cover stories—ideologies serving state, class, 
or elite interests merely masquerading as if they were theories. 
 One example of criticism applied to a positivist understanding of international 
relations is Richard Ashley’s comment on Kenneth Waltz’s system-level struc-
tural explanation for the behaviors we observe among states. The influence of 
 Habermas’s critical theory is apparent in the following passage. Referring to Waltz 
and the “poverty of neorealism,” Ashley asserts: 
 What emerges is a positivist structuralism that treats the given order as the natural 
order, limits rather than expands political discourse, negates or trivializes the sig-
nificance of variety across time and place, subordinates all practice to an interest 
in control, bows to the ideal of a social power beyond responsibility, and thereby 
deprives political interaction of those practical capacities which make social learn-
ing and creative change possible. What emerges is an ideology that anticipates, 
legitimizes, and orients a totalitarian project of global proportions: the rationaliza-
tion of global politics.  12  
 Neoliberal institutionalism hardly fares much better, given its emphasis on main-
taining international stability at times of international economic unrest. As Robert 
Cox has noted, neoliberalism is situated between the system of states and the capi-
talist world economy, providing insight on how the two can coexist. Theory can 
provide insight on how to resolve crises between them.  13  
 Critical theory may be viewed separately from postmodernism since most criti-
cal theorists retain strict methodological criteria to guide their work. Theirs is not a 
complete rejection of science or of positivism. Nevertheless, in terms of intellectual 
precursors and key assumptions, aspects of critical theory overlap with, or can be 
understood more broadly, as related to a postmodernist understanding in IR.  
POSTMODERNISM: MAJOR ASSUMPTIONS 
 For postmodernists, what we see, what we choose to see or measure, and the mech-
anisms or methods we employ are all of human construction that essentially rely on 
perception and cognitive processes influenced particularly by prior understandings 
and meanings. Even the language we use reflects an embedded set of values that 
are an integral part of any culture and found in the narratives or stories people 

334
CHAPTER 7  Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings
commonly employ to depict understandings of their observations and experiences 
in the world around them. As means to understand IR, postmodernists engage in 
linguistic deconstruction of what has been said or written, employing discursive 
practices that emphasize reasoned argument. 
 First, as with critical theorists and feminists, postmodernists assume an inti-
mate connection between power and knowledge in the analysis of IR. Following the 
arguments of Michel Foucault, the production of knowledge is a political process 
that has a mutually supportive relation to power. This is true not only in IR, but in 
all aspects of political life where power is exercised. This is not a realist emphasis 
on the material basis of power, but rather a focus on how actors and commentators 
(such as during the Cold War or after the September 11, 2001, attacks on the World 
Trade Center and Pentagon) attempt to impose authoritative interpretations on 
events. Hence, reality is structured by language, and the development of linguistic 
discourses results in a structure or system consisting of knowledge, subjects, and 
objects. For example, the development of the concept of sovereignty and associated 
terms and assumptions—state, anarchy, borders, security, and such human identi-
ties—is at the heart of much postmodern work in IR. 
 Second, in terms of methodology, some postmodernists follow Friedrich 
 Nietzsche’s lead in tracing over time the genealogy and significance of power- 
knowledge relations and such dominant discourses in IR as sovereignty and 
anarchy.  14  Knowledge is always conditioned by a particular time and place. Under-
standing how particular interpretations of the past continue to guide current think-
ing and behavior also involves highlighting what has been excluded in historical 
narratives. Hence, as Foucault argued, history is not about the uncovering of facts 
and building up a composite picture of the past, but rather exposing “the endlessly 
repeated play of dominations.”  15  In his studies of sanity, sexuality, and punishment, 
Foucault explored how concepts we use commonly were developed or socially 
constructed over time, challenging the generally accepted meanings these concepts 
purport to convey and the power-based human relations they sustain. 
 In engaging in this genealogical excavation, many postmodernists follow the 
approach of Jacques Derrida, who sought both text and subtexts in order to 
 deconstruct—unpack and take apart—the meanings embedded in what we say or 
write and even in the ways we act. By the term  text he didn’t simply mean what is 
written, but rather  text as a metaphor for the need to understand the world as a 
whole and how different interpretations not only represent, but also constitute the 
world—an ontological position.  16  
 Derrida led us to a post-structural turn, going beyond or not being bound 
by the accepted symbols or established structures that effectively channel our 
 understandings—a reaction by him and other post-structuralists of similar mind 
to the universal claims we find in the structuralism of both French philosophical 
thought and the branch of anthropology called semiotics. Particularly objectionable 
to them is any attempt to unify the social sciences with a single structuralist method-
ology based on identifying linguistic or cultural signs and differences. For their part, 
Jean-François Lyotard and his followers reject grand metanarratives employed 
purportedly to explain all of the world in scientific terms. Scholars arguing in this 
genre raise similar objections to balance of power and other metanarratives in IR 
they see masquerading as if they were scientifically based theoretical explanations. 

 
Critical Theorists, Postmodernists, and Their Critics  
335
 Third, in the process of engaging in genealogical excavations of dominant 
discourses and power-knowledge relations, postmodernists highlight competing 
historical perspectives, narratives, or trajectories. Following Nietzsche, there is no 
single historical truth, but rather multiple ones—there being no standard to judge 
them as no objective standard for truth exists. 
 This view is different from that of Kuhn and Toulmin’s use of paradigms or 
lenses that influence scientific work. They assume a real, discoverable objective re-
ality out there, but we adopt different lenses that highlight and interpret “facts” in 
different ways. For postmodernists, these perspectives actually constitute the “real 
world.” A basic ontological assumption, the identification of an historical narrative 
is not simply the interpretation of a series of actions, but rather the means by which 
“reality” is conferred upon events. 
 Just as postmodernists reject the idea that there is a knowable, single truth to 
be discovered, so, too, do they reject the idea that the only way to gain knowledge 
is through a positivist methodology whose application is restricted to conventional 
approaches favored by realists and liberals. For example, postmodernists have taken 
the lead not only in textual analysis, but also in the interpretation of art and theater. 
Christine Sylvester, for example, shows how IR influences the mission of museums 
and, in turn, how visitors experience and interpret the art that is displayed.  17  
 Finally, many postmodernists have a normative commitment to the idea that 
the sovereign state is not the only means by which to organize political and social 
life. The language of IR that emphasizes states in a condition of anarchy reinforces 
the current exclusionary paradigm that effectively precludes alternative forms of 
political and social organization. Furthermore, the territorialization of political 
identity justifies a political discourse and policies that affirm the right of state of-
ficials to brutalize their subjects and restrict the possibility of expanding democratic 
values. Hence, postmodernists take issue with the ontological perspective of realists 
and liberals that privilege the state as the unit of analysis and make it an ontological 
given for IR theorizing. In some postmodernist understandings, states do not simply 
use force in an instrumental, means-ends calculation to achieve certain objectives. 
Rather, the role of violence is important even in the origins and constitution of the 
state itself.  18  
 In sum, postmodernists dive beneath the surface—they deconstruct the words 
and phrases or text we use—and look for underlying meanings or subtexts in our 
communications or the narratives we adopt to depict our understandings. As sub-
jective creatures, we human beings are ourselves the source of knowledge we have 
about the world around us. Even our own identities are formed by the way we come 
to understand the world around us; the self is defined subjectively by each of us in 
relation to (an)other.  
CRITICAL THEORISTS, POSTMODERNISTS, 
AND THEIR CRITICS 
 Mainstream IR has consistently ignored critical theory and postmodernism. When 
it has addressed these interpretive understandings, there have been two major lines 
of argument. 

336
CHAPTER 7  Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings
 First, similar to charges leveled against economic structuralists, critical theo-
rists and postmodernists substitute ideology for explanation and engage in wishful 
thinking unconstrained by reality. A realist would no doubt suggest this literature 
belongs in this volume’s final chapter on normative theory where the  ought as op-
posed to the  is holds sway. One realist, Randall Schweller, has commented that 
Andrew Linklater “argues by fiat rather than by the weight of hard evidence, which 
is in scant supply here.” Radical propositions are “supported by nothing more than 
references to some other critical theorist who shares Linklater’s vision or tendency 
to rely on slippery, undefined, and unmeasured concepts.” By Linklater not tak-
ing seriously the obstacles to his triple transformation of the international system 
(increased  moral and  economic equality while remaining sensitive to  cultural dif-
ferences), Linklater’s work “will appear as little more than an intellectual exercise 
in historical speculation and theoretical wishful thinking.”  19  
 Second, and following from the above, is the charge that critical theorists, but 
particularly postmodernists, simply do not follow the cannons of positivism and 
causal theorizing. The editors of one of the major IR journals, for example, justified 
the exclusion of critical theory and postmodernist articles and associated critiques 
of positivism in the following manner: 
 Little of this debate was published in IO, since IO has been committed to an enter-
prise that postmodernism denies: the use of evidence to adjudicate between truth 
claims. In contrast to conventional and critical constructivism, postmodernism falls 
clearly outside the social science enterprise, and in international relations research 
risks becoming self-referential and disengaged from the world, protests to the con-
trary notwithstanding.  20  
 As one postmodernist responded: “There is a brazen acknowledgment of censor-
ship and suppression in the statement about the publication history of arguably 
the discipline’s most influential journal.” For their part, critical theorists reject as a 
false claim that their enterprise stands apart from scientific methods of analysis. To 
the contrary, they uncover the ways and means by which “science” has been used 
to mask power-driven or exploitative agendas. 
 It is true that for many postmodernists, claims made to empirically based, ob-
jective truth are necessarily hollow. Our understandings and meanings are, after all, 
humanly constructed. In the extreme, no knowledge or truth is possible apart from 
the motivations and purposes people put into their construction. From this extreme 
perspective (not all postmodernists go so far), truth is entirely relative. It is this 
highly relative approach to human understanding that leads some postmodernists 
to deny even the possibility of any empirically based truth claims, thus underscoring 
their total rejection of positivism. 
 These are, to say the least, examples of significant challenges to “modern-
ist” science or positivism more generally and to international relations theory in 
particular. It is difficult, however, to deny or dismiss scientific methodologies that 
have produced so much accumulated knowledge in so many diverse fields of hu-
man inquiry. Defenders of positivism see critical and postmodernist thinkers as 
misrepresenting the positivist scientific enterprise which, after all, retains an inher-
ently skeptical orientation to truth claims and demands continued and unending 
empirical tests of such propositions. 

Notes
337
 On the other hand, postmodern critiques make us skeptical of truth claims 
made by mainstream journals. Such critiques encourage us to exercise critical 
scrutiny of the assumptions made about causality, the categories we adopt, the fac-
tors we select, how we define these variables or constants, and the way we relate 
them to each other in the explanatory or predictive theories positivists generate. 
The cover stories identified by critical theorists and the narratives and particular 
uses of language that inform postmodernists already have influenced substantially 
the ways in which concepts are developed and research is conducted across the IR 
field. Taking the human or subjective into account has encouraged IR theorists—no 
matter what image or interpretive understanding influences their work—to be more 
theoretically self-consciousness.  
SUMMATION
 Positivism—modernist science and the scientific method that combine the logic 
of rational theorizing with empirical test—has occupied the mainstream of IR 
theory. In recent decades, however, the Weberian concept of  Verstehen and 
 phenomenology—a focus on human consciousness as essential to our coming to 
know the world of which we are a part—are at the root of interpretive understand-
ings in both critical theory and postmodern thought. 
 If the central question of epistemology is how we know what we think we 
know, critical theorists and postmodernists set aside many of the abstract univer-
salist claims of logical positivists, focusing instead on the human perception and 
understandings that give diverse meanings to the concepts and theories we formu-
late and the behavior we observe. Although some in the extreme entirely reject the 
scientific or modernist project and the truth claims associated with it, others seek 
merely to temper blanket claims of objectivity with interpretive understanding—
subjectivity and intersubjectivity that necessarily are a part of what human beings 
observe, think, and do. As such, the scholar or researcher still wedded to science 
and its canons is at the same time encouraged or cajoled to be humble about truth 
claims, knowing how much they remain a function of human subjectivity. Just as it 
historically has accommodated empirical, theoretical, and philosophical critiques 
by modifying its methods and understandings, science remains open to critical, 
postmodernist, and other challenges.  
NOTES
 1.   Thomas S. Kuhn,  The Structure of Scientific Revolutions, 2nd ed. (Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press, 1962, 1970).  
 2.   See Stephen Toulmin,  Foresight and Understanding:  An Enquiry into the Aims of Science 
(Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1961), especially 99–102, 108–09, 114–15.  
 3.   Imre Lakatos in  The Methodology of Scientific Research Programmes:  Philosophical 
Papers, Vol. I, eds., John Worrall and Gregory Currie (Cambridge, UK: Cambridge 
University Press, 1978), 8–10, 47–52, 70–72, and 85–93.  
 4.   See Plato,  The Republic, trans. Francis MacDonald Cornford (New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1941), ch. XIX, v. 477, 185.  
 5.   Immanuel Kant,  Critique of Pure Reason, Book II, ch. 3.  

338
CHAPTER 7  Positivism, Critical Theory, and Postmodern Understandings
 6.   Howard P. Kainz, trans. and ed.,  Hegel’s Phenomenology of Spirit (University Park, PA: 
Pennsylvania State University Press, 1994), 10–11, 9–10, 96–97, 8.  
 7.   Don Ihde,  Experimental Phenomenology (Albany, NY: State University of New York, 
1986), 14–15, and 36.  
 8.   Paul Keal,  European Conquest and the Rights of Indigenous Peoples (Cambridge: 
 Cambridge University Press, 2003); Heather Rae,  State Identities and the Homogenisa-
tion of Peoples (New York: Cambridge University Press, 2002).  
 9.   See, for example,  The Transformation of Political Community: Ethical Foundations of 
the Post-Westphalian Era (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998).  
 10.  See Robert Cox, “Social Forces, States, and World Orders,” in  Neorealism and Its Crit-
ics, ed., Robert O. Keohane (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986), 207.  
 11.  See, for example, Daniel Garst, “Thucydides and Neorealism,”  International Studies 
Quarterly, 33 (1989): 3–27; R. B. J. Walker, “The Prince and the Pauper: Tradition, 
Modernity, and Practice in the Theory of International Relations,” In  International/
Intertextual Relations:  Postmodern Readings of World Politics, eds., James Der Derian 
and Michael J. Shapiro (Lexington, MA.: Lexington Books, 1989).  
 12.  See Richard K. Ashley, “The Poverty of Neorealism,” in  Neorealism and Its Critics, ed., 
Robert O. Keohane (New York: Columbia University Press, 1986), 258.  
 13.  Robert Cox, “Multilateralism and World Order,”  Review of International Studies, 18 
(1992), 173.  
 14.  Note that the work of Richard Ashley predates Wendt’s constructivist critique of anar-
chy. Ashley, “Untying the Sovereign State: A Double Reading of the Anarchy Problema-
tique,”  Millennium:  Journal of International Studies, 17 (1988): 227–62.  
 15.  Michel Foucault,  Discipline and Punish:  The Birth of the Prison (Harmondsworth, 
England: Penguin, 1977), 228.  
 16.  Jacques Derrida,  Limited Inc. (Evanston: Northwestern University Press, 1988).  
 17.  See Christine Sylvester,  Art/Museums: International Relations Where You Least Expect 
It (Boulder, CO: Paradigm, 2008).  
   18.  One of the initial analyses remains the best. See R. B. J. Walker,  Inside/Outside: Inter-
national Relations as Political Theory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1993). 
For an excellent case study of all of these arguments coming into play, see David  Camp-
bell’s National Deconstruction: Violence, Identity, and Justice in Bosnia (Minneapolis: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1998).  
 19.  Randall L. Schweller, “Fantasy Theory,”  Review of International Studies, 25 (1999), 
147, 148.  
 20.  Peter J. Katzenstein, Robert O. Keohane, and Stephen D. Krasner, “ International 
 Organization and the Study of World Politics,”  International Organization, 52 (1998): 
678. The quotation and rebuttal are both in Anthony Burke, “Postmodernism,” in  The 
Oxford Handbook of International Relations, eds., Christian Reus-Smit and Duncan 
Snidal (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008), 370.  

SE LECTED READIN GS 
Critical Explorations and the Highway 
of Critical Security Theory 
KEN BOOTH
OVERVIEW
 Booth assaults realism. To him, the realism that informs so much of the discourse 
in IR is itself the problem—the culprit pretending to offer remedies to the victim. 
Influenced by the Frankfurt School and the critical-theory tradition with which he 
identifies, the author seeks emancipation from dangerous ideas that put the collec-
tive health of human society in jeopardy. Considering all knowledge as part of a 
social process, Booth departs from traditional theory, which he sees as flawed by 
its reductionism, its grounding in naturalism (as if the state, other institutions and 
what they do were part of the natural order of things), and its regressive claims 
that have dominated politics among nations. The state and other institutions must 
be “denaturalized” or revealed as essentially human creations that serve power-
ful interests. This unmasking not only liberates or emancipates us, but also opens 
us to advancing values central to achieving a more progressive world order that 
enhances world security. To make this happen, critical theory needs to identify 
what is real (ontology), how we know it (epistemology), and what can be done 
about it (praxis).  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   When we are confronted by a factual or theoretical claim, how likely are we to think critically 
about it? Are we prone to dive beneath the surface to explore what underpins these claims?  
 2.  Are theories—often elegantly presented—sometimes used knowingly or unknowingly to cover 
or camouflage realities more difficult to defend?  
 3.  Can we engage in critical thinking by making it a routine to challenge both the factual basis 
and logic of argumentation in support of one or another theory or theoretical proposition?  
 4.  What does Booth mean by the emancipation he advocates?  
 From  Critical Security Studies and World Politics,  edited by Ken Booth. Copyright © 2005 by Lynne Rienner  Publishers, 
Inc. Used with permission of the publisher. 
339

340
KEN BOOTH
 j  The Marxian tradition offers a deep mine of 
ideas that are especially useful for thinking 
about ideology, class, and structural power.  
 j  An embryonic school of critical international 
relations theory has developed. It has begun 
to examine cosmopolitan ideas and practices 
relating to community, democracy, force, 
and law.  6  
 In what follows, seeking to bring together the 
main themes of the critical theory tradition, I am 
conscious of synthesizing an enormous amount of 
sometimes complex theorizing. Purists might squeal, 
but the risk is worth taking in the interests of shap-
ing a coherent and accessible body of ideas relevant 
to a critical theory of security. Four core themes 
emerge.  7  
 Theme One: All Knowledge is a Social  Process 
 Knowledge does not simply exist, waiting to be 
discovered like a glacier. Social and political the-
ories, and the concepts and conceptualizations 
that derive from them, are the products of social 
processes. To a greater or lesser degree, theorists 
both write and are written by the theories of their 
time and circumstances. In this sense, all knowl-
edge about human society is historical knowledge, 
emerging as it does from concrete contexts. Social 
and political theories are not therefore neutral or 
objective; they contain “nontheoretical interests.” 
They exist in real worlds, not some imagined world 
of decontextualized theory; their findings, con-
cerns, and implications are not those that might 
be understood by a disinterested and omniscient 
god (if she existed), standing apart from earthly 
context. Theories are, to repeat Robert Cox’s fa-
mous formulation,“ for some one or  for some pur-
pose.” One aim of critical theory, then, is to seek 
to reveal the “interests of knowledge” as a factor 
in social and political enquiry. Knowledge here in-
cludes what is often described as “common sense.” 
From a Gramscian perspective, common sense is 
equally “ for some one or  for some purpose.” All 
political theorizing has some ethical dimensions, 
whether it is at the level of sophisticated program-
matic planning or down-to-earth common sense. 
The political realm is necessarily a realm of ethics 
and morality. If all positions, including the claim to 
have none, have some nontheoretical (normative) 
implications, objectivity is a false idol in the study 
of human society. The most that can be attained is 
The Highway of Critical Security Theory 
 The framework of ideas developed below might be 
visualized in the Kantian metaphor of a highway. 
In my adaptation of it, the image to keep in mind 
is of two major roads, themselves the product of a 
series of feeder roads, converging and widening into 
a single highway.  1  The two major roads are the  criti-
cal theory tradition in social theory, and the  radi-
cal tradition in international relations theory. The 
highway that is produced is  critical security theory. 
The Critical Theory Tradition 
 The critical theory tradition goes back to Kant.  2  
Of most immediate relevance for current purposes, 
however, is the work of the Frankfurt School, whose 
origins lay in the establishment of the Institute for 
Social Research at the University of Frankfurt in 
1923. During the Nazi period and World War II, 
the school was exiled in the United States before be-
ing reestablished in Germany in 1950.  3  Key scholars 
in the school’s work over some eighty-plus years 
have been Max Horkheimer, Theodor Adorno, and 
 Jürgen Habermas. 
 The most thorough exposition to date bringing 
together the work of the Frankfurt School and the 
problematique of security is Richard Wyn Jones’s 
book  Security, Strategy, and Critical Theory.  4  He 
describes his approach to thinking about security as 
developing “in the light” of the Frankfurt School,  5  
and I am happy to endorse this formulation. I also 
share his view that not all critical theories are equally 
useful when thinking about security and that the use 
of the word “critical” in the label CSS should signal 
the special helpfulness of the Frankfurt School. Not 
all critics of realist-derived security studies would 
share this view, of course, particularly postmodern-
ists and poststructuralists hostile to meta-narratives 
(other than their own), or those peace researchers 
committed to positivism. 
 In addition to the Frankfurt School, there are 
three other feeder roads into the critical theory 
 tradition: 
 j  The body of ideas identified with Antonio 
Gramsci, together with those of his interpreters 
in international studies (the neo-Gramscians). 
They have contributed with considerable insight 
to thinking about hegemony, civil society, and 
the different roles of intellectuals in politics.  

 
Critical Explorations and the Highway of Critical Security Theory  
341
one’s feet firmly on the ground, not constructing 
castles in the air.  
 Theme Four: The Test of Theory is Emancipation 
 Human society in global perspective is shaped by 
ideas that are dangerous to its collective health. 
The evidence for the latter is widespread. It is 
revealed in the extent of structural oppression suf-
fered on account of gender, class, or race; it is 
apparent in the threats to the very environment 
that sustains all life; it is seen in the risks arising 
out of the unintended consequences from devel-
opments in technology; and, as ever, it is experi-
enced in the regular recourse to violence to settle 
political differences. A more just society in global 
perspective would be one that progressively limits 
the power of regressive structures and processes, 
steadily squeezing the space for violent behavior 
in all its direct and indirect manifestations; in this 
process, new opportunities would open up for the 
exploration of what it might mean to be human. 
This exploration, in the spirit of emancipation, 
begins with critique. A radical rethinking of the 
theories and practices that have shaped political 
life is an essential foundation for the reinvention 
of human society. Such rethinking, to be true to 
the spirit of emancipation, requires students to em-
brace a global perspective. The smaller social units 
of  universal human society will not be predictably 
secure until the whole is systematically secured; 
this is one reason why what is called political stud-
ies (or even science) should be logically regarded as 
a subfield of the study of world politics or interna-
tional relations (broadly defined) and not the other 
way around. Emancipation for critical theorists is 
both a critical device for judging theory and the 
continuing goal of practice; its politics seeks to 
denaturalize and overcome oppressive social divi-
sions in human society at all levels. The only tran-
shistorical and permanent fixture in human society 
is the individual physical being, and so this must 
naturally be the ultimate referent in the security 
problematique. Such reverence for the person—the 
singular body—should be understood as synony-
mous with the idea that people exist  collectively, 
in some social context or other. A notion of com-
munity remains the best way of expressing how this 
can be translated into living a good life. The search 
for multilevel emancipatory communities, locally 
and globally, is the biggest institutional challenge 
faced by a critical theory of security. In the pursuit 
a degree of (subjective) critical distance from the 
object of enquiry.  
 Theme Two: Traditional Theory Promotes the 
Flaws of Naturalism and Reductionism  In a 
 famous essay published in 1937, Max Horkheimer, 
a key figure in the Frankfurt School, gave the label 
“traditional theory” to the flawed theorizing that 
his critical theory would seek to overcome.  8  In par-
ticular, he criticized the way traditional theory’s 
commitment to the scientific method had spread 
uncritically and powerfully into all fields. The fal-
lacy of naturalism is the idea that human beings 
and societies belong to the same world of nature as 
everything else and so should be capable of being 
explained by the same scientific method. In par-
ticular, when it comes to explaining human soci-
ety, the characteristic reductionism of the scientific 
method is flawed and needs to be replaced by a 
more holistic perspective. Theorists can therefore 
be divided between those who see themselves pri-
marily as  scientists seeking objective truth about 
society and Frankfurt School critical theorists who 
accept they are part of a social process (seeking to 
promote emancipation). The former (falsely) con-
sider that they are working apart from the world 
they seek to explain, whereas the latter understand 
they are  embedded in society, and that theorizing is 
a social act. Gramsci made the important distinc-
tion, respectively, between  traditional and  organic 
intellectuals.  
 Theme Three: Critical Theory Offers a Basis for 
Political and Social Progress  Critical theory 
stands outside and questions the social and po-
litical phenomena it is examining. . . . It avoids, 
as far as possible, the negative consequences of 
 problem-solving theories, particularly the legiti-
mizing and replicating of the regressive aspects 
of prevailing situations. Problem-solving theories 
such as political realism leave power where it is, 
whereas critical theory attempts to bring about 
structural changes in the human interest, that is, 
reordering power in emancipatory ways. Power, 
in its manifold varieties, cannot be escaped, but 
it can be reordered in a more benign direction. 
In the strategic action undertaken to attempt to 
bring change about, there is no sounder basis than 
 immanent critique —the discovery of the latent 
potentials in situations on which to build politi-
cal and social progress. This means building with 

342
KEN BOOTH
 Five main schools of thought in the radical 
international relations tradition are relevant to the 
development of a critical theory of security: 
 j  The philosophical tradition of social idealism, 
in which human society is conceived as 
self-constituted and international politics 
regarded as just another aspect of human-
made reality.  
 j  The Peace Research and Peace Studies School, 
which since the 1950s has explicitly promoted 
the value of peace. In the 1960s this project 
expanded from concentrating on the problem 
of war into addressing the study of all forms 
of violence, from direct to structural.  
 j  The World Society or World Order School, 
which offers inspiration because of the way 
its proponents developed an explicitly value-
framed and progressive approach to the study 
of global issues.  
 j  Feminist theorizing, whose contribution has 
been the uncovering of the gender interests 
served by political and social theories, as 
well as the exposure of the role(s) played by 
gender in the workings of world politics in 
practice.  
 j  Historical sociology, which has a place in this 
body of ideas because its starting point opens 
up the state and so challenges the ahistorical 
biases and inherent conservatism and statism 
of political realism. Historical sociology 
therefore interrogates what realism takes 
as given and so has radical implications for 
students of international politics.  11  
 Together, these feeder roads add the following 
core themes to those identified earlier: 
 Theme Five: Human Society is its Own Invention 
 If this is true in part, it must be so in whole. What 
we call “international relations,” therefore, is one 
aspect of human-made reality—“facts by human 
agreement” on a global scale, in other words. The 
social idealism represented by Philip Allott’s writ-
ing about the role of law, and of the “self-forged 
chains” that exist nowhere but in the mind, is of a 
similar inspiration to that in peace research arguing 
that political violence is a learned behavior, not 
an inevitable feature of human social interaction.  12  
Social learning can and does take place, but what 
has been learned historically has often not been 
of this objective,   discourse ethics —wherein com-
munication (the basis for community) rather than 
traditional politico-military strategizing (the me-
dium of conflict)—must therefore be a priority. . . .  
The Radical International Relations Tradition 
 The critical theory tradition is mainly (though not 
wholly) important in relation to how we might 
think about what is reliable knowledge (episte-
mology), and what should be done (emancipatory 
praxis). What I am calling the radical international 
relations tradition relates more to what is real in 
world politics (ontology), and what values might 
inform the praxis of global politics in the human 
interest.  9  
 All social and political theories have norma-
tive implications, to a lesser or greater extent, 
either implicitly or explicity. The feeder roads of 
the radical international theory tradition are ex-
plicitly value-laden, and the normative thrust is 
 progressive. The latter is a word I use deliber-
ately, fully aware of its problems and reputation. 
The concept of progress is unfashionable in some 
circles. To postmodernists, for example, the idea 
of progress is almost synonymous with all that has 
gone wrong with the world in the past 200 years; 
it is part of the modernity that, according to some, 
led to the Holocaust.  10  Such views underline the 
need to reconsider the concept of progress. This 
will become easier as progress ceases to be identi-
fied as strongly as it has been with the hubris of 
nineteenth-century liberalism or twentieth-century 
totalitarianism (hardly the complete story of the 
idea of progress), and as the wave of postmod-
ernism and poststructuralism weakens in Western 
intellectual life. In any case, an idea of progress 
informs postructuralist arguments more so than is 
generally recognized. . . . 
 Despite all the assaults on the idea of progress, 
it remains necessary, globally manifested, and (now) 
is almost universally hard-wired. By “progressive” 
I mean simply a belief in the importance of having 
ideals in society and trying to shape law, politics, 
and institutions accordingly. The idea of progress 
derives from the laudable refusal of some people to 
believe that this is the best of all possible worlds. 
Without rational ideals to challenge power, it re-
mains where it is, to be countered only by counter-
vailing power or unreason. 

 
Critical Explorations and the Highway of Critical Security Theory  
343
necessities. Inquiry into the growth of state forma-
tions in different parts of the world will help the 
process of problematizing all institutional identi-
fiers that divide humanity and that get in the way of 
recognizing and implementing the view that every 
person, in principle, has equal moral worth. The 
temporality of all institutions should lead us to focus 
on the individual as the ultimate referent for security; 
the corollary of this is that we should also consider 
as central to our concerns the ultimate collectiv-
ity of individuals, common humanity. Hedley Bull, 
best known for being one of the leading exponents 
of the “international society” approach, described 
“world order” as being “more fundamental and 
primordial” than international order, because the 
“ultimate units” of human society are not states or 
other sociopolitical groupings but individual human 
beings. The latter are “permanent and indestructible 
in a sense in which groupings of them of this or that 
sort are not.”. . .  14  
 Theme Eight: Progressive World Order Values 
Should Inform the Means and Ends of an Inter-
national Politics Committed to Enhancing World 
Security  In today’s circumstances, when the world 
is not working for the vast majority of its inhabit-
ants, the agenda for progressive change is huge. For 
students of security, the exploration of conflict reso-
lution and conflict management is a major departure 
from realism’s fatalistic assumption of violence in 
human affairs and, hence, the belief that force can 
only be met by force. The neatest and most compre-
hensive formulation of the ideas that should inform 
progressive global change grew out of the work of 
the World Order School, with its advocacy of val-
ues such as the delegitimation of violence, the pro-
motion of economic justice, the pursuit of human 
rights, the spread of humane governance, and the 
development of environmental sustainability.  15  It is 
my belief that these normative goals should be pur-
sued in a non-dualistic fashion in order to avoid the 
dangers of  instrumental reason, that is, the threat of 
bringing about a perversion of humanity, society, 
or nature by concentrating entirely on functional 
processes even in the rational pursuit of a desirable 
goal.  16  Nuclear strategy is an illustration of the dan-
ger of instrumental reason. Its evolution shows how 
a belief in the absolute priority of national defense, 
and the subsequent immersion in its processes and 
goals, perverts intuitions and ideas about humanity, 
benign. To the contrary, regressive attitudes have 
been internalized. Central to what Allott calls these 
“deformed ideas” has been the way humans have 
internalized conflict as a foundational myth. This 
has been nowhere stronger than on what he calls 
the “grandest stage of all,” the “tragi- comedy of 
the state-system.” According to this line of thought 
about the openness of history, human society be-
came what it need not have been. Humans could 
have chosen different directions and could yet 
choose a different future. This injunction refers 
not only to reinventing international politics but 
also to the need for a new international political 
economy. This is a dimension of world politics usu-
ally ignored or taken for granted by realist security 
studies. . . .  
 Theme Six: Regressive Theories Have Dominated 
Politics Among Nations  Theory constitutes behav-
ior, and some of the key theories that have formed 
human society on a global scale have not been cal-
culated to produce a more civilized, peaceful, or just 
system of international relations. Examples of such 
thinking include ethnocentric and masculinist ideas, 
as well as the negative images of humanity cultivated 
by prevailing notions about human nature or the hu-
man condition.  13  . . . Ethnocentrism is a particular 
obstacle to creating a just global society and so must 
be challenged by more systematic knowledge about 
the ideas and feelings, and the hopes and fears, of 
people(s) with different thoughtways. One feature 
of regressive (noninclusive) theories about humanity 
is the way they make important sections of society 
invisible. As a result, gender, race, and class, for 
example, are frequently downplayed as categorical 
structures of humanity. The gendered character of 
how societies and economies work was invisible in 
the academic study of international relations until 
feminist theorizing opened the eyes of those who 
were prepared to see. Above all, the ideology of 
statism corrupts all it touches. The concept of  hu-
man security, for example, which originally encour-
aged the idea of a different and more important 
referent than the sovereign state, has been co-opted 
and  incorporated into statist discourses, reviving old 
ideas about high and low politics.  
 Theme Seven: The State and Other Institutions 
Must Be Denaturalized  Human institutions like 
the state are historical phenomena, not biological 

344
KEN BOOTH
and definition can guide us in our explorations 
in relation to three fundamental (philosophical-
theoretical-political) questions. 
 j  What is real? A critical theory of security seeks 
to denaturalize and historicize all human-made 
political referents, recognizing only the pri-
mordial entity of the socially embedded indi-
vidual. The exploration of referents is seen 
through the lens of emancipatory interests, not 
predefined ideas about the nature of the politi-
cal world. Whereas other theories of security 
narrow the agenda because of their singular, 
privileged referents, critical theory is open to 
the exploration of all referents, historical and 
future-imagined, and therefore must consider 
the range of different threats associated with 
them. Imagined referents, the potential of new 
identities, are particularly significant for criti-
cal theory, because herein lies the possibility of 
the future reality of security, community and 
emancipation in world politics.  
 j  What is knowledge? Critical security theory 
questions the reliability of much of what passes 
for knowledge about world politics. The reli-
ability of this traditional knowledge is under 
question because of the political and epistemo-
logical assumptions of those who have the sta-
tus of fact makers in contemporary society. In 
particular, critical theory challenges the ideal of 
objectivity in traditional theory and instead set-
tles for the more realistic goal of critical distance 
between theorist and subject. In this way, the 
presumptions and assumptions of structurally 
powerful contemporary knowledge are inter-
rogated, while critical theory pursues its own 
“knowledge-interests” against the test of an 
inclusive conception of human emancipation. 
Given the different starting point of critical the-
ory from other theories, the conceptualization 
of security is different, and this informs what is 
thought to be relevant and reliable knowledge.  
 j  What might be done? While the spirit of 
critical theory is forward-looking, guided by 
emancipatory interests, the understanding 
of knowledge as a historical process involves 
rethinking the past as a basis for inventing a 
better future. History, after all, is not what 
happened but how it has been interpreted; 
historiography is partly about discovery, but 
more about invention. Consequently, what 
society, and nature and so opens up the possibility 
of war crimes, environmental disaster, genetic dam-
age, and untold human catastrophe. Instrumental 
reason is a dimension in what Robert Lifton and 
E. Markusen have called “the genocidal mentality,  17  
the instrumentalist dynamic shows how even good 
men (and women) can rationalize their activities 
and become the instruments of profound human 
wrongs. One counter to the dualistic ends-justify-
the-means rationality, as was discussed earlier, is 
the Gandhian conception of conceiving ends and 
means as amounting to the same thing: a concrete 
end might be out of reach, but the means that are its 
equivalent are not.  18  
 The eight core themes just identified point in 
the direction of the intellectual highway of a critical 
theory of security. In summary: 
 j  All knowledge is a social process.  
 j  Traditional theory promotes the flaws of 
naturalism and reductionism.  
 j  Critical theory offers a basis for political and 
social progress.  
 j  The test of theory is emancipation.  
 j  Human society is its own invention.  
 j  Regressive theories have dominated politics 
among nations.  
 j  The state and other institutions must be 
denaturalized.  
 j  Progressive world order values should inform 
the means and ends of an international politics 
committed to enhancing world security.  
 From this sense of direction, I now propose a 
definition of a distinct theory of security from a 
Frankfurt School critical theory perspective:  Criti-
cal security theory is both a theoretical commit-
ment and a political orientation. As a theoretical 
commitment it embraces a set of ideas engaging in 
a critical and permanent exploration of the ontol-
ogy, epistemology, and praxis of security, community, 
and emancipation in world politics. As a political 
orientation it is informed by the aim of enhancing 
security through emancipatory politics and net-
works of community at all levels, including the 
potential community of communities—common 
humanity.  
 This [article] began by distinguishing CSS 
as a  body of knowledge from a  theory of secu-
rity with  a critical perspective. It then offered a 
 framework and definition of a particular criti-
cal theory of security. This particular framework 

 
Critical Explorations and the Highway of Critical Security Theory  
345
 pluralism. Any project aimed at rethinking security 
from the bottom up must not be closed to the ideas 
and questions raised by different theoretical per-
spectives. That being said, the drawing of theoretical 
lines is essential for an effective research strategy, 
not to mention any political orientation. At the same 
time, whatever one’s theoretical preference, regular 
engagement with other theoretical perspectives, in-
cluding political realism, will help keep everybody 
honest. There should be no synthesis of critical ap-
proaches around the lowest common denominator 
or any misinformed ignoring of the tradition of 
political realism. 
 Students of security these days seem to be 
condemned to a lifetime of theoretical dialectic, 
but the typical student will not be interested in 
theory for its own sake but rather for what it can 
do in helping us to understand what is happening 
around us (“theory explains the world”), then 
in engaging with world politics more effectively 
(“there is nothing more practical than a good 
theory”). In other words, most of us are interested 
in theory because we are interested in real people 
in real places. So, for example, the concept of 
emancipation should not be allowed to be charac-
terized, as it sometimes is by critics, as abstract or 
unrelated to real conflicts. . . . 
 Being directly relevant to real situations—being 
a set of guidelines for action—has supposed to have 
been the particular strength of political realism. . . . 
Unlike most political realists, one of its founding 
figures, E. H. Carr, questioned what he called “pure 
realism” or “consistent realism.” He argued that 
sound political thought and sound political life were 
synonymous with finding a place for both utopia-
nism and realism. Although he struggled to bring 
together the planes of utopianism and realism, he 
was sure that it was an “unreal kind of realism” 
that ignored the element of morality in any world 
order. He therefore concluded that the “essential 
ingredients of all effective political thinking” were 
“a finite goal, an emotional appeal, a right of moral 
judgement and a ground for action.”  23  I believe the 
framework for a critical theory of security mapped 
out earlier—albeit in a preliminary way—contains 
those essential ingredients and in doing so helps to 
point in the direction of a  utopian realist theory of 
security. Carr would have rejected such a possibil-
ity (he thought it impossible to bring together the 
planes of realism and utopianism), but he would 
have been sympathetic with the attempt. Utopian 
has been done, and might be done, looks 
very different depending on how one tells the 
story of the past. It can be done with regres-
sive assumptions or an emancipatory inter-
est. Similarly, one’s conception of practice 
and problem-solving will vary. On the one 
side is the traditional theorist who sees prac-
tice as separate from theory and conceives 
problem-solving within a predefined world. 
On the other side is the Frankfurt School 
critical theorist who conceives a constitutive 
relationship between theorizing and practice 
and who prioritizes solving the (macro) prob-
lem of the existing situation rather than the 
(micro) problems within that situation. For 
the traditional theorist, what might be done 
takes place within the parameters of replicat-
ing the world; for the Frankfurt School critical 
theorist what might be done is inspired by the 
hope of changing the world, not for theory’s 
sake but for improving the lives of real people 
in real places. . . .  
Toward a Critical Theory of Security 
 The most clearly constructivist school of inter-
national relations today is the curiously labeled 
 English School, with its emphasis on norms and 
rules within a supposed society of states.  19  Although 
constructivism offers important insights into the dy-
namics of world politics,  20  it does not in itself consti-
tute a  theory of international relations, comparable 
with realism, for example, with its distinctive set 
of ideas about the centrality of states, the causal 
significance of the distribution of power, and the 
logic of balance-of-power policies. Constructivism 
is a metatheoretical orientation, seeking to offer 
richer explanations of how the world works  21  ; it 
does not in itself give us a politically relevant ontol-
ogy or praxiological orientation. It offers little or no 
guidance as to whether globalization is desirable or 
whether the U.S.-UK invasion of Iraq in 2003 was 
sensible. Constructivism is not a theory of security; 
what it does is act as a counter to those theories 
claiming that life, including politics among nations, 
is determined (by biology, for example). It reinforces 
the idea, to paraphrase Alexander Wendt, that secu-
rity is what we make it.  22  
 While criticizing various contending theories, 
and outlining the case for a specific critical theory 
of security, I want to emphasize the desirability of 

346
KEN BOOTH
Such an engagement with the real should be the 
heart of the next stage in the growth of critically 
informed security studies.  27  
 Another central task is that of trying to learn 
lessons, in the hope of contributing to the preven-
tion of oppressive structures and situations devel-
oping in the first place. In this respect, the U.S. led 
war on Iraq in 2003 will provide fertile ground for 
lessons. While President George W. Bush and his 
allies, notably Prime Minister Tony Blair, argued 
that the war made the world a safer place, critics 
argue that U.S. and UK leaders and policies over the 
years contributed significantly to creating the dan-
gerous regional situation in the first place, while 
their policies in 2002–2004 made the situation less 
rather than more secure. In light of this record, 
critics maintain that nobody could have confidence 
that U.S.-UK policies in Iraq would create postcon-
flict harmony in the region. Critics point out that 
different attitudes to building up local strongmen, 
supplying arms to human rights abusers, pursu-
ing nuclear disarmament, strengthening the UN, 
and the more vigorous (and less partisan) search 
for a just and lasting peace between Palestine and 
Israel—to mention only headline items—would 
have helped create a different relationship between 
Iraq and the West. The war against Iraq in 2003, 
according to this argument, has made the world a 
more dangerous place, not only by exacerbating 
the situation in the Middle East but also by repli-
cating policies that legitimize violence and that re-
ject multilateral international bodies. Meanwhile, 
as leaders of many states focus on the war on ter-
ror, more important long-term threats to human 
security and regional order—poverty, disease, en-
vironmental decay— remain marginal or ignored. 
Remembering Camus, we should understand that 
human society will never achieve tomorrow what 
its most powerful do not choose to begin to prac-
tice today. 
 There are, however, resources for benevolent 
change.  Immanent Critique points to the growing 
voice of global civil society, for example, though 
the obstacles to benign change should not be un-
derestimated.  28  Where one stands on these mat-
ters is a scholarly responsibility to be considered 
with utmost seriousness because somewhere, some 
people, as these very words are being read, are be-
ing starved, oppressed, threatened, or killed in the 
name of some theory of international politics or 
 economics—or security. 
 realism attempts to bring together the theoretical 
and the empirical, as well as the  where we are 
(globally and locally) and the  where we want to go 
(a harmonious human community with enhanced 
world security).  24  It attempts to do so in a nondu-
alistic manner, fusing ends and means in a manner 
whereby one’s ideals are evident in how one acts, 
not only in what one hopes to achieve. 
 Old thinking about world politics guarantees 
old practices; the means recommended by tradi-
tional theories will ensure that the end will be the 
same old world with the same old dangers—and 
perhaps worse, given the predictable tinderbox 
of the decades ahead. By this I mean that states 
with weapons of mass destruction (WMD) will 
not persuade others to give them up (except by 
coercion) if those very WMD states themselves 
continue to develop the weapons and implicitly if 
not explicitly declare their possession to have po-
litical and strategic utility. Likewise, when pow-
erful states use violence, even if it is claimed to 
be a last resort for humanitarian purposes, they 
are not acting in a manner calculated to make 
violence less likely; if they achieve success in their 
own terms, they do so only by proving to others 
that strategic violence can have political util-
ity. Consistency requires that those who propose 
that world politics is run by laws behave lawfully 
themselves and that those powerful states that 
proclaim democracy should be willing themselves 
to live with being outvoted. The strategic chal-
lenge for emancipatory politics is to develop ideas 
for dealing with today’s security threats (to what-
ever referents we are studying) in ways sensitive 
to the view expressed by Albert Camus that the 
means one uses today shapes the ends one might 
perhaps reach tomorrow.  25  
 If a critical theory of security is to reverse the 
“escape from the real” that has characterized so 
much academic writing about international rela-
tions,  26  then it is essential to ask what it means 
for real people in real places. What, for example, 
does one’s theorizing mean for the people(s) of the 
 Balkans, women in east Africa, the prospects for 
the poorest classes in some region, the war on ter-
ror, the future of the Middle East, the likelihood of 
resource wars, or the possibility of nuclear weapons 
being used somewhere? It has only been constraints 
on space that have prevented more case studies be-
ing offered in this volume, to illustrate what criti-
cally informed empirical studies might look like. 

 
Critical Explorations and the Highway of Critical Security Theory  
347
this and help to emancipate? Security studies will 
contribute—however remotely or indirectly—to 
replicating or changing peoples’ conditions of ex-
istence. As students of security, whether one is new 
to the subject or has been studying it for decades, 
we have a choice: we can decide to study in ways 
that replicate a world politics that does not work 
for countless millions of our fellow human beings; 
or we can decide to study in ways that seek to help 
to lift the strains of life determining insecurity from 
the bodies and minds of people in real villages and 
cities, regions and states. The stakes could not be 
higher.  
Notes
 1.   This elaboration of the metaphor borrows from 
 Hannah Arendt’s borrowing. See Young-Bruehl,  Hannah 
Arendt, 213.  
 2.   For an accessible summary of the ideas of Kant as 
applied to international relations, see Williams and Booth, 
“Kant.”  
 3.   Overviews of the work of the Frankfurt School are 
Held,  Introduction to Critical Theory; Bernstein,  Recov-
ering Ethical Life; Stirk,  Critical Theory, Politics, and 
Society; and Bottomore,  The Frankfurt School and Its 
Critics.  
 4.   Wyn Jones,  Security, Strategy, and Critical Theory. 
 5.   Ibid., ix.  
 6.   For Gramsci’s work see his  Selections from the Prison 
Notebooks, and Fiori,  Antonio Gramsci. For an intro-
duction to Cox’s work, see Cox, “Social Forces,” and 
“Gramsci, Hegemony, and International Relations,” and 
Cox and Sinclair,  Approaches to World Order. For an 
introduction, with useful references, see Smith, “ Marxism 
and International Relations Theory,” in Groom and Light, 
 Contemporary International Relations, and Linklater, 
“Marxism,” in Burchill et al.,  Theories of International 
Relations. Critical international relations theory was 
launched, in practice if not name, by Linklater:  Men and 
Citizens in the Theory of International Relations; Beyond 
Realism and Marxism: Transformation of Political Com-
munity; see also “The Question of the Next Stage in Inter-
national Relations Theory.” On cosmopolitan democracy, 
see Held,  Democracy and Global Order, and Held et al., 
 Global Transformations. I would add the school of critical 
realism to this list, although it has not (so far) produced 
work directly on security. See Patomaki and Wight, “After 
Postpositivism.” A useful collection of essays discussing 
most of the approaches above is Wyn Jones (ed.),  Critical 
Theory and World Politics. 
 7.   Helpful insights for students of security are Wyn 
Jones,  Security, and Hofffman, “Critical Theory and the 
Inter-Paradigm Debate”; and Linklater, “The Achieve-
ments of Critical Theory,” in Smith et al.,  International 
 The framework of critical security theory 
outlined above is policy-relevant, concerned with 
 improving the conditions of political possibility in 
the issue area of security. One familiar difficulty 
from any critical perspective in this respect is the 
fact that current crises are the symptoms of particu-
lar structural wrongs and so are deeply embedded 
in the workings of society. In order to deal with 
such difficulties, as the old saying goes, one would 
not want to start from here. When one is already 
embroiled in a crisis, realistic options are mas-
sively reduced. The main contribution of critical 
approaches must therefore be precrisis, to help us 
think more constructively about ethical commit-
ments, policies, agents, and sites of change, to help 
humankind, in whole and in part, to move away 
from the structural wrongs that ensure that crises, 
like earthquakes, will periodically rent the political 
landscape. 
 The critical theory project in security  studies—
committed to the development of scholarship re-
lating to the in/security of real people in real 
places—can be translated into the two tasks of cri-
tique and reconstruction. Critique entails critical 
explorations of what is real (ontology), what is 
reliable knowledge (epistemology), and what can be 
done (praxis). Reconstruction requires engagement 
with concrete issues in world politics, with the aim 
of maximizing the opportunities for enhancing se-
curity, community, and emancipation in the human 
interest. . . . 
 The one world in which we all live is getting 
smaller, more overheated, and increasingly over-
crowded. Meanwhile, the realities of security are 
becoming more complex as politico-economic and 
technocultural globalization interacts with tradi-
tional conflicts arising out of international compe-
tition and mistrust. Runaway science, irrationalities 
and extremisms of one sort or another, and grow-
ing pressures on resources threaten to add more 
combustible fuel to the already dangerous global 
situation. Human society in the decades to come is 
threatened by a future of complex insecurity. The 
outcome for world society is as uncertain as it has 
ever been—perhaps even more so, given current 
and future destructive capabilities. Confronted by 
the threat of complex insecurity, human society 
needs a theory of world security that is ontologi-
cally inclusive, epistemologically sophisticated, and 
praxeologically varied. Old thinking is guaranteed 
to replicate: Can a critical theory move beyond 

348
DAVID CAMPBELL
 From  Writing Security: United States Foreign Policy and the Politics of Identity , revised edition, by David Campbell. 
Copyright © 1998 University of Minnesota Press. Reprinted by permission of University of Minnesota Press and 
 Manchester University Press, Manchester, UK. 
 17.   Lifton and Markusen,  The Genocidal Mentality. 
 18.   This is briefly explained in Richards,  The Philosophy 
of Gandhi, 31–32. See also Parekh,  Gandhi’s Political 
Philosophy, 142–170. I have elaborated the argument in 
“Two Terrors, One Problem.”  
 19.   For a recent set of essays on the English School, see 
the special issue of  International Relations 17, 3 (Decem-
ber 2003).  
 20.   Sympathetic overviews of constructivism are: Reus-
Smit, “Constructivism,” in Burchill et al.,  Theories; and 
Adler,“Constructivism and International Relations,” in 
Carlsneas et al.,  Handbook. 
 21.   The most prominent, but controversial text, is Wendt, 
 Social Theory. 
 22.   The reference is to Wendt’s article, “Anarchy Is What 
States Make of It,” 391–425.  
 23.   Carr,  The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939, 10, 89.  
 24.   I attempted to challenge the conventional interpreta-
tion of Carr as simply a realist in “Security and Anarchy,” 
527–545.  
 25.   See Hoffmann,  Duties Beyond Borders, 197.  
 26.   This is elaborated in Booth, “Human Wrongs”; the 
phrase is Clement Rosset’s.  
 27.   See the special issue of  International Relations 18, 
3 (September 2004). A range of articles looks at specific 
empirical cases through critical lenses.  
 28.   For a selection of perspectives see Lechner and Boli 
(eds.),  The Globalization Reader, 2nd ed., pts. 6–10.  
Theory. The indispensable starting point is Horkheimer’s 
seminal essay, “Traditional and Critical Theory,” in 
Horkheimer,  Critical Theory. 
 8.   Horkheimer, “Traditional and Critical Theory.”  
 9.   Note Johansen, The National Interest and the Hu-
man, and Mel Gurtov,  Global Politics in the Human 
Interest. 
 10.   See in particular Bauman,  Modernity and the Holo-
caust. A very different perspective on the Enlightenment is 
captured in Porter,  Enlightenment. 
 11.  Examples of a key work in each of the schools just 
mentioned are, respectively: Allott,  Eunomia; Galtung, 
 There Are Alternatives; Falk,  Human Rights Horizons; 
Enloe,  Bananas, Beaches, and Bases; and Tilley,  Coercion, 
Capital, and European States. 
 12.  Falk and Kim (eds.),  The War System, contains an 
important selection of relevant literature. Also, Allott, 
“The Future of the Human Past,” in Booth (ed.),  Statecraft 
and Security. 
 13.  On these notions and human history, see Allott, “The 
Future of the Human Past.”  
 14.  Bull,  The Anarchical Society, 22.  
 15.   This school of thought has been preeminently rep-
resented in the work of Falk. See, inter alia,  A Study of 
Future Worlds, The Promise of World Order, and  Human 
Rights Horizons. 
 16.  See Horkheimer,  Critique of Instrumental Reason; 
and Adorno and Horkheimer,  Dialectic of Enlightenment. 
Writing Security 
DAVID CAMPBELL
OVERVIEW
 David Campbell blends elements of critical theory and postmodernism drawn from 
continental European interpretive understandings. The term  danger —a core con-
cept in security studies—is hardly a neutral term. We can unpack or deconstruct the 
meanings assigned to danger that serve the purposes of states and those in power 

Writing Security 
349
positions within them. Danger in the form of threats gives the state its identity 
and justifies its existence. Campbell also takes issue with the “epistemic realism” 
he observes in security studies as if the world we see is purely material—one com-
posed of objects that are separate somehow from the ideas or beliefs about them 
and the narratives to which such thinking gives rise.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.   To what extent are the threats that motivate national security concerns merely a function of 
how we see and interpret the world around us?  
 2.   Is the state created to serve the security interests of the nation or is the latter itself a product of 
the state that bolsters its position by fostering a sense of common identity among the people 
within its territorial jurisdiction?  
 3.   Do we tend to accept at face value the claims we hear or read? How prone are we to probe 
both the surface and subsurface meanings of narratives on security or, for that matter, on 
other issues on national and international agendas?  
 Danger is not an objective condition. It is not a 
thing that exists independently of those to whom 
it may become a threat. To illustrate this, consider 
the manner in which the insurance industry assesses 
risk. In François Ewald’s formulation, insurance is 
a technology of risk the principal function of which 
is not compensation or reparation, but rather the 
operation of a schema of rationality distinguished 
by the calculus of probabilities. In insurance, ac-
cording to this logic, danger (or, more accurately, 
risk) is “neither an event nor a general kind of 
event occurring in reality . . . but a specific mode 
of treatment of certain events capable of happen-
ing to a group of individuals.” In other words, for 
the technology of risk in insurance, “Nothing is a 
risk in itself; there is no risk in reality. But on the 
other hand, anything  can be a risk; it all depends on 
how one analyzes the danger, considers the event. 
As Kant might have put it, the category of risk is a 
category of the understanding; it cannot be given in 
sensibility or intuition.”  1  In these terms, danger is an 
effect of interpretation. Danger bears no essential, 
necessary, or unproblematic relation to the action or 
event from which it is said to derive. Nothing is in-
trinsically more dangerous for insurance technology 
than anything else, except when interpreted as such. 
 This understanding of the necessarily interpre-
tive basis of risk has important implications for 
international relations. It does not deny that there 
are “real” dangers in the world: infectious diseases, 
 accidents, and political violence (among others) 
have consequences that can literally be understood 
in terms of life and death. But not all risks are equal, 
and not all risks are interpreted as dangers. Modern 
society contains a veritable cornucopia of danger; 
indeed, there is such an abundance of risk that it is 
impossible to objectively know all that threatens us.  2  
Those events or factors that we identify as danger-
ous come to be ascribed as such only through an 
interpretation of their various dimensions of dan-
gerousness. Moreover, that process of interpretation 
does not depend on the incidence of “objective” 
factors for its veracity. For example, HIV infection 
has been considered by many to be America’s major 
public health issue, yet pneumonia and influenza, 
diabetes, suicide, and chronic liver disease have all 
been individually responsible for many more deaths. 
Equally, an interpretation of danger has licensed a 
“war on (illegal) drugs” in the United States, despite 
the fact that the consumption level of (and the num-
ber of deaths that result from) licit drugs exceeds by 
a considerable order of magnitude that associated 
with illicit drugs. . . . 
 Furthermore, the role of interpretation in the 
articulation of danger is not restricted to the pro-
cess by which some risks come to be considered 
more serious than others. An important function 
of interpretation is the way that certain modes of 
representation crystallize around referents marked 
as dangers. Given the often tenuous relationship 

350
DAVID CAMPBELL
be associated, and indebtedness to a tradition does 
not determine one’s argument in every instance. But 
the purpose of overdrawing these positions (which 
we might call, in equally crude terms, realist and 
Marxist) is to make the point that although each is 
usually thought to be the antinomy of the other, they 
both equally efface the indispensability of interpreta-
tion in the articulation of danger. As such, they share 
a disposition from which this analysis differs. Com-
mitted to an  epistemic realism —whereby the world 
comprises objects whose existence is independent of 
ideas or beliefs about them—both of these under-
standings maintain that there are material causes to 
which events and actions can be reduced. And oc-
casioned by this epistemic realism, they sanction two 
other analytic forms: a  narrativizing historiography 
in which things have a self-evident quality that allows 
them to speak for themselves, and a  logic of explana-
tion in which the purpose of analysis is to identify 
those self-evident things and material causes so that 
actors can accommodate themselves to the realm 
of necessity they engender.  5  Riven with various de-
mands, insistences, and assertions that things “must” 
be either this or that, this disposition is the most com-
mon metatheoretical discourse among practitioners 
of the discipline of international relations. 
 But there are alternative ways to think. . . . Con-
trary to the claims of epistemic realism, I argue that 
as understanding involves rendering the unfamiliar 
in the terms of the familiar, there is always an ineluc-
table debt to interpretation such that there is nothing 
outside of discourse. Contrary to a narrativizing 
historiography, I employ a mode of historical repre-
sentation that self-consciously adopts a perspective. 
And contrary to the logic of explanation, I embrace 
a logic of interpretation that acknowledges the im-
probability of cataloging, calculating, and specifying 
the “real causes,” and concerns itself instead with 
considering the manifest political consequences of 
adopting one mode of representation over another. 
 As such, my argument is part of an emerging 
dissident literature in international relations that 
draws sustenance from a series of modern thinkers 
who have focused on historically specific modes of 
discourse rather than the supposedly independent 
realms of subjects and objects.  6  Starting from the 
position that social and political life comprises a set 
of practices in which things are constituted in the 
process of dealing with them, this dissent does not 
(and does not desire to) constitute a discrete meth-
odological school claiming to magically illuminate 
between an interpretation of danger and the “objec-
tive” incidence of behaviors and factors thought to 
constitute it, the capacity for a particular risk to be 
represented in terms of characteristics reviled in the 
community said to be threatened can be an impor-
tant impetus to an interpretation of danger. . . . The 
ability to represent things as alien, subversive, dirty, 
or sick has been pivotal to the articulation of danger 
in the American experience. 
 In this context, it is also important to note that 
there need not be an action or event to provide the 
grounds for an interpretation of danger. The mere 
existence of an alternative mode of being, the pres-
ence of which exemplifies that different identities 
are possible and thus denaturalizes the claim of a 
particular identity to be  the true identity, is some-
times enough to produce the understanding of a 
threat.  3  In consequence, only in these terms is it pos-
sible to understand how some acts of international 
power politics raise not a whit of concern, while 
something as seemingly unthreatening as the novels 
of a South American writer can be considered such 
a danger to national security that his exclusion 
from the country is warranted.  4  For both insur-
ance and international relations, therefore, danger 
results from the calculation of a threat that objec-
tifies events, disciplines relations, and sequesters 
an ideal of the identity of the people said to be at 
risk. . . . The invasion of Kuwait [serves] . . . as a 
useful touchstone by which to outline some of the 
assumptions under-girding this study. Consider, for 
example, this question: How did the Iraqi invasion 
become the greatest danger to the United States? 
Two answers to this question seem obvious and 
were common. Those indebted to a power-politics 
understanding of world politics, with its emphasis 
on the behavior of states calculated in rational terms 
according to the pursuit of power, understood the 
invasion to be an easily observable instance of na-
ked aggression against an independent, sovereign 
state. To those indebted to an economistic under-
standing, in which the underlying forces of capital 
accumulation are determinative of state behavior, 
the U.S.-led response, like the Iraqi invasion, was 
explicable in terms of the power of oil, markets, and 
the military-industrial complex. 
 Each of these characterizations is surely a carica-
ture. The range of views in the debate over this crisis 
was infinitely more complex than is suggested by 
these two positions; there were many whose analyses 
differed from those with whom they might normally 

Writing Security 
351
arose, took shape, gained importance, and effected 
politics.  10  In short, this mode of analysis asks how 
certain terms and concepts have historically func-
tioned within discourse. 
 To suggest as much, however, is not to argue 
in terms of the discursive having priority over the 
nondiscursive. Of course, this is the criticism most 
often mounted by opponents to arguments such as 
this, understandings apparent in formulations like 
“if discourse is all there is,” “if everything is lan-
guage,” or “if there is no reality.”  11  In so doing they 
unquestioningly accept that there are distinct realms 
of the discursive and the nondiscursive. Yet such a 
claim, especially after the decades of debates about 
language, interpretation, and understanding in the 
natural and social sciences, is no longer innocently 
sustainable. It can be reiterated as an article of faith 
to rally the true believers and banish the heretics, 
but it cannot be put forward as a self-evident truth. 
As Richard Rorty has acknowledged, projects like 
philosophy’s traditional desire to see “how lan-
guage relates to the world” result in “the impossible 
attempts to step outside our skins—the traditions, 
linguistic and other, within which we do our think-
ing and self-criticism—and compare ourselves with 
something absolute.”  12  The world exists indepen-
dently of language, but we can never  know that 
(beyond the fact of its assertion), because the exis-
tence of the world is literally inconceivable outside 
of language and our traditions of interpretation.  13  
In Foucault’s terms, “We must not resolve discourse 
into a play of pre-existing significations; we must 
not imagine that the world turns toward us a leg-
ible face which we would only have to decipher; the 
world is not the accomplice of our knowledge; there 
is no prediscursive providence which disposes the 
world in our favour.”  14  
 Therefore, to talk in terms of an analysis that 
examines how concepts have historically functioned 
within discourse is to refuse the force of the dis-
tinction between discursive and nondiscursive. As 
Laclau and Mouffe have argued, “The fact that 
every object is constituted as an object of discourse 
has  nothing to do with whether there is a world 
external to thought, or with the realism/idealism 
opposition . . . What is denied is not that . . . objects 
exist externally to thought, but the rather different 
assertion that they could constitute themselves as 
objects outside of any discursive condition of emer-
gence.”  15  This formulation seeks neither to banish 
arguments that authorize their positions through 
the previously dark recesses of global politics. Nor is 
it the dissent of a self-confident and singular figure 
claiming to know the error of all previous ways and 
offering salvation from all theoretical sin. Rather, 
this form of dissent emerges from a disparate and 
sometimes divergent series of encounters between 
the traditions of international relations and theories 
increasingly prominent in other realms of social 
and political inquiry. It is a form of dissent that 
celebrates difference: the proliferation of perspec-
tives, dimensions, and approaches to the very real 
dilemmas of global life. It is a form of dissent that 
celebrates the particularity and context-bound na-
ture of judgements and assessments, not because it 
favors a (so-called) relativist retreat into the incom-
mensurability of alternatives, but because it rec-
ognizes the universalist conceits of all attempts to 
force difference into the strait-jacket of identity.  7  
It is a form of dissent skeptical—but not cynical—
about the traditions of international relations and 
their claims of adequacy to reality. It is a form of 
dissent that is not concerned to seek a better fit be-
tween thought and the world, language and matter, 
proposition and fact. On the contrary, it is a form 
of dissent that questions the very way our problems 
have been posed in these terms and the constraints 
within which they have been considered, focusing 
instead on the way the world has been made histori-
cally possible.  8  
 Consequently, in attempting to understand the 
ways in which United States foreign policy has 
interpreted danger and secured the boundaries of 
the identity in whose name it operates, this analysis 
adopts neither a purely theoretical nor a purely his-
torical mode. It is perhaps best understood in terms 
of a history of the present, an interpretative attitude 
suggested by Michel Foucault.  9  A history of the 
present does not try to capture  the meaning of the 
past, nor does it try to get  a complete picture of 
the past as a bounded epoch, with underlying laws 
and teleology. Neither is a history of the present an 
instance of presentism—where the present is read 
back into the past—or an instance of finalism, that 
mode of analysis whereby the analyst maintains 
that a kernel of the present located in the past has 
inexorably progressed such that it now defines our 
condition. Rather, a history of the present exhibits 
an unequivocally contemporary orientation. Begin-
ning with an incitement from the present—an acute 
manifestation of a ritual of power—this mode of 
analysis seeks to trace how such rituals of power 

352
DAVID CAMPBELL
between internal and external, is “tenuously main-
tained” by the transformation of elements that were 
originally part of identity into a “defiling other-
ness.”  18  In this formulation, there is no originary 
or sovereign presence that inhabits a prediscursive 
domain and gives the body, its sex, or gender a natu-
ralized and unproblematic quality. To be sure, many 
insist on understanding the body, sex, and gender as 
naturalized and unproblematic. But for their claim 
to be persuasive, we would have to overlook (among 
other issues) the multifarious normalizing codes that 
abound in our society for the constitution and disci-
plining of sexuality. In seeking to establish and po-
lice understandings of what constitutes the normal, 
the accepted, and the desirable, such codes effect 
an admission of their constructed nature and the 
contingent and problematic nature of the identity 
of the body. 
 Understanding the gendered identity of the 
body as performative means that we regard it as 
having “no ontological status apart from the various 
acts that constitute its reality.” As such, the idea that 
gender is an interior essence definitive of the body’s 
identity is a discursively constructed notion that 
is required for the purposes of disciplining sexual-
ity. In this context, genders are neither “true” or 
“false,” nor “normal” or “abnormal,” but “are only 
produced as the truth effects of a discourse of pri-
mary and stable identity.” Moreover, gender can be 
understood as “an identity tenuously constituted in 
time, instituted in an exterior space through  a styl-
ized repetition of acts ” an identity achieved, “ not 
[through]  a founding act, but rather a regulated 
process of repetition. ”  19  
 Choosing the question of gender and the body 
as an exemplification of the theme of identity is not 
to suggest that as an “individual” instance of iden-
tity the performative constitution of gender and the 
body is prior to and determinative of instances of 
collective identity. In other words, I am not claim-
ing that the state is analogous to an individual with 
a settled identity. To the contrary, I want to suggest 
that the performative constitution of gender and the 
body is analogous to the performative constitution 
of the state. Specifically, I want to suggest that we 
can understand the state as having “no ontological 
status apart from the various acts which constitute 
its reality”; that its status as the sovereign presence 
in world politics is produced by “a discourse of 
primary and stable identity” and that the identity 
of any particular state should be understood as 
reference to “external reality,” nor to suggest that 
any one representation is as powerful as another. 
On the contrary, if we think in terms of a discursive 
economy—whereby discourse (the representation 
and constitution of the “real”) is a managed space in 
which some statements and depictions come to have 
greater value than others—the idea of “external 
reality” has a particular currency that is  internal to 
discourse. For in a discursive economy, investments 
have been made in certain interpretations; dividends 
can be drawn by those parties that have made the 
investments; representations are taxed when they 
confront new and ambiguous circumstances; and 
participation in the discursive economy is through 
social relations that embody an unequal distribu-
tion of power. Most important, the effect of this 
understanding is to expand the domain of social and 
political inquiry: “The main consequence of a break 
with the discursive/extradiscursive dichotomy is the 
abandonment of the thought/reality opposition, and 
hence a major enlargement of the field of those 
categories which can account for social relations. 
Synonymy, metonymy, metaphor are not forms of 
thought that add a second sense to a primary, con-
stitutive literality of social relations; instead, they 
are part of the primary terrain itself in which the 
social is constituted.”  16  The enlargement of the in-
terpretive imagination along these lines is necessary 
in order to account for many of the recent develop-
ments in world politics, and to understand the texts 
of postwar United States foreign policy. . . . 
 Identity is an inescapable dimension of being. 
No body could be without it. Inescapable as it is, 
identity—whether personal or collective—is not 
fixed by nature, given by God, or planned by in-
tentional behavior. Rather, identity is constituted 
in relation to difference. But neither is difference 
fixed by nature, given by God, or planned by inten-
tional behavior. Difference is constituted in relation 
to identity.  17  The problematic of identity/difference 
contains, therefore, no foundations that are prior to, 
or outside of, its operation. Whether we are talking 
of “the body” or “the state,” or of particular  bodies 
and states, the identity of each is performatively 
constituted. Moreover, the constitution of identity 
is achieved through the inscription of boundaries 
that serve to demarcate an “inside” from an “out-
side,” a “self” from an “other,” a “domestic” from 
a “foreign.” 
 In the specific case of the body, Judith Butler 
has argued that its boundary, as well as the border 

Writing Security 
353
the state’s identity and contain challenges to the 
state’s representation cannot finally or absolutely 
succeed. Aside from recognizing that there is always 
an excess of being over appearance that cannot 
be contained by disciplinary practices implicated in 
state formation, were it possible to reduce all being 
to appearance, and were it possible to bring about 
the absence of movement which in that reduction 
of being to appearance would characterize pure se-
curity, it would be at that moment that the state 
would wither away.  23  At that point all identities 
would have congealed, all challenges would have 
evaporated, and all need for disciplinary authori-
ties and their fields of force would have vanished. 
Should the state project of security be successful in 
the terms in which it is articulated, the state would 
cease to exist. Security as the absence of movement 
would result in death via stasis. Ironically, then, the 
inability of the state project of security to succeed is 
the guarantor of the state’s continued success as an 
impelling identity. 
 The constant articulation of danger through for-
eign policy is thus not a threat to a state’s identity or 
existence: it is its condition of possibility. While the 
objects of concern change over time, the techniques 
and exclusions by which those objects are consti-
tuted as dangers persist. Such an argument, how-
ever, is occluded by the traditional representations of 
 international politics through their debts to epistemic 
realism and its effacement of interpretation. . . . 
Border Crossings 
 Where once . . . objections to the impoverished 
understanding of “postmodernism” in international 
relations would have been made in a defensive 
mode, now they are put forward with an air of re-
signed exasperation. Where once we were all caught 
in the headlights of the large North American car 
of international relations theory, now the continen-
tal sportster of critical theories has long since left 
behind the border guards and toll collectors of the 
mainstream—who can be observed in the rearview 
mirror waving their arms wildly still demanding 
papers and the price of admission—as the occu-
pants go on their way in search of another political 
problem to explore. Time has moved on for most 
people, and with it has come a raft of exciting new 
research in international relations that is indebted, 
implicitly as well as explicitly, to the Enlightenment 
ethos articulated by Foucault. 
“tenuously constituted in time . . . through  a stylized 
repetition of acts, ” and achieved, “ not [through] 
 a founding act, but rather a regulated process of 
repetition. ” 
 . . . Much of the conventional literature on the 
nation and the state implies that the essence of 
the former precedes the reality of the latter: that 
the identity of a “people” is the basis for the legiti-
macy of the state and its subsequent practices. How-
ever, much of the recent historical sociology on this 
topic has argued that the state more often than not 
precedes the nation: that nationalism is a construct 
of the state in pursuit of its legitimacy. Benedict 
Anderson, for example, has argued in compelling 
fashion that “the nation” should be understood as 
an “imagined political community” that exists only 
insofar as it is a cultural artifact that is represented 
textually.  20  Equally, Charles Tilly has argued that 
any coordinated, hierarchical, and territorial entity 
should be only understood as a “nation al state.” He 
stresses that few of these national states have ever 
become or presently are “nation-states”—national 
states whose sovereign territorialization is perfectly 
aligned with a prior and primary form of identifica-
tion, such as religion, language, or symbolic sense 
of self. Even modern-day Great  Britain, France, and 
Germany (and, equally, the United States,  Australia, 
and Canada) cannot be considered nation-states even 
though they are national states.  21  The importance of 
these perspectives is that they allow us to understand 
national states as unavoidably paradoxical entities 
that do not possess prediscursive, stable identities. 
As a consequence, all states are marked by an inher-
ent tension between the various domains that need 
to be aligned for an “imagined political community” 
to come into being—such as territoriality and the 
many axes of identity—and the demand that such 
an alignment is a response to (rather than constitu-
tive of) a prior and stable identity. In other words, 
states are never finished as entities; the tension be-
tween the demands of identity and the practices that 
constitute it can never be fully resolved, because the 
performative nature of  identity can never be fully re-
vealed. This paradox inherent to their being renders 
states in permanent need of reproduction: with no 
ontological status apart from the many and varied 
practices that constitute their reality, states are (and 
have to be) always in a process of becoming. For a 
state to end its practices of representation would 
be to expose its lack of prediscursive foundations; 
stasis would be death.  22  Moreover, the drive to fix 

354
DAVID CAMPBELL
United States, on ideological grounds, writers like the 
Nobel Prize winner Gabriel Garcia Marquez.  
 5.   See Hayden White,  The Content of the Form: Narra-
tive Discourse and Historical Representation, Baltimore, 
1987, especially chapter one.  
 6.   See ‘Speaking the language of exile: dissidence in 
international studies,’ edited by Richard K. Ashley and 
R. B. J. Walker,  International Studies Quarterly, XXXIV, 
1990, 259–416.  
 7.   The charge of ‘relativism’ has become a mantra-like 
repudiation employed by realists and others seeking to 
delegitimize an argument such as this. The logic behind this 
criticism is that any position concerning itself with the con-
structed nature of reality has to assume (implicitly or explic-
itly) that all positions are relative to a specific framework, 
paradigm, or culture, such that we can make no judgments 
about right and wrong, good or bad, etc. Furthermore, it is 
often maintained that such an assumption is contradictory, 
because the relativist is said to resort to a universal: i.e., that 
all things are relative. For two reasons, I think such a charge 
is mistaken and misleading. Firstly, the meaning of relativ-
ism is usually ascribed by the objectivist critic, but in a way 
that refuses to question the terms of the debate. Specifically, 
the charge of relativism, rests on the dubious assumption 
that there is indeed some overarching, universal framework 
to which one is relative. For all the efforts of philosophers 
and others over the centuries, I am not aware of any agree-
ment on the existance or nature of such an Archimedean 
point. Indeed, those factors which are sometimes cited as 
‘universal’—such as tradition or culture—invoke the very 
intersubjective qualities that the so-called relativist is con-
cerned with. Secondly, the characteristics subsumed under 
the term relativism by realist critics usually bear the hall-
marks of subjectivism rather than relativism. The concern 
for the lack of standards and truths is usually said to derive 
from the alleged moral solipsism that results from so-called 
relativism; the idea that the abandonment of universals 
leads to an ethical anarchy in which anything goes. But the 
so-called relativist is concerned with the social and intersub-
jective nature of paradigms, practices, and standards, and 
thus rejects the idea that these are the property of individu-
als. My thinking on these issues has been most influenced 
by Richard Bernstein,  Beyond Objectivism and Relativism: 
Science, Hermeneutics and Praxis, Oxford, 1983.  
 8.   See Jim George and David Campbell, ‘Patterns of 
dissent and the celebration of difference: critical social 
theory and international relations,’  International Studies 
Quarterly, XXXIV, 1990, 269–93.  
 9.   Michel Foucault,  Discipline and Punish: The Birth of 
the Prison, trans. by Alan Sheridan, New York, 1979, 31.  
 10.   See Hubert L. Dreyfus and Paul Rabinow,  Michel 
Foucault: Beyond Structuralism and Hermeneutics, 
 Brighton, 1983, 118–20.  
 11.   For a good account of these formulations see  Judith 
Butler, ‘Contingent foundations: feminism and the ques-
tion of “postmodernism”,’ in  Feminists Theorize the 
 Few things are more problematic and trouble-
some than the naming of intellectual trends. This has 
to be constantly borne in mind, because the research 
being considered here does not constitute a neatly 
demarcated “school” of thought, it does not often 
if ever embrace the label of “postmodernism,” and 
many scholars who might be associated with it could 
easily be identified in other terms. But when consid-
ered as the whole it is not, multiple answers abound 
to the challenge that those who have gained inspira-
tion from the critical themes of continental philoso-
phy should embark on their own research agendas. 
Of note is work that deals with familiar issues in es-
tranging ways, including research on the performa-
tive nature of state identity (particularly its gendered 
character) in the context of U.S. intervention; studies 
of the centrality of representation in North-South 
relations and immigration policies; a deconstructive 
account of famine and humanitarian crises; interpre-
tive readings of diplomacy and  European security; 
the radical rethinking of international order and the 
challenge of the refugee; critical analyses of interna-
tional law and African sovereignties; a recasting of 
ecopolitics; the rearticulation of the refugee regime 
and sovereignty; a problematization of the UN and 
peacekeeping; a semiotic reading of militarism in 
Hawaii; and arguments concerning practices of con-
temporary warfare, strategic identities, and security 
landscapes in NATO, among many others. 
 For all the differences, nuances and subtleties, 
this work incorporates many of the key achieve-
ments of “poststructuralism” (meaning the interpre-
tive analytic of “postmodernism”), especially the 
rethinking of questions of agency, power, and rep-
resentation in modern political life. . . .  
Notes
 1.   Francois Ewald, ‘Insurance and risk,’ in  The Foucault 
Effect: Studies in Governmental Rationality, edited by 
Graham Burchell, Colin Gordon and Peter Miller, Hemel 
Hempstead, 1991, 199.  
 2.   Mary Douglas and Aaron Wildavsky,  Risk and Cul-
ture: An Essay on the Selection of Technological and 
Environmental Dangers, Berkeley, 1982.  
 3.   ‘The threat is posed not merely by  actions the other 
might take to injure or defeat the true identity but by 
the very visibility of its mode of  being as other.’ William 
E.  Connolly,  Identity/Difference: Democratic Negotia-
tions of Political Paradox, Ithaca, 1991, 66.  
 4.   I am referring here to the policies of the recently 
curtailed McCarran–Walter Act which excluded from the 

Milton Friedman. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1953. 
 Giddens, Anthony.  Positivism and Sociology. London: 
Henemann, 1974. 
 Giere, Ronald N., and Alan W. Richardson.  Origins 
of Logical Empiricism. Minneapolis: University of 
Minnesota Press, 1977. 
 Hanfling, Oswald.  Logical Positivism. Oxford: 
B. Blackwell, 1981. 
 Hartung, Frank. “The Social Function of Positivism.” 
 Philosophy of Science 12, 2 (1945): 120–33. 
 Hempel, Karl.  Philosophy of Natural Sciences. New 
York: Prentice Hall, 1966. 
 Jangam, R. T.  Logical Positivism and Politics. Delhi: 
Sterling Publishers, 1970. 
 Kauffman, Felix.  Methodology of Social Sciences. 
 London: Oxford University Press, 1944. 
 ———. “Basic Issues in Logical Positivism.” In  Philo-
sophic Thought in France and the United States, ed., 
Farbin Marver. Albany: State University of New 
York Press, 1968. 
 Kockelmans, Joseph.  Philosophy of Science: The Histor-
ical Background. New York: The Free Press, 1968. 
 Kraft, Victor.  The Vienna Circle: The Origin of Neo-
positivism, a Chapter in the History of Recent Phi-
losophy. New York: Greenwood Press, 1953. 
j On Positivism 
 Achinstein, Peter, and Barker, Stephen.  The Legacy of 
Logical Positivism: Studies in the Philosophy of Sci-
ence. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1969. 
 Ayer, Alfred Jules.  Logical Positivism. Glencoe, IL: 
Free Press, 1959. 
 Bergmann, Gustav.  The Metaphysics of Logical Posi-
tivism. New York: Longmans Green, 1954. 
 Carnap, Rudolph.  An Introduction to the Philosophy 
of Science. New York: Basic Books, 1966. 
 Comte, Auguste.  A General View of Positivism. 
 Newark, NJ: Irving Publishers Co., 1972. 
 Deutsch, Karl. “Recent Trends in Research Methods 
in Political Science.” In  A Design for Political Sci-
ence: Scope, Objectives, and Methods, ed., James 
Charlesworth. Philadelphia: American Academy of 
Political and Social Science, 1966. 
 Eckstein, Harry. “Case Study and Theory in Political 
Science.” In  Handbook of Political Science, Vol. 7, 
eds., Fred Greenstein and Nelson Polsby. Reading, 
MA: Addison-Wesley, 1975. 
 Friedman, Michael.  Reconsidering Logical Positivism. 
Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 Friedman, Milton. “The Methodology of Positive 
Economics.” In  Essays in Positive Economics, ed., 
which it pretends only to describe realistically and to 
analyze objectively.’ Hayden White,  Tropics of Discourse: 
Essays in Cultural Criticism, Baltimore, 1978. 2.  
 17.   For a general discussion on this theme see Connolly, 
 Identity/Difference. 
 18.   Judith Butler,  Gender Trouble: Feminism and the 
Subversion of Identity, New York, 1990, 133.  
 19.   Ibid, 136, 140–1, 145 respectively. Emphasis in the 
original.  
 20.   Benedict Anderson,  Imagined Communities: Reflec-
tions on the Origin and Spread of Nationalism, revised 
edition, New York, 1991.  
 21.   Charles Tilly,  Capital, Coercion, and European 
States, A.D. 990–1990, New York, 1990.  
 22.   In his account of the importance of speed and tem-
porality to politics, Paul Virilio observed, somewhat gran-
diosely, that ‘ Stasis is death really seems to be  the general 
law of the World. ’ Virilio,  Speed and Politics, trans. by 
Mark Polizzotti, New York, 1986, 67.  
 23.   ‘In a social configuration whose precarious equilib-
rium is threatened by an ill-considered initiative, security 
can henceforth be likened to the absence of movement.’ 
Virilio,  Speed and Politics, 125.  
 Political, edited by Judith Butler and Joan W. Scott, New 
York, 1992.  
 12.   Richard Rorty, ‘Introduction: pragmatism and phi-
losophy,’ in  Consequences of Pragmatism (Essays 1972–
1980). Brighton, 1982, xix.  
 13.   This is different from the claim that there are 
‘ alternative conceptual frameworks’ through which we 
can know the world, for such a position eventually col-
lapses into a Kantian understanding, whereby ‘the world’ 
is a thing-in-itself thoroughly independent of our knowl-
edge. See Rorty, ‘The world well lost,’ in  Consequences of 
 Pragmatism. 
 14.  Michel Foucault, ‘The order of discourse,’ in  Lan-
guage and Politics, edited by Michael Shapiro, Oxford, 
1984, 127.  
  15.  Ernesto Laclau and Chantal Mouffe,  Hegemony and 
Socialist Strategy: Towards a Radical Democratic Politics, 
trans. by Winston Moore and Paul Cammack, London, 
1985, 108.  
 16.   Ibid, 110. White has expressed a similar sentiment: 
‘Tropic is the shadow from which all realistic discourse 
tries to flee. This flight, however, is futile; for tropics is 
the process by which all discourse  constitutes the objects 
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
Suggestions for Further Reading
355

 Kuhn, Thomas.  The Structure of Scientific Revolu-
tions. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1962. 
 Lakatos, Imre. “Falsification and the Methodology of 
Scientific Research Programmes.” In  Criticism and 
the Growth of Knowledge, eds., Imre Lakatos and 
Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1970. 
 Masterman, Margaret. “The Nature of a Paradigm.” In 
 Criticism and the Growth of Knowledge, eds., Imre 
Lakatos and Alan Musgrave. Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1970. 
 Mises von, Richard.  Positivism: A Study in Human Un-
derstanding. Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 
1951. 
 Nagel, Ernest.  The Structure of Science. New York: 
Harcourt, Brace and World, 1960. 
 Parrini, Paolo, Wesley C. Salmon, and Merrilee 
H. Salmon, eds.  Logical Empiricism—Historical 
and Contemporary Perspectives. Pittsburgh: Uni-
versity of Pittsburgh Press, 2003. 
 Popper, Karl.  Conjectures and Refutations. The Growth 
of Scientific Knowledge. London:  Routledge, 1963. 
 ———.  The Logic of Scientific Discovery. New York: 
Basic Books, 1959. 
 ———.  Objective Knowledge. London: Oxford Uni-
versity Press, 1972. 
 Rescher, Nicholas.  The Heritage of Logical Positiv-
ism. Lanham, MD: University Press of America, 
1985. 
 Sarkar, Sahotra.  The Legacy of the Vienna Circle: 
 Modern Reappraisals. New York: Garland Pub.,
1996. 
 Scharff, Robert.  Comte After Positivism. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1995. 
 Schmidtt, Brian. “Further Ahead or Further Behind? 
The Debate over Positivism.”  Mershon Interna-
tional Studies Review 41 (1997): 107–12. 
 Weimer, Walter.  Notes on the Methodology of Sci-
entific Research. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Assoc., 1979. 
 Werkmeister, William. “Seven Theses of Logical Posi-
tivism Critically Examined.”  The Philosophical 
 Review 46, 3 (May 1937): 276–97. 
 Wittgenstein, Ludwig.  Tractatus Logico Philosophicus. 
London: Routledge, 2001.  
j On Critical Theory 
 Ackerly, Brooke, and Jaqui True. “Studying the Strug-
gles and Wishes of the Age: Feminist Theoretical 
Methodology and Feminist Theoretical Methods.” 
In  Feminist Methodologies for International Rela-
tions, eds., Brooke Ackerly, Maria Stern, and  Jaqui 
True. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 
2006. 
 Anievas, Alexander. “Critical Dialogues: Habermasian 
Social Theory and International Relations.”  Politics 
25, 3 (September 2005): 135–43. 
 Arash, Abizadeh. “Does Collective Identity Presup-
pose an Other? On the Alleged Incoherence of 
Global Solidarity,”  American Political Science Re-
view. Vol. 99, No. 1 (February 2005): 45-60. 
 Ashley, Richard. “Untying the Sovereign State: A 
Double Reading of the Anarchy Problematique.” 
 Millennium: Journal of International Studies 17 
(1988): 227–62. 
 Beiler, Andreas, and Adam Morton. “The Gord-
ian Knot of Agency-Structure in International 
 Relations: A Neo-Gramscian Perspective.”  Eu-
ropean Journal of International Relations 7, 1 
(2001): 5–35. 
 Bernstein, Richard. “The Critical Theory of Society.” 
In  The Restructuring of Social and Political Theory. 
London: Methuen, 1976. 
 Booth, Ken.  Theory of World Security. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2008. 
 ———.  Critical Security Studies and World Politics . 
Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2005. 
 ———, and Daniel Wheeler.  Security Dilemma: Fear, 
Cooperation and Trust in World Politics. New 
York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2007. 
 Brown, Chris. “Turtles All the Way Down: Anti-
Foundationalism, Critical Theory and International 
Relations.”  Millennium: Journal of International 
Studies 23, 2 (1994): 227–30. 
 Cavarero, Adriana.  Horrorism: Naming Contempo-
rary Violence. New York: Columbia University 
Press, 2008. 
 Chandler, David. “The Revival of Carl Schmitt in 
International Relations: The Last Refuge of Critical 
Theorists?”  Millennium: Journal of International 
Studies 37, 1 (August 2008): 27–48. 
 Chernoff, Fred. “Reflectivist Opposition to the Scien-
tific Approach: Critical Theory, Poststructuralism, 
and Interpretive Constructivism.” In  Theory and 
Metatheory in International Relations: Concepts 
and Contending Accounts. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2007. 
 Cox, Robert. “Gramsci, Hegemony, and International 
Relations: An Essay in Method.” In  Approaches 
to World Order, eds., Robert Cox and Timothy 
 Sinclair. London: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
356
Suggestions for Further Reading

 Gill, Stephen.  Gramsci, Historical Materialism and In-
ternational Relations. New York: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1993. 
 ———.  Power and Resistance in the New World Or-
der, 2nd ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. 
 Glazer, Charles. “Structural Realism in a More Com-
plex World.”  Review of International Studies 29 
(July 2003): 403–14. 
 Hoffman, Mark. “Conversations on Critical Interna-
tional Relations Theory.”  Millennium: Journal of 
International Studies 17, 1 (1988): 91–95. 
 ———. “Restructuring, Reconstruction, Reinscription, 
Rearticulation: Four Voices in Critical International 
Theory.”  Millennium 20 (1991): 169–85. 
 Honneth, Axel.  Disrespect: The Normative Founda-
tions of Critical Theory. Cambridge: Polity, 2007. 
 Hutchings, Kimberly.  Time and World Politics: 
Thinking the Present, Reappraising the Political. 
 Manchester: Manchester University Press, 2008. 
 Inayatullah, Naeem, and David Blaney.  International 
Relations and the Problem of Difference. New 
York: Routledge, 2004. 
 Jabri, Vivienne, and Eleanor O’Gorman.  Women, 
Culture, and International Relations (Critical Per-
spectives on World Politics). Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner, 1999. 
 Jackson, Richard, Marie Smith, and Jeroen  Gunning. 
 Critical Terrorism Studies: A New Research Agenda. 
London: Routledge, 2009. 
 Jutila, Matti, Samu Pehkonen, and Tarja Väyrynen. 
“Resuscitating a Discipline: An Agenda for Critical 
Peace Research.”  Millennium: Journal of Interna-
tional Studies 36, 3 (May 2008): 623–40. 
 Keyman, E. Fuat.  Globalization, State, Identity/ 
Difference: Toward a Critical Social Theory of 
International Relations. Atlantic Heightlands, NJ: 
Humanities Press, 1997. 
 Kissling, Claudia.  Civil Society and Nuclear Non- 
Proliferation. Aldershot: Ashgate, 2008. 
 Krause, Keith. “Critical Theory and Security Studies.” 
 Cooperation and Conflict 33, 3 (1998): 298–333. 
 Lapid, Yosef. “The Third Debate: On the Prospects 
of International Relations in a Post-Positivist Era.” 
 International Studies Quarterly 33, 3 (September 
1989): 235–54. 
 Leysens, Anthony.  The Critical Theory of Robert 
W. Cox: Fugitive or Guru. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2008. 
 Linklater, Andrew.  Critical Theory and World Poli-
tics: Citizenship, State and Humanity. London: 
 Routledge, 2007. 
 ———. “Social Forces, States and World Orders.” In 
 Approaches to World Order, eds., Robert Cox and 
Timothy Sinclair. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1996. 
 Der Derian, James.  Critical Practices in International 
Theory: Selected Essays. London: Routledge, 
2009. 
 ———, and Michael Shapiro, eds.  International/In-
tertextual Relations: Boundaries of Knowledge and 
Practice in World Politics. Lexington, MA: Lexing-
ton Books, 1998. 
 Devetak, Richard. “Between Kant and Pufendorf: Human-
itarian Intervention, Statist Anti- Cosmopolitanism 
and Critical International Theory.”  Review of Inter-
national Studies 33 (2007): 151–74. 
 ———. “Critical Theory.” In  Theories of International 
Relations, 2nd ed., eds., Scott Burchill, Andrew Lin-
klater, Matthew Paterson, Christian Reus-Smit, and 
Jaqui True. Houndmills: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001. 
 Eckersley, Robyn. “The Ethics of Critical Theory.” 
In  The Oxford Handbook of International Rela-
tions, eds., Christian Reus-Smit and Duncan Snidal. 
 Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2008. 
 Edkins, Jenny.  Poststructuralism & International Rela-
tions: Bringing the Political Back In. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner, 1999. 
 ———, and Nick Vaughan-Williams.  Critical Theorists 
and International Relations. London:  Routledge, 2009. 
 Eschle, Catherine, and Bice Maiguashca.  Critical 
Theories, International Relations and ‘the Anti-
Globalisation Movement’: The Politics of Global 
Resistance. London: Routledge, 2005. 
 Fierke, Karin M.  Changing Games, Changing Strate-
gies: Critical Investigations in Security. Manchester, 
UK: Manchester University Press, 1998. 
 ———.  Critical Approaches to International Security. 
Cambridge, UK: Polity, 2007. 
 Friedrichs, Jorg. “The Meaning of New Medievalism.” 
 European Journal of International Relations 7, 4 
(2001): 475–501. 
 George, Jim. “International Relations and the Search 
for Thinking Space: Another View of the Third 
Debate.”  International Studies Quarterly 33, 3 
( September 1989): 269–79. 
 ———, and David Campbell. “Patterns of Dissent and 
the Celebration of Difference: Critical Social Theory 
and International Relations.”  International Studies 
Quarterly 34, 3 (September 1990): 269–93. 
 Geuss, Raymond.  The Idea of a Critical Theory: 
Habermas and the Frankfurt School. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1981. 
Suggestions for Further Reading
357

 Richmond, Oliver. “Critical Contributions to Peace.” 
In  Peace in International Relations: A New Agenda. 
London: Routledge, 2008. 
 ———. “Reclaiming Peace in International Relations.” 
 Millennium: Journal of International Studies 36, 3 
(May 2008): 439–70. 
 Roach, Steven. “Critical International Theory and 
Meta-Dialectics.”  Millennium: Journal of Interna-
tional Relations 35, 2 (March 2007): 321–42. 
 ———.  Critical Theory and International Relations: A 
Reader. New York: Routledge, 2007. 
 ———. Critical Theory of International Politics. New 
York: Routledge, 2009. 
 Rush, Fred.  The Cambridge Companion to Critical The-
ory. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Sabia, Daniel, and Jerald Wallulis.  Changing Social 
Science: Critical Theory and Other Critical Perspec-
tives. Albany, NY: State University of New York 
Press, 1983. 
 Shapcott, Richard. “Critical Theory.” In  The Oxford 
Handbook of International Relations, eds., Chris-
tian Reus-Smit and Duncan Snidal. Oxford: Oxford 
University Press, 2008. 
 Sheehan, Michael.  Securing Outer Space: International 
Relations Theory and the Politics of Space. New 
York: Routledge, 2009. 
 Stephens, Angharad, and Nick Vaughan-Williams. 
 Terrorism and the Politics of Response. London: 
Routledge, 2008. 
 Stockman, Norman.  Antipositivist Theories of the Sci-
ences: Critical Rationalism, Critical Theory and Sci-
entific Realism. Dordrecht: D. Reidel, 1983. 
 Thompson, Lisa.  States and Security: Emancipatory 
versus Orthodox Approaches. Belleville, South 
 Africa: University of the Western Cape, 1996. 
 Weber, Cynthia.  International Relations Theory. A 
Critical Introduction, 2nd ed. New York: Taylor & 
Francis, 2004. 
 Weber, Martin. “Constructivism and Critical Theory.” 
In  An Introduction to International Relations: 
Australian Perspectives, eds., Richard Devetak, 
Anthony Burke, and Jim George. Cambridge: 
 Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
 Wyn Jones, Richard.  Critical Theory and World Poli-
tics. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 2000. 
 ———. “Introduction: Locating Critical International 
Theory.” In  Critical Theory and World Politics, ed., 
Richard Wyn Jones. Boulder, CO: Lynne Rienner, 
2000. 
 ———.  Security, Strategy and Critical Theory.  Boulder, 
CO: Lynne Rienner, 1999.  
 ———. “Marxism.” In  Theories of International Re-
lations, eds., Scott Burchill and Andrew Linklater. 
London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1996. 
 ———. “Realism, Marxism and Critical Theory.”  Re-
view of Internationa1 Studies 12, 4 (1986): 301–12. 
 ———. “The Changing Contours of Critical Interna-
tional Theory.” In  Critical Theory and World Poli-
tic, ed., Richard Wyn Jones. Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner, 2000. 
 ———.  Transformation of Political Community: 
Ethical Foundations of the Post-Westphalian Era. 
 Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998. 
 Lynch, Mark. “Critical Theory: Dialogue, Legitimacy, 
and Justifications for War.” In  Making Sense of 
International Relations Theory, ed.,  Jennifer Ster-
ling-Folker. Boulder, CO: Lynne  Rienner, 2006. 
 McCormack, Tara.  Critical Security Theory and 
Contemporary Power Relations: Emancipation, 
Critique and the International Order. New York: 
Routledge, 2009. 
 McDonald, Patrick J.  The Invisible Hand of Peace: 
Capitalism, the War Machine, and International 
Relations Theory. New York: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 2009. 
 Moore, Cerwyn, and Chris Farrands.  International 
Relations Theory and Philosophy: Interpretive Dia-
logues. New York: Routledge, 2010. 
 Nizamani, Haider. “Our Region Their Theories: A 
Case for Critical Security Studies in South Asia.” 
In  International Relations in South Asia, ed., 
Navnita Behera. New Delhi: Sage Publications 
 India, 2008. 
 Odysseos, Louiza.  The Subject of Coexistence: Other-
ness in International Relations. Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press, 2007. 
 Payne, Rodger A. “Neorealists as Critical Theorists,” 
 Perspectives on Politics. Vol. 5, No. 3 (September 
2007): 503–14. 
 Peterson, V. Spike.  A Critical Rewriting of Global Po-
litical Economy: Integrating Reproductive, Produc-
tive and Virtual Economies. New York: Routledge, 
2003. 
 Pensky, Max, ed.  Globalizing Critical Theory.  Lanham, 
MD: Rowman & Littlefield, 2005. 
 Price, Richard, and Christian Reus-Smit. “Danger-
ous Liaisons? Critical International Theory and 
 Constructivism.”  European Journal of Interna-
tional Relations 4 (1998): 259–94. 
 Rengger, Nicholas, and Tristram Thirkell-White.  Critical 
International Relations Theory after 25 Years. Cam-
bridge: Cambridge University Press, 2007. 
358
Suggestions for Further Reading

 Derrida, Jacques.  Limited Inc. Evanston: Northwest-
ern University Press, 1988. 
 Devetak, Richard. “Postmodernism.” In  Theories of 
International Relations, eds., Scott Burchill and 
 Andrew Linklater. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 
1996. 
 ———. “The Project of Modernity and International 
Relations Theory.”  Millennium 24, 1 (1995): 27–51. 
 Epstein, Charlotte.  The Power of Words in Interna-
tional Relations. Cambridge, MA.: MIT Press, 2008. 
 Foucault, Michel.  Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the 
Prison. Harmondsworth, England: Penguin, 1977. 
 George, Jim.  Discourses of Global Politics: A Critical 
(Re)Introduction to International Relations. Boul-
der, CO: Lynne Rienner, 1994. 
 Ihde, Don.  Experimental Phenomenology. Albany, 
NY: State University of New York, 1986. 
 Jarvis, Darrill.  International Relations and the Chal-
lenge of Postmodernism: Defending the Discipline. 
Columbia, SC: University of South Carolina, 2000. 
 Neufield, Mark.  The Restructuring of International 
Relations Theory. Cambridge: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1995. 
 Shapiro, Michael. “Strategic Discourse/Discursive 
Strategy: The Representation of Security Policy in 
the Video Age.”  International Studies Quarterly 34, 
3 (1990): 327–40. 
 ———, and Hayward Alker, eds.  Challenging Bound-
aries: Global Flows, Territorial Identities, Minne-
apolis, MN: University of Minnesota Press, 1996. 
 Smith, Steve. “Epistemology, Postmodernism and In-
ternational Relations Theory: A Reply to Østerud.” 
 Journal of Peace Research 34 (1997): 330–36. 
 Walker, Robert, ed.”Contemporary Militarism and the 
Discourse of Dissent.”  Alternatives 9, 4 (1983): 
303–22. 
 ———. Culture, Ideology, and World Order. Boulder, 
CO: Westview, 1984. 
 ———.  Inside/Outside: International Relations as Po-
litical Theory. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 1992. 
 ———. “Realism, Change, and International Politi-
cal Theory.”  International Studies Quarterly 31, 1 
(March 1987): 65–86. 
 ———. “World Politics and Western Reason: Univer-
salism, Pluralism, Hegemony.”  Alternatives 7, 2 
(1981): 195–227.  
j On Postmodernism 
 Ashley, Richard. “The Achievements of Poststructural-
ism.” In  International Theory: Positivism & Beyond, 
eds., Steve Smith, Ken Booth, and Marysia Zalewski. 
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 ———. “The Poverty of Neorealism,”  International 
Organization 38, 2 (Spring 1984): 225–86. 
 ———. “The Powers of Anarchy: Theory, Sovereignty, 
and the Domestication of Global Life.” In  Interna-
tional Theory: Critical Investigation, ed., James Der 
Derian. London: MacMillan, 1995. 
 ———, and Robert B. J. Walker. “Speaking the Lan-
guage of Exile: Dissidence in International Studies.” 
 International Studies Quarterly 34, 3 (September 
1990): 259–68. 
 Beer, Francis.  Meanings of War and Peace. College 
Station, TX: Texas A&M University Press, 2001. 
 Campbell, David. “MetaBosnia: Narratives of the Bos-
nian War.”  Review of International Studies 24, 3 
(1998), 261–81. 
 ———.  National Deconstruction:  Violence, Identity, 
and Justice in Bosnia. Minneapolis, MN: University 
of Minnesota Press, 1998. 
 ———. “Political Prosaics, Transversal Politics, and 
the Anarchical World.” In  Challenging Boundaries: 
Global Flows, Territorial Identities, eds., Michael 
Shapiro and Hayward Alker. Minneapolis, MN: 
University of Minnesota Press, 1996. 
 ———. “Security, Order, and Identity in Europe: A 
Commentary.”  Current Research on Peace and Vio-
lence 13, 3 (1990/91): 175–80. 
 ———.  Writing Security: United States Foreign Policy 
and the Politics of Identity. Minneapolis, MN: Uni-
versity of Minnesota Press, 1998. 
 Dalby, Simon. “American Security Discourse: The Per-
sistence of Geopolitics.”  Political Geography Quar-
terly 9, 2 (April 1990): 171–88. 
 Der Derian, James, ed.  International Theory: Critical 
Investigations, London: MacMillan, 1995. 
 ———.  On Diplomacy: A Genealogy of Western Es-
trangement. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1987. 
 ———. “The Terrorist Discourse: Signs, States, and 
Systems of Global Political Violence.” In  World 
Security: Trends and Challenges at Century’s End, 
eds., Michael Klare and Daniel Thomas. New York: 
St. Martin’s, 1991. 
 ———, and Michael Shapiro, eds.  International/Inter-
Textual Relations. Postmodern Readings of World 
Politics. Lanham, MD: Lexington Books, 1989. 
Suggestions for Further Reading
359

360
Feminist Understandings 
in IR Theory 
8
CHAPTER 
 F
 eminism as interpretive understanding encompasses diverse perspectives to 
include liberal, radical, and postmodern versions applied to the subject matter 
of IR. As a result, methodologies may vary. Feminist IR perspectives cannot be 
divorced from broader historical concerns of the feminist movement whether post-
colonial struggles or civil and political rights throughout the world. Accordingly, we 
place feminism as a separate critique or interpretive understanding of conventional 
international relations theory that offers an alternative perspective and starting point 
for both theory and practice. 
 Feminist approaches are important for highlighting major blindspots in main-
stream IR, providing an alternative lens— gender —through which to view world 
politics, and providing new insights on the often-overlooked political, social, and 
economic roles that women play in IR. Feminists argue that the IR discipline falls 
into the trap of believing that the masculine experience is the human experience. 
Feminism in all its forms has a strong normative commitment to enhancing the 
prospects of peace and reducing violence and conflict, the latter effects all too often 
suffered by women. 
INTELLECTUAL PRECURSORS AND INFLUENCES 
 Although feminist approaches to IR began to appear in the 1980s, feminism has 
deep intellectual and policy-oriented roots. Certainly Plato (c. 427–347 b.c.) 
 elevated the role of women alongside men in the idealized republic he constructed 
even if Aristotle (384–322 b.c.) subsequently did not afford women the same equal 
standing. For his part, the ancient playwright Aristophanes (c. 446–386 b.c.) por-
trayed women in  Lysistrata not only as more oriented toward peace and less prone 
to resort to warlike activities than men, but also as powerful, often decisive actors in 
their own right. In his  Assemblywomen  we see women assuming control of politics 
and establishing in Athens a society in which communal, egalitarian values become 
prominent. 

Intellectual Precursors and Influences 
361
 This theme—that women matter and can be decisive, trumping the decisions 
and actions of men—also can be found in the modern political theory of Niccolò 
Machiavelli (1469–1527). Indeed, Machiavelli portrays  Fortuna metaphorically as 
a powerful woman who not only challenges, but also has the capacity to reverse 
even the most powerful of men.  1  Chances of beating  Fortuna are at best 50–50. 
 This is not the place to elaborate in detail the very rich, multi-century social 
history of modern liberal movements to emancipate women and legitimate feminine 
understandings. We select here only a few representative samples from an exten-
sive literature and history of feminist movements. For example, we note the ideas 
advanced by an early feminist writer, Mary Astell (1666–1731), who articulated 
what has become a “core liberal feminist belief that men and women are equally 
capable of reason, and that therefore they should be equally educated in its use.” 
Moreover, one even can find in Astell, albeit in embryonic form, some of the core 
ideas of recent radical feminism: the idea that “man (whether as sexual predator 
or tyrannous husband) is the natural enemy of woman” as well as “the idea that 
women must be liberated from the need to please men.”  2  
 Better known among the early-modern feminist writers but still reflecting Astell’s 
insights, Mary Wollstonecraft (1759–1797) in her persuasive  Vindication of the 
Rights of Women (1792) refuted the claim “that women were less capable of reason 
than men” and argued (as Astell had) that since “men and women are equally pos-
sessed of reason, they must be equally educated in its use.”  3  Critical of the lesser place 
afforded women in French revolutionary thought and actions, Wollstonecraft argued 
that the education of women would enable them not only to exercise their reason, but 
also to realize their inner virtues as fellow human beings. Consistent with this logic, 
women are (and should be treated as) the equals of men in the rights they possess. 
 One finds similar views expressed in both socialist and liberal writings of the 
nineteenth and early-twentieth centuries. In his  Subjection of Women (1861), the 
utilitarian John Stuart Mill (1806–1873) built upon these earlier, foundational 
writings, railing against the subordinate and often abusive condition women had 
to endure. The remedy could be found in legislation that equalized the position of 
women, assuring access to education and employment as well as full protection of 
the law and political rights as fellow citizens and full participants in society. 
 Karl Marx (1818–1883) did not address feminist issues as directly as his 
revolutionary and intellectual partner, Friedrich Engels (1820–1895), did in two 
key works— The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State and  The 
Condition of the Working Class in England . Engels referred to “the world historical 
defeat of the female sex” as “the man took command in the home also; the woman 
was degraded and reduced to servitude; she became the slave of his lust and a mere 
instrument for the production of children.”  4  Liberation of women will come with 
the revolution that frees them from the bondage of being treated as private property 
controlled by men: “The supremacy of the man in marriage is the simple conse-
quence of his economic supremacy, and with the abolition of the latter [economic 
supremacy based on private property] will [male supremacy over women] disap-
pear of itself.” Engels also observed the abuse of women and men in the workplace 
in early industrial capitalism—“women made unfit for childbearing, children de-
formed, men enfeebled, limbs crushed, whole generations wrecked, afflicted with 
disease and infirmity, purely to fill the purses of the bourgeoisie.” 

362
CHAPTER 8  Feminist Understandings in IR Theory
 Building upon nineteenth-century challenges posed by Maria Stewart (1803–
1879), a free black woman, and Elizabeth Cady Stanton (1815–1902), Susan B. 
Anthony (1820–1906), and others, the stage was set for the twentieth-century 
suffrage movement. American women finally received the right to vote in 1919. 
Parallel efforts were also underway in Europe and much later in Latin America 
and elsewhere. It was after the Second World War, however, that feminist writ-
ings and associated movements put in place the intellectual foundation not just for 
feminist scholarship in our own times, but also for important efforts to transform 
the conditions experienced and roles played by women in what has become a truly 
global project. 
 In the popular literature, feminist writers challenged exclusionary policies 
toward women, unequal treatment, and other patterns of male dominance.  5  
Feminist understandings have had and likely will continue to have substantial 
impact on a global scale concerning human rights with regard to equal treatment 
and the empowerment of women, allowing them the same opportunities that 
traditionally and historically have been reserved in most cultures to men. Some 
feminists note that empowering women will also give them the means to limit 
family size voluntarily, thus reducing population growth rates to economically 
sustainable levels. Women are also seen by many feminists as more prone to 
approaching issues of peace and conflict resolution from a broader, both social 
and cultural perspective.  
MAJOR ASSUMPTIONS 
 First, feminist approaches in IR use  gender as the major category of analysis to 
highlight women’s perspectives on social issues and research. Gender is a set 
of socially and culturally constructed characteristics that are (often stereotypi-
cally) associated with what it means to be masculine or feminine. Masculinity 
is associated with power and forceful activity, a rationality often cold to human 
concerns, self-empowered autonomy, and assumption of leadership in public 
roles. Conversely, feminine characteristics supposedly include less assertive or less 
aggressive behavior, willful dependence on—or interdependence in—nurturing 
relationships with others, sensitivity to emotional aspects of issues, and a focus 
on the private realm. 
 The two gender categories are dependent upon one another for their meaning 
and permeate all aspects of public and private life. One’s gendered identity or self 
comes to be defined in relation to (an)other—relationships, for example, between 
mother, father, and child or male and female peers. For its part, society reinforces 
the idea that to be a “real man” means not to display “feminine” characteristics. 
Hence, the emphasis on gender is not just about women, but men and masculinity 
as well. In terms of  epistemology , many feminists, as we will see, pursue empirical 
research. Yet the strict positivist dichotomies such as the separation of fact and 
value are rejected by many feminists who adopt a constructivist approach to their 
work, emphasizing how knowledge is shaped by culture, history, and context. 
Although some feminists can be found among realists and even more among liber-
als, they are more likely to be critics of scholars within any of the four IR images 
who marginalize gender as an interpretive lens. 

Major Assumptions 
363
 In sum, feminist scholars claim that as gender permeates social life, it has 
profound and largely unnoticed effects on the actions of states, international 
organizations, and transnational actors. Feminist scholarship seeks to develop a 
research agenda and associated concepts to trace and explain these effects. Feminist 
approaches to international relations first began to appear frequently in the inter-
national relations literature in the 1980s. 
 Second, from the feminist perspective gender is particularly important as a 
primary way to signify relationships of power not only in the home, but also in the 
world of foreign policy and international relations. When we privilege masculinity, 
women socially but also legally can be cast into a subordinate status. Gender hier-
archies perpetuate unequal role expectations, contributing to inequalities between 
men and women in IR. Feminists emphasize social relations as the key unit of analy-
sis, obviously interested in the causes and consequences of unequal power relation-
ships between men and women. Unequal power relations exist through time, across 
cultures, and all levels of analysis. This perspective on power is obviously quite 
different from that of scholars associated with the four images outlined in this book 
in which power is usually viewed in terms of states, international organizations, 
multinational corporations, and other nongovernmental organizations, or classes. 
The realist rational, unitary, power-maximizing state—which many feminists have 
noted interestingly is associated with male characteristics—marginalizes (or worse, 
leaves no room at all for) gender as an analytical category. 
 More conventional IR theories are therefore riven with unexamined assump-
tions about the international system to include the belief that its concepts are 
 gender-neutral. Feminists take issue with this, arguing that virtually the entire 
Western philosophical tradition ignores feminine perspectives or even exalts a 
masculine bias. This is why an important task for feminist theory is to make 
strange what has heretofore appeared familiar or natural—the absence of feminist 
theories or understandings in mainstream IR. Indeed, until the emergence of this 
feminist critique the basic assumptions and concepts of the field have been take 
as unproblematic by mainstream theorists.  6  Not surprisingly, critical theory and 
postmodern strains of thought have found a place within the broader feminist 
 approach to IR, particularly given the failure of most mainstream theories to take 
gender adequately into account. 
 Third, many contemporary IR theory feminists are dedicated to the emancipa-
tory goal of achieving equality for women via the elimination of unequal gender 
relations. Rather than basing their analysis on cold, abstract speculation of how 
anarchy may influence the behavior of rational, unitary states (as many realists are 
prone to do), the emphasis instead is on how, for example, military conflict among 
and within states directly affects the lives of the dispossessed, women in particular. 
Far from states being viewed as a security provider, they are just as likely to threaten 
human security if one empirically examines not only the system level of analysis but 
also the state, societal, or local levels. Hence, many feminists find highly suspect the 
view that the  levels of analysis demarcate abstractly a clear division between the 
international system and component states-as-units. What’s missing is the human 
dimension. When gender is introduced as a category of analysis, old assumptions 
about security as well as new assumptions about who benefits from globalization 
can be examined in a new, more humane light.  

364
CHAPTER 8  Feminist Understandings in IR Theory
STRANDS OF FEMINISM IN IR 
 Feminist interpretive understandings can be found within a number of the images 
and approaches discussed in this book.  7  Liberal feminists emphasize the exclusion 
of women from important public spheres of social, political, and economic life. 
There are two strands of research. The first seeks to expose the many areas of IR 
where women are underrepresented and to identify ways to overcome barriers to 
expanded participation. Such studies look at the underrepresentation of women in 
security and arms control policymaking circles or international organizations. Lib-
eral feminism of this strand, therefore, tends to accept the position of mainstream 
realist IR that strategic questions and the “high politics” of military security are an 
important subject for research. As gender stereotyping historically has consigned 
women to the private sphere, success for women in IR also becomes the practical 
matter of upping their numbers in diplomatic and security-oriented policymaking 
positions. 
 The second strand of research looks to uncover ways in which women have 
actually been there—participants in and witnesses of major events, but their pres-
ence not reported. If women were not identified in international organizations or 
on the battlefield, where were they? Behind the scenes in organizational settings, 
factories, hospitals, peace campaigns, and even on battlefields? Unsung heroes fer-
rying airplanes across oceans for use in war zones? 
 One important example of work in this genre is Cynthia Enloe’s  Bananas, 
Beaches, and Bases  8  in which she finds some women (spouses, mothers, daughters, 
girlfriends, and the like) “protected,” while other categories (non-Americans, racial 
minorities, prostitutes—so-called camp followers or those cultivated in communi-
ties outside military bases at home and abroad) are exploited. Often denigrated 
as “common whores,” camp followers provide necessary support services such as 
securing supplies, doing laundry, and nursing. Protection (a form of subordina-
tion) and exploitation are, then, two manifestations of male dominance associated 
historically with militaries at home and abroad. 
 Masculinist behaviors associated with militarization of social life thus have 
adverse effects on women the larger society has tended to ignore. Moreover, such 
conduct is by no means unique to the American experience. It is indeed a global 
phenomenon. Other studies look at the role of women on the home front and their 
role in filling positions in factories vacated by conscripted men. Liberal feminist 
accounts have also examined the important but usually unreported role of women 
in Third World economic development. 
 Some feminists take issue with the liberal-feminist approach. The argument is 
that there is an underlying assumption that including more women in positions pre-
viously denied them will eliminate gender inequalities. But feminists approaching 
the issue from the perspective of class or patriarchy claim that inequalities define 
the very structures in which women might participate. Participation alone will not 
alter this fundamental fact. 
 Some feminists argue that subordination and domination of women by men is 
the most basic form of oppression. Much of society is structured to reinforce and 
maintain patriarchy. Masculine perspectives emphasizing conflict dominate the 
social sciences and IR theorizing, focusing on such key ideas as defining security 

Gender, War, and Security Studies 
365
in terms of aggregating power. A feminist perspective would expand the concept 
of security to include the empowerment of women, economic development, and 
concern for the global ecological commons. Some feminists also take the perspec-
tive of women as nurturers and, hence, more likely to be peace-oriented than men. 
Some say this is the result of genetic code resulting in men who are prone to be 
more aggressive and territorial. Others reject biological determinism and point to 
young men raised in societies that educate them in martial values (e.g., competitive 
“contact” or combative sports) and devalue by comparison the work of women to 
include their running households and raising children. 
 One of the contributions of feminists is to reject the idea that IR is limited to 
“high politics,” a position logically following from the rejection of the distinction 
between public and private realms. The danger, say some, is that the supposedly 
more peace-loving and nurturing female also plays to stereotypes of those who 
would prefer to confine them to subordinate status and caution against the role of 
women in national security policymaking positions. 
 Finally, postmodern feminism aims to displace realist and liberal positivist dis-
course and epistemology with a commitment to skepticism concerning truth claims 
about IR. The emergence of postcolonial theory—assessing the historical legacy of 
colonial and imperial experiences Third World societies and cultures still have to 
confront—also has an important feminist component relating in particular to these 
development and human rights challenges. Much of this work has focused on Third 
World countries and the roles women have played and continue to play in tribal 
and other settings. Postmodernists are therefore allied with postcolonial critics of 
liberal and radical feminism by rejecting the implicit assumption that women are 
essentially a homogeneous group unaffected by race, class, culture, sexuality, and 
history. What connects all of them is a concern for the nature of power relationships 
up and down the levels of analysis. 
 Postmodernists tend to reject the idea that there is some ultimate core or es-
sential identity to women that would have the effect of constraining them. The cate-
gory of “women” is a socially constructed fiction and postmodernists engage in the 
task of deconstructing that fiction, composed as it is of particular social or cultural 
understandings. Feminist critics of postmodernism, however, are concerned that if 
the category of “women” is essentially indeterminate, then how can an alternative 
world order with a different role for women be suggested? If critical discourse has 
the subversive effect of undermining concepts and creating conceptual disarray, 
what will be the replacement? Despite differences and often pointed criticisms of 
each other, there is consensus among these feminists on the paucity of both women 
in IR and the perspectives they represent in what is still a male-dominant field re-
plete with masculinist understandings usually taken uncritically as givens.  
GENDER, WAR, AND SECURITY STUDIES 
 Scholars with a feminist perspective have been critical of “masculinist” approaches 
to conflict that tend to emphasize power and balance-of-power politics, coercive 
diplomacy, unilateralism, and the use of force. From this perspective, conduct in 
international relations seems similar to schoolyard conflicts, particularly among 

366
CHAPTER 8  Feminist Understandings in IR Theory
boys in which the strong do what they will and the weak do what they must. As 
such, arms races and the use of force in warfare are masculinist constructs. It is not 
surprising that with some exceptions the perpetrators of guerrilla, terrorist, and 
other examples of politically motivated violence in IR tend to be men or boys, rarely 
women or girls. Women are not usually found on the battlefront but rather are con-
signed to the home front. Those engaged in supporting the war effort through work 
such as in munitions factories traditionally (as in World War II) were expected to 
relinquish these roles once the male “heroes” returned from the war. 
 One of the first feminist works to examine war from conventional and uncon-
ventional perspectives was Jean Bethke Elshtain’s  Women and War (1987). She 
was not interested in contemporary IR research on war but cast her net much more 
broadly. Her starting point is Georg Hegel’s (1770–1831) Just Warriors/Beautiful 
Souls dichotomy—Western men are seen fit to plan, conduct, and narrate wars, 
while women are viewed as too soft and motherly to do much more than be the 
receivers of warrior tales. Her personal testimony is followed by historical perspec-
tives on war, peace, and armed civic virtue dating back to ancient Greece. Women 
are absent from historical accounts, and part of her mission is to show how women 
have made sense of war and have not merely stood by to suffer it or stand by their 
warrior man out of duty.  9  
 A major effort to summarize empirical studies ranging up and down all levels 
of analysis is Joshua Goldstein’s  War and Gender.  10  The puzzle he is interested in 
is the fact that despite political, economic, and cultural differences, gender roles 
in war are consistent across all known human societies (although this is chang-
ing). Historically, when faced with the prospect of war, the response has been in a 
gender-based way to assemble fighters who were usually exclusively male. War is 
a diverse, multifaceted enterprise, just as gender norms outside war show similar 
diversity. Yet such diversity vanishes when it comes to the connection between 
war and gender. Goldstein applies strands of feminist thought to provide possible 
answers to this puzzle. 
 On sexual orientation, homophobic prejudices drawn from the larger society 
become particularly acute in the all-male military setting, given an institutional 
culture emphasizing the masculine and discounting the feminine. Only in more 
recent decades are women allowed to assume combat roles in U.S. military units—
the masculinist orientation that historically or traditionally warfare is essentially 
a male enterprise. In the U.S., women are allowed to serve in combat-related tasks 
at sea and as fighter, bomber, and helicopter pilots, but even now they are not in-
tegrated in ground-combat units that remain a male preserve, even though women 
frequently find themselves in the line of fire performing their “noncombat” duties. 
 The concept of  security itself has come under scrutiny and become a contested 
concept. The question asked by feminists is “Security for whom?” Does it make 
sense to continue to view the patriarchal state as the mainstay of security? Is the 
security of individuals or groups adequately understood in terms of being members 
of a given national community? Is achieving security to be found in the traditional 
realist conception? 
 An even more basic question is “What is meant by security?” Is it limited to de-
terring or preventing an outside power from attacking the state of which one is a cit-
izen? Perhaps the denial of basic human rights, widespread poverty, environmental 

Gender and International Organizations 
367
degradation, and gender inequality could also be viewed as security issues that 
are applicable to men, women, and children. Challenging the entire discourse of 
 “security” is in line with the concerns of critical theorists and postmodernists and 
an expansive notion of security attuned to many liberal conceptions.  11  This struggle 
over meaning—what is meant by security and peace in relation to masculinity or 
femininity—is a constant concern of many feminists.  
GENDER AND INTERNATIONAL ORGANIZATIONS 
 Feminist critiques are not limited to the state, mainstream theories of IR, and  conceptions 
of security. International organizations and nongovernmental organizations, so often 
seemingly beloved by liberal scholars, also have come under scrutiny. The purpose of 
such work is to ask questions that have gone unasked, and view such organizations 
from the perspective of gender. 
 One of the best-known IR feminist scholars working on these topics for many 
years is Sandra Whitworth. A recurrent theme of her work is how international 
organizations are part of complex political and social processes that aid in the 
construction of assumptions about the proper roles of women and men in the work-
force. Early case studies involved the International Planned Parenthood Federation 
(IPPF) and the International Labour Organisation (ILO).  12  The case studies exam-
ine the ways in which such organizations over time understood and organized their 
programs around shifting views of gender. How these understandings came to exist 
and how activists managed to influence their construction and redefinition is the 
main theme of one of her books. The underlying assumption is that such institu-
tions are a reflection of the interests, norms, and ideas of hegemonic groups. 
 Whitworth’s  Men, Militarism, and UN Peacekeeping  13  brings gendered under-
standing to national participation in international organizations. As a professor at a 
Canadian university, she was all too well aware of the positive global image of UN 
peacekeepers in general and Canadian forces in particular. Widespread faith and 
a belief in the necessity of peacekeeping were reinforced with the end of the Cold 
War and the dramatic expansion in the number of peacekeeping missions. Not only 
did the number increase, but also the scope of the missions. Mandates went beyond 
military and peacekeeping responsibilities to include also monitoring human rights, 
conducting elections, delivering aid, helping to repatriate refugees, and rebuilding 
state bureaucracies. 
 At a 1993 peacekeeping workshop sponsored by Canada’s Department of 
National Defence, Whitworth was given three minutes to comment on the work-
shop proceedings. Her remarks were not about what had been discussed, but what 
had been ignored: Who benefits from peacekeeping operations? Who is excluded? 
What is the effect of peacekeeping operations on the local people? Audience reaction 
was silence. Problematizing the impact of peacekeeping operations on those most 
affected from Whitworth’s feminist perspective was encouraged by disturbing press 
reporting that challenged blanket assertions that UN peacekeepers were in all cases 
selfless, benign soldiers. It is one thing to point to the actions of men in combat, but 
rather a unique approach to examine militarized masculinity from the perspective 
of peacekeeping missions. For soldiers involved in the latter operations, there is the 
seeming contradiction between what is generally regarded as appropriate masculine 

368
CHAPTER 8  Feminist Understandings in IR Theory
behavior inculcated from basic training onward to the demands of restricted weap-
ons use and the ability to engage skillfully in community relations. 
 As Whitworth notes, in some cases states and even the UN have had a tendency 
to dismiss any information that contradicts the image of UN peacekeepers as altru-
istic and benign, preferring to view negative reports as merely isolated examples of 
“a few bad apples.” But over time the United Nations and national governments 
have confronted the charges of sexual exploitation and physical violence against 
those who are supposed to be protected. Whitworth, however, argues that while 
attention to gender has made such concerns more visible within the UN, such cri-
tiques have had minimal impact on the actual UN way of doing business. In other 
words, by incorporating the language of gender into official UN policy, it ironically 
has had the effect of silencing criticism by ensuring that broader issues such as mili-
tarized masculinity do not end up on formal UN agendas. 
 Whitworth and other feminist scholars have addressed the empirical neglect of 
women and gender relations. In no small way they have contributed to the growth 
of transnational women’s networks that have worked with sympathetic actors 
in states and international organization bureaucracies to effect policy changes. 
Amnesty International in 1990, for example, added gender to its list of forms of 
political persecution. As a result of media coverage of the Yugoslavian civil war 
in the 1990s and resulting political pressure, rape is now widely recognized as a 
war crime under the Geneva Conventions Against War Crimes and, hence, can be 
prosecuted by the International Criminal Court.  
GENDERED UNDERSTANDINGS AND IR THEORY 
 Feminists utilize gender as an interpretive lens through which to view international 
relations in general and IR theory in particular. With such a perspective, we become 
more aware of inequality and patterns of dominance, making us more sensitive to 
the discourse and concepts used to analyze international relations. As such, feminist 
scholarship offers a counterweight to masculinist understandings that are more 
prevalent in IR theories that emphasize power, balance of power, and instrumental 
rationality in the conduct of state and non-state institutions and their agents. 
 It is not as if men are incapable of producing gendered analysis such as that 
done by Whitworth and her feminist colleagues any more than women cannot be 
hard-headed realists. Perhaps in order to be taken seriously in a still male-dominant 
world that extends as well to academic communities, it may be that many women 
seeking positions in public or university life have been forced to adopt what some 
feminist theorists have labeled “masculinist” understandings. 
 Our principal focus here, however, is on the interpretive understandings associ-
ated with gender. Gendered understandings lead us to be critical of theoretical work 
in IR that masks the masculine or overlooks the feminine. Feminists tend to be more 
associated with liberal, postcolonial, constructivist, critical theory, postmodern, 
and other understandings than with realism, English School, economic structural-
ism, or other approaches to IR. Many liberal feminist theorists are also likely to see 
 themselves comfortably within the positivist or scientific camp, merely introducing 
gender as an important albeit frequently overlooked or neglected explanatory factor 
in IR or other social-scientific work.  

Feminists and Their Critics 
369
FEMINISTS AND THEIR CRITICS 
What Critics? 
 Given the vigorous feminist critique of mainstream IR theorizing over the past 
several decades, one would expect a robust response. This has not been the case. 
Silence, not spirited rebuttal, more often has been the result. Perhaps the best way to 
interpret this lack of response is to note the lack of feminist work in the leading IR 
journals. One exception has been the British publication,  Review of International 
Studies. Approaches compatible with feminism such as constructivism and even 
critical theory and postmodernism have received critiques, but feminist perspec-
tives on IR are usually an afterthought in such reviews. It is always possible that 
mainstream scholars often find feminist IR understandings, at least in terms of their 
own work, to be irrelevant, interesting but tangential, or dangerous to address for 
fear of being cast as an ignorant male “who just doesn’t get it.”  
Research Program and Cumulative Knowledge 
 One early sympathetic observer of the feminist literature is Robert Keohane, who 
called for dialogue across paradigms.  14  He claimed that aspects of feminist un-
derstanding could fit comfortably under the neoliberal institutionalism research 
program. Indeed, what was missing was a feminist research program that could 
produce cumulative knowledge about IR. 
 In what still stands today as the best rejoinder not only to Keohane, but 
also to mainstream theorists in general, is J. Ann Tickner’s “You Just Don’t 
Understand: Troubled Engagements between Feminist and IR Theorists.”  15  It 
is all the more interesting as it was published in one of the major IR journals, 
 International Studies Quarterly. Tickner noted that very often IR-trained femi-
nists frequently encounter awkward silences when presenting academic papers at 
conferences. She raised the key question of whether the difficulty in cross-cultural 
conversations was essentially due to the very different realities, epistemologies, 
and research interests of feminists and mainstream IR scholars. Furthermore, she 
argued that these differences themselves are gendered, making communication all 
the more difficult. 
 In particular, conventional IR scholars (realists, neorealists, neoliberals, peace 
researchers, behavioralists, and empiricists committed to data-driven methods) mis-
understand the feminist meaning of gender that emphasizes the socially constructed 
nature of gender and the fact it embodies relationships of power inequality. Second, 
feminists and non-feminists ontologically observe different realities when they look 
at international politics. Feminists tend to see unequal social-power relations across 
the levels of analysis as opposed to a realist ontology in which supposedly rational, 
unified states are the most important players. 
 Finally, there is an epistemological divide for those feminists questioning the 
positivist approach to knowledge. Although committed to epistemological plural-
ism, many feminists are skeptical of methodologies that claim facts are neutral and 
prefer more historically based, interpretive understandings that raise the question 
of the extent to which gender roles and patriarchy are variable across time and 
space. The problem-solving framework of mainstream IR implicitly accepts the 

370
CHAPTER 8  Feminist Understandings in IR Theory
given order in the world, but feminists join with constructivists, critical theorists, 
and postmodernists to question this assumption.  
NOTES
 1.   Hannah Pitkin,  Fortune Is a Woman (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1984, 1999).  
 2.   For eighteenth- and nineteenth-century thought, we draw on Valerie Bryson,  Feminist 
Political Theory, 2nd ed. (New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 1992, 2003), 9–10.  
 3.   Ibid., 16. 
 4.   Friedrich Engels,  The Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State (Peking: For-
eign Languages Press, 1978), 65 as cited by Bryson, 59. Subsequent quotes same page.  
 5.   For example, see Betty Friedan’s now classic  Feminine Mystique (New York: Dell, 
1964).  
 6.   Sandra Harding,  Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? Thinking from Women’s Lives 
(Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 1991), 123.  
 7.   This section draws on Sandra Whitworth,  Feminism and International Relations: 
Towards a Political Economy of Gender in Interstate and Non-Governmental Institu-
tions (New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994), 12–25.  
 8.   Cynthia Enloe,  Bananas, Beaches, and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of International 
Politics (London: Pandora, 1989). 
 9.   Christine Sylvester,  Feminist International Relations: An Unfinished Journey  (Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2002), 8–14. In  Chapter   2 the author provides excellent 
overviews of the life and work of not only Elshtain, but also Cynthia Enloe and J. Ann 
Tickner. 
 10.   Joshua Goldstein,  War and Gender: How Gender Shapes the War System and Vice Versa 
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2001).  
 11.   For examples of feminist thought on security, see Jill Steans,  Gender and International 
Relations (Cambridge: Polity Press, 1998),  Chapter  5 . 
 12.   Whitworth,  Feminism and International Relations . 
 13.   Sandra Whitworth,  Men, Militarism and UN Peacekeeping: A Gendered Analysis 
 (Boulder: Lynne Rienner, 2004).  
 14.   Robert O. Keohane, “International Relations Theory: Contributions of a Feminist 
Standpoint,”  Millennium  18 (1989) 245–53.  
 15.  J. Ann Tickner,  International Studies Quarterly, 41 (1997) 611–32.  

SE LECTED READI N GS 
The Logic of Masculinist Protection: 
Reflections on the Current Security State 
IRIS MARION YOUNG 
OVERVIEW
 Gender matters in understanding the construction of the security state, which 
directly reflects masculinist understandings. Young observes how the “protec-
tion” role assumed by males—frequently characterized as “loving self-sacrifice”— 
effectively subordinates “those in the protected position.” So it is with the “security 
state” that assumes the male-protective role and uses this responsibility to impose 
its will on the citizenry, particularly when faced by threats or dangers:“The logic 
of masculinist protection positions leaders, along with other officials such as sol-
diers and firefighters, as protectors and the rest of us in the subordinate position of 
dependent protected people.” 
 The security state thus has two faces—“one facing outward to defend against 
enemies and the other facing inward to keep those under protection under 
 necessary control.” As a practical matter, of course, the world is full of risks and 
“no state can make any of us completely safe.” Following the ideal of “demo-
cratic citizenship,” she rejects “the hierarchy of protector and protected,” opting 
instead for the “defender” role that both women and men customarily perform. 
Generalized at a global level, democratic citizenship avoids the authoritarian, 
masculinist orientation of the security state in favor of “respect and political 
equality among the world’s peoples where none of us think that we stand in the 
position of paternal authority who knows what is good for the still-developing 
others.”  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  Is Young correct when she argues that the cultural position of men as “protectors” of women 
is really a long-established form of gender subordination?  
 2.  Can we identify among men and with masculinist orientations that are more prone to engage 
in warfare than if women were in these positions?  
 3.  Does democratic citizenship mean rejecting the hierarchy of protector and protected? If so, 
what should replace it?  
From “The Logic of Masculinist Protection: Reflections on the Current Security State” by Iris Marion Young in  Signs: 
Journal of Women in Culture and Society , Vol. 29, No. 1, © 2003 University of Chicago Press. Used by permission of 
University of Chicago Press.
371

372
IRIS MARION YOUNG
These accounts concentrate on international rela-
tions, moreover, and do less to carry the analysis to 
an understanding of the relation of states to citizens 
internally. My interest in this essay is in this dual 
face of security forms, those that wage war outside 
a country and conduct surveillance and detention 
inside. I notice that democratic values of due pro-
cess, separation of powers, free assembly, and hold-
ing powerful actors accountable come into danger 
when leaders mobilize fear and present themselves 
as protectors. . . . 
Masculinism as Protection 
 Several theorists of gender argue that masculinity 
and femininity should not be conceptualized with 
a single logic but rather that ideas and values of 
masculinity and femininity, and their relation to one 
another, take several different and sometimes over-
lapping forms (Brod and Kaufman 1994; Hooper 
2001). In this spirit, I propose to single out a par-
ticular logic of masculinism that I believe has not 
received very much attention in recent feminist the-
ory, that associated with the position of male head 
of household as a protector of the family, and, by 
extension, with masculine leaders and risk takers as 
protectors of a population. Twenty years ago Judith 
Stiehm called attention to the relevance of a logic 
of masculinist protection to analysis of war and 
security issues, and I will draw on some of her ideas 
(Stiehm 1982). Her analysis more presupposes than 
it defines the meaning of a masculine role as protec-
tor, so this is where I will begin. 
 The logic of masculinist protection contrasts 
with a model of masculinity assumed by much femi-
nist theory, of masculinity as self-consciously domi-
native. On the male domination model, masculine 
men wish to master women sexually for the sake 
of their own gratification and to have the pleasures 
of domination. They bond with other men in com-
radely male settings that give them specific benefits 
from which they exclude women, and they harass 
women in order to enforce this exclusion and main-
tain their superiority (MacKinnon 1987; May 1998, 
chaps. 4–6). 
 This image of the selfish, aggressive, dominative 
man who desires sexual capture of women corre-
sponds to much about male-dominated institutions 
and the behavior of many men within them. For 
my purposes in this essay, however, it is important 
to recall another apparently more benign image of 
 Much writing about gender and war aims to explain 
bellicosity or its absence by considering attributes of 
men and women (Goldstein 2001). Theories adopt-
ing this approach attempt to argue that behavioral 
propensities of men link them to violence and those 
of women make them more peaceful and that these 
differences help account for the structure of states 
and international relations. Such attempts to con-
nect violence structures with attributes or behav-
ioral propensities that men or women supposedly 
share, however, rely on unsupportable generaliza-
tions about men and women and often leap too 
quickly from an account of the traits of persons to 
institutional structures and collective action. Here 
I take a different approach. I take gender not as an 
element of explanation but rather one of interpreta-
tion, a tool of what might be called ideology critique 
(Cohn 1993). Viewing issues of war and security 
through a gender lens, I suggest, means seeing how a 
certain logic of gendered meanings and images helps 
organize the way people interpret events and cir-
cumstances, along with the positions and possibili-
ties for action within them, and sometimes provides 
some rationale for action. 
 I argue that an exposition of the gendered logic 
of the masculine role of protector in relation to 
women and children illuminates the meaning and 
effective appeal of a security state that wages war 
abroad and expects obedience and loyalty at home. 
In this patriarchal logic, the role of the mascu-
line protector puts those protected, paradigmati-
cally women and children, in a subordinate position 
of dependence and obedience. To the extent that 
citizens of a democratic state allow their leaders to 
adopt a stance of protectors toward them, these citi-
zens come to occupy a subordinate status like that 
of women in the patriarchal household. We are to 
accept a more authoritarian and paternalistic state 
power, which gets its support partly from the unity a 
threat produces and our gratitude for protection. At 
the same time that it legitimates authoritarian power 
over citizens internally, the logic of masculinist pro-
tection justifies aggressive war outside. I interpret 
Thomas Hobbes as a theorist of authoritarian gov-
ernment grounded in fear of threat and the apparent 
desire for protection such fear generates. 
 Although some feminist theorists of peace and 
security have noticed the appeal to protection as 
justification for war making (Stiehm 1982; Tickner 
1992, 2001), they have not elaborated the gendered 
logic of protection to the extent that I try to do here. 

 
The Logic of Masculinist Protection: Reflections on the Current Security State 
373
bully. The feminine woman, rather, on this con-
struction, adores her protector and happily defers 
to his judgment in return for the promise of security 
that he offers. She looks up to him with gratitude for 
his manliness and admiration for his willingness to 
face the dangers of the world for her sake. That he 
finds her worthy of such risks gives substance to her 
self. It is only fitting that she should minister to his 
needs and obey his dictates. 
 Hobbes is the great theorist of political power 
founded on a need and desire for protection. He de-
picts a state of nature in which people live in small 
families where all believe some of the others envy 
them and desire to enlarge themselves by stealing 
from or conquering them. As a consequence, every-
one in this state of nature must live in a state of fear 
and insecurity, even when not immediately under 
attack. Households must live with the knowledge 
that outsiders might wish to attack them, especially 
if they appear weak and vulnerable, so each must 
construct defensive fortresses and be on watch. It 
is only sensible, moreover, to conduct preemptive 
strikes against those who might wish to attack and 
to try to weaken them. But each knows that the oth-
ers are likely to make defensive raids, which only 
adds to fear and insecurity. In Hobbes’s state of na-
ture some people may be motivated by simple greed 
and desire for conquest and domination. In this 
state of nature everyone has reason to feel insecure, 
however, not because all have these dominative mo-
tives but because he or she is uncertain about who 
does and each person understands his or her own 
vulnerability. 
 In her contemporary classic,  The Sexual 
Contract, Carole Pateman interprets Hobbes along 
the lines of contemporary feminist accounts of 
men as selfish aggressors and sexual predators. In 
the state of nature, roving men take advantage of 
women encumbered by children and force them 
to submit to sexual domination. Sometimes they 
keep the women around as sexual servants; thus 
arises marriage. These strong and aggressive men 
force other men to labor for them at the point of a 
sword. On Pateman’s account, this is how the pa-
triarchal household forms, through overpowering 
force (1988, chap. 3). 
 One can just as well read Hobbes’s ideas through 
the lens of the apparently more benign masculinity 
of protection. Here we can imagine that men and 
women get together out of attraction and feel love 
for the children they beget. On this construction, 
masculinity, one more associated with ideas of chiv-
alry. In this latter image, real men are neither selfish 
nor do they seek to enslave or overpower others for 
the sake of enhancing themselves. Instead, the gal-
lantly masculine man is loving and self-sacrificing, 
especially in relation to women. He faces the world’s 
difficulties and dangers in order to shield women 
from harm and allow them to pursue elevating and 
decorative arts. The role of this courageous, respon-
sible, and virtuous man is that of a protector. 
 The “good” man is one who keeps vigilant 
watch over the safety of his family and readily risks 
himself in the face of threats from the outside in 
order to protect the subordinate members of his 
household. The logic of masculinist protection, 
then, includes the image of the selfish aggressor 
who wishes to invade the lord’s property and sexu-
ally conquer his women. These are the bad men. 
Good men can only appear in their goodness if 
we assume that lurking outside the warm familial 
walls are aggressors who wish to attack them. The 
dominative masculinity in this way constitutes pro-
tective masculinity as its other. The world out there 
is heartless and uncivilized, and the movements and 
motives of the men in it are unpredictable and diffi-
cult to discern. The protector must therefore take all 
precautions against these threats, remain watchful 
and suspicious, and be ready to fight and sacrifice 
for the sake of his loved ones (Elshtain 1987, 1992).
Masculine protection is needed to make a home a 
haven. 
 Central to the logic of masculinist protection 
is the subordinate relation of those in the protected 
position. In return for male protection, the woman 
concedes critical distance from decision-making au-
tonomy. When the household lives under a threat, 
there cannot be divided wills and arguments about 
who will do what, or what is the best course of ac-
tion. The head of the household should decide what 
measures are necessary for the security of the people 
and property, and he gives the orders that they must 
follow if they and their relations are to remain safe. 
As Stiehm puts it: “The protector cannot achieve 
status simply through his accomplishment, then. 
Because he has dependents he is as socially connected 
as one who is dependent. He is expected to provide 
for others. Often a protector tries to get help from 
and also control the lives of those he protects—in 
order to ‘better protect’ them” (1982, 372). 
 Feminine subordination, in this logic, does not 
constitute submission to a violent and overbearing 

374
IRIS MARION YOUNG
legitimation of female inequality and subordination 
by appeal to a need for protection has dwindled. My 
purpose in articulating a logic of masculinist protec-
tion is not to argue that it describes private life today 
but rather to argue that we learn something about 
public life, specifically about the relation of a state 
to its citizens, when state officials successfully mo-
bilize fear. States often justify their expectations of 
obedience and loyalty, as well as their establishment 
of surveillance, police, intimidation, detention, and 
the repression of criticism and dissent, by appeal to 
their role as protectors of citizens. I find in Hobbes 
a clever account of authoritarian rule grounded in 
the assumption of threat and fear as basic to the 
human condition, and thus a need for protection as 
the highest good. 
 Hobbes tells a story about why individuals and 
families find it necessary to constitute a sovereign, 
a single power to rule them all. In response to the 
constant fear under which they live, families may 
join confederations or protection associations. Such 
protection associations, however, no matter how 
large and powerful, do not reduce the reasons for 
fear and insecurity. As long as the possibility exists 
that others will form larger and stronger protec-
tive associations, the nasty state of war persists. As 
long as there is a potential for competition among 
units, and those units hold the means to try to force 
their desires on one another, they must live in fear. 
Without submission to a common power to which 
they yield their separate forces, moreover, members 
of a protective association are liable to turn on one 
another during times when they need to rely on one 
another for protection from others (Hobbes [1668] 
1994, chap. 17, 3, 4; cf. Nozick 1974, chap. 2). So 
Hobbes argues that only a Leviathan can assure 
safety and quell the fear and uncertainty that gener-
ate a spiral of danger. All the petty protectors in the 
state of nature give up their powers of aggression 
and defense, which they turn over to the sovereign. 
They make a covenant with one another to live in 
peace and constitute civil society under the common 
rule of an absolute authority who makes, interprets, 
and enforces the laws of the commonwealth for the 
sake of peace and security of subjects. 
 Readers of Hobbes sometimes find in the image 
of Leviathan a mean and selfish tyrant who sucks 
up the wealth and loyalty of subjects for his own 
aggrandizement. Democratic values and freedoms 
would be much easier to assert and preserve in 
modern politics if the face of authoritarianism were 
families have their origin in a desire for companion-
ship and caring. In the state of nature, however, 
each unit has reason to fear the strangers who might 
rob or kill its members; each then finds it prudent at 
times to engage in preemptive strikes and to adopt 
a threatening stance toward the outsiders. On this 
alternative account, then, patriarchal right emerges 
from male specialization in security. The patriarch’s 
will rules because the patriarch faces the dangers 
outside and needs to organize defenses. Female sub-
ordination, on this account, derives from this posi-
tion of being protected. As I will discuss in the next 
section, however, Hobbes does not think that it is 
a good idea to leave this armed power in the hands 
of individual male heads of household. Instead, the 
sovereign takes over this function. 
 Both Pateman’s story of male domination and 
the one I have reconstructed depict patriarchal gen-
der relations as upholding unequal power. It is im-
portant to attend to the difference, however, I think, 
because in one relation the hierarchial power is 
obvious and in the other it is more masked by virtue 
and love. Michel Foucault (1988, 1994) argues that 
power conceived and enacted as repressive power, 
the desire and ability of an agent to force the other 
to obey his commands, has receded in importance 
in modern institutions. Other forms of power that 
enlist the desire of those over whom it is exercised 
better describe many power relations both histori-
cally and today. One such form of power Foucault 
calls pastoral power. This is the kind of power that 
the priest exercises over his parish and, by exten-
sion, that many experts in the care of individuals 
exercise over those cared for. This power often ap-
pears gentle and benevolent both to its wielders and 
to those under its sway, but it is no less powerful 
for that reason. Masculinist protection is more like 
pastoral power than dominative power that exploits 
those it rules for its own aggrandizement.  
The State as Protector 
and Subordinate Citizenship 
 The gendered logic of masculinist protection has 
some relevance to individual family life even in mod-
ern urban America. Every time a father warns his 
daughter of the dangerous men he fears will ex-
ploit her and forbids her from “running around” 
the city, he inhabits the role of the male protec-
tor. Nevertheless, in everyday family life and other 
sites of interaction between men and women, the 

 
The Logic of Masculinist Protection: Reflections on the Current Security State 
375
own affairs to the sovereign, on condition that all 
others do the same, that gives the sovereign both 
its power and unity of will (Hobbes [1668] 1994, 
chap. 17, 13). Sovereign authority, then, must be 
absolute, and it cannot be divided. The sovereign 
decides what is necessary to protect the common-
wealth and its members. The sovereign decides what 
actions or opinions constitute a danger to peace and 
properly suppresses them. “The condition of man in 
this life shall never be without inconveniences; but 
there happeneth in no commonwealth any greater 
inconvenience, but what proceeds from the subject’s 
disobedience and breach of these covenants from 
which the  commonwealth hath its being, and who-
soever, thinking sovereign power too great, will seek 
to make it less, must subject himself to the power 
that can limit it, that is to say, to a greater” (Hobbes 
[1668] 1994, chap. 20, li, 135). 
 Through the logic of protection the state de-
motes members of a democracy to dependents. 
State officials adopt the stance of masculine pro-
tector, telling us to entrust our lives to them, not 
to question their decisions about what will keep 
us safe. Their protector position puts the citi-
zens and residents who depend on state officials’ 
strength and vigilance in the position of women 
and  children under the charge of the male protec-
tor (cf. Berlant 1997). Most regimes that suspend 
certain rights and legal procedures declare a state 
of emergency. They claim that special measures of 
unity and obedience are required in order to ensure 
protection from unusual danger. Because they take 
the risks and organize the agency of the state, it 
is their prerogative to determine the objectives of 
protective action and their means. In a security 
state there is no room for separate and shared pow-
ers, nor for questioning and criticizing the protec-
tor’s decisions and orders. Good citizenship in a 
security regime consists of cooperative obedience 
for the sake of the safety of all. 
 The authoritarian security paradigm, I have 
argued, takes a form analogous to that of the mas-
culine protector toward his wife and the other mem-
bers of his patriarchal household. In this structure, 
I have suggested, masculine superiority flows not 
from acts of repressive domination but from the 
willingness to risk and sacrifice for the sake of the 
others (Elshtain 1987, 1992). For her part, the sub-
ordinate female in this structure neither resents nor 
resists the man’s dominance, but rather she admires 
it and is grateful for its promise of protection. 
so ugly and easy to recognize. Like the benevolent 
patriarch, however, Leviathan often wears another 
aspect, that of the selfless and wise protector whose 
actions aim to foster and maintain security. What I 
call a security state is one whose rulers subordinate 
citizens to ad hoc surveillance, search, or detention 
and repress criticism of such arbitrary power, jus-
tifying such measures as within the prerogative of 
those authorities whose primary duty is to maintain 
security and protect the people. 
 The security state has an external and an in-
ternal aspect. It constitutes itself in relation to an 
enemy outside, an unpredictable aggressor against 
which the state needs vigilant defense. It organizes 
political and economic capacities around the accu-
mulation of weapons and the mobilization of a mili-
tary to respond to this outsider threat. The state’s 
identity is militaristic, and it engages in military 
action but with the point of view of the defendant 
rather than the aggressor. Even when the security re-
gime makes a first strike, it justifies its move as nec-
essary to preempt the threatening aggressor outside. 
Security states do not justify their wars by appealing 
to sentiments of greed or desire for conquest; they 
appeal to their role as protectors. 
 Internally, the security state must root out 
the enemy within. There is always the danger 
that among us are agents who have an interest in 
disturbing our peace, violating our persons and 
property, and allowing outsiders to invade our 
communities and institutions. To protect the state 
and its citizens, officials must therefore keep a 
careful watch on the people within its borders and 
observe and search them to make sure they do not 
intend evil actions and do not have the means to 
perform them. The security state overhears con-
versations in order to try to discover conspiracies 
of disaster and disruption, and it prevents people 
from forming crowds or walking the streets after 
dark. In a security state there cannot be separation 
of power or critical accountability of official action 
to a public. Nor can a security state allow expres-
sion of dissent. 
 Once again, Hobbes explains why not. It is 
necessary that the sovereign be one. The common-
wealth can secure peace only if it unites the plurality 
of its members into one will. Even if the sovereign 
consists of an assembly of officials and not only 
one ruler, it must be united in will and purpose. It 
is the mutual covenant that each man makes to all 
the others to give over his right of governing his 

376
IRIS MARION YOUNG
crowd offers protection from other gangs to indi-
viduals, their families, and businesses, for a fee. If 
some people decline their services, the gangsters 
teach them a brutal lesson and by example teach 
a lesson to others who might wish to go their own 
way. Thus those who wish to break free of the 
racketeer’s protection discover that they are most in 
danger from him. Insofar as state laws and policies 
assume or reinforce the view that a “good” woman 
should move under the guidance of a man, Peterson 
argued, the state functions as a protection racket. It 
threatens or allows men to threaten those women 
who wish to be independent of the individualized 
protection of husbands or boyfriends. Not only do 
the protectors withhold protection from the women 
who claim autonomy, but they may become attack-
ers (Peterson 1977; cf. Card 1996). 
 The security state functions as a similar protec-
tion racket for those who live under it. As long as 
we accept the state’s protection and pay the price it 
exacts not only in taxpayer dollars but also in reduc-
tion of our freedom and submission to possible sur-
veillance, we are relatively safe. If we try to decline 
these services and seek freedom from the position of 
dependence and obedience in which they put us, we 
become suspect and thereby threatened by the very 
organization that claims to protect us. . . . 
 The logic of masculinist protection positions 
leaders, along with some other officials such as sol-
diers and firefighters, as protectors and the rest of us 
in the subordinate position of dependent protected 
people. Justifications for the suspension of due pro-
cess or partial abrogation of privacy rights and civil 
liberties, as well as condemnation of dissent, rest on 
an implicit deal: that these are necessary trade-offs 
for effective protection. The legitimacy of this deal 
is questionable, however, not only because it may 
not be effective in protecting us but also because it 
cheapens and endangers democracy. Subordinate 
citizenship is not compatible with democracy. The 
relation of leaders to citizens under democratic 
norms ought to be one of equality, not in the sense 
of equal power but in the sense that citizens have an 
equal right and responsibility with leaders to make 
policy judgments, and thus that leaders entrusted 
with special powers should be held accountable to 
citizens. Institutions of due process, public proce-
dure and record, organized opposition and criti-
cism, and public review both enact and recognize 
such equal citizenship. Trading them for protection 
puts us at the mercy of the protectors.  
 Patriotism has an analogous emotive function 
in the constitution of the security state. Under threat 
from outside, all of us, authorities and citizens, 
imagine ourselves a single body enclosed on and 
loving itself. We affirm our oneness with our fellow 
citizens and together affirm our single will behind 
the will of the leaders who have vowed to protect 
us. It is not merely that dissent is dangerous; worse 
yet, it is ungrateful. Subordinate citizenship does 
not merely acquiesce to limitations on freedom in 
exchange for a promise of security; the consent is 
active, as solidarity with the others uniting behind 
and in grateful love of country. . . .  
Is It a Good Deal? 
 I discussed earlier how the logic of masculinist 
protection constitutes the “good” men who pro-
tect their women and children by relation to other 
“bad” men liable to attack. In this logic, virtu-
ous masculinity depends on its constitutive relation 
to the presumption of evil others. Feminists have 
much analyzed a correlate dichotomy between the 
“good” woman and the “bad” woman. Simply put, 
a “good” woman stands under the male protection 
of a father or husband, submits to his judgment 
about what is necessary for her protection, and re-
mains loyal to him. A “bad” woman is one who is 
unlucky enough not to have a man willing to protect 
her, or who refuses such protection by claiming the 
right to run her own life. In either case, the woman 
without a male protector is fair game for any man to 
dominate. There is a bargain implicit in the mascu-
linity protector role: either submit to my governance 
or all the bad men out there are liable to approach 
you, and I will not try to stop them. 
 I have argued so far that the position of citizens 
and residents under a security state entails a similar 
bargain. There are bad people out there who might 
want to attack us. The state pledges to protect us but 
tells us that we should submit to its rule and deci-
sions without questioning, criticizing, or demanding 
independent review of the decisions. Some of the 
measures in place to protect us entail limitation on 
our freedom and especially limitation of the freedom 
of particular classes of people. The deal is this: you 
must trade some liberty and autonomy for the sake 
of the protection we offer. Is it a good deal? 
 Some years ago, Susan Rae Peterson likened the 
state’s relation to women under a system of male 
domination to a protection racket. The gangland 

 
The Logic of Masculinist Protection: Reflections on the Current Security State 
377
them in the periphery. Providing services for Indian 
women and other oppressed women in the empire 
also offered opportunities for the employment of 
middle-class professional women (Burton 1994). 
 Some contemporary feminists have worried that 
Western feminists today have had some tendency to 
express and act in similar ways in relation to non-
Western women. In a well-known essay, Chandra 
Mohanty, for example, claims that Western femi-
nists too often use an objectified general category of 
third-world women, who are represented as passive 
and victimized by their unenlightened cultures and 
political regimes (1991). Uma Narayan claims that 
much feminist discussion of the situation of women 
in Asian and African societies, or women in Asian 
immigrant communities in Western societies, “repli-
cates problematic aspects of Western representations 
of Third World nations and communities, aspects 
that have their roots in the history of colonization” 
(1997, 43). 
 Assuming that these criticisms of some of the 
discourse, attitudes, and actions of Western feminists 
have some validity, the stance they identify helps ac-
count for the ease with which feminist rhetoric can 
be taken up by today’s imperialist power and used 
for its own ends. It also helps account for the support 
of some feminists for the war against Afghanistan. 
Sometimes feminists may identify with the stance of 
the masculine protector in relation to vulnerable and 
victimized women. The protector-protected rela-
tion is no more egalitarian, however, when between 
women than between men and women. . . . 
 Democratic citizenship should first involve ad-
mitting that no state can make any of us completely 
safe and that leaders who promise that are them-
selves suspect. The world is full of risks. Prudence 
dictates that we assess risks, get information about 
their sources, and try to minimize them, and we 
rightly expect our government to do much of this 
for us. In a democracy citizens should not have to 
trade this public responsibility for submission to 
surveillance, arbitrary decisions, and the stifling of 
criticism. 
 In making this claim I am extending recent 
feminist arguments against a model of citizenship 
that requires each citizen to be independent and 
self-sufficient in order to be equal and fully autono-
mous. Feminist theorists of care and welfare have 
argued that the rights and dignity of individuals 
should  not be diminished just because they need 
help and support in order to carry out their chosen 
War and Feminism 
 The logic of masculinist protection, I have argued, 
helps account for the rationale leaders give for deep-
ening a security state and its acceptance by those 
living under their rule. There are two faces to the 
security state, one facing outward to defend against 
enemies and the other facing inward to keep those 
under protection under necessary control. . . . 
 The stance of the male protector, I have argued, 
is one of loving self-sacrifice, with those in the femi-
nine position as the objects of love and guardian-
ship. Chivalrous forms of masculinism express and 
enact concern for the well-being of women, but they 
do so within a structure of superiority and subordi-
nation. The male protector confronts evil aggressors 
in the name of the right and the good, while those 
under his protection submit to his order and serve 
as handmaids to his efforts. Colonialist ideologies 
have often expressed a similar logic. The knights 
of civilization aim to bring enlightened understand-
ing to the further regions of the world still living in 
cruel and irrational traditions that keep them from 
developing the economic and political structures 
that will bring them a good life. The suppression of 
women in these societies is a symptom of such back-
wardness. Troops will be needed to bring order and 
guard fledgling institutions, and foreign aid work-
ers to feed, cure, and educate, but all this is only 
a period of tutelage that will end when the subject 
people demonstrate their ability to gain their own 
livelihood and run their own affairs. Many people 
living in Asian, African, and Latin American societ-
ies believe that not only U.S. military hegemony but 
also international trade and financial institutions, 
as well as many Western-based nongovernmental 
development agencies, position them in this way as 
feminized or infantilized women and children under 
the protection and guidance of the wise and active 
father. 
 In its rhetoric and practice, according to some 
scholars, the British feminist movement of the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries aligned 
itself with the universal humanitarian civilizing 
mission invoked as the justification for the British 
Empire. Feminists endorsed male imperial leaders’ 
assessment of the status of women in other nations 
as a measure of their level of moral development. 
Such interest in the status of women was useful 
to feminists in pointing out the hypocrisy of deny-
ing women’s rights in the center as one fought for 

378
IRIS MARION YOUNG
a democratic relationship, however, the policeman 
protector comes under the collective authority of the 
people whose neighborhood he patrols. Democratic 
citizenship at a global level, then, would constitute a 
relationship of respect and political equality among 
the world’s peoples where none of us think that we 
stand in the position of the paternal authority who 
knows what is good for the still-developing oth-
ers. To the extent that global law enforcement is 
necessary, it is only legitimate if the world’s peoples 
together have formulated the rules and actions of 
such enforcement (cf. Archibugi and Young 2002).  
References
 Archibugi, Daniele, and Iris Marion Young. 2002. “Envi-
sioning a Global Rule of Law.”  Dissent 49 (Spring): 
27–37. 
 Berlant, Lauren. 1997. “The Theory of Infantile Citizen-
ship.” In her  The Queen of America Goes to  Washington 
City: Essays on Sex and Citizenship, 25–54. Durham, 
N.C.: Duke University Press. 
 Brod, Harry, and Michael Kaufman, eds. 1994.  Theoriz-
ing Masculinities. London: Sage. 
 Burton, Antoinette. 1994.  Burdens of History: British Fem-
inists, Indian Women, and Imperial Culture, 1865–
1915. Chapel Hill: University of North  Carolina Press. 
 Card, Claudia. 1996. “Rape Terrorism.” In her  The Un-
natural Lottery: Character and Moral Luck , 97–117. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 
 Cohn, Carol. 1993. “Wars, Wimps, and Women: Talking 
Gender and Thinking War.” In  Gendering War Talk , 
ed. Miriam Cooke and Angela Woollacott, 227–48. 
Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press. 
 Elshtain, Jean Bethke. 1987.  Women and War. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
 ———. 1992. “Sovereignty, Identity, Sacrifice.” In  Gen-
dered States: Feminist (Re)visions of International 
Relations Theory, ed. V. Spike Peterson, 141–54. 
Boulder, Colo.: Lynne Rienner. 
 Firestone, David. 2002. “Are You Safer Today Than a Year 
Ago?” New York Times, Sunday, November 17, sec. 4, 1. 
 Foucault, Michel. 1988. “Technologies of the Self.” In 
 Technologies of the Self: A Seminar with Michel 
 Foucault, ed. Luther Martin, Huck Guttman, and 
Patricia Hutton, 19–49. Amherst: University of Mas-
sachusetts Press. 
 ———. 1994. “ Omnes et Singulatim: Toward a Critique 
of Political Reason.” In  The Essential Works of Fou-
cault, vol. 3,  Power, ed. James D. Faubion, 298–325. 
New York: New Press. 
 Goldstein, Joshua S. 2001.  War and Gender: How Gender 
Shapes the War System and Vice Versa. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 
projects (Tronto 1994; Kittay 1999). Persons who 
need care or other forms of social support ought not 
to be forced into a position of subordination and 
obedience in relation to those who provide care and 
support; not only should they retain the rights of full 
citizens to choose their own way of life and hold au-
thorities accountable but also they ought to be able 
to criticize the way in which support comes to them 
(Sevenhuijsen 1998; Hirschmann 2002, chap.  5; 
Young 2003). This feminist argument rejects the 
assumption behind a notion of self-sufficient citi-
zenship that a need for social support or care is 
more exceptional than normal. On the contrary, 
the well-being of all persons can be enhanced by the 
care and support of others, and in modern societies 
some of this generalized care and support ought to 
be organized and guaranteed through state institu-
tions. The organization of reasonable measures to 
protect people from harm and to make people con-
fident that they can move and act relatively safely is 
another form of social support. Citizens should not 
have to trade their liberty of movement or right to 
protest and hold leaders accountable in return for 
such security. 
 Democratic citizenship thus means ultimately 
rejecting the hierarchy of protector and protected. 
In the article I cited above, Stiehm argues that rejec-
tion of this hierarchy implies installing a position of 
defender in place of both that of the protector and 
the protected. A society of defenders is “a society 
composed of citizens equally liable to experience 
violence and equally responsible for exercising so-
ciety’s violence” (1982, 374). Modern democracies, 
including U.S. democracy, are founded partly on 
the principle that citizens should be able to defend 
themselves if they are also to defend the republic 
from tyranny. In the twenty-first century, in a world 
of organized and less organized military institutions 
and weapons capable of unimaginable destruction, 
it is hard to know what it might mean for world citi-
zens to exercise collective self-defense. It certainly 
does not mean that every individual should amass 
his or her own weapons cache. Nor does it mean 
whole groups and nations engaging in arms races. 
The distinction between defender and protector in-
vokes an ideal of equality in the work of defense, 
and today this may have at least as much to do with 
political processes that limit weapons and their use 
as with wielding arms. 
 The United States claims to use its arms to do 
this, much as a policeman does in domestic life. In 

 
The Logic of Masculinist Protection: Reflections on the Current Security State 
379
 American Government in a Changed World: The 
 Effects of September 11, 2001, ed. Dennis L. Dresang 
et al., 171–91. New York: Longman. 
 Pateman, Carole. 1988.  The Sexual Contract . Stanford, 
Calif.: Stanford University Press. 
 Peterson, Susan Rae. 1977. “Coercion and Rape: The 
State as a Male Protection Racket.” In  Feminism and 
Philosophy, ed. Mary Vetterling-Braggin, Frederick 
A. Elliston, and Jane English, 360–71. Totowa, N.J.: 
Littlefield Adams. 
 Sevenhuijsen, Selma. 1998.  Citizenship and the Ethics of 
Care: Feminist Considerations on Justice, Morality, 
and Politics . New York: Routledge. 
 Stiehm, Judith. 1982. “The Protected, the Protector, the 
Defender.”  Women’s Studies International Forum 
5(3/4): 367–76. 
 Tickner, J. Ann. 1992.  Gender in International Relations: 
Feminist Perspectives on Achieving Global Security 
New York: Columbia University Press. 
 ———. 2001.  Gendering World Politics: Issues and 
 Approaches in the Post–Cold War Era . New York: 
Columbia University Press. 
 ———. 2002. “Feminist Perspectives on 9/11.”  Interna-
tional Studies Perspectives 3(4): 333–50. 
 Tronto, Joan. 1994.  Moral Boundaries: A Political Argu-
ment for an Ethic of Care . New York: Routledge. 
 Young, Iris Marion. 2003. “Autonomy, Welfare Reform, 
and Meaningful Work.” In  The Subject of Care: Femi-
nist Perspectives on Dependency, ed. Eva Feder Kittay 
and Ellen K. Feder, 40–60. Lantham, Md.: Rowman & 
Littlefield.  
 Hirschmann, Nancy J. 2002.  The Subject of Liberty: To-
ward a Feminist Theory of Freedom. Princeton, N.J.: 
Princeton University Press. 
 Hobbes, Thomas. (1668) 1994.  Leviathan. Indianapolis: 
Hackett. 
 Hooper, Charlotte. 2001.  Manly States: Masculinities, 
International Relations, and Gender Politics. New 
York: Columbia University Press. 
 Kittay, Eva Feder. 1999.  Love’s Labor: Essays on Women, 
Equality, and Dependency. New York: Routledge. 
 MacKinnon, Catharine. 1987.  Feminism Unmodified: 
Discourses on Life and Law. Cambridge, Mass.: 
 Harvard University Press. 
 May, Larry. 1998. Masculinity and Morality . Ithaca, N.Y.: 
Cornell University Press. 
 Mobanty, Chandra Talpade. 1991. “Under Western 
Eyes: Feminist Scholarship and Colonial Discourse.” 
In  Third World Women and the Politics of Femi-
nism,  ed. Chandra Talpade Mohanty, Ann Russo, 
and Lourdes Torres, 51–80. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press. 
 Narayan, Uma. 1997. “Restoring History and the Politics 
of ‘Third World Traditions’: Contesting the Colo-
nialist Stance and Contemporary Contradictions of 
 Sati .” In her  Dislocating Cultures: Identities, Tradi-
tions, and Third World Feminism, 41–80. New York: 
Routledge. 
 Nozick, Robert. 1974.  Anarchy, State, and Utopia . New 
York: Basic Books. 
 O’Connor, Karen. 2002. “For Better or for Worse? Women 
and Women’s Rights in the Post 9/11 Climate.” In 

Why Women Can’t Rule the World: 
International Politics According to 
Francis Fukuyama 
J. ANN TICKNER 
OVERVIEW
 A prominent feminist scholar and former president of the International Studies 
Association, the author takes on what she sees as Francis Fukuyama’s misrep-
resentations about feminism and the feminist standpoint. In the process she 
provides feminist understandings about how and why gender matters not only 
to theorizing about IR, but also about the challenges women face globally. 
“IR feminists” want to rid the field of “idealistic associations of women with 
peace, idealism, and impracticality,” particularly since such characterizations 
effectively “disempower women and keep them in their place, which is out of 
the ‘real world’ of international politics.” What feminists want is for “women 
and men [to] participate in reducing damaging and unequal hierarchical struc-
tures, such as gender and race,” indeed, “constructed gender hierarchies” that 
not only “result in the devaluation of women’s lives and their economic and 
social contributions to society,” but also “contribute to conflict, inequality and 
oppression.”  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  To what extent do feminist perspectives also reflect understandings on gender held by con-
structivists, critical theorists, and postmodernists?  
 2.  Is Tickner’s assault on Francis Fukuyama’s claims legitimate? Does she effectively refute his 
position as she represents it?  
 3.  How and where do we draw the line between gender as an interpretive lens that highlights 
differences between masculinist and feminist understandings and gender-based stereotypes 
that create more confusion than clarity?  
From “Why Women Can’t Rule the World: International Politics According to Francis Fukuyama,” by J. Ann Tickner from 
 International Studies Review Vol. 1, No. 3. Copyright © 1999. Reprinted with permission of Blackwell Publishing Ltd.
 Feminist perspectives on international relations have 
proliferated in the last ten years, yet they remain 
marginal to the discipline as a whole, and there 
has been little engagement between feminists and 
international relations (IR) scholars. As I have sug-
gested elsewhere, I believe this is largely due to mis-
understandings about feminist IR scholarship that 
are reflected in questions that feminists frequently 
380

 
Why Women Can’t Rule the World: International Politics According to Francis Fukuyama 
381
may engender, can be found in Francis Fukuyama’s 
recent article, “Women and the Evolution of World 
Politics,” in  Foreign Affairs, as well as in the com-
mentaries on it in the subsequent issue.  5  Unlike the 
type of criticism mentioned above that, often mis-
takenly, accuses feminists of claiming the morally 
superior high ground for women, Fukuyama boldly 
asserts that indeed women  are more peaceful than 
men. But, as has so often been the case, Fukuyama 
deploys his argument to mount a strong defense for 
keeping men in charge. Not only does this type of 
reasoning feed into more strident forms of backlash 
against women in international politics, but it also 
moves our attention further away from more im-
portant issues. Hypothesizing about the merits or 
disadvantages of women in charge, or debating the 
relative aggressiveness of men and women, does lit-
tle to address the realities of a variety of oppressions 
faced by women worldwide. Fukuyama’s views not 
only deflect from important feminist agendas, but 
they also support some disturbing trends in IR more 
generally, which are reinforcing polarized views of 
the world in terms of civilization clashes and zones 
of peace versus zones of turmoil.  6  
 Foreign Affairs chose to publish Fukuyama’s ar-
ticle under the cover title (in red) “What If Women 
Ran the World?” This title was surely designed to 
provoke (and perhaps frighten) its readers, most 
of whom are probably unfamiliar with IR feminist 
scholarship. More problematically, it is likely that 
this will be the only article that mentions feminist 
IR scholarship to which readers of  Foreign Affairs 
will be exposed.  7  Responses in the subsequent issue 
of  Foreign Affairs were, for the most part, quite 
hostile to Fukuyama’s position, and asked what 
was wrong with his argument. Katha Pollitt asserts, 
“just about everything.”  8  Nevertheless, by focusing 
on the need to rebut Fukuyama’s sociobiological 
and over-generalized portrayal of warlike men and 
peaceful women, these responses, like the article 
itself, refocus conversations in unproductive ways 
that do little to clarify many of the issues with which 
IR feminists are concerned. 
 Fukuyama’s article is not overtly antifeminist. 
Indeed, he cites what he calls “a vigorous femi-
nist subdiscipline within the field of international 
relations” (p. 32) quite favorably, albeit chastis-
ing postmodernism for its commitment to social 
constructionism and radical feminism for its mis-
guided utopianism (p. 40).  9  Curiously, in light of 
his misgivings about utopianism, Fukuyama offers 
are asked when presenting their work to IR au-
diences.  1  Many of these misunderstandings reflect 
considerable ontological and epistemological differ-
ences, which are particularly acute with respect to 
mainstream IR approaches. In other words, femi-
nists and IR scholars frequently talk about different 
worlds and use different methodologies to under-
stand them.  2  
 A different kind of misunderstanding, also prev-
alent, arises from the fact that talking about gender 
involves issues of personal identity that can be very 
threatening, even in academic discourse. Feminists 
are frequently challenged by their critics for seem-
ing to imply (even if it is not their intention) that 
women are somehow “better” than men. In IR, this 
often comes down to accusations that feminists are 
implying that women are more peaceful than men 
or that a world run by women would be less violent 
and morally superior. Critics will support their chal-
lenges by reference to female policymakers, such as 
Margaret Thatcher, Golda Meir, or Indira Gandhi, 
who, they claim, behaved exactly like men.  3  
 Most IR feminists would deny the assertion 
that women are morally superior to men. Indeed, 
many of them have claimed that the association of 
women with peace and moral superiority has a long 
history of keeping women out of power, going back 
to the debates about the merits of female suffrage 
in the early part of the century. The association of 
women with peace can play into unfortunate gender 
stereotypes that characterize men as active, women 
as passive; men as agents, women as victims; men as 
rational, women as emotional. Not only are these 
stereotypes damaging to women, particularly to 
their credibility as actors in matters of international 
politics and national security, but they are also dam-
aging to peace. 
 As a concept, peace will remain a “soft” is-
sue, utopian and unrealistic, as long as it is asso-
ciated with femininity and passivity.  4  This entire 
debate about aggressive men and peaceful women 
frequently comes up when issues about women and 
world politics are on the table. Moreover, it detracts 
from what feminists consider to be more pressing 
agendas, such as striving to uncover and understand 
the disadvantaged socioeconomic position of many 
of the world’s women and why women are so poorly 
represented among the world’s policymakers. 
 A current version using the claim that women 
are more peaceful than men to women’s disadvan-
tage, and the types of agenda-deflecting debates it 

382
J. ANN TICKNER
world would have to include socially constructed 
feminized men, this hypothetical picture seems 
like a considerable leap from reality. Even though 
Fukuyama’s portrait of this feminized world is 
seemingly sympathetic, I believe that his message 
is, in fact, deeply conservative—offering one more 
iteration of the well-established argument that a 
“realistic” view of international politics demands 
that “real” men remain in charge. Accepting its 
premises actually silences, rather than promotes, 
feminist agendas and women’s equality. Although 
many of his claims can be successfully challenged 
on empirical grounds, as his critics demonstrated by 
their rebuttals in  Foreign Affairs, his views feed into 
a conservative agenda that serves not to put women 
in control, but to keep them out of positions of 
power. 
 Why is this the case? Because Fukuyama tells us 
that no matter how attractive it may seem, we should 
not move further toward this feminized world; in-
stead, we must keep things the way they are—with 
strong men at the helm. He argues that women are 
not able to deal with today’s threats that come from 
violent leaders, such as Slobodan Milosevic, Saddam 
Hussein, and Mobutu Sese Seko. On the horizon are 
threats from states in the Middle East, Africa, and 
South Asia, led by aggressive younger men unsocial-
ized in the ways of mature democracies. Fukuyama 
claims that people in agricultural societies, presum-
ably outside the zone of peace, with their surpluses 
of young, hotheaded men, are less concerned with 
military casualties and therefore more prone to pick 
fights (p. 38), an assertion that appears to have dis-
turbingly racist overtones. 
 Closer to home, citing the necessity for combat 
readiness in the face of these dangers, Fukuyama, 
by advocating separation of men and women in 
single-sex military units, effectively advises against 
women in combat positions. Although he does not 
deny that women could do as well in combat as men 
(which was indeed demonstrated in the Gulf War), 
he claims that their presence destroys combat units’ 
cohesion, which he believes is built on male bond-
ing (p. 37). This “false necessity,” together with the 
need to channel what he calls the biologically rooted 
male desire to dominate into successful competition 
in universities, corporations, and political arenas, 
seems to imply fewer rather than more opportunities 
for women in both military and civilian life.  10  
 And what of men’s biological or naturally ag-
gressive tendencies?  11  As feminists have pointed out, 
a seemingly optimistic, even radical vision of a dif-
ferent, relatively peaceful, “feminized” world (in the 
West at least), where men’s aggressive animal in-
stincts have been tamed and channeled into produc-
tive activities associated with liberal democracy and 
capitalism. Fukuyama supports his central claim—
that men have “naturally” aggressive instincts—
by comparing their behavior to the aggressive and 
even Machiavellian behavior of male chimpanzees 
in Gombe National Park in Tanzania. This type of 
aggression, which, Fukuyama argues, is atypical of 
most intraspecies behavior, is as true of male hu-
mans as it is of their nearest evolutionary relatives, 
male chimpanzees. 
 Fukuyama notes that, as with chimps, violence 
in all types of human societies has been perpetrated 
largely by men. He develops this claim by document-
ing recent discoveries in the life sciences and evolu-
tionary psychology that find profound differences 
between the sexes, especially in areas of violence and 
aggression. Whereas he is careful to say that culture 
also shapes human behavior, Fukuyama believes 
that this line of thinking will replace social con-
structionist views of gender differences that came 
about as a reaction to the misuse of Darwinism to 
reinforce racial superiority and class stratification. 
In other words, these findings have profound impli-
cations for all the social sciences. 
 Fukuyama also notes that feminists prefer to 
see such behavior as a product of patriarchal cul-
ture rather than rooted in human biology because 
biologically rooted behavior is harder to change; 
therefore, they will not be happy with his claims. 
Fukuyama goes on to hypothesize about a feminized 
world that would follow different rules. He sees 
the realization of such a world as a distinct pos-
sibility, at least in the West, as women gain more 
political power. What he calls the “feminization” 
of world politics has been taking place gradually as 
women have won the right to vote. The right to vote, 
along with a relative increase in numbers of elderly 
women, has resulted in a gender gap with respect to 
voting on issues of foreign policy and national secu-
rity, with women being less supportive of national 
defense spending and involvement in war than men. 
In spite of these trends, Fukuyama predicts that men 
will continue to play an important role, particularly 
in international politics where toughness and ag-
gression are still required. 
 Given the difficulties of changing genetically 
programmed behavior and presuming that this new 

 
Why Women Can’t Rule the World: International Politics According to Francis Fukuyama 
383
(who must have overcome their aggressive genes) in 
the ruling coalitions of his feminized world, such 
a world is unappealing and sure to threaten, or 
perhaps amuse, those presently in charge, as well 
as reinforce culturally defined gender stereotypes 
about international politics and women. 
 What IR feminists  have argued for is getting 
rid of idealistic associations of women with peace. 
Associations of women with peace, idealism, and 
impracticality have long served to disempower 
women and keep them in their place, which is out 
of the “real world” of international politics. 
 When Fukuyama claims that sociobiology was 
misused at the turn of the century, with respect to 
race and ethnicity, he, too, is misusing it. He does 
this under the guise of evidence about profound 
genetically rooted differences between the sexes by 
inferring that these differences predetermine men’s 
and women’s different (and unequal) roles with re-
spect to contemporary international politics.  15  Of 
course, feminists want women to participate more 
fully in global politics and contribute to making the 
world a less dangerous place. But, rather than killing 
each other, haven’t many men been working toward 
this goal also? 
 Wherever men’s genes may have pointed, they 
founded the discipline of international relations by 
trying to understand why states go to war and try-
ing to devise institutions to diminish its likelihood 
in the future. Preferred futures are not feminized, 
but ones in which women  and men participate in 
reducing damaging and unequal hierarchical social 
structures, such as gender and race. 
 Many feminists would agree that biology may 
indeed be a contributing factor to certain aggressive 
behaviors. Yet understanding and working to lessen 
various insecurities that women face can only be 
achieved if we acknowledge a need for diminishing 
socially constructed gender hierarchies that result 
in the devaluation of women’s lives and their eco-
nomic and social contributions to society. In spite 
of Fukuyama’s assertion that social constructionism 
is being effectively challenged by new findings in 
evolutionary biology, the fact that the majority of 
subsistence farmers in Africa are women, while men 
are more frequently found in the more prosperous 
cash crop sector, can hardly be explained by biology 
alone. Culturally assigned roles, which have little 
to do with biology, diminish women’s socioeco-
nomic position in most societies. Speculating about 
women in charge, whether their boxing gloves are 
one of the main reasons why today’s military is re-
cruiting women is because not enough “aggressive” 
men are joining up. Much of basic training involves 
overcoming men’s reluctance to kill. Advances in 
military technology have depersonalized warfare so 
that the problems associated with the long-standing 
reluctance of men in combat to fire their weapons 
have been lessened.  12  Violence inside states, which 
is more prevalent in the United States than in many 
states outside the western democratic “zone of 
peace,” about which Fukuyama speaks so favor-
ably, stems at least as much from lack of economic 
opportunities as it does from innate male aggres-
sion.  13  Tenure in universities and corporate success 
are not just about satisfying the need for social 
recognition of alpha males; they are much-needed 
guarantees of income and job security, important to 
both men  and women. 
 If we were to accept that men do have aggres-
sive tendencies, the leap from aggressive men to ag-
gressive states is problematic, as many international 
relations scholars have pointed out.  14  Do men’s 
aggressive tendencies really get channeled into in-
ternational war, thus leading to the possibility of 
domestic peace between wars? The high homicide 
rate in the United States makes one skeptical of this 
possibility, whereas Switzerland, a country with 
one of the lowest homicide rates in the world, 
is rarely an international aggressor. If most men, 
particularly young men, have violent tendencies, as 
Fukuyama claims, why is it that some states are so 
much more peaceful than others? Statesmen do not 
choose war lightly. Nor is war generally decided 
at the ballot box where, according to Fukuyama, 
significant numbers of women are voting for peace. 
It has often been older men who send young men 
off to war to fight for what they see as legitimate 
national interests. Would American policymakers 
in the 1960s or today’s Vietnam veterans be satis-
fied with the explanation that America fought in 
Vietnam as an outlet for the aggressive tendencies 
of its young men? 
 Now to turn to some of the real feminist agen-
das for international politics—agendas that are 
completely silenced by Fukuyama’s article. I know 
of no international relations feminists who hypoth-
esize about or advocate women running the world, 
as the cover title of Fukuyama’s article and the 
turn-of-the-century illustration depicting a woman 
in boxing gloves “flooring her beau” (p. 29) suggest. 
Although Fukuyama includes socially feminized men 

384
J. ANN TICKNER
the political participation of women tenuous at best. 
A more fruitful line of investigation is one that is 
illustrated by a study outlining the results of survey 
data collected in several Middle Eastern countries, 
democratic and otherwise. The data show that in 
the case of the Arab-Israeli dispute, women are not 
less militaristic than men, but both women and men 
who are more supportive of gender equality are also 
more favorably disposed to compromise.  21  A cluster 
of such attitudes could be the building blocks not for 
a more feminized world, whatever that may mean, 
but for a more just and peaceful world in which 
gender and other social hierarchies of domination, 
which have resulted in the subordination of women, 
are diminished. 
 The debate surrounding Fukuyama’s article ap-
pears to have stimulated a race to demonstrate who 
can be more aggressive than whom. Marshaling 
evidence of women’s participation in wars, with 
pictures of female soldiers on parade and document-
ing women’s violence in matters of abuse of children 
and servants, Ehrenreich and Pollitt assure us that 
women can be every bit as aggressive as men.  22  
 Are these the debates we should be having? 
Surely they deflect from the real issues with which in-
ternational relations scholars are struggling—namely 
to try to understand the roots of war and what can 
be done to prevent it. Investigating the enormous 
variations in levels of conflict across history and so-
cieties is surely a more promising place to begin than 
in deterministic, biologically rooted theories about 
the aggressive nature of men. International relations 
feminists have added a new and important dimen-
sion to these investigations. 
 Rather than joining debates about aggressive 
men and peaceful women, IR feminists are striv-
ing to better understand unequal social hierarchies, 
including gender hierarchies, which contribute to 
conflict, inequality, and oppression. Evidence sug-
gests that war is more likely in societies with greater 
gender inequality. Intentionally or not, Fukuyama’s 
musings about women running the world deflect 
attention away from this more pressing agenda of 
working toward a world with increased gender 
equality. Such a world could, I believe, be a less con-
flictual one for both women and men. Let us turn 
our attention to more productive conversations be-
tween feminist and international relations scholars 
about the evolution of world politics, conversations 
that strive to better understand how such a world 
could be realized. 
on or off, seems far removed from the lived reality 
of the vast majority of the world’s women. Katha 
Pollitt states that even in the United States, where 
Fukuyama claims that women are fast gaining po-
litical power, women constitute only 12 percent of 
Congress and, after eighty years of female suffrage, 
have not even won the right to paid maternity leave 
or affordable day care.  16  Running foreign policy, 
she concludes, seems like a fantasy.  17  Nevertheless, 
by focusing on these unlikely futures, Fukuyama ef-
fectively silences more pressing agendas and deflects 
investigations away from trying to understand why 
the world’s women are so often disempowered and 
even oppressed. 
 Of course, IR feminists are concerned with is-
sues of war and peace. But rather than debating 
whether men are aggressive and women peaceful, 
they are asking new questions about conflict, as well 
as trying to expand conventional agendas. Feminist 
agendas include human rights issues such as rape in 
war, military prostitution, refugees (the majority of 
whom are women and children), and more gener-
ally issues about civilian casualties.  18  Even though 
civilians now account for well over 80 percent of 
wartime casualties, understanding the reasons for 
and consequences of these disturbing trends has 
not been at the center of international relations 
investigations. Feminists have also joined the de-
bate about whether security should be defined more 
broadly to include issues of structural and ecological 
violence. With this question in mind, feminists are 
investigating the often negative effects of structural 
adjustment and economic globalization on women, 
as well as problems associated with the degradation 
of the environment.  19  All of these issues seem closer 
to women’s lived realities than debates about their 
likelihood of running the world. 
 By asserting that developed democracies tend to 
be more feminized than authoritarian states, and by 
linking this to the popular claim about the relative 
peacefulness of democracies, Fukuyama obscures 
deeper truths and hides more progressive practical 
possibilities. 
 Kal Holsti has suggested that a better explana-
tion for “zones of peace,” which actually extend 
well beyond Western democracies, is the diminished 
likelihood of war between strong states with gov-
ernments seen as legitimate by their populations.  20  
There are very few states where women have reached 
a critical mass in political decisionmaking, which 
makes any link between the democratic peace and 

 
Why Women Can’t Rule the World: International Politics According to Francis Fukuyama 
385
naturally aggressive tendencies are also questionable. He 
contends that the Gombe chimps became aggressive only 
after human-induced changes in their feeding patterns.  
 12.   While there has been evidence documenting soldiers’ 
reluctance to kill, I realize this is a controversial argu-
ment. For further discussion of this issue, including po-
sitions that refute this hypothesis, see Joanna Bourke, 
 An Intimate History of Killing: Face to Face Killing in 
Twentieth Century Warfare (London: Granta Books, 
1999).  
 13.   The recent dramatic drop in the crime rate in the 
United States seems to support this position.  
 14.   For examples, see Kenneth Waltz,  Theory of 
International Politics (Reading, Mass.: Addison Wesley, 
1979), Chap. 2; and Jane Jaquette, “States Make War,” 
 Foreign Affairs 78, 1 (1999), 128–129.  
 15.   The popularity of sociobiological arguments about 
sex differences is evidenced by a cover story in  Time, 
March 8, 1999, 57, by Barbara Ehrenreich entitled “The 
Real Truth about the Female.” Ehrenreich’s position is 
much more sympathetic to women—she cites feminist 
scholars who are doing serious work in this area—but it is 
indicative of a trend toward emphasizing the sociobiologi-
cal roots of human behavior and its appeal to wider audi-
ences. Many feminists would probably argue that biology 
and culture are mutually constitutive of each other.  
 16.   Pollitt, “Father Knows Best,” 125.  
 17.   Katie Grant points out that if, as Fukuyama claims, 
men can become feminized, we do not necessarily need 
women to run things, even in this new gentler world. 
Grant, “Why We Need Men.”  
 18.   Ruth Seifert, “The Second Front: The Logic of Sexual 
Violence in Wars,”  Women’s Studies International Forum 
19, 1–2 (1996), 35–43; Cynthia Enloe,  Bananas, Beaches, 
and Bases: Making Feminist Sense of International 
Politics (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1990); 
Katharine Moon,  Sex Among Allies: Military Prostitution 
in US-Korean Relations (New York: Columbia University 
Press, 1997); and Susan Forbes Martin,  Refugee Women 
(London: Zed Books, 1992).  
 19.   Eleonore Kofman and Gillian Youngs, eds., 
 Globalization: Theory and Practice (London: Pinter, 
1996); Maria Mies and Vandana Shiva,  Ecofeminism 
(London: Zed Books, 1993); and Rosi Braidotti et al., 
 Women, the Environment and Sustainable Development: 
Towards a Theoretical Synthesis (London: Zed Books, 
1994).  
 20.   Kalevi Holsti,  The State, War, and the State of War 
(Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press, 1996).  
 21.   Mark Tessler and Ina Warriner, “Gender, Feminism, 
and Attitudes Toward International Conflict: Exploring 
Relationships with Survey Data from the Middle East,” 
 World Politics  49, 2 (1997), 250–281.  
 22.   Barbara Ehrenreich, “Men Hate War Too,”  Foreign 
Affairs 78, 1 (1999), 120–121; and Katha Pollitt, “Father 
Knows Best,” 123.  
Notes
 1.   J. Ann Tickner, “You Just Don’t Understand: 
Troubled Engagements Between Feminists and IR 
Theorists,”  International Studies Quarterly 41, 4 (1997), 
611–632. 
 2.   The symposium in  International Studies Quarterly 
42, 1 (1998), 193–209 is an exception to the lack of en-
gagement. It also demonstrates some of the conversational 
difficulties to which I refer.  
 3.   Tickner, “You Just Don’t Understand,” 613.  
 4.   For elaboration on this claim, see Jean B. Elshtain, 
“The Problem with Peace,” in Jean Elshtain and Sheila 
Tobias, eds.,  Women, Militarism and War (Savage, Md.: 
Rowman and Littlefield, 1990), 255–266; and Christine 
Sylvester, “Some Dangers in Merging Feminist and Peace 
Projects,”  Alternatives 12, No. 4 (1987), 493–509.  
 5.   Francis Fukuyama, “Women and the Evolution of 
World Politics,”  Foreign Affairs 77, 5 (1998), 24–40; and 
Barbara Ehrenreich, Katha Pollitt, et al., “Fukuyama’s 
Follies: So What If Women Ran the World?”  Foreign 
Affairs 78, 1 (1999), 118–129.  
 6.   See, for example, Samuel Huntington,  The Clash of 
Civilizations and the Remaking of World Order (New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1996); and Max Singer and 
Aaron Wildavsky,  The Real World Order: Zones of 
Peace, Zones of Turmoil (Chatham, N.J.: Chatham House 
Publishers, 1993). Fukuyama also draws on the democratic 
peace argument to support his global polarization view. 
For further discussion of this point, see Miriam Fendius 
Elman, “The Never-Ending Story: Democracy and Peace,” 
V.1, No. 3 (1999)  International Studies Review .  
 7.   Indeed, Fukuyama’s article has received much world-
wide attention in the press, as well as in the foreign 
policy community. See, for example, Katie Grant, “Why 
We Need Men in Our New Feminine World,”  Glasgow 
Herald, January 11, 1999, 13.  
 8.   Katha Pollitt, “Father Knows Best,”  Foreign Affairs 
78, 1 (1999), 123.  
 9.   Since  Foreign Affairs does not allow footnotes, it 
is often difficult to know to which specific literature 
Fukuyama refers when making such criticism.  
 10.   This type of argument has shown up in more viru-
lent forms. See, for example, Harvey Mansfield, “Why a 
Woman Can’t Be More Like a Man,”  Wall Street Journal, 
November 3, 1997, A22. Mansfield accuses feminists of 
“feminizing America.” He argues that women are not 
cut out for war and that men must be allowed to fulfill 
their traditional role as protectors, a role that is being 
undermined as women gain equal access to jobs outside 
the home. Fukuyama also addresses some of these issues in 
his new book  The Great Disruption: Human Nature and 
the Reconstitution of Social Order (New York: Free Press, 
1999).  
  11.  R. Brian Ferguson, “Perilous Positions,”  Foreign 
Affairs 78, 1 (1999), 125 claims that chimpanzees’ 

386 
Suggestions for Further Reading
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 
 Ackerly Brooke, Maria Stern, and Jacqui True, eds. 
 Feminist Methodologies for International Relations. 
New York: Cambridge University Press, 2006. 
 Agathangelou, Anna.  Global Political Economy of Sex: 
Desire, Violence, and Insecurity in Mediterranean 
Nation-States. London: Palgrave, 2005. 
 Agathangelou, Anna, and L. H. M. Ling. “The House of 
IR: From Family Power Politics to the Poisies of World-
ism.”  International Studies Review 6 (2004): 21–49. 
 ———. “Power, Borders, Security, Wealth: Lessons of 
Violence and Desire from September 11th.”  Interna-
tional Studies Quarterly 48 (2004): 517–38. 
 Alexander, M. Jacqui. “Redrafting Morality: The 
Postcolonial State and the Sexual Offenses Bill of 
Trinidad and Tobago.” In  Third World Women 
and the Politics of Feminism, eds., Chandra Talpade 
 Mohanty, Ann Russo, and Lourdes Torres. Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 1991, 133–52. 
 Arrendondo, Gabriela F., et al., eds.  Chicano Femi-
nisms: A Critical Reader. Durham, NC: Duke Uni-
versity Press, 2003. 
 Beckman, Peter R., and Francine D’Amico.  Women, Gen-
der, and World Politics: Perspectives, Policies, and Pros-
pects. Westport, CT: Bergin & Garvey Publishers, 1994. 
 Braedley, Susan, and Meg Luxton, Eds.  Neoliberalism 
and Everyday Life. Montreal: McGill Queen’s Uni-
versity Press, 2010. 
 Bryson, Valerie.  Feminist Political Theory , 2nd ed. 
New York: Palgrave MacMillan, 1992, 2003. 
 Butler, Judith.  Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Sub-
version of Identity. New York: Routledge, 1990. 
 Carpenter, R. Charlie. “Gender Theory in World Poli-
tics: Contributions of a Nonfeminist Standpoint?” 
 International Studies Review 4, 3 (2002): 153–65. 
 ———. “Women, Children and Other Vulnerable 
Groups: Gender, Strategic Frames and the Protec-
tion of Civilians as a Transnational Issue.”  Interna-
tional Studies Quarterly 49 (2005): 295–334. 
 Carver, Terrell, ed. “The Forum: Gender and Interna-
tional Relations.”  International Studies Review 5 
(2003): 287–302. 
 Chowdhry, Geeta, and Sheila Nair, eds.  Power, Post-
colonialism and International Relations: Reading 
Race, Gender, Class. London: Routledge, 2002. 
 Cohn, Carol. “Sex and Death in the Rational World of 
Defense Intellectuals.”  Signs: Journal of Women in 
Culture and Society 12, 4 (Summer 1987): 687–718. 
 Collins, Patricia Hill.  Black Feminist Thought: Knowl-
edge, Consciousness, and the Politics of Empower-
ment , 2nd ed. New York: Routledge, 2000. 
 Crenshaw, Kimberle, Neil Gotanda, Gary Peller, and 
Kendall Thomas, eds.  Critical Race Theory: The 
Key Writings That Formed the Movement. New 
York: New Press, 1996. 
 D’Amico, Francine, and Peter Beckman, eds.  Women in 
World Politics. Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey, 
1995. 
 Davis, Angela.  Women, Race, and Class. New York: 
Vintage Books, 1981. 
 Eisenstein, Zillah.  Against Empire: Feminisms, Racism, 
and the West. London: Zed Book, 2004. 
 Elshtain, Jean. “Feminist Inquiry and International 
Relations.” In  New Thinking in International 
Relations Theory, eds., Michael Doyle, and John 
 Ikenberry. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1997. 
 ———.  Women and War. New York: Basic Books, 1987. 
 Enke, Anne. “Smuggling Sex through the Gates: Race, 
Sexuality, and the Politics of Space in Second Wave 
Feminism.”  American Quarterly 55, 4 (2003): 
635–67. 
 Enloe, Cynthia.  Bananas, Beaches, and Bases: Making 
Feminist Sense of International Politics. Berkeley: 
The University of California Press, 1990. 
 ———.  The Curious Feminist: Searching for Women 
in a New Age of Empire. Berkeley: University of 
California Press, 2004. 
 ———.  Does Khaki Become You? The Militarization 
of Women’s Lives. London: Pandora, 1983. 
 ———. “Margins, Silences, and Bottom Rungs: How 
to Overcome the Underestimation of Power in In-
ternational Relations.” In  International Theory: 
 Positivism and Beyond , eds., Steve Smith, Ken 
Booth, and Marysia Zalewski. New York: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1996. 
 ———.  The Morning After: Sexual Politics at the End 
of the Cold War. Berkeley: University of California 
Press, 1993. 
 Goldstein, Joshua.  War and Gender: How Gender 
Shapes the War System and Vice Versa. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 2001. 
 Grant, R., and K. Newland, eds.  Gender and Interna-
tional Relations. Bloomington: Indiana University 
Press, 1991. 
 Harding, Sandra.  Whose Science? Whose Knowledge? 
Thinking from Women’s Lives. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1991. 
 Hartspock, N.  The Feminist Standpoint Revisited and 
Other Essays. Boulder, CO: Westview, 1998. 
 Hekman, Susan. “Truth and Method: Feminist 
Standpoint Theory Revisited.”  Signs: Journal of 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
387
 Lippa, Richard A.  Gender, Nature, and Nurture, 2nd ed. 
New York: Taylor & Francis—Lawrence  Erlbaum 
Associates, 2005. 
 Locher, Birgit, and Elisabeth Prügl. “Feminism and 
Constructivism: Worlds Apart or Sharing the Mid-
dle Ground?”  International Studies Quarterly 45, 1 
(March 2001): 111–29. 
 Marchal, Joseph A.  The Politics of Heaven: Women, 
Gender, and Empire in the Study of Paul. Minne-
apolis, MN: Fortress Press, 2008. 
 Mbire-Barungi, Barbara. “Ugandan Feminism: Politi-
cal Rhetoric or Reality?”  Women’s Studies Interna-
tional Forum 22, 4 (1999): 435–39. 
 McClintock, Anne.  Imperial Leather: Race, Gender, 
and Sexuality in the Colonial Contest. London: 
Routledge, 1995. 
 Meyer, M., and Elisabeth Prügl.  Gender Politics in 
Global Governance. Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 1999. 
 Midgley, Clare, ed.  Gender and Imperialism. Manches-
ter: Manchester University Press, 1998. 
 Mikell, Gwendolyn. “African Feminism: Towards a 
New Politics of Representation.”  Feminist Studies 
21, 2 (Summer, 1995): 405–24. 
 Mohanty, Chandra Talpade.  Feminism without Bor-
ders: Decolonizing Theory, Practicing Solidarity. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 2003. 
 ———, Ann Russo, and Lourdes Torres, eds.  Third 
World Women and the Politics of Feminism. Bloom-
ington: Indiana University Press, 1991. 
 Moraga, Cherrie, and Gloria Anzaldúa, eds.,  This 
Bridge Called My Back: Writings By Radical 
Women of Color. Berkeley, CA: Third Woman 
Press, 1981, 2002. 
 Morris, Rosalind C.  Can the Subalterns Speak?: Reflec-
tions on the History of an Idea. New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 2010. 
 Murphy, Craig. “Seeing Women, Recognizing Gen-
der, Recasting International Relations.”  Inter-
national Organization 50, 3 (Summer 1996): 
513–38. 
 Naples, Nancy, ed.  Community Activism and Feminist 
Politics: Organizing across Race, Class, and Gen-
der. London: Routledge, 1998. 
 Niva, S. “Tough and Tender: New World Order Mas-
culinity and the Gulf War.” In  The “Man” Ques-
tion in International Relations , eds., M. Zalewski 
and J. Parpart. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1998. 
 Nnaemeka, 
Obioma. 
“Nego-Feminism: 
Theoriz-
ing, Practicing, and Purging Africa’s Way.”  Signs: 
 Journal of Women in Culture and Society 29, 2 
(2004): 357–85. 
Women in Culture and Society 22, 2 (Winter 
1997): 341–65. 
 hooks, bell [sic].  Feminist Theory: From Margin to  Center , 
2nd ed. Cambridge, MA: South End Press, 2000. 
 Hooper, Charlotte.  Manly States. New York:  Columbia 
University Press, 2000. 
 ———. “Masculinist Practices and Gender Politics: 
The Operation of Multiple Masculinities in Interna-
tional Relations.” In  The Man Question in Interna-
tional Relations , eds., M. Zalewski and J. Parpart. 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1998. 
 ———. “Masculinities in Transition: The Case of Glo-
balization.” In  Gender and Global Restructuring: 
Sightings, Sites and Resistances , eds., M. Marchand 
and A. S. Runyan. London: Routledge, 2000. 
 Howes, Ruth, and Michael Stevenson, eds.  Women 
and the Use of Military Force. Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner, 1993. 
 Imam, Ayesha, Amina Marna, and Fatou Sow, eds. 
 Engendering African Social Sciences. Chippenham, 
UK: Antony Rowe, 1997. 
 Jabri, Vivienne, and Eleanor O’Gorman, eds.  Women, 
Culture, and International Relations. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner, 1999. 
 James, Stanlie, and Abena Busia, eds.  Theorizing Black 
Feminisms: The Visionary Pragmatism of Black 
Women. New York: Routledge, 1993. 
 Jones, Adam. Gender Inclusive: Essays on Violence, 
Men, and Feminist International Relations. New 
York: Routledge, 2009. 
 Jubri, Vivien, and Eleanor O’Gorman, Eds.  Women, 
Culture and International Relations. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner, 1999. 
 Kalu, Anthonia. “Women and the Social Construction 
of Gender in African Development.”  Africa Today 
43, 3 (Summer, 1996): 269–88. 
 Kaplan, Caren, et al., eds.  Between Woman and Nation: 
Nationalisms, Transnational Feminisms and the State. 
Durham, NC: Duke University Press, 1999. 
 Kaufman, Joyce P., and Kristen P. Williams.  Women, 
the State, and War. Lexington, Mass.: Lexington 
Books, 2007. 
 Kelly, Rita Mae, et al., eds.  Gender, Globalization, 
and Democratization. Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 2001. 
 Keohane, Robert. “Beyond Dichotomy: Conversa-
tions between International Relations and Feminist  
Theory.”  International Studies Quarterly 42, 1 
(March 1998): 193–97 .
 Koikari, Mire.  Pedagogy of Democracy: Feminism and 
the Cold War in the U.S. Occupation of Japan. 
Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 2008. 

388 
Suggestions for Further Reading
Theory: Positivism and Beyond , eds., Steve Smith, 
Ken Booth, and Marysia Zalewski. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 1996. 
 ———. “The Emperors’ Theories and Transforma-
tions: Looking at the Field through Feminist 
Lenses.” In  Transformations in the Global Politi-
cal Economy , eds., D. Pirages and C. Sylvester. 
 London: Macmillan, 1992. 
 ———.  Feminist International Relations: An Unfin-
ished Journey. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2002. 
 ———.  Feminist Theory and International Relations 
in a Postmodern Era. Cambridge: Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, 1994. 
 ———. “‘Masculinity,’ ‘Femininity,’ and ‘Interna-
tional Relations’: Or Who Goes to the ‘Moon’ with 
Bonaparte and the Adder?” In  The ‘Man’ Ques-
tion in International Relations , eds., J. Parpart and 
M. Zalewski. Boulder, CO: Westview, 1998. 
 Tickner, J. Ann.  Gender in International Relations: 
Feminist Perspectives on Achieving Global Security. 
New York: Columbia University Press, 1992. 
 ———.  Gendering World Politics. New York: Colum-
bia University Press, 2001. 
 ———. “Hans Morgenthau’s Principles of Political Re-
alism: A Feminist Reformulation.”  Millennium: Jour-
nal of International Studies 17, 3 (1998): 429–40. 
 ———. “You Just Don’t Understand: Troubled 
Engagements between Feminists and IR Theo-
rists.”  International Studies Quarterly 41 (1998): 
611–32. 
 True, Jacqui. “Feminism.” In  Theories of Interna-
tional Relations , eds., Scott Burchill and Andrew 
Linklater. London: Palgrave Macmillan, 1996. 
 ———, and Michael Mintrom. “Transnational Net-
works and Policy Diffusion: The Case of Gender 
Mainstreaming.”  International Studies Quarterly 
45, 1 (March 2001): 27–57. 
 Weber, C.  Faking It: US Hegemony in a “Post-Phallic” 
Era. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press, 
1999. 
 Whitworth, S.  Feminism and International Relations: 
Towards a Political Economy of Gender in Inter-
state and Non Governmental Institutions. London: 
Macmillan, 1994. 
 Whitworth, Sandra.  Men, Militarism and UN Peace-
keeping: A Gendered Analysis. Boulder: Lynne 
 Rienner, 2004. 
 Zalewski, Marysia. “Well, What Is the Feminist Per-
spective on Bosnia?”  International Affairs 71, 2 
(April 1995): 339–56.  
 Nussbaum, Martha.  Sex and Social Justice. Oxford, 
UK: Oxford University Press, 1999. 
 Okeke, Philomina. “Postmodern Feminism and Knowl-
edge Production; The African Context.”  Africa 
 Today 43, 3 (Summer, 1996): 223–34. 
 Oyewùmi, Oyèrónké, ed.  African Women and Femi-
nism: Reflecting on the Politics of Sisterhood. Law-
renceville, NJ: Africa World Press, 2003. 
 Parpart, Jane L., and Marysia Zalewski, Eds.  Rethink-
ing the Man Question: Sex, Gender and Violence in 
Interntional Relations. London and New York: Zed 
Books, 2008. 
 Pateman, Carole.  The Sexual Contract. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 1988. 
 Peterson, V. Spike.  Gendered States: Feminist (Re)vi-
sions of International Theory. Boulder, CO: Lynne 
Rienner, 1992. 
 ———, and S. Runyan.  Global Gender Issues. Boul-
der, CO: Westview Press, 1993. 
 Pettman, J.  Worlding Women: A Feminist Interna-
tional Politics. London: Routledge, 1996. 
 Pierson, Jan Nederveen.  Empire and Emancipation: 
Power and Liberation on a World Scale. London: 
Pluto Press, 1990. 
 Rai, Shirin, ed.  Women and the State: International 
Perspectives. Bristol, PA: Taylor and Francis, 1996. 
 Robinson, Fiona.  Globalizing Care: Ethics, Feminist 
Theory, and International Relations. Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1999. 
 Rosen, Ruth.  The World Split Open: How the Modern 
Women’s Movement Changed America. New York: 
Viking, 2000. 
 Rosenblatt, Lisa.  Feminist IR: The Constructions of 
World Pictures and Fish Stories. Wien [Vienna]: 
WUV-Universitätverlag, 1999. 
 Shepherd, Laura J.  Gender Matters in Global Politics: 
A Feminist Introduction to International Relations. 
New York: Routledge, 2010. 
 Smith, Barbara, ed.  Home Girls: A Black Feminist 
Anthology. New York: Kitchen Table/Women of 
Color Press, 1983. 
 Spelman, Elizabeth.  Inessential Women: Problems of 
Exclusion in Feminist Thought. Boston: Beacon 
Press, 1988. 
 Steans, Jill.  Gender and International Relations: An 
Introduction. New Brunswick: Rutgers University 
Press, 1998. 
 Stienstra, D.  Women’s Movements and International 
Organizations. New York: St. Martin’s Press, 1994. 
 Sylvester, Christine. “The Contributions of Feminist 
Theory to International Relations.” In  International 

Normative Considerations 
PART
III

This page intentionally left blank 

391
CHAPTER
9
Normative IR Theory: 
Ethics and Morality 
 I
 n this final chapter we discuss the role of normative theory in IR, important 
contributors to this literature, and the challenge of applying normative concerns 
to actual foreign policy choices by the use of contemporary examples. Until 
 recent years, textbooks on international relations were conspicuous for the absence 
of much discussion of normative theory. This was a rather strange turn of events 
in that the intellectual traditions underlying the images discussed in this book are 
a blend of normative (what  should  be the case?) and empirical questions (what  is 
the case?). 
 For writers as divergent as Machiavelli, Grotius, Kant, Carr, or Marx, it was 
inconceivable to discuss politics without at least some attention to the relation be-
tween facts and values. The two were thought by them to be inseparable, although 
they differed on the relative importance of each. Constructivists, critical theorists, 
postmodernists, and feminists necessarily incorporate normative considerations 
within the subjectivities and intersubjectivities that define their interpretive under-
standings. The examination of socially constructed norms or rules that have guided 
actual conduct in international relations, for example, often rests on or is buttressed 
by normative theories that contribute to their legitimacy or acceptance over time. 
The law of war, intervention, norms on distributive justice, human rights, and 
 humanitarian law all relate to the domain of normative theory. 
NORMS, ETHICS, AND MORALITY 
 Philosophers differ on what is meant by norms, morality, and ethics.  1  For our pur-
poses in the context of IR theory, what they have in common is that they all prescribe 
what the world  should  be and what  ought to be right conduct. Explicit in this concep-
tion is the idea that norms might require people, states, or international and transna-
tional actors to act in ways that do not promote the actor’s self-interest. 
 In this chapter we raise some of the issues central to an understanding of nor-
mative international relations theory. When, if ever, is war just, and what is just 
conduct in war? Are there universally understood human rights? On what grounds 

392
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
are armed or other forms of intervention legitimate? On what moral bases should 
statesmen make foreign policy choices? It is not our intention here to delve deeply 
into such complex questions, an enterprise well beyond the scope of this effort. 
Over the centuries, many international relations theorists have grappled with nor-
mative questions, and we want here only to alert the readers to some of the most 
critical of these. 
 Second, we also want to recognize normative international relations theory 
building as a legitimate enterprise worthy of more scholarly efforts. As discussed in 
 Chapter  1 , normative theory differs fundamentally from empirical theory. Proposi-
tions in normative theory that deal with what  ought to be are not subject to the 
formal empirical tests of hypotheses about what  is , which is the realm of empirical 
theory. An explicit expression of this position is to be found in the article by James 
Rosenau in  Chapter   1 . 
 Nevertheless, value orientations are present even among empirical theorists in 
all four international relations images we identify.  What is studied and  how it is 
studied are preferences that vary from theorist to theorist across all four images. 
Although empirical theorists as positivists try to minimize the effect of individual 
value bias through objective testing of hypotheses, personal values cannot be 
filtered out completely. Values are less problematic in social constructivism, criti-
cal theory, postmodernism, and feminism as they are central to these interpretive 
understandings. 
 Third, normative IR theory is important if not inescapable in the realm of for-
eign policy. Policymaking is all about making choices. Choices among competing 
alternatives made by policymakers are informed not just by knowledge of what  is or 
could be the possible outcome of a decision, but also by a rationale for what  ought 
to be. Developing the bases for such choices is the domain of normative theory.  
NORMATIVE THEORY: ALTERNATIVE PERSPECTIVES 
The Levels of Analysis 
 There are differing perspectives on how to approach a discussion of normative 
theory and IR. One way of looking at this is in terms of the levels of analysis—the 
individual, the community or nation, and the world. In terms of the individual, 
the simple yet important question is do we have duties beyond borders? Particu-
larly in an era of globalization, how might we live in a world threatened by not 
only weapons of mass destruction but also global climate change?  2  
 The national or community position on norms holds that obligations to fel-
low citizens take priority over those of strangers living in other nations, states, or 
cultures. The attempt to develop and justify normative universal criteria is ques-
tionable from this perspective. This does not mean, however, that states are unable 
to come to common agreement in certain areas. In fact, international law provides 
bases for states to respect one another’s autonomy.  3  Furthermore, the idea that 
there is a pluralism of values among societies or groups does not mean there is no 
basis for criticizing, for example, the abuse of human rights. 
 A third perspective—and our major focus in this chapter—concerns universal 
or cosmopolitian normative theorizing. This dates back to Aristotle’s virtue-based 

Normative Theory: Alternative Perspectives 
393
ethics, the Stoics and natural law thinking ( jus naturale ) and, as developed by the 
Romans, the  jus gentium or law of nations (or peoples), Kantian moral imperatives, 
utilitarian principles of the greatest good for humankind, and social-contract bases 
for moral choice in society.  
Moral Relativism 
 Universal or cosmopolitan perspectives are in direct conflict with the idea of moral 
relativism, which holds that no universal standard exists by which to assess an ethi-
cal proposition’s truth. If we really believe, however, in a strict moral  relativism—
that values and rights can have no independent standing of their own—then we are 
saying in effect that there is no such thing as morality or ethics. 
 One significant problem with moral relativism is that it gives us no universal 
basis for condemning atrocities and such human tragedies as the Holocaust. To 
put it rather starkly: Just because eliminating the Jews as a people may have been 
considered legitimate within a Nazi political subculture, this belief did not make 
it right. Even if we have difficulty agreeing on many other values, genocide is so 
offensive to the human spirit that it is condemned as mass murder on universal, 
not just on particular cultural grounds. Any rational human being, regardless of 
cultural origin, should understand the immorality of such atrocities. 
 What about a religious basis for universal human rights? Islam, Christianity, 
Judaism, Hinduism, Buddhism, and other religions do not just limit themselves to 
their followers, but frequently also make universally applicable moral claims. Some 
of these—for example, the importance of respect for life, human dignity, justice or 
fairness—are found in all religious traditions. As a practical matter, however, rejec-
tion of religion by some and the absence of theological consensus even among the 
followers of various religious groups prevent us from using particular religions as 
the solitary bases for common, worldwide acceptance of human rights and other 
moral claims. Instead, many writers have tried to identify secular or non-religious 
bases for their universalist positions to which we now turn.  
Secular Bases for Moral or Ethical Choice 
 Stoics
 The Roman orator Cicero (106–43  b.c. ) states that “true law is right 
reason in agreement with nature; it is of universal application, unchanging and 
 everlasting.” He asserts: “Justice is one; it binds all society, and is based on one 
law.” Indeed, he observes: “Justice does not exist at all if it does not exist in 
Nature.”  4  
 Stoic ideas were very influential in republican and imperial Rome. As dis-
cussed in  Chapter   3  , the Stoics argued that we are all part of a larger community 
of  humankind, regardless of our different political communities and cultures. The 
ability to reason is a quality shared by all humans, and this makes it possible for 
us to determine the laws of nature that are applicable to all regardless of the com-
munity in which one lives. “Internationalist” ideas found in the Stoic writings 
of  Seneca (1–65 a.d.), Paul of Tarsus—St. Paul to Christians (c. 5–67 a.d.), and 
 Roman Emperor Marcus Aurelius (121–180 a.d.) were very influential in republi-
can and imperial Rome. 

394
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
 This universalism was the basis for the idea of law common to the nations of 
the Roman empire—a law of the peoples or, in Latin, a  jus gentium. That values 
transcend a single community or state was also central to the thought of Augustine 
(354–430), Aquinas (1225–1274), and other religious writers of the Middle Ages. 
As discussed in previous chapters, Grotius (1583–1645) and others later contrib-
uted to a secular basis for international law—whether based on general principles 
consistent with reasoned understanding of natural law, customary international 
practice, the writings of jurists (as in decisions rendered by judges or justices), or 
commitments in treaties or conventions voluntarily undertaken by states—the four 
generally accepted sources of international law. Similarly, natural law thinking also 
played an important role in the social-contract theories of Hobbes (1588–1679) 
and Locke (1632–1704).  
 Kant
 Immanuel Kant (1724–1804), whose work has already been mentioned in 
other chapters, has us use our rational faculty to look inward. The moral element 
is captured by the oft-quoted phrase of one standing alone at night in awe looking 
upward reflectively at “the starry sky above me and the moral law within me.” 
This vision of the universal transcends space and time and yet can be discovered 
within oneself. 
 In this regard Kant is best known for his writings on reason with direct applica-
tion to discovering universal maxims or ethical imperatives we are duty-bound to 
follow not just in our private lives, but also in the positions we hold in our public 
lives. For Kant, a fundamental principle is to act always so that you respect every 
human being as a rational, thinking agent capable of choice. According to Kant, 
the individual has free will to choose the correct moral course, clearly a voluntarist 
position. Individual behavior is not predetermined, but the individual is obligated, 
nevertheless, to follow the moral law that is discoverable through the proper exer-
cise of reason. 
 According to Kant, one should exercise free will and act according to the “cat-
egorical imperative”—independent of contingencies—whereby one acts “according 
to the maxim which you can at the same time will to be a universal law.” Moreover, 
one should “treat humanity, in your own person, and in the person of everyone 
else as an end as well as a means, never merely as a means.” Put another way, we 
are to treat other human beings as ends worthy in themselves, not just as means. 
Finally, the correct prescription for moral conduct is knowable by the individual 
and amounts to those precepts that have universally binding character.  5  
 It is this universal dimension in Kantian ethics that is also the basis for his think-
ing on international relations. Kant addressed war and peace in international society, 
looking toward an improvement in state behaviors among liberal republics that 
would make them decidedly less prone to use force against other states—in effect, a 
democratic peace (see the discussion in  Chapter   3 ). The Kantian ideal was indeed a 
future, cosmopolitan international society of individuals, states, or other actors 
following ethical principles and aiming toward perfection. In other words, “right 
reason” is to be used to discern obligations stemming from universal law that tran-
scends the laws made by individual states. This was to be the path toward “perpetual 
peace”—a world free of war. A federation of peaceful states could (but would not nec-
essarily) come to be established as a response to the very real security needs of states.  

Normative Theory: Alternative Perspectives 
395
 Utilitarians
 In contrast to Kantian ethics, the writings of Jeremy Bentham 
(1748–1832), John Stuart Mill (1806–1873), and others focus on attaining the 
greatest good for the greatest number as the principal criterion of utilitarian 
thought. We should be concerned with assessing outcomes or the consequences of 
our actions. A “society is rightly ordered,” according to utilitarians, if “its major 
institutions are arranged so as to achieve the greatest net balance of satisfaction.”  6  
Utilitarians take this abstract principle and apply it to a wide range of human 
circumstances, including a defense of liberty and other human rights as represent-
ing the greatest good for the greatest number. The main application of utilitarian 
principles was to be within domestic societies. In principle, however, utilitarian and 
Kantian criteria provide a philosophical basis for international law because the ap-
plication of these criteria transcends the boundaries of any given state or society. 
In practice, of course, we face enormous obstacles trying to apply either Kantian 
or utilitarian ethics as the basis for constructing some radically new and just world 
order, given the present division of the world into separate, sovereign states with 
very different perspectives on global issues.  
 Social-Contract Theorists  The question of the scope of justice is an issue dating 
back to the beginning of philosophy. Should conceptions of justice have boundar-
ies, limiting it to particular societies or cultures? Or is justice by nature universal 
and cosmopolitan? Social-contract theorists are of interest to normative IR theory 
as they frequently begin with the domestic question of justice and have provided 
insight on the later expansion of such normative concerns to international politics. 
 The social-contract approach as a guide to right behavior assumes that indi-
viduals may voluntarily agree to bind or obligate themselves to some set of prin-
ciples. The challenge is explaining how this might come about. In Rousseau’s stag 
hunt analogy discussed in  Chapters   2 and  3 , the hunters in a state of nature can 
be understood as maximizing individual, short-term self-interest by going for the 
hare. In a world of no sovereign authority to compel collaboration or to force the 
honoring of contracts, no other outcome can be expected. For Thomas Hobbes, 
escaping the state of nature could only be achieved by the people elevating a 
 sovereign—whether a monarch or legislature—to provide the order and security 
that come from governance. 
 Although Hobbes finds a way out of a figurative state of nature for domestic 
politics, he sees no such social-contract remedy to resolve the problems of coopera-
tion among states exisiting in an anarchic international system. As noted by English 
School theorists and some constructivists, however, different assumptions about 
the state of nature result in different prospects for international collaboration. 
 The seventeenth-century English writer John Locke reasoned that human 
 beings have certain  natural rights to life, liberty, and property, which they surren-
der only as part of a social contract. The notion among social-contract theorists 
that, quite apart from cultural context, human beings have rights as part of their 
nature obviously provides another secular ground for making universalistic moral 
claims. To Locke (and to Thomas Jefferson [1743–1826], who followed Locke’s 
lead),  human rights are thus part of human nature. The citizenry or people who 
empower governments in the first place must therefore strictly limit the authority of 
governments to abridge them. In fact, governments are created in part to guarantee 

396
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
certain civil rights, which are those rights that individuals have as members of the 
societies to which they belong. This conception can be applied to the domestic as 
well as the international levels of analysis. 
 Building on this social-contract approach as a means to finding justice within 
a society, John Rawls (1921–2002) asked what would be considered fair if indi-
viduals were in a state of nature and none knew in advance what one’s place in 
society, class position, wealth, or social status would be. Behind this common “veil 
of ignorance” about outcomes, what principles of distributive justice would these 
hypothetically free agents choose? 
 One principle taken from Rawls’s analysis is that “all social values—liberty and 
opportunity, income and wealth, and the bases of self-respect—are to be distributed 
equally unless an unequal distribution of any, or all, of these values is to everyone’s 
advantage.” Beyond that, socioeconomic inequality is admissible only if it benefits 
everyone in society and if there is an equal opportunity for everyone to acquire 
those positions associated with unequal rewards. 
 Whether one extends such propositions as the basis for global justice for indi-
viduals or for states as if they were individuals was not altogether clear in Rawls’s 
now classic  A Theory of Justice. In that volume he formulates a “conception of jus-
tice for the basic structure of society,” observing that “the conditions for the law of 
nations may require different principles arrived at in a somewhat different way.”  7  
 In his later work, however, Rawls takes up this challenge by exploring the ways 
and means of extending a “law of peoples” that transcends the borders of states and 
their respective societies. The idea of constructing an international or global society 
logically calls for the application of universal norms. Similar to the intended univer-
sal applicability of the Roman law of peoples (or, in Latin, the  jus gentium ), he finds 
that behind a veil of ignorance “a well ordered nonliberal society” or authoritarian 
regime in our times “will accept the same law of peoples that well ordered liberal 
societies accept.”  8  Not surprisingly, he finds the fabric of this law in the liberal 
 understandings of human rights, freedom, independence, and nonintervention. 
 If one allows social-contract theory to be applied to states as if they were indi-
vidual persons, it becomes a basis for a  positivist (in the legal, not epistemological 
sense) interpretation of international law. Among positivists, international law and 
the obligation to follow other international rules or norms stem not from natural 
law or natural rights, but rather from affirmative actions taken by states. Kantian, 
utilitarian, or other principles may be part of the calculus of deciding which rules 
are to be made binding, but it is the voluntary contract, or choice, made by states in 
the form of a treaty, convention, or customary practice (so routine in performance 
as to amount to an implicit contract) that creates the obligation. 
 Norms, morality, and ethics, therefore, are not new to the study of inter-
national relations. They may be addressed in terms of “right reason” to discern 
 obligations stemming from some aspect of natural law or provide the greatest good 
for the greatest number under utilitarian reasoning. Alternatively, they may con-
form more closely to a positivist approach to constructing international law—that 
treaties, for example, are binding and that such obligations ought to be kept. The 
 Kantian perspective in particular contrasts sharply with the views of Machiavelli 
and Hobbes described in  Chapter   2 . Although concerns for moral choices certainly 
are present in classical realism, power and the balance of power have clearly been 

Justice and War 
397
the more important considerations in this tradition. It is, however, incorrect to view 
power and values as if they were mutually exclusive approaches to international 
politics. As E. H. Carr, an intellectual precursor in the realist tradition and of the 
English School, observed: 
 The utopian who dreams that it is possible to eliminate self-assertion from politics 
and to base a political system on morality alone is just as wide of the mark as 
the realist who believes that altruism is an illusion and that all political action is 
self-seeking.  9  
 In short, international politics involves a blend of values and power, utopianism 
and realism. Such a perspective can be found in virtually all the intellectual pre-
cursors discussed in this book. There is disagreement, however, as to the relative 
importance of values and power, and which values should be pursued.  
JUSTICE AND WAR 
 One fairly well-developed area that stands as an exception to our general obser-
vation of the paucity of normative international relations theory is that dealing 
with the morality of war itself ( jus ad bellum ) and the ethical or moral constraints 
within any given war ( jus in bello ). Scholars of all perspectives have examined this 
issue, and it is therefore an appropriate place to start our overview of normative 
theory and the challenges of its application. 
 Informed speculation on this subject builds on a tradition in Western thought 
extending back to the ancient Greeks. Contrary to the absolute pacifism of many 
early Christians, the writings of St. Augustine (354–430  A.D. ) drew from the work 
of Cicero (and Plato before him), addressing war as something that was to be 
avoided but that was sometimes necessary: “It is the wrong-doing of the  opposing 
party which compels the wise man to wage wars.”  10  The corpus of the just war 
theory grew with additions made by Aquinas, Francisco Suárez (1548–1617), 
 Francisco de Victoria (c. 1492–1546), and other religious and political  philosophers 
of the medieval period. 
 That we can develop a theory of just war through the exercise of right reason 
and right conduct are philosophical assumptions underlying normative theory 
on armed conflict. Perhaps not surprisingly, given their preoccupation with 
national security issues, much contemporary thinking on just war has occurred 
primarily among realists, particularly classical realists. The subject has also been 
of substantial interest in the English School, steeped as it is in the history of 
international relations and the Grotian and other philosophical understandings 
that go with it. 
 Not all realists would accept the Machiavellian characterization of war as 
something useful for acquiring or maintaining rule and that, if postponed, might 
work only to the advantage of the enemy. A Machiavellian principle underscored 
by Clausewitz, as noted in  Chapter  2 , is that war is decidedly not a legitimate end 
in itself, but is merely a means used to achieve essentially political purposes. That 
war should not be waged without “legitimate” purpose—that it should at least 
be subordinate to the political objective or serve some national interest—can be 
 understood as a limited, but nevertheless moral statement in itself. 

398
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
 Defense against provoked aggression is generally conceded (except by absolute 
pacifists) to be a legitimate political objective justifying war. Nevertheless, in just 
war thinking, war is a last resort to be undertaken only if there appears to be some 
chance of success. The death and destruction wrought by war are to be minimized, 
consistent with achieving legitimate military purposes. Indeed, there can be no 
positive moral content in war unless legitimate political objectives and military 
purposes are served. Following conventional military logic found in Clausewitz, 
the purpose in any war is to destroy or substantially weaken an enemy’s war-
making capability. Military necessity, so defined, however, does not justify the 
use of means disproportionate to the ends sought or the use of weapons that are 
indiscriminate or that cause needless human suffering. Moreover, the lives of non-
combatants are to be spared. 
 Just war theory does not confine itself merely to whether one has a right to 
use armed force or resort to war in international relations. It goes beyond the  jus 
ad bellum to raise questions of right conduct in war once armed conflict breaks 
out—the  jus in bello. Very real limits are set in an effort to confine the death 
and destruction of warfare to what is militarily necessary, thus reducing war’s 
barbarity. These principles that specify the bases for moral legitimacy of going 
to war and the conduct or use of force  in war are summarized in  Table   9.1  . As 
with any set of moral or ethical principles, their application depends upon right 
intention, which critics observe cannot always be assumed when it comes to the 
conduct of states still sovereign in an anarchic world lacking in viable enforce-
ment authority. 
 Scholars in the English School, liberals, and classical realists of Grotian per-
suasion identify rules or laws that constrain states, statesmen, and soldiers in the 
exercise of their war powers. Treaties or conventions based largely on earlier just 
war thinking have come into force beginning with the Hague Conventions in the 
late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. These were followed by the twenti-
eth-century Geneva Conventions and other agreements that collectively provide 
the basis for the contemporary law of war. Defining aggression and dealing with 
 insurgencies in which the very legitimacy of the parties is in question remain on the 
agenda of important moral and legal challenges. 
Just War Principles 
Jus Ad Bellum 
Jus In Bello 
1. Just cause 
2. Legitimate authority 
3. Proportionality of war 
4. Chance of success 
5. War as last resort; exhaust peaceful 
means to resolve dispute 
1. Military necessity 
2. Spare non-combatants and other 
defenseless persons 
3. Proportional means 
4. Means not immoral  per se: not 
indiscri minate or causing needless 
suffering 
 Note: Application of all principles assumes right intention. 
TABLE 9.1 

Justice and War 
399
Applying Just War Theory in the Twenty-First Century 
 Quite apart from such concerns, however, the focus on limits in just war theory and 
international law could be seen as impractical in an age dominated by weapons of 
mass destruction (WMD). Furthermore, can just war theory be used to legitimate 
deterrence doctrines arguing that in order to maintain peace one must threaten 
devastation even on a global scale?  11  The continuing proliferation of nuclear weap-
ons capabilities has made countries in some regions—the Middle East and South 
Asia—particularly vulnerable. Nevertheless, just war theory, imperfect as it may be, 
ought not be set aside. Indeed, in a time of increasing global insecurity, the effort in 
just war theory to put practical limits on the use of force and thus to reduce, if not 
completely eliminate, the barbarity of warfare remains salient in what is at best a 
still emergent, global civil society. 
 Just war theory did not prevent obliteration bombing of cities or other popu-
lation centers in World War II. At the time, many defenders of this strategy saw 
these raids as undermining societal morale in enemy countries, thus weakening an 
enemy’s will to resist. But postwar evaluation of strategic bombing and other uses 
of air power raised a serious challenge to this rationale. Rage among survivors con-
tributed in many cases to an increased will to resist rather than to submit. If so, then 
obliteration bombing proved to be counterproductive or dysfunctional, even mili-
tarily speaking. With the benefit of hindsight, obliteration bombing of population 
centers has been discredited both militarily and morally in the years since World 
War II. Put another way, there can be no moral justification under just war doctrine 
for such mass death and destruction, particularly because these military actions did 
not serve legitimate military purposes. Just because military purposes are served, of 
course, is not enough to justify  any conduct in war. Additional conditions need to 
be met to satisfy  jus in bello obligations. 
 Although the principle of military necessity can be construed so broadly in 
the interest of national security as to allow almost any conduct in war, we expect 
 political authorities or military commanders to approach the use of force with a 
spirit consistent with the human-cost reduction purpose of just war theory. Indeed, 
it is a narrow construction of military necessity that is prescribed by just war 
theory.  Destroying an enemy’s war-making capability focuses destructive efforts 
on an adversary’s armed forces and  only those parts of the society’s infrastructure 
that directly contribute to its war-making effort. It is not a call to destroy an entire 
society, its population, or anything else of material or cultural value. People will 
still be killed and property destroyed, but probably far less damage will be sustained 
when the principle of military necessity is narrowly interpreted to limit the destruc-
tiveness of war to what is absolutely necessary for military purposes. 
 A distinction is therefore often drawn between  counterforce and  countervalue 
targets. Counterforce targets include military headquarters, troop or tank formations, 
combat aircraft, ships, maintenance facilities, and other military installations the  
destruction of which would directly weaken an enemy’s war-making capability. 
Countervalue targets are factories, rail junctions, civilian airports, and power plants 
in or near cities that contribute to an enemy’s war-making capability or overall war 
 effort. Even if people are not the intended victims, the bombing of countervalue targets 
usually produces more civilian, noncombatant casualties than counterforce targeting. 

400
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
 Moreover, compatible with the  jus in bello , the means used to accomplish mili-
tary purposes need to be proportional to the goal. If a 300-pound bomb can be used 
to destroy a particular military target, a 10,000-pound bomb ought not to be used, 
particularly if doing so increases the  collateral destruction of lives and property. 
In the same spirit, navy warships may choose to avoid sinking an enemy merchant 
ship by disabling the propeller. If feasible, they can then board and search the cargo. 
Again, just war theory aims to reduce unnecessary death or other damage. 
 One possible way to achieve this is to invoke the  dual or  double-effect prin-
ciple in dealing with the moral problem of killing noncombatants and producing 
collateral damage in warfare. Any action may have two or more effects or conse-
quences. If the intent is to destroy a legitimate target that contributes to an enemy’s 
war-making capability or overall war effort, then every reasonable effort must be 
made to avoid unnecessary casualties or other destruction. The “good effect” is 
destroying the legitimate military target. Dropping bombs, sending missiles, land-
ing artillery shells, or firing on such a target may also have unintended human and 
material consequences—the “bad effect.” 
 Following double-effect logic and assuming proportionality—that the target is 
worth destroying in light of its military value when weighed against the expected 
consequences—just war theory would seem to support the idea that killing non-
combatants or destroying civilian property may be morally justifiable when both 
effects occur simultaneously or the good effect precedes the bad. For example, in 
targeting an armaments factory at night when most workers were expected to be 
at home, it is accepted that a few workers may still be killed when the factory is 
destroyed. Or a bomb may go astray and kill some people in a residential area next 
to the factory, even though efforts were made to avoid this unfortunate outcome. 
That is the misfortune of war. Bad things happen in war, which is why just war 
theory puts so much emphasis on avoiding war in the first place. 
 If warriors  intend the bad effect or if it precedes the good, such conduct does 
not satisfy the principle of double effect and is understood, therefore, to be morally 
wrong. Bombing workers at their homes next to the armaments factory (the bad 
effect) will likely reduce or eliminate the production capacity of the factory (the 
good effect, militarily speaking). The problem is that this good effect depends upon 
achieving the bad effect first. However good one’s objectives or purposes may be, 
just-war theorists argue that good ends cannot justify evil means: The ends do not 
justify the means. It would be morally wrong to bomb the village. If factory produc-
tion must be halted, then the factory itself should be targeted, preferably at a time 
when as many workers as possible can be spared.  
Morality and Weaponry 
 Any weapon can be used immorally, but some could not be used morally even 
if one intended to do so. Immoral weapons are those that are indiscriminate or 
cause needless suffering. A rifle is not immoral in itself; if used properly, it can be 
used with discrimination, sparing noncombatants. If used improperly to murder 
noncombatants, for example, it is the action and not the weapon that is immoral. 
 The same is true for most conventional bombs delivered accurately by airplanes 
or missiles. They can be used morally or immorally, depending for the most part on 

Justice and War 
401
the target selected and how it is to be destroyed. The more accurate, the better is 
true from both a military and a moral position. Indeed, destruction of a legitimate 
military target is more likely, and collateral or unnecessary death and destruction, 
if not eliminated, can at least be minimized if accurate weapons are employed. 
 By contrast, wildly inaccurate weapons—including chemical or biological 
agents as in gas or germ warfare—by their very nature eliminate the distinction 
between combatant and noncombatant. Such weapons usually are not useful mili-
tarily, as winds disperse chemical agents indiscriminately, and diseases can spread 
to both sides of the battlefield and more generally across societies. Such weapons 
are immoral in themselves and have been declared illegal. Treaties prohibit the use 
of chemical and biological weapons. 
 The international consensus that led to these chemical and biological conven-
tions rests on this moral argument. Not only are these weapons indiscriminate, but 
also they fail another moral test by causing needless suffering. Rifle bullets or other 
antipersonnel weapons designed to prolong or otherwise increase agony also fail 
this moral test. Killing in war is supposed to be as humane as possible. Most catego-
ries of weapons that are intended to enhance rather than reduce human suffering 
have also been defined in treaties as illegal. In 1997, for example, 122 governments 
signed a treaty banning antipersonnel landmines that cause the death and disfigure-
ment of thousands of civilians every year. 
 Nuclear weapons are a more controversial case. The two atomic bombs that 
the United States dropped on the Japanese cities of Hiroshima and Nagasaki in 
1945 were justified at the time by many on the utilitarian grounds that the bomb-
ings would shorten the war. Those who made this argument saw the loss of life 
at Hiroshima and Nagasaki as precluding an even greater loss of life that would 
have resulted from an Allied invasion of the Japanese home islands. The Japa-
nese had fought tenaciously to defend islands in the Pacific such as Iwo Jima and 
Guam; it was believed they would fight with even greater determination to defend 
their homeland. Others questioned the morality of bombing people even for this 
purpose, suggesting that if the bombs were to be used at all, they should have 
been directed toward strictly military targets, not population centers interspersed 
with military targets. Decisionmakers responded that the Japanese leaders should 
take the blame, as they made the decision to locate military-related plants where 
they did.  12  
 Each of the weapons dropped on Japan was less than 20 kilotons (20,000 tons) 
in yield. Many nuclear weapons today have a much larger multimegaton (multimil-
lion tons) yield, with such heat, blast, and radiation effects that they cannot be used 
with discrimination, so these weapons fail on human-suffering grounds as well. 
On the other hand, some have argued that lower-yield, tactical nuclear weapons 
(perhaps as small as one kiloton or less, with reduced-radiation effects) can be used 
with discrimination and need not cause unnecessary suffering. Critics are skeptical 
of any such claim. They also counter that using any nuclear weapons at all “opens 
Pandora’s box,” legitimating this category of weaponry and increasing the likeli-
hood that even larger nuclear weapons will be employed by one or another of the 
parties. Indicative of the lack of consensus on these issues, and unlike chemical and 
biological agents, nuclear weapons have not yet been declared illegal, however ill 
advised or immoral their use might be.  

402
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
JUSTICE AND HUMAN RIGHTS 
 The quest for universal understanding of socioeconomic, political, and legal rights 
belonging to individuals, groups, classes, societies, and humanity as a whole has 
proven to be an evolutionary and still ongoing process.  13  Particularly challenging 
is unequal, adverse treatment human beings suffer based on such factors as race or 
ethnicity, national origin, social or economic class, age, gender, and sexual identity 
or orientation. Gross violations of labor, safety and health standards for adults as 
well as children, illegal trafficking of persons for prostitution or slave labor, torture, 
and genocide are among the more extreme forms of human exploitation on the 
global human rights agenda. 
The Enlightenment 
 Although the concept of rights in Western thought has roots in ancient Greek, 
Roman, and religious writings, it was the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century En-
lightenment and the social-contract theorists and other thinkers of that period who 
collectively provided stronger philosophical ground for specifying human aspira-
tions for liberty and equality, coupled with communitarian concerns and human 
obligations in society. The liberal spirit of the Enlightenment was developed further 
in the nineteenth-century work of the utilitarians and Kantians. 
 Hobbes, Locke, Rousseau (1712–1778), and other classic social-contract theo-
rists differed on the relative emphasis or importance each placed on liberty, equal-
ity, community, and order, but a common theme was that human beings—the 
people—are the ultimate source of legitimate political authority in society. This 
democratic understanding is explicit in Locke and Rousseau. Even for Hobbes, 
the monarch (or “assembly” acting as legislature) rested legitimately not on divine 
right, but rather on the people who vested the sovereign with authority and power 
to maintain societal order in the interest of their own security. 
 The thirteenth-century English  Magna Carta and the late eighteenth-century 
U.S. Bill of Rights and French Declaration of the Rights of Man are documentary 
statements of aspirations to rights taking a political or legal form. Content analysis 
of these documents, however, reveals greater focus on  individual political and legal 
rights in the English and American documents. The French declaration, by contrast, 
extends itself to the socioeconomic realm with applications not just to individuals, 
but also to larger aggregations at both communal and societal levels. In short, a 
people may have rights as a class, group, or society as a whole. 
 In the present-day global society, these differences in understandings across 
societies and cultures remain. Culture obviously matters in how we interpret or 
understand rights in different social contexts. There are differences in relative 
importance, for example, of liberty, equality, and order and whether rights or 
 obligations are to be applied primarily at the individual level of analysis or at 
larger human aggregations. Thus, the United States tends to focus on human rights 
as individual political and legal rights and liberties, whereas many other states and 
societies accept these civil rights and liberties as part of a much larger package 
that also puts a higher premium on socioeconomic rights and communitarian 
understandings.  

Justice and Human Rights 
403
Current Application 
 Notwithstanding different cultural understandings or interpretations of how  human 
rights should be defined and implemented, human-rights advocates adopt a univer-
salist rather than a relativist view. Whether using a methodology of  social contract, 
utilitarian, Kantian, Aristotelian virtue-based or of religious origin,  advocates 
search for universal, underlying values that inform our understandings of human 
rights in practice. Thus, respect for life, human dignity, and justice or fairness are 
broadly understood and accepted even as there is disagreement on how these values 
are to be applied in particular human rights contexts. Even so, because there is an 
understanding of such underlying, universal values as respect for life and human 
dignity, there is at least a basis for discourse aimed in the interest of justice and 
fairness at resolving differences in how these values are applied across societies. 
 Although politics clearly plays a role in these determinations, giving a relatively 
louder voice to the preferences of some states over others, at a more fundamen-
tal level is the continuing discourse that develops consensus across cultures and 
 societies on the realization of these values in common practice. Thus, the Universal 
Declaration of Human Rights adopted by the U.N. General Assembly in 1948 
 emphasizes the political and legal, individual preferences of its sponsors. Neverthe-
less, six of the thirty articles—20% of the declaration—do address socioeconomic 
and cultural rights, albeit in individual, rather than collective terms. Importantly, 
this 20% would serve as a foundation for later expansion in U.N. treaties or agree-
ments not just on civil and political rights, but also on such matters as economic, 
social, and cultural rights; elimination of racial discrimination; elimination of dis-
crimination against women; and providing for a children’s bill of rights.  
Humanitarian Treatment and the Sovereign State 
 Human rights claims and demands for humanitarian treatment grounded in treaty 
commitments often collide with the prerogatives of a sovereign state. States claim 
a  right under international law to exclusive jurisdiction over all persons within its 
territory. Many human rights advocates, however, see both moral and legal bases 
for action (to include armed intervention in such severe cases as genocide) when 
decisions or policies of governments violate human rights. This is particularly so 
when states have legally bound themselves in treaties specifying commitment to 
these same rights. When national security considerations conflict with these obliga-
tions, compliance by states cannot be taken for granted. 
 There are difficulties, of course, beyond the question of when armed interven-
tion in the domestic affairs of a sovereign state legally can be legitimate, which we 
discuss below. For example, the jurisdiction of the International Court of Justice 
(ICJ) as a legal remedy or alternative to using force is limited to ruling on disputes 
or cases states voluntarily bring to the court for judicial decision. Even when the 
court has rendered a decision, compliance still depends on the will of states to carry 
out their obligations specified in these rulings. Beyond states as parties to legal 
disputes on human rights or other matters, an International Criminal Court (ICC) 
has been established to hold individuals accountable for genocide, crimes against 
humanity, war crimes, and the crime of aggression. The kinds of cases the ICC may 
take are important, but remain limited, its jurisdiction also severely constrained by 

404
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
the fact not all states have yet authorized this tribunal. The United States has been 
among the most prominent non-subscribers to the Rome Statute of the Interna-
tional Criminal Court (agreed in 1998, entering into force in 2002). 
 The Convention on the Prevention and Punishment of the Crime of Genocide 
(1948, entering into force in 1951) defined  genocide as “any of the following acts 
committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical [sic], 
racial or religious group”: “(a) killing members of the group; (b) causing serious 
bodily or mental harm to members of the group; (c) deliberately inflicting on the 
group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole 
or in part; (d) imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group; [and] 
(e) forcibly transferring children of the group to another group.” Although the con-
vention does not provide armed intervention as an explicit remedy to stop genocide, 
when such severe human rights violations threaten international peace and security, 
there is a legal basis for humanitarian intervention under U.N. auspices (namely, 
under Articles 34, 41, and 42 of the U.N. Charter). Beyond using threats to inter-
national peace and security to legitmate armed intervention, some see emerging 
in customary international law the occurrence of genocide as a legitimate basis in 
itself for armed intervention. By contrast, opponents of this view (particularly 
governments complicit in genocidal actions) politically oppose what they see as an 
expansion of the U.N. agenda. They claim such efforts are meddling in the internal 
affairs of sovereign states, which amounts to a violation of international law. 
 In just war theory and the law of war discussed above, an effort must be 
made to spare noncombatants and other defenseless persons. Guilty or not, 
 noncombatants—civilian populations—are not the proper object of warfare. Even 
captured enemy soldiers are now defenseless persons who may be taken prisoner 
but may not be executed just because they are prisoners. Prisoners of war (some-
times called PWs or POWs) have rights, and under the Geneva Conventions these 
guarantees of humanitarian treatment have been made part of international law. 
 This is why the establishment by the United States of the prison at Guantánamo 
Bay, Cuba, has been so controversial. The prison was established following the 
overthrow of the Taliban régime in Afghanistan in the fall of 2001 to hold suspected 
terrorists (as were prisons also established at Bagram Air Base in  Afghanistan and 
at other locations, some secret). The U.S. government, relying on law dating back 
to the Civil War and World War II, declared that these individuals were not prison-
ers of war, but rather “enemy combatants” held as “detainees.” As a result, they 
allegedly could not invoke the international legal rights associated with prisoners 
of war—a perspective hotly disputed by critics of American prison policies in Cuba 
and elsewhere. 
 For its part, the U.S. Supreme Court in  Hamdan v. Rumsfeld (2006) ruled that 
Common Article 3 of the Geneva Conventions that provides safeguards to those 
held in such prisons does apply. In this regard, the article holds that they are to 
be treated “humanely” with the following prohibitions: “(a) violence to life and 
person, in particular murder of all kinds, mutilation, cruel treatment and torture; 
(b) taking of hostages; (c) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular, humiliat-
ing and degrading treatment; and (d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out 
of executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted 
court affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable by 

Armed Intervention and State Sovereignty 
405
civilized peoples.” Moreover, those who are “wounded and sick shall be collected 
and cared for.” 
 Practical concern for finding information deemed vital to national security 
frequently conflicts with the moral and legal obligations to afford humane treat-
ment in the interrogations of those taken captive. The Convention against Torture 
and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment (1984, entering 
into force in 1987) defines  torture as “any act by which severe pain or suffering, 
whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such purposes 
as  obtaining from him or a third person information or a confession, punishing 
him for an act he or a third person has committed or is suspected of having com-
mitted, or intimidating or coercing him or a third person, or for any reason based 
on discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by or at the 
instigation of or with the consent or acquiescence of a public official or other per-
son acting in an official capacity. It does not include pain or suffering arising only 
from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions.” Those who argue that torture is 
legitimate—or who stretch the operational definitions of what constitutes torture—
are in effect saying that the  end (national security ) justifies the means to that end.  
ARMED INTERVENTION AND STATE SOVEREIGNTY 
 The issue of armed intervention is a good example of where traditional concerns 
with the laws of war blend with concerns over human rights. The 1928 Pact of Paris 
(or Kellogg-Briand Pact) was an unsuccessful attempt to eliminate the use of force 
in international relations. It was supposed to help outlaw “recourse to war for the 
solution of international controversies.” Hope was placed in world peace through 
law in a system of  collective security under the League of Nations. As such, collec-
tive security is different from  collective defense —alliances or coalitions that rely ul-
timately on armed defense or military power rather than collective law enforcement. 
 The League of Nations tried to substitute law-abiding behavior for individual 
and collective- defense relations based on power, balance of power, and military 
might. Law-abiding states under collective- security arrangements enforce interna-
tional law against law-breaking states. But the League of Nations seemed powerless 
to counter such aggressive actions as French intervention in Germany over unpaid 
war reparations (1923–1925), the Italian capture of the Mediterranean island of 
Corfu (1923), the outbreak of the China-Japan war (1931), the Bolivia–Paraguay 
Chaco war (1932–1935), Italy’s invasion of Ethiopia (1935), Germany’s annexa-
tion of Austria and part of Czechoslovakia (1938), and finally the outbreak of 
World War II in 1939. 
 In an attempt to put the lessons of the interwar period to practical effect, the 
United Nations Charter (1945) does specify conditions under which force may 
legally be used: (1) unilaterally in self-defense; (2) multilaterally when authorized 
by the U.N. Security Council “to maintain or restore international peace and 
security”; and (3) in multilateral, often regional, collective-defense action as, for 
example, in the North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO). 
 Armed interventions still occur frequently enough, sometimes justified by 
the participants as serving humanitarian purposes or as a measure to maintain 
or restore international peace and security—a broad grant of legal authority for 

406
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
U.N.-sponsored actions. In a world of sovereign states, diplomatic and other forms 
of intervention in the domestic affairs of another state, especially armed interven-
tion, are normally prohibited under international law. Article 2 of the U.N. Charter 
establishes the United Nations “on the principle of sovereign equality of all its 
Members.” Members pledge themselves to “settle their international disputes by 
peaceful means” and to “refrain in their international relations from the threat or 
use of force against the territorial integrity or political independence of any state.” 
 States that have suffered violation of their legal rights may choose arbitration, 
mediation, or a judicial remedy as offered by the International Court of Justice or 
an appropriate regional or national court. As noted above, a critical weakness is 
that these tribunals do not have enforcement powers. As a practical matter, then, 
states often resort to self-help to include the use of force, which remains very much 
a part of international relations. As we have observed, in an anarchic world that 
lacks a central government or other governing authority with the power to enforce 
international law, sovereign states do not always comply with such legal authori-
zations and restrictions. States sometimes choose to violate or ignore their obliga-
tions under international law. At other times, political leaders and diplomats have 
proven to be quite capable of interpreting or manipulating legal principles to justify 
what they already have done or plan to do in any event. 
Intervention and Civil Wars 
 If applying international law is difficult in the case of interstate wars, it is even more 
complicated when the conflict is internal to a particular state and society—a civil 
war. Given the crises of authority faced by so many states today, it is not surprising 
that internal wars, not interstate wars, are the most likely threat to international 
peace and security. It is often difficult to contain civil wars within the borders of 
the affected state. Quite apart from outside interference, civil wars can spill beyond 
their borders and become interstate wars. 
 Even when motives are legitimate and not contrived, interventions in the 
domestic affairs of sovereign states conflict with a long-established princi-
ple of international law that prohibits them. Consider the American Civil War 
(1861–1865) and the debate in Great Britain as to whether or not Britain should 
support the South. The southern states claimed sovereignty as the Confederate 
States of America and sought outside assistance in their struggle against the United 
States of America, from which they claimed to be separate. 
 The Lincoln administration in Washington denied the South’s claim, arguing 
that the southern states had no right to secede from the Union in the first place. Thus, 
to Lincoln it was not a war between sovereign states, but rather a civil war fought 
between loyal U.S. armed forces and those loyal to the rebellious states. Through 
careful diplomacy, Washington made its interpretation of events clear to the British, 
stressing that outside intervention was illegal. Whether they accepted the Lincoln 
administration’s rationale or not, London chose not to intervene either diplomati-
cally or militarily even as it continued to trade with the South. 
 Determining the difference between an interstate war and a civil war is often 
difficult. American armed intervention in Vietnam, for example, was justified by the 
United States as coming to the defense of South Vietnam (the Republic of Vietnam) 

Armed Intervention and State Sovereignty 
407
against aggression from North Vietnam (the Democratic Republic of Vietnam). If 
this were factually correct, then going to the aid of a victim of aggression was legiti-
mate under international law. On the other hand, if the situation in Vietnam were 
understood as a civil war, with a single state torn between two rival governments 
and an insurgent movement tied to one of the parties, then outside intervention in 
such an internal matter would not have been legitimate under international law. 
 The war in Vietnam was fought not only by the regular forces of North and 
South Vietnam, the United States, the Republic of Korea, and Australia; it also 
involved guerrilla warfare supported by North Vietnam. This capitalized on North 
Vietnam’s ties with the people in the countryside. By using antigovernment and 
ideological appeals, knowledge of the terrain, and the protective cover of the 
jungle canopy, these nonuniformed irregulars (or guerrillas) conducted a very 
successful campaign against the South Vietnamese government and its allies. This 
guerrilla warfare included terrorism, ambushes, rocket attacks, and sometimes 
even firefights with regular forces. These guerrillas were part of an antigovernment 
insurgent movement that, coupled with the efforts of North Vietnamese regu-
lars, eventually succeeded in winning the war and wresting control of the South 
 Vietnamese government. 
 The former Yugoslavia provides another example of the important distinction 
between  civil war and  interstate war. Serbs opposed both the secession of “break-
away republics” and their recognition in the early 1990s by outside states as in-
dependent, sovereign states. From the Serbian perspective, the ensuing war among 
competing parties was really a civil war precluding any legal right to intervention 
by outside parties. Having been recognized as separate, independent, and sovereign 
states by U.N. members, however, Croatia, Slovenia, and Bosnia-Herzogovina were 
seen by other observers as engaging in a war among states against Serbia. As an 
interstate war, then, outside intervention by the U.N., NATO, or other legitimate 
authorities acting in compliance with the U.N. Charter was presented as legitimate.  
Criteria for Humanitarian Intervention 
 In the absence of an invitation from the legitimate government of a state, even 
humanitarian intervention—using force to stop the fighting among competing 
groups, provide the necessary security to feed starving people, halt genocide or 
ethnic cleansing, or for similar humanitarian purposes—legally conflicts with the 
principle of nonintervention in the domestic affairs of a state. As noted above, a 
basis under customary international law may be emerging to give legal legitimacy 
to intervention intended to stop genocide. For its part, the U.N. Charter does not 
give the Security Council authority to use force for humanitarian purposes  per se. 
Armed intervention under U.N. auspices in the internal affairs of a state, however 
justifiable the humanitarian purpose might seem, is legitimate in this strict inter-
pretation only if the problem cannot likely be contained, thus posing a threat to 
international peace and security. 
 The case of Kosovo in 1999 illustrates this point. No one denied that Kosovo 
was a province of Yugoslavia. The Serbs stated that whatever actions they took in 
the province were, therefore, an internal matter, and outside intervention was a 
violation of their sovereignty. The Serbian policy of systematic ethnic “cleansing” 

408
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
(forcing the ethnic separation, movement, or murdering of peoples), however, led to 
NATO military action on the grounds of humanitarian intervention and the claim 
that Serbian actions were a threat to regional peace and security. 
 Humanitarian motives may genuinely accompany actions taken primarily for 
national-interest reasons. In other cases, however, humanitarian motives are pre-
sented as a pretext used by political leaders and diplomats in an effort to justify 
armed interventions done exclusively (or almost entirely) for national-interest rea-
sons. Propagandists like to present humanitarian purposes for armed intervention 
to make the behavior seem less self-serving. 
 Events in 1989 brought an end to the Cold War, but not to armed intervention. 
Subsequent years have been marked by a continuation of armed interventions by 
outside states and multilateral coalitions of states as in responses to Iraq’s armed 
intervention and takeover of Kuwait, civil strife in Somalia and Haiti, and genocide 
in the Balkan states and central Africa. Following terrorist attacks on the United 
States engineered by  al-Qaeda , regimes were overturned by interventions under 
NATO auspices in Afghanistan in 2001 and in Iraq in 2003 by the United States, 
United Kingdom, and a coalition of other states. The latter invasion was justified, 
among other reasons, on the presumption that Iraq possessed (and likely would use) 
weapons of mass destruction. 
 Policymakers face decisions about whether or not to intervene with armed 
force to respond to aggression, prevent or stop genocide, restore order, or maintain 
the peace. Both economic and military capabilities as well as domestic political 
support (or opposition) typically are part of the decision-making calculus. We can 
also identify at least five additional and often competing criteria or factors typically 
weighed by policymakers considering armed intervention. Political support for (or 
opposition to) armed intervention is often expressed in terms of one or more of the 
several criteria we now take up in turn: 
 1.  Sovereignty.   Under international law, states are normally prohibited from 
intervention in the domestic affairs of other sovereign states unless requested 
by the legitimate government of the state subject to such intervention. 
However, as noted above, use of force (including armed intervention) is 
allowed under the U.N. Charter for collective security as when the Security 
Council authorizes using force in response to a contingency endangering 
international peace and security (Chapter VII, particularly Article 42). 
Similarly, self-defense or collective defense by alliances or coalitions of states 
is justified in responding to aggression against a sovereign state (Chapter VII, 
Article 51).  
 2.  National Interest.   Armed intervention is an option often weighed against 
considerations of national interest and related national security objectives. 
Some argue that armed intervention should be pursued only if there is a 
 vital national interest to be served. Even if one considers this criterion to be 
decisive, as many realists do, there is no escaping the practical difficulty in 
trying to define precisely what the national interest (much less  vital national 
interest) might be in a particular case. The national interest is subject to 
multiple interpretations, but even with this ambiguity, it remains part of the 
decision-making calculus. Thus, when states act in self-defense or come to the 

Armed Intervention and State Sovereignty 
409
aid of other states to repel aggression, they claim legal legitimacy for acting 
in the national interest. Indeed, the U.N. Charter in Article 51 recognizes 
“the inherent right of individual or collective self-defense.” Of course, not 
all interventions taken to advance national interest meet this self-defense 
criterion and amount instead to acts of aggression.  
 3.  Human Rights.   A consensus has been forming, mainly in the last half of 
the twentieth century that continues to the present, that represents human 
beings as having rights that may supersede those claimed by sovereign 
states. The groundwork was laid by the Universal Declaration of Human 
Rights, passed by the UN General Assembly in 1948. This human rights 
consensus rests on increasing understanding and acceptance of respect for 
life, human dignity, and justice or fairness as universal ethical or moral 
principles that have global application to individuals, groups, and other 
categories or classes of human beings.  14  Both unilateral and multilateral 
voluntary assistance for relief in natural disasters is a manifestation of 
these principles in action. The enormous human and material cost suffered 
by the victims of mass destruction and atrocities throughout the twentieth 
century resulted in substantial growth in international law, which has 
come to (1) define certain civil or political, social, and economic rights and 
(2) prohibit certain acts defined as war crimes, genocide, and other crimes 
against peace and humanity. When such human rights violations are also 
understood to endanger international peace and security, there is clearer 
legal ground for humanitarian, armed intervention under U.N. Security 
Council auspices. This follows Chapter VII of the U.N. Charter or is based 
on an emerging consensus in customary international law of a human 
rights rationale for intervention at least in such extreme cases as stopping 
genocide.  
 4.  Expected Net Effect on the Human Condition.   Armed intervention has very 
real costs not just to people and property in states and societies subject to 
intervention, but also to the armed forces conducting such interventions. 
The extent of these costs usually cannot be known with certainty, but 
policymakers nevertheless try to estimate what they are likely to be. It is 
extraordinarily difficult, if not impossible, to quantify with precision the net 
effect (benefits minus costs) on the human condition even after an armed 
intervention has occurred. Deaths and other casualties can be counted and 
property losses estimated, but some human costs (for example, psychological 
damage) may not be known for many years, if then. The problem is 
compounded when one tries to estimate what these costs might be in advance 
of an armed intervention. Nevertheless, this criterion typically plays on 
the minds of policymakers who contemplate whether armed intervention 
will better or worsen the human condition. At the very least, expected net 
effect on the human condition can influence how an armed intervention is 
implemented. Using this criterion, policymakers may select options expected 
to minimize or reduce adverse consequences to both armed forces and the 
peoples subject to their actions.  
 5.  Degree of Multilateralism.   As unilateral armed intervention, regardless of 
motivation or justification, has come increasingly into disfavor, policymakers 

410
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
have been more prone to look for multilateral support and cooperation 
in conducting armed interventions. U.N. Security Council mandates, for 
example, provide political and legal ground for proceeding. In the absence 
of such Security Council action, proceeding multilaterally under Article 
51 as a collective-defense response is still viewed by most policymakers as 
politically preferable to unilateral action. This helps explain why the George 
W. Bush administration, despite a generally dismissive attitude toward the 
United Nations, sought a U.N. Security Council resolution in the fall of 2002 
requiring Iraq to readmit weapons inspectors. This effort ultimately included 
an elaborate oral and visual presentation to the U.N. Security Council by 
then secretary of state, Colin Powell, on alleged Iraqi weapons of mass 
destruction.  
 These five criteria often compete with each other, and choices concerning how 
much weight to give to one over the other have to be made sooner or later. That 
said, we are left with an analytical framework that specifies factors typically part of 
decisions to engage in armed intervention. Because states usually intervene to serve 
their interests does not mean that they always do so for only self-serving purposes. 
They may wish to intervene quite genuinely for humanitarian reasons or, consistent 
with their broad interests, to contribute to restoration of international peace and 
security. This seems to be the case in NATO’s intervention in Kosovo. In such cases 
states may weigh the costs and benefits of armed intervention or in terms of how 
well they serve the human condition. 
 In some cases the use of force for humanitarian purposes may cause even more 
bloodshed than if no intervention had taken place. In other cases the reverse is true: 
Armed intervention at relatively low cost may succeed in providing greater security 
and meeting human needs. The difficulty, of course, is that expected net costs or 
benefits to human beings are not always easy to estimate accurately.  
ALTERNATIVE IMAGES AND FOREIGN POLICY CHOICE 
 The relative emphasis placed on order, justice, freedom, and change—values that 
are part of foreign policymaking and that have a direct bearing on international 
politics—varies widely among realists, liberals, economic structuralists, and adher-
ents to the English School. Realist concern with power and the balance of power is 
closely related to value commitments of statesmen who see order as essential to na-
tional security. If they are committed further to the avoidance of war, they may see 
their tasks as one of managing conflict and seeking to maximize accomplishment of 
state objectives, however constrained by states comprising the balance. Following 
Machiavelli, the realist sees national security or the national interest—at a mini-
mum, survival in an anarchic world—as the  raison d’état justifying state policy. The 
first generation of English School scholars such as Hedley Bull also placed emphasis 
on the importance of international order. Bull’s major question was in fact where 
order comes from in an  Anarchical Society. 
 To some extent, the value bias among liberals is also conservative, if not to the 
same degree. To liberals and more recent work in the English School, change should 
be (and usually is) evolutionary and incremental. If change is to be willed, then 

Rationality and Foreign Policy Choice 
411
reformist, not revolutionary, measures typically are the appropriate ones. Liberal 
theories, given the fragmentation of states and proliferation of actors that are their 
starting point, focus on the formation of coalitions and countercoalitions, whether 
within a state or across national borders. This is hardly the environment for radical 
changes that require greater societal unity or, at least, a strong and unitary lead-
ership. Faction against faction, governmental department against governmental 
department—the Madisonian formula underlying the American Constitution—is 
not the means to sweeping change. There are simply too many obstacles (or poten-
tial obstacles in the form of opposing groups or factions) to make change easy to 
come by. 
 Many liberals, however, place greater emphasis on democratic notions of hu-
man rights and justice for individuals, groups, and societies than they do on order 
within and among states. Richard Falk, for example, identifies four values to be 
maximized as part of his World Order Models Project: minimization of collective 
violence, maximization of economic well-being, maximization of social and politi-
cal justice, and maximization of ecological quality. To minimize collective violence, 
order remains important to Falk, but his focus quickly shifts to social and welfare 
issues that need to be addressed as part of the world order. The liberalism in Falk’s 
approach is evident in his characterization of it as “a transnational social movement 
dedicated to global reform.”  15  
 Justice, especially distributive justice, is a central concern not only to a number 
of liberals, but also to many economic structuralists. As noted, John Rawls presents 
a non-Marxist formulation that supports the normative preferences of both liberals 
like Falk and those economic structuralists who focus on patterns of human exploi-
tation and inequalities in the distribution of wealth between the industrial countries 
of the North and the less-developed countries of the South. Economic structuralists 
of Marxist persuasion and many postcolonial theorists and historians do not need 
Rawls, of course, given their own long-standing moral concern with exploitative 
class relations and associated prescriptions for overturning what they see as the 
existing, unjust world order. 
 To many economic structuralists, reformism and incremental change are 
merely prescriptions for maintaining the status quo. If justice is to be served, what 
may be needed is revolutionary change that sweeps out an unjust world order 
and  replaces it with one that allows for an equitable distribution of wealth and 
resources. Whether understood as exploitation of peasants and workers by an inter-
national  bourgeoisie or as domination by highly industrial core states and societies 
over poor, industrially underdeveloped peripheral states, the answer is always the 
same: Justice requires change. Order, peace, and individual freedom will only be 
established after fundamental (or revolutionary) change of the existing order has 
been effected.  
RATIONALITY AND FOREIGN POLICY CHOICE 
 Foreign policy choice is the domain in which moral and ethical values apply 
 directly. On the basis of some set of criteria, decisionmakers ultimately choose 
authoritatively among competing alternatives. Can the rational choice model allow 
us to avoid or side-step normative issues? 

412
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
 The rational model, often a critical element in realist thinking, amounts to poli-
cymakers’ ordering of alternatives, making decisions, and taking actions to achieve 
the most efficient outcome in terms of ends sought. This process is, however, not 
value free. First, determining the objective or ends to be sought obviously involves 
value choices. Second, the idea that the means chosen to achieve these goals should 
be the most efficient, the best, or even just “good enough” is itself a value underly-
ing the decision-making calculus. Finally, even if statesmen can reach a consensus 
on what general values should be pursued internationally, there may be honest 
disagreement as to how these values are to be defined and implemented. A good 
example of this problem involves human rights, which we already have mentioned 
above. 
 Notwithstanding a Universal Declaration of Human Rights in 1948 and a 
number of human rights conventions since then, it often has been difficult to forge 
a consensus among governments on which criteria should apply in approaching 
questions of human rights: Which rights are to be protected, the relative importance 
or weight of different values when they conflict, and whose rights—individuals, 
groups, classes, states—take precedence. 
 In sum, contrary to what one might first presume, the rational model of for-
eign policy decision making is by no means a value-free approach, particularly 
given the wide range of values pursued by statesmen and different views as to how 
a particular value should be defined and implemented. As has been discussed in 
 Chapter  3 , some liberals challenge whether foreign policy decision making can ever 
conform to a rational model when the actors involved are various organizations 
and small groups of individuals and when decisions are typically the outcome of 
bargaining, compromising, “end-running,” or related tactics. Each separate actor 
may act  rationally to achieve its own goals and values, but this is not the same 
thing as assuming that statesmen act rationally to achieve the goals or interests 
of the entire state and society. Similarly, some economic structuralists may question 
the rationality of a decision-making or foreign-policy process that, from their point 
of view, is dominated by narrow class interests. Whatever may be the rationality of 
individuals, institutions, or classes in maximizing or serving their own values or 
interests, the outcome for the whole may be suboptimal or less than the best.  
VALUES, CHOICES, AND THEORY 
 The case for normative theory is not subject to debate for critical theorists, post-
modernists, and feminists. Normative theory also has a place in many English 
School and classical realist formulations. The same is probably true for most con-
structivists. The idea of divorcing norms from inquiry is at a minimum difficult to 
achieve, if not impossible. The traditional debate has been over the role of norma-
tive theory in the four images. For realists and liberals of positivist bent, explana-
tory theory and normative theory occupy separate realms. 
 We conclude, however, that normative theory is indeed relevant to each of 
the images and associated theories we discuss in this book to the extent that one 
finds allowance for the exercise of human will. How much can political leaders, 
heads of international organizations, or directors of transnational organizations 
affect the course of events? If those statesmen are driven internally, consistent with 

Notes
413
some psychological theories, or if they are severely constrained by their external 
environment, then normative theory plays a reduced, if any, role in their decision 
making. On the other hand, if human beings do have some degree of control over 
their  affairs, including international relations, and if causal theories take this effect 
of the will into account and exclude determinist inevitabilities, then why has the 
normative part often been neglected in international relations theory? 
 A central argument made in this book is that the image, set of assumptions, and 
interpretive understandings one holds concerning international relations do affect 
the sense one makes of “facts” and the types of explanations or predictions one of-
fers. Although it is important to come to an understanding of biases or perspectives 
associated with any particular image or interpretive understanding of international 
relations and world politics, we are by no means making the argument that such 
knowledge is a function only of prior assumptions, preferences, or values. When 
what we see as facts contradicts the image or understanding we hold, then it is the 
image or understanding that should be altered or even overturned to accommodate 
new information. Our knowledge of international relations is imperfect and vari-
ous biases color our vision, but the world has a way of breaking down our pre-
conceptions when these preconceptions are fallacious. Scientific skepticism about 
claims to truth forces testing of various propositions or hypotheses with historical, 
interpretive, or other empirical data. Whether in the natural or social realms, sci-
entific progress that enhances our knowledge of the world is painfully slow, but it 
is persistent.  
NOTES
 1.   Morality is sometimes viewed narrowly as the religious principles of a particular tradi-
tion, group, or individual (e.g., Christian morality). Ethics can be viewed as either the 
philosophical study of morality, or the same as morality (e.g., Christian ethics). One 
could also draw a distinction between normative and value considerations, perhaps see-
ing value as just one part of normative theory. Indeed, one can see that some normative 
considerations are nonmoral ones, as when an artist uses the terms  ought and  right in 
an aesthetic context that does not have the moral content usually associated with these 
words. For our purposes, however, we use the terms  normative,  moral,  ethics, and  value 
interchangeably. 
 2.   For example, Mary Midgley, “Individualism and the Concept of Gaia,”  Review of In-
ternational Studies 26 (2000): 29–44; Stanley Hoffmann,  Duties beyond Borders: On 
the Limits and Possibilities of Ethical International Politics (Syracuse, NY: Syracuse 
University Press, 1981).  
 3.   A prime example of this perspective is Terry Nardin,  Law, Morality and the Relations of 
States (Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1983). Nardin refers to “communitar-
ian” norms.  
 4.   See, for example, Cicero, “‘The Republic’ and ‘The Laws,’” in William Ebenstein,  Great 
Political Thinkers, 4th ed. (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1969), pp. 136–38.  
 5.   Immanuel Kant,  Foundations of the Metaphysics of Morals, trans. by Lewis White 
Beck (Indianapolis: Bobbs-Merrill, 1959), 66–67. The literature on Kant is vast, and 
no attempt is made to summarize it here. We are particularly drawn, however, to the 
late Hannah Arendt’s  Lectures on Kant’s Political Philosophy (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1982).  

414
CHAPTER 9  Normative IR Theory: Ethics and Morality
 6.   See John Rawls,  A Theory of Justice (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1971), 22.  
 7.   Ibid., 62 and 8, respectively.  
 8.   See John Rawls’s lecture on “The Law of Peoples,” in Stephen Shute and Susan Hurley, 
eds.,  On Human Rights (New York: Basic Books, 1993), 41–82. The quote is on p. 43. 
Cf. his later  The Law of Peoples (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 2001). See 
also his  Justice as Fairness:  A Restatement (Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press of Harvard 
University Press, 2001).  
 9.   E. H. Carr,  The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939 (New York: Harper & Row, 
1964), 97.  
 10.  St. Augustine, “The City of God,” in Ebenstein,  Great Political Thinkers, 181–84.  
 11.  See, for example, Louis René Beres,  Mimicking Sisyphus: America’s Countervailing 
Nuclear Strategy (Lexington, MA: Lexington Books, 1983).  
 12.  See, for example, Ward Wilson, “The Winning Weapon: Rethinking Nuclear Weapons 
in Light of Hiroshima,”  International Security 31, 4 (Spring 2007); 162–79.  
 13.  For an overview, see Jack Donnelly,  International Human Rights (Boulder, CO: West-
view Press, 2006).  
 14.  Other covenants address Racial Discrimination (1966), Discrimination against Women 
(1979), Torture and Other Cruel, Inhuman or Degrading Treatment or Punishment 
(1984), and the Rights of a Child (1989).  
 15.  See Richard A. Falk,  A Study of Future Worlds (New York: Free Press, 1975), 11–30, 
and Falk,  The End of World Order: Essays on Normative International Relations (New 
York: Holmes and Meier, 1983), 53.  

SE LECTED READIN GS 
Morality, Politics, and Perpetual Peace 
IMMANUEL KANT
 From Beck, Lewis White,  Perpetual Peace: Kant (Library of Liberal Arts), 1 st Edition, © 1957, pp. 35–46. Reprinted by 
permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ. 
 Taken objectively, morality is in itself practical, being 
the totality of unconditionally mandatory laws ac-
cording to which we ought to act. It would obviously 
be absurd, after granting authority to the concept of 
duty, to pretend that we cannot do our duty, for in 
that case this concept would itself drop out of moral-
ity ( ultra posse nemo obligatur ). Consequently, there 
can be no conflict of politics, as a practical doctrine 
of right, with ethics, as a theoretical doctrine of right. 
That is to say, there is no conflict of practice with 
theory, unless by ethics we mean a general doctrine 
of prudence, which would be the same as a theory of 
the maxims for choosing the most fitting means to 
accomplish the purposes of self-interest. But to give 
this meaning to ethics is equivalent to denying that 
there is any such thing at all. 
OVERVIEW
 Writing from Königsberg in East Prussia, eighteenth-century philosopher Im-
manuel Kant (1724–1804) presents an argument for politics compatible with 
moral principle within a state and among states. He rejects classic notions that 
in politics might makes right or that one must compromise ethics for prudential 
reasons. Moral principle—not expediency—guides us in the ideal politics he pre-
scribes. He tells us that we “cannot compromise here and seek the middle course 
of a pragmatic conditional law between the morally right and the expedient.” 
Consistent with this idealism, he concludes that “all politics must bend its knee 
before the right” in a progressive effort “to reach the stage where it will shine with 
an immortal glory.”  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  How realistic is Kant? Are his critics fair in calling him utopian?  
 2.  If democracies or liberal republics around the world commit themselves to right conduct in 
their international relations, does peace become more likely?  
 3.  Do Kant’s observations about how politics are (or ought to be) have relevance in an increas-
ingly globalized world?  
 4.  To what extent do those who advance human rights and the rule of law draw inspiration from 
Kant?  
415

416
IMMANUEL KANT
 Politics say, “Be ye wise as serpents”; moral-
ity adds, as a limiting condition, “and guileless as 
doves.” If these two injunctions are incompatible 
in a single command, then politics and morality are 
really in conflict; but if these two qualities ought 
always to be united, the thought of contrariety is 
absurd, and the question as to how the conflict be-
tween morals and politics is to be resolved cannot 
even be posed as a problem. Although the prop-
ositions, “Honesty is the best policy,” implies a 
theory which practice unfortunately often refutes, 
the equally theoretical “Honesty is better than any 
policy” is beyond refutation and is indeed the indis-
pensable condition of policy. 
 The tutelary divinity of morality yields not to 
Jupiter, for this tutelary divinity of force still is sub-
ject to destiny. That is, reason is not yet sufficiently 
enlightened to survey the entire series of predeter-
mining causes, and such vision would be necessary 
for one to be able to foresee with certainty the happy 
or unhappy effects which follow human actions by 
the mechanism of nature (though we know enough 
to have hope that they will accord with our wishes). 
But what we have to do in order to remain in the 
path of duty (according to rules of wisdom) reason 
instructs us by her rules, and her teaching suffices 
for attaining the ultimate end. 
 Now the practical man, to whom morality is 
mere theory even though he concedes that it can and 
should be followed, ruthlessly renounces our fond 
hope [that it will be followed]. He does so because 
he pretends to have seen in advance that man, by his 
nature, will never will what is required for realizing 
the goal of perpetual peace. Certainly the will of 
each individual to live under a juridical constitution 
according to principles of freedom (i.e., the distribu-
tive unity of the will of all) is not sufficient to this 
end. That all together should will this condition (i.e., 
the collective unity of the united will)—the solution 
to this troublous problem—is also required. Thus a 
whole of civil society is formed. But since a uniting 
cause must supervene upon the variety of particular 
volitions in order to produce a common will from 
them, establishing this whole is something no one 
individual in the group can perform; hence in the 
practical execution of this idea we can count on 
nothing but force to establish the juridical condi-
tion, on the compulsion of which public law will 
later be established. We can scarcely hope to find in 
the legislator a moral intention sufficient to induce 
him to commit to the general will the establishment 
of a legal constitution after he has formed the nation 
from a horde of savages; therefore, we cannot but 
expect (in practice) to find in execution wide devia-
tions from this idea (in theory). 
 It will then be said that he who once has power 
in his hands will not allow the people to prescribe 
laws for him; a state which once is able to stand un-
der no external laws will not submit to the decision 
of other states how it should seek its rights against 
them; and one continent, which feels itself superior 
to another, even though the other does not interfere 
with it, will not neglect to increase its power by 
robbery or even conquest. Thus all theoretical plans 
of civil and international laws and laws of world 
citizenship vanish into empty and impractical ideas, 
while practice based on empirical principles of hu-
man nature, not blushing to draw its maxims from 
the usages of the world, can alone hope to find a 
sure ground for its political edifice. 
 If there is no freedom and no morality based on 
freedom, and everything which occurs or can occur 
happens by the mere mechanism of nature, certainly 
politics (which is the art of using this mechanism 
for ruling men) is the whole of practical wisdom, 
and the concept of right is an empty thought. But 
if we find it necessary to connect the latter with 
politics, and even to raise it to a limiting condition 
thereon, the possibility of their being united must be 
conceded. I can easily conceive of a moral politician, 
i.e., one who so chooses political principles that they 
are consistent with those of morality; but I cannot 
conceive of a political moralist, one who forges a 
morality in such a way that it conforms to the states-
man’s advantage. 
 When a remediable defect is found in the con-
stitution of the state or in its relations to others, the 
principle of the moral politician will be that it is a 
duty, especially of the rulers of the state, to inquire 
how it can be remedied as soon as possible in a way 
conforming to natural law as a model presented by 
reason; this he will do even if it costs self-sacrifice. 
But it would be absurd to demand that every defect 
be immediately and impetuously changed, since the 
disruption of the bonds of a civil society or a union 
of world citizens before a better constitution is ready 
to take its place is against all politics agreeing with 
morality. But it can be demanded that at least the 
maxim of the necessity of such a change should be 
taken to heart by those in power, so that they may 
continuously approach the goal of the constitution 
that is best under laws of right. A state may exercise a 

Morality, Politics, and Perpetual Peace 
417
republican rule, even though by its present constitu-
tion it has a despotic sovereignty, until gradually the 
people become susceptible to the influence simply 
of the idea of the authority of law (as if it possessed 
physical power) and thus is found fit to be its own 
legislator (as its own legislation is originally estab-
lished on law). If a violent revolution, engendered 
by a bad constitution, introduces by illegal means 
a more legal constitution, to lead the people back 
to the earlier constitution would not be permitted; 
but, while the revolution lasted, each person who 
openly or covertly shared in it would have justly 
incurred the punishment due to those who rebel. As 
to the external relations of states, a state cannot be 
expected to renounce its constitution even though it 
is a despotic one (which has the advantage of being 
stronger in relation to foreign enemies) so long as it 
is exposed to the danger of being swallowed up by 
other states. Thus even in the case of the intention to 
improve the constitution, postponement to a more 
propitious time may be permitted.  1  
 It may be that despotizing moralists, in practice 
blundering, often violate rules of political prudence 
through measures they adopt or propose too precip-
itately; but experience will gradually retrieve them 
from their infringement of nature and lead them on 
to a better course. But the moralizing politician, by 
glossing over principles of politics which are op-
posed to the right with the pretext that human na-
ture is not capable of the good as reason prescribes 
it, only makes reform impossible and perpetuates 
the violation of law. 
 Instead of possessing the  practical science they 
boast of, these politicians have only  practices; they 
flatter the power which is then ruling so as not 
to be remiss in their private advantage, and they 
sacrifice the nation and, possibly, the whole world. 
This is the way of all professional lawyers (not 
legislators) when they go into politics. Their task 
is not to reason too nicely about the legislation 
but to execute the momentary commands on the 
statute books; consequently, the legal constitution 
in force at any time is to them the best, but when 
it is amended from above, this amendment always 
seems best, too. Thus everything is preserved in its 
accustomed mechanical order. Their adroitness in 
fitting into all circumstances gives them the illu-
sion of being able to judge constitutional principles 
 according to concepts of right (not empirically, but 
a priori). They make a great show of understanding 
 men (which is certainly something to be expected of 
them, since they have to deal with so many) without 
understanding  man and what can be made of him, 
for they lack the higher point of view of anthropo-
logical observation which is needed for this. If with 
these ideas they go into civil and international law, 
as reason prescribes it, they take this step in a spirit 
of chicanery, for they still follow their accustomed 
mechanical routine of despotically imposed coer-
cive laws in a field where only concepts of reason 
can establish a legal compulsion according to the 
principles of freedom, under which alone a just 
and durable constitution is possible. In this field 
the pretended practical man thinks he can solve the 
problem of establishing such a constitution without 
the rational idea but solely from the experience he 
has had with what was previously the most lasting 
constitution—a constitution which in many cases 
was opposed to the right. 
 The maxims which he makes use of (though he 
does not divulge them) are, roughly speaking, the 
following sophisms: 
 1.  Fac et excusa.   Seize every favourable op-
portunity for usurping the right of the state over its 
own people or over a neighboring people; the justifi-
cation will be easier and more elegant  ex post facto, 
and the power can be more easily glossed over, 
especially when the supreme power in the state is 
also the legislative authority which must be obeyed 
without argument. It is much more difficult to do 
the violence when one has first to wait upon the 
consideration of convincing arguments and to meet 
them with counterarguments. Boldness itself gives 
the appearance of inner conviction of the legitimacy 
of the deed, and the god of success is afterward the 
best advocate.  
 2.  Si fecisti, nega.   What you have committed, 
deny that it was your fault—for instance, that you 
have brought your people to despair and hence to 
rebellion. Rather assert that it was due to the ob-
stinacy of your subjects; or, if you have conquered 
a neighboring nation, say that the fault lies in the 
nature of man, who, if not met by force, can be 
counted on to make use of it to conquer you.  
 3.  Divide et impera.   That is, if there are cer-
tain privileged persons in your nation who have 
chosen you as their chief ( primus inter pares ), set 
them at variance with one another and embroil them 
with the people. Show the latter visions of greater 
freedom, and all will soon depend on your untram-
meled will. Or if it is foreign states that concern you, 

418
IMMANUEL KANT
it is a pretty safe means to sow discord among them 
so that, by seeming to protect the weaker, you can 
conquer them one after another.  
 Certainly no one is now the dupe of these politi-
cal maxims, for they are already universally known. 
Nor are they blushed at, as if their injustice were 
too glaring, for great powers blush only at the judg-
ment of other great powers but not at that of the 
common masses. It is not that they are ashamed 
of revealing such principles (for all of them are in 
the same boat with respect to the morality of their 
maxims); they are ashamed only when these maxims 
fail, for they still have political honor which cannot 
be disputed—and this honor is the aggrandizement 
of their power by whatever means.  2  
 All these twistings and turnings of an immoral 
doctrine of prudence in leading men from their 
natural state of war to a state of peace prove at 
least that men in both their private and their public 
 relationships cannot reject the concept of right or 
trust themselves openly to establish politics merely 
on the artifices of prudence. Thus they do not refuse 
obedience to the concept of public law, which is 
especially manifest in international law; on the con-
trary, they give all due honor to it, even when they 
are inventing a hundred pretenses and subterfuges 
to escape from it in practice, imputing its authority 
as the source and union of all laws, to crafty force. 
 Let us put an end to this sophism, if not to the 
injustice it protects, and force the false representa-
tives of power to confess that they do not plead 
in favor of the right but in favor of might. This is 
revealed in the imperious tone they assume as if they 
themselves could command the right. Let us remove 
the delusion by which they and others are duped, 
and discover the supreme principle from which the 
intention to perpetual peace stems. Let us show that 
everything evil which stands in its way derives from 
the fact that the political moralist begins where the 
moral politician would correctly leave off, and that, 
since he thus subordinates principles to the end (put-
ting the cart before the horse), he vitiates his own 
purpose of bringing politics into agreement with 
morality. 
 To make practical philosophy self-consistent, 
it is necessary, first, to decide the question: In prob-
lems of practical reason, must we begin from its 
material principles, i.e., the end as the object of 
choice? Or should we begin from the formal prin-
ciples of pure reason, i.e., from the principle which 
is concerned solely with freedom in outer relations 
and which reads, “So act that you can will that your 
maxim could become a universal law regardless of 
the end”? 
 Without doubt it is the latter which has prece-
dence, for as a principle of law it has unconditional 
necessity. On the other hand, the former is obliga-
tory only if we presuppose the empirical conditions 
of the proposed end, i.e., its practicability. Thus if 
this end (in this case, perpetual peace) is a duty, it 
must be derived from the formal principle of the 
maxims of external actions. The first principle, that 
of the political moralist, pertaining to civil and in-
ternational law and the law of world citizenship, is 
merely a problem of technique ( problema techni-
cum ); the second, as the problem of the moral poli-
tician to whom it is an ethical problem ( problema 
morale ), is far removed from the other in its method 
of leading toward perpetual peace, which is wished 
not merely as a material good but also as a condition 
issuing from an acknowledgment of duty. 
 For the solution of the former, the problem of 
political prudence, much knowledge of nature is 
required so that its mechanism may be employed 
toward the desired end; yet all this is uncertain in its 
results for perpetual peace, with whatever sphere of 
public law we are concerned. It is uncertain, for ex-
ample, whether the people are better kept in obedi-
ence and maintained in prosperity by severity or by 
the charm of distinctions which flatter their vanity, 
by the power of one or the union of various chiefs, 
or perhaps merely by a serving nobility or by the 
power of the people. History furnishes us with con-
tradictory examples from all governments (with the 
exception of the truly republican, which can alone 
appeal to the mind of a moral politician). Still more 
uncertain is an international law allegedly erected 
on the statutes of ministries. It is, in fact, a word 
without meaning, resting as it does on compacts 
which, in the very act of being concluded, contain 
secret reservations for their violation. 
 On the other hand, the solution of the sec-
ond problem, that of political wisdom, presses itself 
upon us, as it were; it is clear to everyone and puts 
to shame all affectation. It leads directly to the end, 
but, remembering discretion, it does not precipi-
tately hasten to do so by force; rather, it continu-
ously approaches it under the conditions offered by 
favorable circumstances. 
 Then it may be said, “Seek ye first the kingdom 
of pure practical reason and its righteousness, and 

Morality, Politics, and Perpetual Peace 
419
your end (the blessing of perpetual peace) will nec-
essarily follow.” For it is the peculiarity of morals, 
especially with respect to its principles of public 
law and hence in relation to a politics known a 
priori, that the less it makes conduct depend on the 
proposed end, i.e., the intended material or moral 
advantage, the more it agrees with it in general. 
This is because it is the universal will given a priori 
(in a nation or in the relations among different na-
tions) which determines the law among men, and 
if practicing consistently follows it, this will can 
also, by the mechanism of nature, cause the desired 
result and make the concept of law effective. So, 
for instance, it is a principle of moral politics that 
a people should unite into a state according to ju-
ridical concepts of freedom and equality, and this 
principle is based not on prudence but on duty. 
Political moralists may argue as much as they wish 
about the natural mechanism of a mass of men 
forming a society, assuming a mechanism which 
would weaken those principles and vitiate their 
end; or they may seek to prove their assertions by 
examples of poorly organized constitutions of an-
cient and modern times (for instance, of democra-
cies without representative systems). They deserve 
no hearing, particularly as such a pernicious theory 
may itself occasion the evil which it prophesies, 
throwing human beings into one class with all other 
living machines, differing from them only in their 
consciousness that they are not free, which makes 
them, in their own judgment, the most miserable of 
all beings in the world. 
 The true but somewhat boastful sentence which 
has become proverbial,  Fiat iustitia, pereat mundus 
(“Let justice reign even if all the rascals in the world 
should perish from it”), is a stout principle of right 
which cuts asunder the whole tissue of artifice or 
force. But it should not be misunderstood as a per-
mission to use one’s own right with extreme rigor 
(which would conflict with ethical duty); it should 
be understood as the obligation of those in power 
not to limit or to extend anyone’s right through 
sympathy or disfavor. This requires, first, an inter-
nal constitution of the state erected on pure prin-
ciples of right, and, second, a convention of the state 
with other near or distant states (analogous to a uni-
versal state) for the legal settlement of their differ-
ences. This implies only that political maxims must 
not be derived from the welfare or happiness which 
a single state expects from obedience to them, and 
thus not from the end which one of them proposes 
for itself. That is, they must not be deduced from 
volition as the supreme yet empirical principle of 
political wisdom, but rather from the pure concept 
of the duty of right, from the  ought whose principle 
is given a priori by pure reason, regardless of what 
the physical consequences may be. The world will 
by no means perish by a diminution in the number 
of evil men. Moral evil has the . . . property of be-
ing opposed to and destructive of its own purposes 
(especially in the relationships between evil men); 
thus it gives place to the moral principle of the good, 
though only through a slow progress. 
 Thus objectively, or in theory, there is no con-
flict between morals and politics. Subjectively, how-
ever, in the selfish propensity of men (which should 
not be called “practice,” as this would imply that it 
rested on rational maxims), this conflict will always 
remain. Indeed, it should remain, because it serves 
as a whetstone of virtue, whose true courage (by 
the principle,  tu ne cede malis, sed contra audentior 
ito )  3  in the present case does not so much consist 
in defying with strong resolve evils and sacrifices 
which must be undertaken along with the conflict, 
but rather in detecting and conquering the crafty 
and far more dangerously deceitful and treasonable 
principle of evil in ourselves, which puts forward the 
weakness of human nature as justification for every 
transgression. 
 In fact, the political moralist may say: The ruler 
and people, or nation and nation, do each other no 
injustice when by violence or fraud they make war 
on each other, although they do commit injustice in 
general in that they refuse to respect the concept of 
right, which alone could establish perpetual peace. 
For since the one does transgress his duty against 
the other, who is likewise lawlessly disposed toward 
him, each gets what he deserves when they destroy 
each other. But enough of the race still remains to let 
this game continue into the remotest ages in order 
that posterity, some day, might take these perpetra-
tors as a warning example. Hence providence is 
justified in the history of the world, for the moral 
principle in man is never extinguished, while with 
advancing civilization reason grows pragmatically 
in its capacity to realize ideas of law. But at the 
same time the culpability for the transgressions also 
grows. If we assume that humanity never will or can 
be improved, the only thing which a theodicy seems 
unable to justify is creation itself, the fact that a race 
of such corrupt beings ever was on earth. But the 
point of view necessary for such an assumption is far 

too high for us, and we cannot theoretically support 
our philosophical concepts of the supreme power 
which is inscrutable to us. 
 To such dubious consequences we are inevita-
bly driven if we do not assume that pure principles 
of right have objective reality, i.e., that they may be 
applied, and that the people in a state and, further, 
states themselves in their mutual relations should 
act according to them, whatever objections empiri-
cal politics may raise. Thus true politics can never 
take a step without rendering homage to morality. 
Though politics by itself is a difficult art, its union 
with morality is no art at all, for this union cuts 
the knot which politics could not untie when they 
were in conflict. The rights of men must be held 
sacred, however much sacrifice it may cost the rul-
ing power. One cannot compromise here and seek 
the middle course of a pragmatic conditional law 
between the morally right and the expedient. All 
politics must bend its knee before the right. But by 
this it can hope slowly to reach the stage where it 
will shine with an immortal glory. 
Notes
 1.   These are permissive laws of reason. Public law laden 
with injustice must be allowed to stand, either until ev-
erything is of itself ripe for complete reform or until this 
maturity has been brought about by peaceable means; for 
a legal constitution, even though it be right to only a low 
degree, is better than none at all, the anarchic condition 
which would result from precipitate reform. Political wis-
dom, therefore, will make it a duty to introduce reforms 
which accord with the ideal of public law. But even when 
nature herself produces revolutions, political wisdom will 
not employ them to legitimize still greater oppression. On 
the contrary, it will use them as a call of nature for funda-
mental reforms to produce a lawful constitution founded 
upon principles of freedom, for only such a constitution is 
durable.  
 2.   Even if we doubt a certain wickedness in the nature of 
men who live together in a state, and instead plausibly cite 
lack of civilization, which is not yet sufficiently advanced, 
i.e., regard barbarism as the cause of those anti-lawful 
manifestations of their character, this viciousness is clearly 
and incontestably shown in the foreign relations of states. 
Within each state it is veiled by the compulsion of civil 
laws, because the inclination to violence between the citi-
zens is fettered by the stronger power of the government. 
This relationship not only gives a moral veneer ( causae 
non causae ) to the whole but actually facilitates the devel-
opment of the moral disposition to a direct respect for the 
law by placing a barrier against the outbreak of unlawful 
inclinations. Each person believes that he himself would 
hold the concept of law sacred and faithfully follow it 
provided he were sure that he could expect the same from 
others, and the government does in part assure him of 
this. Thereby a great step (though not yet a moral step) is 
taken toward morality, which is attachment to this con-
cept of duty for its own sake and without regard to hope 
of a similar response from others. But since each one with 
his own good opinion of himself presupposes a malicious 
disposition on the part of all the others, they all pronounce 
the judgment that they in fact are all worth very little. We 
shall not discuss how this comes about, though it cannot 
be blamed on the nature of man as a free being. But since 
even respect for the concept of right (which man cannot 
absolutely refuse to respect) solemnly sanctions the theory 
that he has the capacity of conforming to it, everyone sees 
that he, for his part, must act according to it, however 
others may act. 
 3.   “Yield not to evils, but go against the stronger” 
( Aeneid VI. 95).  
420
IMMANUEL KANT

The Nature of Politics 
E. H. CARR
OVERVIEW
 The twentieth-century English writer, E. H. Carr (1892–1982), argues that the 
practice and study of politics require an appreciation of realism as well as uto-
pianism, power as well as morality: “It is as fatal in politics to ignore power as 
it is to ignore morality. . . .” He explores the resulting tension between realism 
with its focus on power and interest and utopian thought that seeks realization 
of ideals. Although Carr was never a member of the British Committee that 
preceded formation of the English School, his representation of the tension 
between realist and utopian thought and continuing search for the bases of 
international society clearly establish him as an intellectual precursor of the 
English School.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  In what ways is Carr’s position similar to (or different from) Kant (see the previous reading) 
on the relation between politics and moral principle?  
 2.  To what extent is the use of force to advance national interests also subject to moral 
 restraints—the balance between power and morality identified by Carr?  
 3.  Following Carr’s understanding, can present-day, human-rights advocates expect success in 
advancing their global agenda without taking politics into account? As a practical matter, how 
do they balance their ideals with the political constraints that confront them without sacrific-
ing their moral commitment to advancing the human condition globally?  
 4.  To what extent are Carr’s understandings of power and moral principle reflected in the con-
duct of international relations and the foreign policies pursued by the leaders of present-day 
states?  
 From  The Twenty Years’ Crisis: 1919–1939, by E. H. Carr and Professor Michael Cox, Copyright © 1960 Palgrave 
 Macmillan, reproduced with permission. 
 Man has always lived in groups. The smallest kind 
of human group, the family, has clearly been neces-
sary for the maintenance of the species. But so far as 
is known, men have always from the most primitive 
times formed semi-permanent groups larger than 
the single family; and one of the functions of such 
a group has been to regulate relations between its 
members. Politics deals with the behavior of men 
in such organised permanent or semi-permanent 
groups. All attempts to deduce the nature of society 
from the supposed behavior of man in isolation are 
purely theoretical, since there is no reason to assume 
that such a man ever existed. Aristotle laid the foun-
dation of all sound thinking about politics when he 
declared that man was by nature a political animal. 
 Man in society reacts to his fellow men in two 
opposite ways. Sometimes he displays egoism, or 
the will to assert himself at the expense of others. 
421

422
E. H. CARR
At other times he displays sociability, or the desire 
to cooperate with others, to enter into reciprocal 
relations of good-will and friendship with them, and 
even to subordinate himself to them. In every society 
these two qualities can be seen at work. No soci-
ety can exist unless a substantial proportion of its 
members exhibits in some degree the desire for co-
operation and mutual good-will. But in every society 
some sanction is required to produce the measure 
of solidarity requisite for its maintenance; and this 
sanction is applied by a controlling group or indi-
vidual acting in the name of the society. Membership 
of most societies is voluntary, and the only ultimate 
sanction which can be applied is expulsion. But the 
peculiarity of political society, which in the modern 
world takes the form of the state, is that member-
ship is compulsory. The state, like other societies, 
must be based on some sense of common interests 
and obligations among its members. But coercion is 
regularly exercised by a governing group to enforce 
loyalty and obedience; and this coercion inevitably 
means that the governors control the governed and 
“exploit” them for their own purposes.  1  
 The dual character of political society is there-
fore strongly marked. Professor Laski tells us that 
“every state is built upon the consciences of men.”  2  
On the other hand, anthropology, as well as much 
recent history, teaches that “war seems to be the 
main agency in producing the state”; and Professor 
Laski himself, in another passage, declares that “our 
civilisation is held together by fear rather than by 
good-will.”  3  There is no contradiction between these 
apparently opposite views. When Tom Paine, in the 
 Rights of Man, tries to confront Burke with the di-
lemma that “governments arise either  out of the 
people or  over the people,” the answer is that they 
do both. Coercion and conscience, enmity and good-
will, self-assertion and self-subordination, are pres-
ent in every political society. The state is built up out 
of these two conflicting aspects of human nature. 
Utopia and reality, the ideal and the institution, 
morality and power, are from the outset inextricably 
blended in it. In the making of the United States, 
as a modern American writer has said, “Hamilton 
stood for strength, wealth, and power, Jefferson, for 
the American dream”; and both the power and the 
dream were necessary ingredients.  4  
 If this be correct, we can draw one important 
conclusion. The utopian who dreams that it is pos-
sible to eliminate self-assertion from politics and 
to base a political system on morality alone is just 
as wide of the mark as the realist who believes 
that altruism is an illusion and that all political 
action is based on self-seeking. These errors have 
both left their mark on popular terminology. The 
phrase “power politics” is often used in an invidious 
sense, as if the element of power or self-assertion in 
politics were something abnormal and susceptible of 
elimination from a healthy political life. Conversely, 
there is a disposition, even among some writers who 
are not strictly speaking realists, to treat politics as 
the science of power and self-assertion and exclude 
from it by definition actions inspired by the moral 
consciousness. Professor Catlin describes the  homo 
politicus as one who “seeks to bring into conformity 
with his own will the wills of others, so that he may 
the better attain his own ends.”  5  Such terminologi-
cal implications are misleading. Politics cannot be 
divorced from power. But the  homo politicus who 
pursues nothing but power is as unreal a myth as the 
 homo economicus who pursues nothing but gain. 
Political action must be based on a coordination of 
morality and power. 
 This truth is of practical as well as theoretical 
importance. It is as fatal in politics to ignore power 
as it is to ignore morality. The fate of China in the 
nineteenth century is an illustration of what happens 
to a country which is content to believe in the moral 
superiority of its own civilisation and to despise the 
ways of power. The Liberal Government of Great 
Britain nearly came to grief in the spring of 1914 
because it sought to pursue an Irish policy based on 
moral authority unsupported (or rather, directly op-
posed) by effective military power. In Germany, the 
Frankfort Assembly of 1848 is the classic example 
of the impotence of ideas divorced from power; and 
the Weimar Republic broke down because many of 
the policies it pursued—in fact, nearly all of them 
except its opposition to the communists—were un-
supported, or actively opposed, by effective military 
power.  6  The utopian, who believes that democracy 
is not based on force, refuses to look these unwel-
come facts in the face. 
 On the other hand, the realist, who believes 
that, if you look after the power, the moral author-
ity will look after itself, is equally in error. The 
most recent form of this doctrine is embodied in 
the much-quoted phrase: “The function of force is 
to give moral ideas time to take root.” Internation-
ally, this argument was used in 1919 by those who, 
unable to defend the Versailles Treaty on moral 
grounds, maintained that this initial act of power 

The Nature of Politics 
423
would pave the way for subsequent moral appease-
ment. Experience has done little to confirm this 
comfortable belief. The same fallacy is implicit in 
the once popular view that the aim of British policy 
should be “to rebuild the League of Nations, to 
make it capable of holding a political aggressor in 
restraint by armed power, and thereafter to labour 
faithfully for the mitigation of just and real griev-
ances.”  7  Once the enemy has been crushed or the 
“aggressor” restrained by force, the “thereafter” 
fails to arrive. The illusion that priority can be given 
to power and that morality will follow, is just as 
dangerous as the illusion that priority can be given 
to moral authority and that power will follow. 
 Before proceeding, however, to consider the 
respective roles of power and morality in politics, 
we must take some note of the views of those who, 
though far from being realists, identify politics with 
power and believe that moral concepts must be alto-
gether excluded from its scope. There is, according 
to this view, an essential antinomy between politics 
and morality; and the moral man as such will there-
fore have nothing to do with politics. This thesis has 
many attractions, and reappears at different periods 
of history and in different contexts. It takes at least 
three forms. 
 1.  Its simplest form is the doctrine of nonre-
sistance. The moral man recognises the existence 
of political power as an evil, but regards the use of 
power to resist power as a still greater evil. This is 
the basis of such doctrines of non-resistance as those 
of Jesus or of Gandhi, or of modern pacifism. It 
amounts, in brief, to a boycott of politics.  
 2.  The second form of the antithesis between 
politics and morality is anarchism. The state, as 
the principal organ of political power, is “the most 
flagrant, most cynical and most complete negation 
of humanity.”  8  The anarchist will use power to 
overthrow the state. This revolutionary power is, 
however, not thought of as political power, but as 
the spontaneous revolt of the outraged individual 
conscience. It does not seek to create a new po-
litical society to take the place of the old one, but a 
moral society from which power, and consequently 
politics, are completely eliminated. “The principles 
of the Sermon on the Mount,” an English divine 
recently remarked, would mean “sudden death to 
civilised society.”  9  The anarchist sets out to destroy 
“civilised society” in the name of the Sermon on the 
Mount.  
 3.  A third school of thought starts from the 
same premise of the essential antithesis between mo-
rality and politics, but arrives at a totally different 
conclusion. The injunction of Jesus to “render unto 
Caesar the things that are Caesar’s, and unto God 
the things that are God’s,” implies the coexistence 
of two separate spheres: the political and the moral. 
But the moral man is under an obligation to assist—
or at any rate not to obstruct—the politician in the 
discharge of his non-moral functions. “Let every 
soul be subject to the higher powers. The powers 
that be are ordained of God.” We thus recognise 
politics as necessary but non-moral. This tradition, 
which remained dormant throughout the Middle 
Ages, when the ecclesiastical and the secular author-
ity was theoretically one, was revived by Luther in 
order to effect his compromise between reformed 
church and state. Luther “turned on the peasants 
of his day in holy horror when they attempted to 
transmute the ‘spiritual’ kingdom into an ‘earthly’ 
one by suggesting that the principles of the gospel 
had social significance.”  10  The division of functions 
between Caesar and God is implicit in the very con-
ception of an “established” church. But the tradi-
tion has been more persistent and more effective in 
Lutheran Germany than anywhere else. “We do not 
consult Jesus,” wrote a German liberal nineteenth 
century pastor, “when we are concerned with things 
which belong to the domain of the construction of 
the state and political economy”  11  and Bernhardi 
declared that “Christian morality is personal and 
social, and in its nature cannot be political.”  12  The 
same attitude is inherent in the modern theology 
of Karl Barth, which insists that political and so-
cial evils are the necessary product of man’s sinful 
nature and that human effort to eradicate them is 
therefore futile; and the doctrine that Christian mo-
rality has nothing to do with politics is vigorously 
upheld by the Nazi régime. This view is basically 
different from that of the realist who makes moral-
ity a function of politics. But in the field of politics 
it tends to become indistinguishable from realism.  
 The theory of the divorce between the spheres 
of politics and morality is superficially attractive, if 
only because it evades the insoluble problem of find-
ing a moral justification for the use of force.  13  But it 
is not ultimately satisfying. Both non- resistance and 
anarchism are counsels of despair, which appear 
to find widespread acceptance only where men feel 
hopeless of achieving anything by political  action; 

and the attempt to keep God and Caesar in wa-
tertight compartments runs too much athwart the 
deepseated desire of the human mind to reduce its 
view of the world to some kind of moral order. We 
are not in the long run satisfied to believe that what 
is politically good is morally bad; and since we 
can neither moralise power nor expel power from 
politics, we are faced with a dilemma which can-
not be completely resolved.  14  The planes of utopia 
and of reality never coincide. The ideal cannot be 
institutionalised, nor the institution idealised. “Poli-
tics,” writes Dr. Niebuhr, “will, to the end of his-
tory, be an area where conscience and power meet, 
where the ethical and coercive factors of human 
life will interpenetrate and work out their tentative 
and uneasy compromises.”  15  The compromises, like 
solutions of other human problems, will remain 
uneasy and tentative. But it is an essential part of 
any compromise that both factors shall be taken 
into account. 
 We have now therefore to analyse the part 
played in international politics by these two cardinal 
factors: power and morality.  
Notes
 1.   “Everywhere do I perceive a certain conspiracy of 
the rich men seeking their own advantage under the name 
and pretext of the commonwealth” (More,  Utopia ). “The 
exploitation of one part of society by another is common 
to all past centuries.” ( Communist Manifesto ).  
 2.   A Defence of Liberty against Tyrants (Vindiciae con-
tra Tyrannos ), ed. Laski, Introd. 55.  
 3.   Linton,  The Study of Man, 240; Laski,  A Grammar 
of Politics , 20.  
 4.   J. Truslow Adams,  The Epic of America , 112. The 
idea that the state has a moral foundation in the consent 
of its citizens as well as a power foundation was pro-
pounded by Locke and Rousseau and popularised by the 
American and French revolutions. Two recent expressions 
of the idea may be quoted. The Czecho-Slovak decla-
ration of independence of October 18, 1918, described 
Austria- Hungary as “a state which has no justification 
for its existence, and which, since it refuses to accept the 
fundamental basis of modern world-organisation [i.e. self-
determination], is only an artificial and unmoral construc-
tion.” In February 1938, Hitler told Schuschnigg, the then 
Austrian Chancellor, that “a régime lacking every kind of 
legality and which in reality ruled only by force, must in 
the long run come into continually increasing conflict with 
public opinion” (speech in the Reichstag of March 17, 
1938). Hitler maintained that the two pillars of the state 
are “force” and “popularity.” ( Mein Kampf, 579).  
 5.   Catlin,  The Science and Method of Politics, 309.  
 6.   It is significant that the world  Realpolitik was coined 
in the once famous treatise of von Rochau,  Grundsˉatze der 
Realpolitik published in 1853, which was largely inspired 
by the lessons of Frankfort. The inspiration which Hitler’s 
 Realpolitik has derived from the lessons of the Weimar 
Republic is obvious.  
 7.   Winston Churchill,  Arms and the Covenant, 368. 
The argument that power is a necessary motive force for 
the remedy of “just” grievances is further developed on 
209–216.  
 8.   Bakunin, ( Œuvres , i. p. 150; cf. vi. 17: “If there is a 
devil in all human history, it is this principle of command 
and authority.”  
 9.   The Dean of St. Paul’s, quoted in a leading article in 
 The Times , August 2, 1937.  
 10.   R. Niebuhr,  Moral Men and Immoral Society, 77.  
 11.   Quoted in W. F. Bruck,  Social and Economic History 
of Germany, 65.  
 12.   Bernhardi,  Germany and the Next War (Engl. 
transl.), 29.  
 13.   “Force in the right place,” as Mr. Maxton once said 
in the House of Commons, is a meaningless conception, 
“because the right place for me is exactly where I want to 
use it, and for him also, and for everyone else.”(House of 
Commons, November 7, 1933:  Official Record, col. 130). 
Force in politics is always the instrument of some kind of 
group interest.  
 14.   Acton was fond of saying that “great men are almost 
always bad men,” and quotes Walpole’s dictum that “no 
great country was ever saved by good men” ( History of 
Freedom, 219). Rosebery showed more acuteness when he 
remarked that “there is one question which English people 
ask about great men: Was he ‘a good man’?” ( Napoleon: 
The Last Phase , 364)  
 15.   R. Niebuhr,  Moral Man and Immoral Society, 4.  
424
E. H. CARR

The Law of Peoples 
JOHN RAWLS
OVERVIEW
 In his earlier  Theory of Justice  (1971), social-contract theorist John Rawls 
(1921–2002) addressed the choices human beings would make constituting rules 
for society behind a “veil of ignorance,” not knowing in advance how they indi-
vidually would fare—whether born rich or poor, advantaged or disadvantaged. 
His focus in that volume was on the bases for constituting rules to assure justice 
or fairness within a society, not across societies. Rawls takes up in this article the 
problem of extending a common law of peoples across diverse societies—some 
liberal and others hierarchical or authoritarian. Regardless of how they are con-
stituted, behind a veil of ignorance societies would seek equal treatment, which 
allows “a liberal conception of justice” developed domestically “to be extended 
to yield a more general law of peoples without prejudging the case against non-
liberal societies.” It is in an effort by Rawls to construct a universal approach to 
justice among the world’s peoples, taking into account their cultural, political, 
and other differences.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  How likely will the world’s “peoples” agree on principles to guide their conduct in interna-
tional relations? Is the understanding of the Law of Peoples Rawls advances realistic or is it 
merely another utopian scheme not likely to succeed?  
 2.  Why is “moral learning” so essential to achieving the “realistc utopia” Rawls anticipates?  
 3.  In what ways is thinking by Rawls similar to (or different from) Kant? From Carr? (See the 
readings by Kant and Carr also included in this chapter.)  
 4.  Why do you think Rawls refers to a Society of “Peoples” rather than to an international 
society of states (or one composed of both state and non-state actors)?  
 Reprinted by permission of the publisher from  The Laws of Peoples by John Rawls, pp. 35–37, 41, 44 – 46, 124 –128, 
 Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, Copyright © 1999 by the President and Fellows of Harvard College. 
§4. The Principles of the Law of Peoples 
 4.1. Statement of the Principles. Initially, we may 
assume that the outcome of working out the Law 
of Peoples only for liberal democratic societies will 
be the adoption of certain familiar principles of 
equality among peoples. These principles will also, I 
 assume, make room for various forms of cooperative 
associations and federations among peoples, but will 
not affirm a world-state. Here I follow Kant’s lead 
in  Perpetual Peace (1795) in thinking that a world 
government—by which I mean a unified political 
regime with the legal powers normally exercised by 
central governments—would either be a global des-
potism or else would rule over a fragile empire torn 
by frequent civil strife as various regions and peoples 
tried to gain their political freedom and autonomy.  1  
As I discuss below, it may turn out that there will be 
425

426
JOHN RAWLS
many different kinds of organizations subject to the 
judgment of the Law of Peoples and charged with 
regulating cooperation among them and meeting 
certain recognized duties. Some of these organiza-
tions (such as the United Nations ideally conceived) 
may have the authority to express for the society of 
well-ordered peoples their condemnation of unjust 
domestic institutions in other countries and clear 
cases of the violation of human rights. In grave cases 
they may try to correct them by economic sanctions, 
or even by military intervention. The scope of these 
powers covers all peoples and reaches their domestic 
affairs. 
 These large conclusions call for some discus-
sion. Proceeding in a way analogous to the pro-
cedure in  A Theory of Justice,  2  let’s look first at 
familiar and traditional principles of justice among 
free and democratic peoples:  3  
  1.  Peoples are free and independent, and their 
freedom and independence are to be respected 
by other peoples.  
  2.  Peoples are to observe treaties and 
undertakings.  
  3.  Peoples are equal and are parties to the 
agreements that bind them.  
  4.  Peoples are to observe a duty of non-
intervention.  
  5.  Peoples have the right of self-defense but no 
right to instigate war for reasons other than 
self-defense.  
  6.  Peoples are to honor human rights.  
  7.  Peoples are to observe certain specified 
restrictions in the conduct of war.  
  8.  Peoples have a duty to assist other peoples 
living under unfavorable conditions that 
prevent their having a just or decent political 
and social regime.  
 4.2. Comments and Qualifications. This statement 
of principles is, admittedly, incomplete. Other prin-
ciples need to be added, and the principles listed 
require much explanation and interpretation. Some 
are superfluous in a society of well-ordered peoples, 
for example, the seventh regarding the conduct of 
war and the sixth regarding human rights. Yet the 
main point is that free and independent well-ordered 
peoples are ready to recognize certain basic prin-
ciples of political justice as governing their conduct. 
These principles constitute the basic charter of the 
Law of Peoples. . . . 
 I contend that the eight principles of the Law 
of Peoples (see §4.1) are superior to any others. 
Much as in examining the distributive principles 
in justice as fairness, we begin with the baseline 
of  equality—in the case of justice as fairness the 
equality of social and economic primary goods, 
in this case the equality of and the equal rights of 
all peoples. In the first case we asked whether any 
departure from the baseline of equality would be 
agreed to provided that it is to the benefit of all 
citizens of society and, in particular, the least ad-
vantaged. (I only hint here at the reasoning.) With 
the Law of Peoples, however, persons are not under 
one but many governments, and the representatives 
of peoples will want to preserve the equality and 
independence of their own society. In the work-
ing of organizations and loose  4  confederations of 
peoples, inequalities are designed to serve the many 
ends that peoples share. In this case the larger and 
smaller peoples will be ready to make larger and 
smaller contributions and to accept proportionately 
larger and smaller returns. 
 Thus, in the argument in the original position 
at the second level I consider the merits of only the 
eight principles of the Law of Peoples listed in §4.1. 
These familiar and largely traditional principles I 
take from the history and usages of international 
law and practice. The parties are not given a menu 
of alternative principles and ideals from which to 
select, as they are in  Political Liberalism, or in  A 
Theory of Justice. Rather, the representatives of 
well-ordered peoples simply reflect on the advan-
tages of these principles of equality among peoples 
and see no reason to depart from them or to propose 
alternatives. These principles must, of course, satisfy 
the criterion of reciprocity, since this criterion holds 
at both levels—both between citizens as citizens and 
peoples as peoples. . . .  
§5. Democratic Peace and Its Stability 
 5.1. Two Kinds of Stability. To complete this over-
view of the Law of Peoples for well-ordered liberal 
societies, I must do two things. One is to distinguish 
two kinds of stability: stability for the right reasons 
and stability as a balance of forces. The other is to 
offer a reply to political realism as a theory of inter-
national politics, and to those who say that the idea 
of a realistic utopia among peoples is quixotic. I do 
so by sketching a view of democratic peace, from 
which follows a different view of war. 

The Law of Peoples 
427
 Consider first the two kinds of stability. In the 
domestic case, [there is] a process whereby citizens 
develop a sense of justice as they grow up and take 
part in their just social would. As a realistically uto-
pian idea, the Law of Peoples must have a parallel 
process that leads peoples, including both liberal 
and decent societies, to accept willingly and to act 
upon the legal norms embodied in a just Law of 
Peoples. This process is similar to that in the domes-
tic case. Thus, when the Law of Peoples is honored 
by peoples over a certain period of time, with the 
evident intention to comply, and these intentions are 
mutually recognized, these peoples tend to develop 
mutual trust and confidence in one another. More-
over, peoples see those norms as advantageous for 
themselves and for those they care for, and therefore 
as time goes on they tend to accept that law as an 
ideal of conduct.  5  Without such a psychological 
process, which I shall call moral learning, the idea 
of realistic utopia for the Law of Peoples lacks an 
essential element. 
 As I have said, peoples (as opposed to states) 
have a definite moral nature. This nature includes a 
certain proper pride and sense of honor; they may be 
proud of their history and achievements, as a  proper 
patriotism allows. Yet the due respect they ask for is a 
due respect consistent with the equality of all peoples. 
Peoples must have interests— otherwise they would 
be either inert and passive, or likely to be swayed by 
unreasonable and sometimes blind passions and im-
pulses. The interests which move peoples (and which 
distinguish them from states) are reasonable interests 
guided by and congruent with a fair equality and a 
due respect for all peoples. It is these reasonable in-
terests that make democratic peace possible, and the 
lack thereof causes peace between states to be at best a 
 modus vivendi, a stable balance of forces only for the 
time being. 
 5.2. Reply to Realist Theory. I reply to the realist 
theory that international relations have not changed 
since Thucydides’ day and that they continue to be 
an ongoing struggle for wealth and power by recall-
ing a familiar view of peace for a society of liberal 
peoples. It leads to a different view of war than the 
hegemonic theory of the realist. 
 The idea of a liberal democratic peace unites 
at least two ideas. One is the idea that between 
the unalterable miseries of life such as plagues and 
epidemics, on the one hand, and remote unchange-
able causes such as fate and the will of God, on 
the other, there are political and social institutions 
that can be changed by the people. This idea led to 
the movement toward democracy in the eighteenth 
century. As Saint-Just said, “The idea of happiness is 
new in Europe.”  6  What he meant was that the social 
order was no longer viewed as fixed: political and 
social institutions could be revised and reformed for 
the purpose of making peoples happier and more 
satisfied. 
 The other idea is that of the  Moeurs douces of 
Montesquieu,  7  the idea that a commercial  society 
tends to fashion in its citizens certain virtues such 
as assiduity, industriousness, punctuality, and pro-
bity; and that commerce tends to lead to peace. 
Putting these two ideas together—that social 
 institutions can be revised to make people more 
satisfied and happy (through democracy), and that 
commerce tends to lead to peace—we might sur-
mise that democratic peoples engaged in commerce 
would tend not to have occasion to go to war with 
one another. Among other reasons, this is because 
what they lacked in commodities they could acquire 
more easily and cheaply by trade; and because, 
being liberal constitutional democracies, they 
would not be moved to try to convert other peoples 
to a state religion or other ruling comprehensive 
doctrine. . . . 
 18.1. Society of Peoples Is Possible. Political phi-
losophy is realistically utopian when it extends what 
are ordinarily thought of as the limits of practical 
political possibility. Our hope for the future rests 
on the belief that the possibilities of our social world 
allow a reasonably just constitutional democratic 
society living as a member of a reasonably just Soci-
ety of Peoples. An essential step to being reconciled 
to our social world is to see that such a Society of 
Peoples is indeed possible. 
 Recall four basic facts to which I have often 
referred. These facts can be confirmed by reflecting 
on history and political experience. They were not 
discovered by social theory; nor should they be in 
dispute, as they are virtually truisms. 
 (a)  The Fact of Reasonable Pluralism: A basic 
feature of liberal democracy is the fact of reason-
able pluralism—the fact that a plurality of con-
flicting reasonable comprehensive doctrines, both 
religious and nonreligious (or secular), is the normal 
result of the culture of its free institutions. Different 
and irreconcilable comprehensive doctrines will be 
united in supporting the idea of equal liberty for all 

428
JOHN RAWLS
 doctrines and the idea of the separation of church 
and state. Even if each might prefer that the others 
not exist, the plurality of sects is the greatest assur-
ance each has of its own equal liberty.  8  
 (b)  The Fact of Democratic Unity in Diversity: 
This is the fact that in a constitutional democratic 
society, political and social unity does not require 
that its citizens be unified by one comprehensive 
doctrine, religious or nonreligious. Until the end 
of the seventeenth century, or later, that was not 
a common view. Religious division was seen as a 
disaster for a civil polity. It took the experience of 
actual history to show this view to be false. While 
it is necessary that there be a public basis of under-
standing, this is provided in a liberal democratic 
society by the reasonableness and rationality of its 
political and social institutions, the merits of which 
can be debated in terms of public reason.  
 (c)  The Fact of Public Reason: This is the fact 
that citizens in a pluralist liberal democratic society 
realize that they cannot reach agreement, or even 
approach mutual understanding, on the basis of 
their irreconcilable comprehensive doctrines. Thus, 
when citizens are discussing fundamental political 
questions, they appeal not to those doctrines, but 
to a reasonable family of political conceptions of 
right and justice, and so to the idea of the politically 
reasonable addressed to citizens as citizens. This 
does not mean that doctrines of faith or nonreligious 
(secular) doctrines cannot be introduced into politi-
cal discussion, but rather that citizens introducing 
them should also provide sufficient grounds in pub-
lic reason for the political policies that religious or 
nonreligious doctrines support.  
 (d)  The Fact of Liberal Democratic Peace: This 
is the fact discussed in §5 that, ideally, well-ordered 
constitutional democratic societies do not go to war 
against one another, and they engage in war only in 
self-defense, or in an alliance defending other liberal 
or decent peoples. This is principle (5) of the Law of 
Peoples.  9  
 These four facts provide an explanation of why 
a reasonably just Society of Peoples is possible. I 
believe that in a society of liberal and decent peoples 
the Law of Peoples would be honored, if not all the 
time, then most of the time, so that it would be rec-
ognized as governing the relations among them. To 
show this, one proceeds through the eight principles 
that would be agreed to (§4.1) and notes that none 
of them is likely to be violated. Liberal democratic 
and decent peoples are likely to follow the Law of 
Peoples among themselves, since that law suits their 
fundamental interests, and each wishes to honor 
its agreements with the others and to be known 
as trustworthy. The principles most likely to be 
violated are the norms for the just conduct of war 
against aggressive outlaw states, and the duty of as-
sistance owed to burdened societies. This is because 
the reasons supporting these principles call for great 
foresight and often have powerful passions working 
against them. But it is the duty of the statesman to 
convince the public of the enormous importance of 
these principles. 
 To see this, recall the discussion of the role of 
the statesman in the conduct of war against an en-
emy state, and the emotions and hatreds the states-
man must be prepared to resist. Similarly with the 
duty of assistance: there may be many aspects of 
the culture and people of a foreign society living 
under unfavorable conditions that interfere with 
the natural sympathy of other societies, or that lead 
them to underestimate, or fail to recognize, the great 
extent to which human rights are being violated 
in the foreign society. A sense of social distance 
and anxiety about the unknown make these feelings 
stronger. A statesman may find it difficult to con-
vince public opinion in his or her own people of the 
enormous importance to them of enabling other so-
cieties to establish at least decent political and social 
institutions. 
 18.2. Limits of Reconciliation. I noted [in the In-
troduction] that two ideas motivate the Law of 
Peoples. The first is that the great evils of human 
 history—unjust war, oppression, religious persecu-
tion, slavery, and the rest—result from political 
 injustice, with its cruelties and callousness. The 
second is that once political injustice has been elim-
inated by following just (or at least decent) social 
policies and establishing just (or at least decent) 
basic institutions, these great evils will eventually 
disappear. I call a world in which these great evils 
have been eliminated and just (or at least decent) 
basic institutions established by both liberal and 
decent peoples who honor the Law of Peoples a 
“realistic utopia.” This account of realistic utopia 
shows us, in the tradition of the late writings of 
Kant, the social conditions under which we can 
reasonably hope that all liberal and decent peoples 
may belong, as members in good standing, to a 
reasonable Society of Peoples. 

The Law of Peoples 
429
 There are, however, important limits to recon-
ciliation. I mention two. Many persons—call them 
“fundamentalists” of various religious or secular 
doctrines which have been historically dominant—
could not be reconciled to a social world such as I 
have described. For them the social world envisaged 
by political liberalism is a nightmare of social frag-
mentation and false doctrines, if not positively evil. 
To be reconciled to a social world, one must be able 
to see it as both reasonable and rational. Reconcili-
ation requires acknowledging the fact of reasonable 
pluralism both within liberal and decent societies 
and in their relations with one another. Moreover, 
one must also recognize this pluralism as consis-
tent with reasonable comprehensive doctrines, both 
 religious and secular.  10  Yet this last idea is precisely 
what fundamentalism denies and political liberalism 
asserts. 
 A second limitation to reconciliation to a social 
world that realizes the idea of a realistic utopia is 
that it may be a social world many of whose mem-
bers may suffer considerable misfortune and an-
guish, and may be distraught by spiritual emptiness. 
(This is the belief of many fundamentalists.) Politi-
cal liberalism is a liberalism of freedom—in this it 
stands with Kant, Hegel, and J. S. Mill. It upholds 
the equal freedom both of liberal and decent peoples 
and of liberal peoples’ free and equal citizens; and it 
looks to ensure these citizens adequate all-purpose 
means (primary goods) so that they can make intel-
ligent use of their freedoms. Their spiritual well-
being, though, is not guaranteed. Political liberalism 
does not dismiss spiritual questions as unimportant, 
but to the contrary, because of their importance, it 
leaves them for each citizen to decide for himself or 
herself. This is not to say that religion is somehow 
“privatized”; instead, it is not “politicized” (that is, 
perverted and diminished for ideological ends). The 
division of labor between political and social insti-
tutions, on the one hand, and civic society with its 
many and diverse associations (religious and secu-
lar), on the other, is fully maintained. 
 18.3. Concluding Reflection. The idea of  realistic 
utopia reconciles us to our social world by showing 
us that a reasonably just constitutional democracy 
existing as a member of a reasonably just Society of 
Peoples is  possible. It establishes that such a world 
can exist somewhere and at some time, but not that 
it must be, or will be. Still, one might feel that the 
possibility of such a liberal and decent political and 
social order is quite irrelevant, so long as this pos-
sibility is also not realized. 
 While realization is, of course, not unimport-
ant, I believe that the very possibility of such a social 
order can itself reconcile us to the social world. The 
possibility is not a mere logical possibility, but one 
that connects with the deep tendencies and inclina-
tions of the social world. For so long as we believe 
for good reasons that a self-sustaining and reason-
ably just political and social order both at home and 
abroad is possible, we can reasonably hope that we or 
others will someday, somewhere, achieve it; and we 
can then do something toward this achievement. This 
alone, quite apart from our success or failure, suffices 
to banish the dangers of resignation and cynicism. By 
showing how the social world may realize the features 
of a realistic utopia, political philosophy provides a 
long-term goal of political endeavor, and in working 
toward it gives meaning to what we can do today. 
 Thus, our answer to the question of whether a 
reasonably just Society of Peoples is possible affects 
our attitudes toward the world as a whole. Our 
answer affects us before we come to actual politics, 
and limits or inspires how we take part in it. Reject-
ing the idea of a just and well-ordered Society of 
Peoples as impossible will affect the quality and tone 
of those attitudes and will determine our politics in a 
significant way. In  A Theory of Justice and  Political 
Liberalism I sketched the more reasonable concep-
tions of justice for a liberal democratic regime and 
presented a candidate for the most reasonable. In 
this monograph on the Law of Peoples I have tried 
to extend these ideas in order to set out the guide-
lines for a liberal society’s foreign policy in a reason-
ably just Society of Peoples. 
 If a reasonably just Society of Peoples whose 
members subordinate their power to reasonable 
aims is not possible, and human beings are largely 
amoral, if not incurably cynical and self-centered, 
one might ask, with Kant, whether it is worthwhile 
for human beings to live on the earth.  11  
Notes
 1.   Kant says in Ak:VIII:367: “The idea of international 
law presupposes the separate existence of independent 
neighboring states. Although this condition is itself a state 
of war (unless federative union prevents the outbreak of 
hostilities), this is rationally preferable to the amalgama-
tion of states under one superior power, as this would end 
in one universal monarchy, and laws always lose in vigor 
what government gains in extent; hence a  condition of 

430
BARACK OBAMA
soulless despotism falls into anarchy after stifling seeds of 
good.” Kant’s attitude to universal monarchy was shared 
by other writers of the eighteenth century. See, for ex-
ample, Hume’s “Of the Balance of Power” (1752), in 
 Political Essays, ed. K. Haakonssen (Cambridge: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1994). F. H. Hinsley,  Power and 
the Pursuit of Peace (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1966), also mentions Montesquieu, Voltaire, and 
Gibbon, pp. 162ff., and he has an instructive discussion 
of Kant’s ideas in  Chapter   4 . See also Patrick Riley,  Kant’s 
Political Philosophy (Totowa, N.J.: Rowman and Little-
field, 1983),  chaps.   5 and  6 . 
 2.  See  A Theory of Justice, where  Chapter   2 discusses 
the principles of justice and  Chapter   3 gives the reason-
ing from the original position concerning the selection of 
principles. All references to  A Theory of Justice are to the 
original edition (Harvard University Press, 1971).  
 3.   See J. L. Brierly,  The Law of Nations: An Introduc-
tion to the Law of Peace, 6 th  ed. (Oxford: Clarendon 
Press, 1963), and Terry Nardin,  Law, Morality, and the 
Relations of States (Princeton: Princeton University Press, 
1983). Both Brierly and Nardin give similar lists as prin-
ciples of international law.  
 4.   I use this adjective to emphasize that confederations 
are much less tight than federations and do not involve the 
powers of federal governments.  
 5.   The process here is similar to the gradual, if at first 
reluctant, acceptance of a principle of toleration.  
 6.   See Albert Hirschman’s  Rival Views of Market Soci-
ety (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1992), 
pp. 105ff.  
 7.   See Hirschman,  Rival Views, pp. 107ff. The phrase 
 moeurs douces (gentle manners) is in Montesquieu’s  The 
Spirit of Laws, trans. and ed. Anne Cohler, Basia Miller, 
and Harold Stone (Cambridge: Cambridge University 
Press, 1989), book 20, p. 338. In  Chapter  2  of that 
book, Montesquieu argues that commerce tends to lead 
to peace.  
 8.   See James Madison: “Where there is such a variety of 
sects, there cannot be a majority of any one sect to oppress 
and persecute the rest. . . . The United States abound in 
such a variety of sects, that it is a strong security against re-
ligious persecution.” Virginia Convention, June 12, 1788. 
 Papers of James Madison, ed. William T. Hutchinson and 
William M. E. Rachal (Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1962), vol. 11, p. 130.  
 9.   Montesquieu defines it as “the principle that the vari-
ous nations should do to one another in times of peace the 
most good possible, in times of war the least ill possible, 
without harming their true interests.”  The Spirit of Laws, 
book 1, chap. 3.  
 10.   Catholicism since Vatican II, and some forms of Prot-
estantism, Judaism, and Islam are examples of this.  
 11.   “If justice perishes, then it is no longer worthwhile 
for men to live upon the earth.” Kant,  Rechtslehre, in 
Remark E following §49, Ak:VI:332.  
On War and Peace—The Nobel Peace 
Prize Speech 
BARACK OBAMA
OVERVIEW
 This speech reflects understandings found in IR theory on war and peace. Draw-
ing from normative theory  , President Obama lays out classic tenets of just war 
theory—that “war is justified only when it . . . is waged as a last resort or in self-
defense; if the force used is proportional, and if, whenever possible, civilians are 
spared from violence.” Invoking the liberal internationalism of Woodrow Wilson, 
he also advances the democratic peace hypothesis (see  Chapter   3 ), commenting, for 

 
On War and Peace—The Nobel Peace Prize Speech 
431
example, that “America has never fought a war against a democracy.” Moreover, 
“agreements among nations, strong institutions, support for human rights, and 
investments in development” constitute an international agenda consistent with 
the global-governance focus of many IR theorists of using liberal lenses to guide 
their work.  
Questions to Keep in Mind 
 1.  Although there are ample references to liberal theory, is there also a realist undercurrent in 
this speech?  
 2.  Is there a tension between Obama’s comments on moral and legal principles and what Max 
Weber called the “ethics of responsibility” that go with being a head of state or head of gov-
ernment concerned with national security?  
 3.  How or to what extent does Obama’s speech reflect the tension E. H. Carr observed between 
ideals and the realities that confound policymakers (see the reading by Carr in  this chapter  )?  
 4.  What is the relation between the work of IR theorists and policymakers—or do the two oper-
ate in what, for the most part, are separate domains?  
Remarks by the President at the Acceptance 
of the Nobel Peace Prize 
 Oslo City Hall 
 Oslo, Norway 
 December 10, 2009 
 THE PRESIDENT: Your Majesties, Your Royal 
Highnesses, distinguished members of the Norwe-
gian Nobel Committee, citizens of America, and 
citizens of the world: 
 I receive this honor with deep gratitude and great 
humility. It is an award that speaks to our highest as-
pirations—that for all the cruelty and hardship of our 
world, we are not mere prisoners of fate. Our actions 
matter, and can bend history in the direction of justice. 
 And yet I would be remiss if I did not ac-
knowledge the considerable controversy that your 
 generous decision has generated. (Laughter.) In part, 
this is because I am at the beginning, and not the end, 
of my labors on the world stage. Compared to 
some of the giants of history who’ve received 
this prize—Schweitzer and King; Marshall and 
 Mandela—my accomplishments are slight. And then 
there are the men and women around the world who 
have been jailed and beaten in the pursuit of justice; 
those who toil in humanitarian organizations to 
relieve suffering; the unrecognized millions whose 
quiet acts of courage and compassion inspire even 
the most hardened cynics. I cannot argue with those 
who find these men and women—some known, 
some obscure to all but those they help—to be far 
more deserving of this honor than I. 
 But perhaps the most profound issue surround-
ing my receipt of this prize is the fact that I am the 
Commander-in-Chief of the military of a nation in 
the midst of two wars. One of these wars is wind-
ing down. The other is a conflict that America did 
not seek; one in which we are joined by 42 other 
countries—including Norway—in an effort to de-
fend ourselves and all nations from further attacks. 
 Still, we are at war, and I’m responsible for the 
deployment of thousands of young Americans to 
battle in a distant land. Some will kill, and some will 
be killed. And so I come here with an acute sense 
of the costs of armed conflict—filled with difficult 
questions about the relationship between war and 
peace, and our effort to replace one with the other. 
 Now these questions are not new. War, in one 
form or another, appeared with the first man. At the 
dawn of history, its morality was not questioned; 
it was simply a fact, like drought or disease—the 
manner in which tribes and then civilizations sought 
power and settled their differences. 
 And over time, as codes of law sought to con-
trol violence within groups, so did philosophers and 
clerics and statesmen seek to regulate the destructive 
power of war. The concept of a “just war” emerged, 
suggesting that war is justified only when certain con-
ditions were met: if it is waged as a last resort or in 
self-defense; if the force used is proportional; and if, 
whenever possible, civilians are spared from violence. 
 Of course, we know that for most of history, 
this concept of “just war” was rarely observed. The 
capacity of human beings to think up new ways to 

432
BARACK OBAMA
kill one another proved inexhaustible, as did our 
capacity to exempt from mercy those who look 
different or pray to a different God. Wars between 
armies gave way to wars between nations—total 
wars in which the distinction between combatant 
and civilian became blurred. In the span of 30 years, 
such camage would twice engulf this continent. And 
while it’s hard to conceive of a cause more just than 
the defeat of the Third Reich and the Axis powers, 
World War II was a conflict in which the total num-
ber of civilians who died exceeded the number of 
soldiers who perished. 
 In the wake of such destruction, and with the 
advent of the nuclear age, it became clear to victor and 
vanquished alike that the world needed institutions to 
prevent another world war. And so, a quarter century 
after the United States Senate rejected the League of 
Nations—an idea for which Woodrow Wilson re-
ceived this prize—America led the world in construct-
ing an architecture to keep the peace: a Marshall Plan 
and a United Nations, mechanisms to govern the wag-
ing of war, treaties to protect human rights, prevent 
genocide, restrict the most dangerous weapons. 
 In many ways, these efforts succeeded. Yes, ter-
rible wars have been fought, and atrocities committed. 
But there has been no Third World War. The Cold 
War ended with jubilant crowds dismantling a wall. 
Commerce has stitched much of the world together. 
Billions have been lifted from poverty. The ideals of 
liberty and self-determination, equality and the rule of 
law have haltingly advanced. We are the heirs of the 
fortitude and foresight of generations past, and it is a 
legacy for which my own country is rightfully proud. 
 And yet, a decade into a new century, this old 
architecture is buckling under the weight of new 
threats. The world may no longer shudder at the 
prospect of war between two nuclear superpowers, 
but proliferation may increase the risk of catastro-
phe. Terrorism has long been a tactic, but modern 
technology allows a few small men with outsized 
rage to murder innocents on a horrific scale. 
 Moreover, wars between nations have increas-
ingly given way to wars within nations. The resur-
gence of ethnic or sectarian conflicts; the growth 
of secessionist movements, insurgencies, and failed 
states—all these things have increasingly trapped 
civilians in unending chaos. In today’s wars, many 
more civilians are killed than soldiers; the seeds of 
future conflict are sown, economies are wrecked, 
civil societies torn asunder, refugees amassed, chil-
dren scarred. 
 I do not bring with me today a definitive solu-
tion to the problems of war. What I do know is 
that meeting these challenges will require the same 
vision, hard work, and persistence of those men and 
women who acted so boldly decades ago. And it will 
require us to think in new ways about the notions of 
just war and the imperatives of a just peace. 
 We must begin by acknowledging the hard 
truth: We will not eradicate violent conflict in our 
lifetimes. There will be times when nations—acting 
individually or in concert—will find the use of force 
not only necessary but morally justified. 
 I make this statement mindful of what Martin 
Luther King Jr. said in this same ceremony years ago: 
“Violence never brings permanent peace. It solves 
no social problem: it merely creates new and more 
complicated ones.” As someone who stands here as a 
 direct consequence of Dr. King’s life work, I am living 
testimony to the moral force of non-violence. I know 
there’s nothing weak—nothing passive— nothing 
 naïve—in the creed and lives of Gandhi and King. 
 But as a head of state sworn to protect and 
 defend my nation, I cannot be guided by their 
 examples alone. I face the world as it is, and can-
not stand idle in the face of threats to the  American 
people. For make no mistake: Evil does exist in 
the world. A non-violent movement could not have 
halted Hitler’s armies. Negotiations cannot con-
vince al Qaeda’s leaders to lay down their arms. To 
say that force may sometimes be necessary is not a 
call to cynicism—it is a recognition of history, the 
imperfections of man and the limits of reason. 
 I raise this point, I begin with this point because 
in many countries there is a deep ambivalence about 
military action today, no matter what the cause. 
And at times, this is joined by a reflexive suspicion 
of America, the world’s sole military superpower. 
 But the world must remember that it was not 
simply international institutions—not just treaties 
and declarations—that brought stability to a post–
World War II world. Whatever mistakes we have 
made, the plain fact is this: The United States of 
America has helped underwrite global security for 
more than six decades with the blood of our citizens 
and the strength of our arms. The service and sacrifice 
of our men and women in uniform has promoted 
peace and prosperity from Germany to Korea, and 
enabled democracy to take hold in places like the 
 Balkans. We have borne this burden not because 
we seek to impose our will. We have done so out of 
enlightened self-interest—because we seek a better 

 
On War and Peace—The Nobel Peace Prize Speech 
433
future for our children and grandchildren, and we 
believe that their lives will be better if others’ children 
and grandchildren can live in freedom and prosperity. 
 So yes, the instruments of war do have a role to 
play in preserving the peace. And yet this truth must 
coexist with another—that no matter how justified, 
war promises human tragedy. The soldier’s courage 
and sacrifice is full of glory, expressing devotion 
to country, to cause, to comrades in arms. But war 
itself is never glorious, and we must never trumpet 
it as such. 
 So part of our challenge is reconciling these two 
seemingly inreconcilable truths—that war is some-
times necessary, and war at some level is an expres-
sion of human folly. Concretely, we must direct our 
effort to the task that President Kennedy called for 
long ago. “Let us focus,” he said, “on a more prac-
tical, more attainable peace, based not on a sudden 
revolution in human nature but on a gradual evolu-
tion in human institutions.” A gradual evolution of 
human institutions. 
 What might this evolution look like? What 
might these practical steps be? 
 To begin with, I believe that all nations—strong 
and weak alike—must adhere to standards that gov-
ern the use of force. I—like any head of state—
reserve the right to act unilaterally if necessary to 
defend my nation. Nevertheless, I am convinced 
that adhering to standards, international standards, 
strengthens those who do, and isolates and weakens 
those who don’t. 
 The world rallied around America after the 
9/11 attacks, and continues to support our efforts in 
Afghanistan, because of the horror of those senseless 
attacks and the recognized principle of self-defense. 
Likewise, the world recognized the need to confront 
Saddam Hussein when he invaded Kuwait—a con-
sensus that sent a clear message to all about the cost 
of aggression. 
 Furthermore, America—in fact, no nation—can 
insist that others follow the rules of the road if we re-
fuse to follow them ourselves. For when we don’t, our 
actions appear arbitrary and undercut the  legitimacy 
of future interventions, no matter how justified. 
 And this becomes particularly important when 
the purpose of military action extends beyond self-
defense or the defense of one nation against an aggres-
sor. More and more, we all confront difficult questions 
about how to prevent the slaughter of civilians by their 
own government, or to stop a civil war whose violence 
and suffering can engulf an entire region. 
 I believe that force can be justified on human-
itarian grounds, as it was in the Balkans, or in 
other places that have been scarred by war. Inac-
tion tears at our conscience and can lead to more 
costly  intervention later. That’s why all responsible 
 nations must embrace the role that militaries with a 
clear mandate can play to keep the peace. 
 America’s commitment to global security will 
never waver. But in a world in which threats are 
more diffuse, and missions more complex, America 
cannot act alone. America alone cannot secure the 
peace. This is true in Afghanistan. This is true in 
failed states like Somalia, where terrorism and pi-
racy is joined by famine and human suffering. And 
sadly, it will continue to be true in unstable regions 
for years to come. 
 The leaders and soldiers of NATO countries, 
and other friends and allies, demonstrate this truth 
through the capacity and courage they’ve shown 
in Afghanistan. But in many countries, there is a 
disconnect between the efforts of those who serve 
and the ambivalence of the broader public. I under-
stand why war is not popular, but I also know this: 
The belief that peace is desirable is rarely enough 
to achieve it. Peace requires responsibility. Peace 
entails sacrifice. That’s why NATO continues to 
be indispensable. That’s why we must strengthen 
U.N. and regional peacekeeping, and not leave the 
task to a few countries. That’s why we honor those 
who return home from peacekeeping and training 
abroad: to Oslo and Rome; to Ottawa and Sydney; 
to Dhaka and Kigali. We honor them not as makers 
of war, but as wagers of peace. 
 Let me make one final point about the use of 
force. Even as we make difficult decisions about 
going to war, we must also think clearly about how 
we fight it. The Nobel Committee recognized this 
truth in awarding its first prize for peace to Henry 
Dunant—the founder of the Red Cross, and a driv-
ing force behind the Geneva Conventions. 
 Where force is necessary, we have a moral and 
strategic interest in binding ourselves to certain rules 
of conduct. And even as we confront a vicious ad-
versary that abides by no rules, I believe the United 
States of America must remain a standard bearer in 
the conduct of war. That is what makes us differ-
ent from those whom we fight. That is a source of 
our strength. That is why I prohibited torture. That 
is why I ordered the prison at Guantanamo Bay 
closed. And that is why I have reaffirmed America’s 
commitment to abide by the Geneva Conventions. 

434
BARACK OBAMA
We lose ourselves when we compromise the very 
ideals that we fight to defend. (Applause.) And we 
honor—we honor those ideals by upholding them 
not when it’s easy, but when it is hard. 
 I have spoken at some length to the question 
that must weigh on our minds and our hearts as 
we choose to wage war. But let me now turn to our 
 effort to avoid such tragic choices, and speak of 
three ways that we can build a just and lasting peace. 
 First, in dealing with those nations that break 
rules and laws, I believe that we must develop alter-
natives to violence that are tough enough to actually 
change behavior—for if we want a lasting peace, 
then the words of the international community must 
mean something. Those regimes that break the rules 
must be held accountable. Sanctions must exact a 
real price. Intransigence must be met with increased 
pressure—and such pressure exists only when the 
world stands together as one. 
 One urgent example is the effort to prevent the 
spread of nuclear weapons, and to seek a world 
without them. In the middle of the last century, na-
tions agreed to be bound by a treaty whose bargain 
is clear. All will have access to peaceful nuclear 
power, those without nuclear weapons will forsake 
them; and those with nuclear weapons will work 
towards disarmament. I am committed to uphold-
ing this treaty. It is a centerpiece of my foreign 
policy. And I’m working with President Medvedev 
to  reduce America’s and Russia’s nuclear stockpiles. 
 But it is also incumbent upon all of us to insist 
that nations like Iran and North Korea do not game 
the system. Those who claim to respect international 
law cannot avert their eyes when those laws are 
flouted. Those who care for their own security can-
not ignore the danger of an arms race in the Middle 
East or East Asia. Those who seek peace cannot stand 
idly by as nations arm themselves for nuclear war. 
 The same principle applies to those who violate 
international laws by brutalizing their own people. 
When there is genocide in Darfur, systematic rape 
in Congo, repression in Burma—there must be con-
sequences. Yes, there will be engagement: yes, there 
will be diplomacy—but there must be consequences 
when those things fail. And the closer we stand 
together, the less likely we will be faced with the 
choice between armed intervention and complicity 
in oppression. 
 This brings me to a second point—the nature of 
the peace that we seek. For peace is not merely the 
absence of visible conflict. Only a just peace based 
on the inherent rights and dignity of every individual 
can truly be lasting. 
 It was this insight that drove drafters of the 
Universal Declaration of Human Rights after the 
Second World War. In the wake of devastation, they 
recognized that if human rights are not protected, 
peace is a hollow promise. 
 And yet too often, these words are ignored. 
For some countries, the failure to uphold human 
rights is excused by the false suggestion that these 
are somehow Western principles, foreign to local 
cultures or stages of a nation’s development. And 
within America, there has long been a tension be-
tween those who describe themselves as realists or 
idealists—a tension that suggests a stark choice be-
tween the narrow pursuit of interests or an endless 
campaign to impose our values around the world. 
 I reject these choices. I believe that peace is un-
stable where citizens are denied the right to speak freely 
or worship as they please, choose their own leaders or 
assemble without fear. Pent-up grievances fester, and 
the suppression of tribal and religious identity can lead 
to violence. We also know that the opposite is true. 
Only when Europe became free did it finally find peace. 
America has never fought a war against a democracy, 
and our closest friends are governments that protect 
the rights of their citizens. No matter how callously de-
fined, neither America’s interests—nor the world’s—are 
served by the denial of human aspirations. 
 So even as we respect the unique culture and tradi-
tions of different countries, America will  always be a 
voice for those aspirations that are universal. We will 
bear witness to the quiet dignity of reformers like Aung 
Sang Suu Kyi; to the bravery of Zimbabweans who 
cast their ballots in the face of beatings; to the hun-
dreds of thousands who have marched silently through 
the streets of Iran. It is telling that the leaders of these 
governments fear the aspirations of their own people 
more than the power of any other nation. And it is 
the responsibility of all free people and free nations to 
make clear that these movements—these movements 
of hope and history—they have us on their side. 
 Let me also say this: The promotion of human 
rights cannot be about exhortation alone. At times, it 
must be coupled with painstaking diplomacy. I know 
that engagement with repressive regimes lacks the 
satisfying purity of indignation. But I also know that 
sanctions without outreach—condemnation without 
discussion—can carry forward only a  crippling sta-
tus quo. No repressive regime can move down a new 
path unless it has the choice of an open door. 

 
On War and Peace—The Nobel Peace Prize Speech 
435
 In light of the Cultural Revolution’s horrors, Nix-
on’s meeting with Mao appeared inexcusable—and 
yet it surely helped set China on a path where millions 
of its citizens have been lifted from poverty and con-
nected to open societies. Pope John Paul’s engagement 
with Poland created space not just for the Catholic 
Church, but for labor leaders like Lech Walesa. Ron-
ald Reagan’s efforts on arms control and embrace 
of perestroika not only improved relations with the 
Soviet Union, but empowered dissidents throughout 
Eastern Europe. There’s no simple formula here. But 
we must try as best we can to balance isolation and 
engagement, pressure and incentives, so that human 
rights and dignity are advanced over time. 
 Third, a just peace includes not only civil 
and political rights—it must encompass economic 
 security and opportunity. For true peace is not just 
freedom from fear, but freedom from want. 
 It is undoubtedly true that development rarely 
takes root without security, it is also true that secu-
rity does not exist where human beings do not have 
access to enough food, or clean water, or the medi-
cine and shelter they need to survive. It does not ex-
ist where children can’t aspire to a decent education 
or a job that supports a family. The absence of hope 
can rot a society from within. 
 And that’s why helping farmers feed their own 
people—or nations educate their children and care 
for the sick—is not mere charity. It’s also why the 
world must come together to confront climate 
change. There is little scientific dispute that if we 
do nothing, we will face more drought, more fam-
ine, more mass displacement—all of which will fuel 
more conflict for decades. For this reason, it is not 
merely scientists and environmental activists who 
call for swift and forceful action—it’s military lead-
ers in my own country and others who understand 
our common security hangs in the balance. 
 Agreements among nations. Strong institutions. 
Support for human rights. Investments in develop-
ment. All these are vital ingredients in bringing about 
the evolution that President Kennedy spoke about. 
And yet, I do not believe that we will have the will, 
the determination, the staying power, to complete this 
work without something more—and that’s the contin-
ued expansion of our moral imagination; an insistence 
that there’s something irreducible that we all share. 
 As the world grows smaller, you might think it 
would be easier for human beings to recognize how 
similar we are; to understand that we’re all basically 
seeking the same things; that we all hope for the 
chance to live out our lives with some measure of hap-
piness and fulfillment for ourselves and our families. 
 And yet somehow, given the dizzying pace of glo-
balization, the cultural leveling of modernity, it per-
haps comes as no surprise that people fear the loss of 
what they cherish in their particular  identities—their 
race, their tribe, and perhaps most powerfully their 
religion. In some places, this fear has led to conflict. 
At times, it even feels like we’re moving backwards. 
We see it in the Middle East, as the conflict between 
Arabs and Jews seems to harden. We see it in nations 
that are tom asunder by tribal lines. 
 And most dangerously, we see it in the way that 
religion is used to justify the murder of innocents 
by those who have distorted and defiled the great 
religion of Islam, and who attacked my country 
from Afghanistan. These extremists are not the first 
to kill in the name of God; the cruelties of the Cru-
sades are amply recorded. But they remind us that 
no Holy War can ever be a just war. For if you truly 
believe that you are carrying out divine will, then 
there is no need for restraint—no need to spare the 
pregnant mother, or the medic, or the Red Cross 
worker, or even a person of one’s own faith. Such 
a warped view of religion is not just incompatible 
with the concept of peace, but I believe it’s incom-
patible with the very purpose of faith—for the one 
rule that lies at the heart of every major religion is 
that we do unto others as we would have them do 
unto us. 
 Adhering to this law of love has always been the 
core struggle of human nature. For we are fallible. 
We make mistakes, and fall victim to the tempta-
tions of pride, and power, and sometimes evil. Even 
those of us with the best of intentions will at times 
fail to right the wrongs before us. 
 But we do not have to think that human nature 
is perfect for us to still believe that the human condi-
tion can be perfected. We do not have to live in an 
idealized world to still reach for those ideals that will 
make it a better place. The non-violence  practiced 
by men like Gandhi and King may not have been 
practical or possible in every circumstance, but the 
love that they preached—their fundamental faith in 
human progress—that must always be the North 
Star that guides us on our journey. 
 For if we lose that faith—if we dismiss it as silly 
or naïve; if we divorce it from the decisions that 
we make on issues of war and peace—then we lose 
what’s best about humanity. We lose our sense of 
possibility. We lose our moral compass. 

436 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 In addition to normative theory understood as philo-
sophical and moral argument, we also include in this 
list more recent writings about how and why norms, 
values, or ideas matter in international relations and 
world politics. We have arranged these selections cat-
egorically—a broad, general category followed by the 
idealism-realism debate, human rights, war and peace, 
and humanitarian intervention.  
j General
 Adler, Emanuel, and Beverly Crawford, eds.  Progress 
in Postwar International Relations. New York: Co-
lumbia University Press, 1991. 
 Albin, Cecilia.  Justice and Fairness in International 
Organization. New York: Cambridge University 
Press, 2001. 
 Altman, Andrew, and Christopher Heath Wellman.  
A Liberal Theory of International Justice. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2009. 
 Arendt, Hannah.  Lectures on Kant’s Political Philoso-
phy. Ed. Ronald Beiner. Chicago: University of Chi-
cago Press, 1982. 
 Beck, Robert J., Anthony Clark Arend, and Robert D. 
Vander Lugt, eds.  International Rules. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1996. 
 Behr, Hartmut.  A History of International Politics 
Theory: Ontologies of the International . New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Beitz, Charles R.  Political Theory and International 
Relations. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University 
Press, 1979. 
 Björkdahl, Annika. “Norms in International Relations: 
Some Conceptual and Methodological Reflections,” 
 Cambridge Review of International Affairs. 15, 1 
(April 2002): 9–23. 
 Brown, Chris.  Practical Judgement in International 
Politics Theory: Selected Essays . New York: 
 Routledge, 2010. 
 Booth, Ken, Tim Dunne, and Michael Cox. “Special 
Issue: How Might We Live? Global Ethics in a New 
Century.”  Review of International Politics. 26, 5 
(December 2000): 1–234. 
 Brandt, Richard B.  Ethical Theory: The Problems of 
Normative and Critical Ethics. Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1959. 
 Caney, Simon.  Justice Beyond Borders. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2006. 
 Clark, Ian.  Legitimacy in International Society. New 
York: Oxford University Press, 2005. 
 Cochran, Molly.  Normative Theory in International 
Relations: A Pragmatic Approach. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press, 1999. 
 Cooley, Alexander, and Hendrik Spruyt.  Contracting 
States: Sovereign Transfers in International Relations. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 2009. 
 Covell, Charles.  The Law of Nations in Political 
Thought: A Critical Survey From Vitoria to Hegel. 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2010. 
 Diehl, Paul F., Charlotte Ku, and Daniel Zamora. “The 
Dynamics of International Law: The Interaction of 
Normative and Operating Systems.”  International 
Organization  57, 1 (Winter 2003): 43–75. 
 Like generations have before us, we must reject 
that future. As Dr. King said at this occasion so many 
years ago, “I refuse to accept despair as the final 
response to the ambiguities of history. I refuse to ac-
cept the idea that the ‘isness’ of man’s present condi-
tion makes him morally incapable of reaching up for 
the eternal ‘oughtness’ that forever confronts him.” 
 Let us reach for the world that ought to be—
that spark of the divine that still stirs within each of 
our souls. (Applause.) 
 Somewhere today, in the here and now, in the 
world as it is, a soldier sees he’s outgunned, but 
stands firm to keep the peace. Somewhere today, in 
this world, a young protestor awaits the brutality 
of her government, but has the courage to march 
on. Somewhere today, a mother facing punishing 
poverty still takes the time to teach her child, scrapes 
together what few coins she has to send that child to 
school—because she believes that a cruel world still 
has a place for that child’s dreams. 
 Let us live by their example. We can acknowl-
edge that oppression will always be with us, and still 
strive for justice. We can admit the intractability of 
depravation, and still strive for dignity. Clear-eyed, 
we can understand that there will be war, and still 
strive for peace. We can do that—for that is the 
story of human progress; that’s the hope of all the 
world; and at this moment of challenge, that must 
be our work here on Earth. 
 Thank you very much. (Applause.)  
SUGGESTIONS FOR FURTHER READING 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
437
 Hirsch, Moshe. “Compliance with International 
Norms in the Age of Globalization: Two Theoretical 
Perspectives.” In  The Impact of International Law 
on International Cooperation: Theoretical Perspec-
tives. Eds. Eyal Benvenisti and Moshe Hirsch. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Hoffmann, Stanley.  Duties beyond Borders: On the 
Limits and Possibilities of Ethical International Pol-
itics. Syracuse, NY: Syracuse University Press, 1981. 
 Keene, Edward.  Beyond the Anarchical Society: Gro-
tius, Colonialism, and Order in World Politics. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 2002. 
 Lebow, Richard Ned.  A Cultural Theory of Interna-
tional Relations. New York: Cambridge University, 
Press, 2009. 
 ———.  Coercion, Cooperation and Ethics in Interna-
tional Relations. New York: Routledge, 2007. 
 Milner, Helen V. “Globalization, Development, and 
International Institutions: Normative and Positive 
Perspectives,”  Perspectives on Politics. Vol. 3, No. 4 
(December 2005): 833–54. 
 Nardin, Terry.  Law, Morality and the Relations of 
States. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
1983. 
 Nelson, Daniel, and Laura Neack, eds.  Global Society 
in Transition: An International Politics Reader. New 
York: Kluwer Law International, 2002,  Chapter  3 . 
 Nolan, Cathal J., ed.  Ethics and Statecraft: The Moral 
Dimension of International Affairs. Westport, CT: 
Praeger, 1995. 
 Onuf, Nicholas.  World of Our Making: Rules and Rule 
in Social Theory and International Relations. Co-
lumbia: University of South Carolina Press, 1989. 
 Rawls, John.  Justice as Fairness: A Restatement. Ed. 
Erin Kelly. Cambridge, MA: Belknap Press, 2001. 
 ———.  The Law of Peoples. Cambridge, MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1999. 
 ———.  A Theory of Justice. Rev. ed.  Cambridge, MA: 
Belknap Press of Harvard University Press, 1971, 
1999. 
 Reus-Smit, Christian, ed.  The Politics of International 
Law. New York: Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Robinson, Fiona.  Globalizing Care: Ethics, Feminist 
Theory, and International Relations. Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1999. 
 Rosenthal, Joel H., ed.  Ethics and International Af-
fairs. Washington, DC: Georgetown University 
Press, 1995. 
 Singer, Peter.  How Are We to Live? Ethics in an Age 
of Self-Interest.  Oxford: Oxford University Press, 
1997. 
 Donelan, Michael.  Elements of International Political 
Theory. New York: Oxford University Press, 1990. 
 Doyle, Michael W. “Symposium: One World, Many Peo-
ples: International Justice in John Rawls’s  The Law 
of Peoples ,”  Perspectives on Politics. Vol. 4, No. 1 
(March 2006): 109-20. 
 Falk, Richard.  The Declining World Order: America’s 
Imperial Geopolitics . New York: Routledge, 2004. 
 ———.  Explorations at the Edge of Time: The Pros-
pects for World Order . Philadelphia: Temple Uni-
versity Press, 1992. 
 ———.  On Humane Governance: Toward a New 
Global Politics . University Park: Pennsylvania State 
University Press, 1995. 
 ———.  Law in an Emerging Global Village: A Post-
Westphalian Perspective . Ardsley, NY: Transna-
tional Publishers, 1998. 
 ———. “Perspectives on Global Justice: Norms, 
Structures, Processes and Context,”  In Between 
Cosmopolitan Ideals and State Sovereignty: Stud-
ies in Global Justice . Eds. Ronald Tinnevelt, and 
Gert  Verschraegen. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 
2006. 
 ———.  Predatory Globalization: A Critique . Malden, 
MA: Polity Press, 1999. 
 ———.  Religion and Humane Global Governance . 
New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001. 
 ———, Balakrishnan Rajagopal, and Jacqueline Ste-
vens, eds.  International Law and the Third World: 
Reshaping Justice . New York: Routledge- Cavendish, 
2008. 
 Fox, Jonathan, and Shmuel Sandler.  Bringing Religion 
Into International Relations. New York: Palgrave 
Macmillan, 2004. 
 Franck, Thomas M.  Fairness in International Law and 
Institutions. New York: Oxford University Press, 
1995. 
 Frost, Mervyn.  Ethics in International Relations: A 
Constitutive Theory. Cambridge, England: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1996. 
 ———.  Towards a Normative Theory of International 
Relations. Cambridge, England: Cambridge Univer-
sity Press, 1986. 
 Gilbert, Alan.  Democratic Individuality. Cambridge, 
UK: Cambridge University Press, 1990. 
 Goldsmith, Jack L., and Eric A. Posner.  The Limits of 
International Law. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2007. 
 Hayden, Patrick.  Political Evil in a Global Age:  Hannah 
Arendt and International Theory . New York: Rout-
ledge, 2009. 

438 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Thompson, Jana.  Justice and World Order: A Philo-
sophical Inquiry. New York: Routledge, Chapman & 
Hall, 1992. 
 Thompson, Kenneth W., ed.  Ethics and International 
Relations. New Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Books, 
1985. 
 ———.  Traditions and Values in Politics and Diplo-
macy. Baton Rouge, LA: State University Press, 1992. 
 Walzer, Michael.  Thick and Thin: Moral Argument at 
Home and Abroad. Notre Dame, IN: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 1994. 
 Wapner, Paul, and Lester Edwin J. Ruiz.  Principled 
World Politics:  The Challenge of Normative In-
ternational Relations. Lanham, MD: Rowman and 
Littlefield, 2000.  
j On Idealism and Realism—An Old Debate 
 Carr, E. H.  The Twenty Years’ Crisis, 1919–1939. New 
York: Harper & Row, 1964. 
 Herz, John H.  The Nation-State and the Crisis of World 
Politics. New York: David McKay, 1976. 
 ———.  Political Realism and Political Idealism. Chi-
cago: University of Chicago Press, 1951. 
 ———. “Political Realism Revisited.”  International 
Studies Quarterly 25, 2 (June 1981): 182–97. 
 Kegley, Charles W. “Neo-Idealism: A Practical Matter.” 
 Ethics and International Affairs 2 (1988): 173–97. 
 Kennan, George F. “Morality and Foreign Policy.”  For-
eign Affairs 64, 2 (Winter 1985–86): 205–18. 
 Morgenthau, Hans J.  In Defense of the National Inter-
est. New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1960. 
 ———.  Politics among Nations, 5th ed. New York: 
Knopf, 1978. 
 ———.  Truth and Power. New York: Praeger, 1970. 
 Niebuhr, Reinhold.  Christian Realism and Political 
Problems. New York, Scribners, 1953. 
 Osgood, Robert E.  Ideals and Self-Interest in American 
Foreign Relations. Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 1953. 
 Wolfers, Arnold. “Statesmanship and Moral Choice.” 
 World Politics (1949): 175–95.  
j On Human Rights 
 Alston, Philip, Ryan Goodman, and Henry J. Steiner. 
 International Human Rights in Context:  Law, 
 Politics, Morals. New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2007. 
 Apodaca, Clair.  Understanding U.S. Human Rights Pol-
icy:  A Paradoxical Legacy. London: Routledge, 2006. 
 Barry, Brian, and Robert E. Goodin, eds.  Free Move-
ment: Ethical Issues in the Transnational Migration 
of People and Money. University Park: Pennsylvania 
State University Press, 1992. 
 Benhabib, Seyla. “Claiming Rights Across Borders: 
International Human Rights and Democratic Sov-
ereignty,”  American Political Science Review. Vol. 
103, No. 4 (November 2009): 691–704. 
 Brysk, Alison.  Globalization and Human Rights. 
Berkeley: University of California Press, 2002. 
 ———.  Human Rights and Private Wrongs: Construct-
ing Global Civil Society. New York: Routledge, 
2005. 
 Charvet, John, and Elisa Kaczynska-Nay.  The Liberal 
Project and Human Rights: The Theory and Prac-
tice of a New World Order. New York: Cambridge 
University Press, 2009. 
 Donnelly, Jack.  The Concept of Human Rights . New 
York: St. Martin’s Press, 1985. 
 ———.  International Human Rights. Boulder, CO: 
Westview Press, 1993, 2006. 
 ———.  Universal Human Rights. New Delhi, India: 
Manas Publications, 2005. 
 ———.  Universal Human Rights in Theory and Prac-
tice. Ithaca, NY: Cornell University Press, 2002. 
 Falk, Richard A.  Achieving Human Rights . New York: 
Routledge, 2009. 
 ———.  Human Rights Horizons: The Pursuit of Jus-
tice in a Globalizing World . New York: Routledge, 
2000. 
 Finnemore, Martha. “Constructing Norms of Humani-
tarian Intervention.” In  The Culture of National 
Security: Norms and Identity in International Poli-
tics, ed., Peter Katzenstein. New York: Columbia 
University Press, 1996. 
 Forsythe, David P.  Human Rights in International Re-
lations, 2nd ed. Cambridge, England: Cambridge 
University Press, 2006. 
 Frost, Mervyn.  Constituting Human Rights: Global 
Civil Society and the Society of Democratic States. 
New York: Routledge, 2002. 
 Greenberg, Karen J., and Joshua J. Dratel, eds.  The Tor-
ture Papers:   The Road to Abu Ghraib. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2005. 
 Haas, Ernst B.  Global Evangelism Rides Again: How 
to Protect Human Rights without Really Trying. 
Berkeley: University of California Institute of Inter-
national Studies, 1978. 
 ———.  Human Rights and International Action: The 
Case of Freedom of Association. Stanford, CA: 
Stanford University Press, 1970. 

Suggestions for Further Reading 
439
 Hunt, Lynn.  Inventing Human Rights:  A History. New 
York: W.W. Norton, 2007. 
 Ignatieff, Michael, Kwame Anthony Appiah, David 
A. Hollinger, and Thomas W. Laqueur.  Human 
Rights as Politics and Idolatry. Princeton, NJ: 
 Princeton University Press, 2003. 
 Ishay, Micheline R.  The History of Human Rights: 
From Ancient Times to the Globalization Era. 
Berkeley, CA: University of California Press, 2004. 
 ———, ed.  The Human Rights Reader. New York: 
Routledge, 1997, 2007. 
 Klotz, Audie.  Norms in International Relations: The 
Struggle against Apartheid. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 1999. 
 Lauren, Paul Gordon.  The Evolution of International 
Human Rights:  Visions Seen, 2nd ed. Phildelphia: 
University of Pennsylvania Press, 2003. 
 Pogge, Thomas W.  World Poverty and Human Rights: 
 Cosmopolitan Responsibilities and Reforms. Cam-
bridge, UK: Polity, 2002. 
 Shute, Stephen, and Susan Hurley, eds.  On Human 
Rights: The Oxford Amnesty Lectures, 1993. New 
York: Basic Books, 1993. 
 Sikkink, Kathryn.  Mixed Signals: U.S. Human Rights 
Policy in Latin America. Ithaca, NY: Cornell 
University Press, 2004.  
j On War and Peace 
 Alford, Roger P. “On War Is Hell.”  Chicago Journal of 
International Law 3 (2002): 207–18. 
 Allan, Pierre, and Alexis Keller, eds.  What Is a Just 
Peace? New York: Oxford University Press, 2006. 
 Arendt, Hannah.  On Violence. New York: Harcourt, 
Brace and World, 1970. 
 Bass, Gary Jonathan.  Stay the Hand of Vengeance:  The 
Politics of War Crimes Tribunals. Princeton, NJ: 
Princeton University Press, 2000. 
 Best, Geoffrey.  War and Law Since 1945. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 1994. 
 Booth, Ken.  Law, Force and Diplomacy. London: Allen & 
Unwin, 1985. 
 Bull, Hedley. “Recapturing the Just War for Political 
Theory.”  World Politics 31, 4 (July 1979): 588–99. 
[A review of Walzer,  Just and Unjust Wars. ] 
 Childress, James F.  Moral Responsibility in Conflict: 
 Essays on Nonviolence, War and Conscience. 
Baton Rouge, LA: Louisiana State University Press, 
1982. 
 Doyle, Michael W.  Striking First: Preemption and 
Prevention in International Conflict. Ed. Stephen 
Macedo. Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 
2008. 
 ———.  Ways of War and Peace. New York: 
W.W. Norton, 1997. [Part Four addresses con-
science and power.] 
 Elshtain, Jean.  Just War against Terror: The Burden 
of American Power in a Violent World. New York: 
Basic Books, 2003. 
 ———.  Women and War. New York: Basic Books, 
1987. 
 Falk, Richard.  The Costs of War: International Law, 
the UN, and World Order After Iraq . New York: 
Routledge, 2008. 
 ——— and David Krieger, Eds.  At the Nuclear Preci-
pice: Catastrophe or Transformation? New York: 
Palgrave Macmillan, 2008. 
 Garcia, Denise.  Small Arms and Security: New Emerg-
ing International Norms. London: Routledge, 2006. 
 Hoffmann, Stanley.  On War and Morality. Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 1989. 
 Howard, Michael, et al., eds.  The Laws of War: 
 Constraints on Warfare in the Western World. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1994. 
 Ignatieff, Michael.  The Lesser Evil: Political Ethics in 
an Age of Terrorism. Princeton, NJ: Princeton Uni-
versity Press, 2004. 
 Johnson, James Turner.  Can Modern War Be Just? New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1984. 
 ———.  Ideology, Reason, and the Limitation of 
War:  Religious and Secular Concepts, 1200–1740. 
 Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1975. 
 ———.  Just War Tradition and the Restraint of War. 
Princeton, NJ: Princeton University Press, 1981. 
 ———.  Morality and Contemporary Warfare. New 
Haven, CT: Yale University Press, 1999. 
 Kegley Jr., Charles, and Raymond Gregory. “Normative 
Constraints on the Use of Force Short of War.”  Journal 
of Peace Research 23, 3 (September 1986): 213–27.
 Lackey, Douglas P.  The Ethics of War and Peace. 
 Englewood Cliffs [now Upper Saddle River], NJ: 
Prentice Hall, 1989.  
 Morrow, James D. “When Do States Follow the 
Laws of War?”  American Political Science Review. 
Vol. 101, No. 3 (August 2007): 559-72. 
 Mueller, John.  The Remnants of War. Ithaca, NY: 
 Cornell University Press, 2004. 
 Nardin, Terry, ed.  The Ethics of War:  Religious and 
Secular Perspectives. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press, 1996. 
 O’Brien, William V.  The Conduct of Just and Limited 
War. New York: Praeger, 1981. 

440 
Suggestions for Further Reading
 Orend, Brian. “Justice after War.”  Ethics and Interna-
tional Affairs 16 (2002): 43–56. 
 ———.  War and International Justice:  A Kantian Perspec-
tive. Blasdell: Wilfrid Laurier University Press, 2000. 
 Piazza, James A., and James Igor Walsh, eds. “Sympo-
sium and the War on Terror,”  PS: Political Science 
and Politics. Vol. 43, No. 3 (July 2010): 407–50. 
 Price, Richard. “Emerging Customary Norms and 
Anti-Personnel Landmines.” In  The Politics of Inter-
national Law, ed., Christian Reus-Smit. New York: 
Cambridge University Press, 2004. 
 Ramsey, Paul.  The Just War: Force and Political Re-
sponsibility. New York: University Press of America, 
1968, 1983. 
 Rapoport, Anatol.  The Origins of Violence. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Transaction Publishers, 1989, 1995. 
 ———.  Peace: An Idea Whose Time Has Come. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1992. 
 ———.  Strategy and Conscience. New York: Schocken 
Books, 1969. 
 Raymond, Gregory. “International Norms: Normative 
Orders and Peace.” In  What Do We Know about 
War, ed., John A. Vasquez. Lanham, MD: Rowman 
and Littlefield, 2000. 
 Reisman, W. Michael, and Christ T. Antonious, eds. 
 The Laws of War: A Comprehensive Collection of 
Primary Documents on International Law Govern-
ing Armed Conflict. New York: Vintage, 1994. 
 Thomas, Ward.  The Ethics of Destruction: Norms and 
Force in International Relations. Ithaca, NY: Cor-
nell University Press, 2001. 
 Walzer, Michael.  Arguing About War. New Haven: Yale 
University Press, 2004. 
 ———.  Just and Unjust Wars. 2nd ed. New York: Basic 
Books, 1977, 1992. 
 Welch, David A.  Justice and the Genesis of War. New 
York: Cambridge University Press, 1993.  
j On Humanitarian Intervention 
 Campbell, Kenneth J.  Genocide and the Global Village, 
2nd rev. ed. New York: Palgrave Macmillan, 2001. 
 Frye, Alton.  Humanitarian Intervention:  Crafting a 
Workable Doctrine. New York: Council on Foreign 
Relations Press, 2000. 
 Haass, Richard N.  Intervention:  The Use of Ameri-
can Military Force in the Post–Cold War World. 
Washington, D.C.: Carnegie Endowment for Inter-
national Peace, 1999. 
 Hoffmann, Stanley.  The Ethics and Politics of Humani-
tarian Intervention. South Bend, IN: University of 
Notre Dame Press, 1997. 
 Holzgrefe, J. L., and Robert O. Keohane, eds.   Humani- 
tarian Intervention:  Ethical, Legal and  Political 
 Dilemmas. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University 
Press, 2003. 
 Hudson, Kimberly A.  Justice, Intervention, and Force 
in International Relations: Reassessing Just War 
Theory in the 21 st  Century . New York: Routledge, 
2009. 
 Janzekovic, John.  The Use of Force in Humanitarian 
Intervention:  Morality and Practicalities. Aldershot, 
Hampshire (UK): Ashgate, 2006. 
 Kuperman, Alan J.  The Limits of Humanitarian Inter-
vention:  Genocide in Rwanda. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution Press, 2001. 
 Kusano, Hiroki. “Humanitarian Intervention: The In-
terplay of Norms and Politics.” In  International 
Intervention in the Post–Cold War World: Moral 
Responsibility and Power Politics, eds., Michael 
C. Davis, Wolfgang Dietrich, Bettina Scholdan, and 
Dieter Sepp. Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharp, 2004. 
 Minow, Martha.  Between Vengeance and Forgiveness: 
 Facing History after Genocide and Mass Violence. 
Boston: Beacon Press, 1998. 
 Orford, Anne.  Reading Humanitarian Intervention: 
 Human Rights and the Use of Force in International 
Law. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University 
Press, 2003. 
 The Responsibility to Protect:  The Report of the In-
ternational Commission on Intervention and State 
Sovereignty. Ottawa: IDRC Books, 2002. 
 Weiss, T.  Humanitarian Intervention:  Ideas in Action. 
Cambridge, England: Polity, 2007. 
 Welsh, Jennifer M., ed.  Humanitarian Intervention and 
International Relations. New York: Oxford Univer-
sity Press, 2006. 
 Wheeler, Nicholas J.  Saving Strangers:  Humanitarian 
Intervention in International Society. New York: 
Oxford University Press, 2002.  

 absolute gains  See relative or absolute gains.   
 abstraction   A general idea, principle, or concept 
without physical or tangible quality. International 
relations theorists sometimes write of systems, 
interdependence, the balance of power, and 
equilibrium—examples of abstractions that may 
be useful to the theorist who wishes to explain or 
account for political or other phenomena.  
 action  A movement or physical act, as when the 
state or its decisionmakers take some concrete step in 
a given situation. An action is the practical expression 
of policy. See also  policy, interaction. 
 actor  A participant or player. The state is 
considered by realists to be the principal actor in 
international relations; non-state actors include 
transnational actors such as multinational 
corporations and banks. See also  rational, unitary, 
transnational, transgovernmental.  
 agency, agent  A voluntarist, nondeterminist focus 
on the role played by human beings and human 
institutions in effecting outcomes; human beings 
matter and what they think and do matter. The 
concept is particularly associated with liberals and 
social constructivists. 
 agent-structure  An ontological question raised 
by social constructivists in particular. As stated by 
 Emanuel Adler : “The agent-structure debate focuses 
on the nature of international reality; more precisely, 
whether what exists in IR, and the explanation for it, 
should revolve around actors, structures, or both.” 
To what extent can states (and other actors) as agents 
shape the world within which they are immersed 
and not just be prisoners of the structure of the 
international system? How much of structure is a 
given, and how much is created by human agency? 
To what extent does the structure constitute the 
actors?  
 aggregation  The bringing together of parts into a single 
whole, as when the state is understood to be a  unitary  
actor. Liberals tend to see the state not as a single, unitary 
whole but as many parts, thus disaggregating or breaking 
the state apart into its component institutions, groups, 
and individual persons.  
 amoral  Morally neutral; without moral content. 
See also  moral. 
 anarchic  See  anarchy.  
 anarchy  The absence of legitimate political 
authority. International politics or the international 
system is said to be anarchic in that there is no central 
or superordinate authority over states.  
 anthropology  The scientific study of humankind, 
including its physical, social, and cultural origins and 
development.  
 appeasement  The policy of allowing another state to 
have what it wants—an attempt to avoid aggression 
by that state; for an example (Munich), see  learning. 
 assumption  A premise or statement taken to be 
true without empirical or factual proof. The theorist 
typically makes assumptions as the starting point 
in developing a given theory. For example, some 
balance-of-power theorists make assumptions about 
the state as principal, unitary, and rational actor.  
 asymmetry, asymmetric  Not symmetrical; lacking 
precise correspondence or relation between or among 
components. An interdependent relation is said to be 
asymmetric if Party  A is more dependent on Party  B 
than Party  B is on Party  A. 
 autarky  An independent posture of self-sufficiency 
without dependence on other actors. Autarky occurs 
when a state attempts as a matter of policy to exist in 
economic isolation from other states.  
 authority  A legitimate right to direct or command 
and to make, decide, and enforce rules. The term 
 authority has a moral or legal quality and, as such, 
can be distinguished from control by brute force or 
by coercion. See also  power.  
 autonomous development  See  development. 
 balance of payments  Accounting concept by which 
the international economic transactions (inflows and 
outflows) of states and their corporate and private 
elements are tracked. Balance of payments includes 
export and import of goods and services (balance of 
trade), capital investment and other “invisible” or 
financial flows, and gold or other financial reserve 
transactions. “Balance” is achieved when gold or 
G LOSSARY 
441

442
Glossary
category of such agencies may be referred to 
as the bureaucracy. An individual member of a 
bureaucracy or administrator is sometimes referred 
to as a  bureaucrat. Bureaucracy, bureaucrat, and 
 bureaucratic are words sometimes used to convey 
negative connotations about government, but 
most academic usage is merely descriptive of the 
governmental administrative function.  
 bureaucratic politics  The formulation of policy 
is a function of the competition among opposing 
individuals who represent diverse governmental 
institutions. Coalitions and countercoalitions 
typically form as a part of the process of bureaucratic 
politics. See also  organizational process.  
 capitalism  An economic system or mode of 
production that emphasizes private ownership of the 
means of production and a free market. One who 
owns the means of production is a capitalist, or 
 bourgeois. See also  bourgeoisie.  
 capitalist world-system  An economic-structuralist 
approach to international relations that emphasizes 
the impact of the worldwide spread of capitalism; 
a focus on class and economic relations and 
the division of the world into a core, periphery, 
and semiperiphery. See also  core, periphery, 
semiperiphery, class, economic structuralism.  
 categorical imperative  Concept associated with 
the work of Immanuel Kant—that one ought to act 
“according to the maxim that you can at the same 
time will [such conduct] to be a universal law” and 
that one should treat others “as an end as well as a 
means, never merely as a means.”  
 causality  B occurs on account of  A, which precedes 
it in time.  A produces or is responsible for the 
subsequent occurrence of  B. In this sequence,  A is the 
 cause and  B is the  effect. Some causes have multiple 
effects, as when  A causes  B, C, and  D. Some effects 
have multiple causes, as when effect  T is caused by 
 Q, R, and  S. Some causes may be  necessary, but not 
 sufficient to produce a given effect, as when 
 A is necessary to cause  D but will not do so unless 
 B or  C is also present (thus,  A and  B or  A and  C are 
 necessary and sufficient causes of  D ). Some causes 
are sufficient in themselves to produce a given effect, 
as when the presence of  A always produces  B. An 
 efficient cause is the factor immediately responsible 
for a given effect, whereas a  permissive cause may 
refer to an underlying condition that allows a certain 
effect to be produced (Kenneth Waltz, for example, 
argues that international anarchy is the permissive 
other financial reserves flow in or out to cover 
differences in the other accounts, as when a country 
exporting more than it imports receives foreign 
currency that it can hold as a financial reserve.  
 balance of power  A key concept among realists 
that refers to a condition of equilibrium among 
states. Realists differ on whether the equilibrium or 
balance among states is (a) created by statesmen or 
(b) occurs quite apart from the will of statesmen as 
an inherent characteristic of international politics. 
Balance-of-power considerations may be used by 
decisionmakers as justification for a given foreign 
policy. Some critics have noted that the multiple 
definitions or meanings of balance of power diminish 
its utility as a concept in international relations 
theory. 
 behavior  The actions and interactions among 
units; the behavior of policymakers or of states. 
 Behavioralism refers to a way to study politics or other 
social phenomena that focuses on the actions and 
interactions among units by using scientific methods 
of observation to include quantification of variables 
whenever possible. A practitioner of  behavioralism  
is often referred to as a  behavioralist. Behaviorism  
refers to the ideas held by those behavioral scientists 
who consider only observed behavior as relevant to 
the scientific enterprise and who reject what they 
consider to be metaphysical notions of “mind” or 
“consciousness.”  
 behavioralism  See  behavior. 
 bipolar, bipolarity  The condition of having two poles, 
as when the distribution of power or capabilities 
in international politics is said to be  bipolar. Some 
theorists consider the Cold War international political 
system to have had a bipolar  structure —the United 
States and the former Soviet Union. Others consider 
it today to be unipolar, multipolar, or to conform to 
some other characterization. See also  structure.  
 bourgeoisie  The capitalist (and, at the time of its 
emergence, the “middle”) class. The class defined 
in Marxian terms by its relation to the means of 
production—its ownership of capital, including 
factories and other machinery of production in a 
capitalist economic mode as well as means of finance. 
A member of this class is sometimes referred to as a 
 bourgeois. 
 bureaucracy  The administrative arm of government 
staffed primarily by appointed, nonelected 
officials. A given governmental agency may be 
referred to as a bureaucracy, whereas the generic 

Glossary
443
of society defined, for example, as a socioeconomic 
category based on income, wealth, or level of living. 
See also  economic structuralism.  
 class conflict  A concept associated with Marxism 
that emphasizes the inevitable clash of interests 
between classes, defined in terms of their relations 
to the means of production (i.e., how goods are 
produced). Marx, for example, analyzed the conflict 
between the  bourgeoisie (owners of capital, especially 
factories and machinery of production) and the 
 proletariat, or workers, who were being exploited 
by the bourgeoisie. Marx argued that eventually 
exploitation would reach the point at which a 
proletarian revolution would occur and the power of 
the bourgeoisie would be broken. See also  proletarian 
revolution, Marxism, economic structuralism.  
 classical realists  These scholars include such 
twentieth-century figures as E. H. Carr, Hans 
Morgenthau, and Arnold Wolfers. While appreciating 
the importance of conceptualization, they were 
skeptical of quantitative approaches to understanding 
international relations. Heavily influenced by reading 
history and the works by the likes of Thucydides, 
Machiavelli, and Hobbes, they also differ from 
modern-day neorealists by putting emphasis on norms 
or values that also play a part in international politics, 
not just balance of power as an abstract structure. 
Furthermore, the role of values has to be considered.  
 coalition  A combination or alliance of individuals, 
factions, or states, including both temporary and 
more enduring groupings of actors, around a 
common interest or purpose.  
 coercive diplomacy  Term developed by Alexander 
George and his associates to describe how threats 
of force are used successfully or unsuccessfully as 
part of diplomacy to achieve national objectives. 
Both positive and negative measures (carrots and 
stick) are part of the coercive-diplomacy kit. See also 
 compellence, deterrence, dissuasion.  
 cognition  The process by which human beings come 
to know or acquire knowledge through perception, 
reasoning, and (some would say) intuition. The term 
 cognitive refers to this process.  
 cognitive dissonance  A concept developed by 
Leon Festinger wherein human beings tend not to 
perceive what is contrary to their preconceived or 
previously held perspectives. To avoid cognitive 
dissonance, individuals either (a) unconsciously 
screen out information or evidence that contradicts 
what they already believe to be true, or (b) interpret 
cause of—the absence of any obstacle to—war, 
whereas other factors proximate to a particular 
situation, such as misperception in a crisis, are among 
the efficient causes of a given war). Some theorists 
reject causality as an abstract or metaphysical notion: 
One can observe  B as coming after or following  A  in 
terms of time, but that does not prove that  A is a 
“cause” of  B. 
 causal modeling  The depiction, such as by a 
computer simulation or diagram, of sequential 
relations among two or more variables and how 
they result in a particular event, action, or outcome, 
including the relative importance or “weight” of each 
variable in producing a particular outcome. Causal 
models depict cause–effect relations, as in a model of 
an arms race that hypothesizes a causal connection 
between the decision of country  A to increase the 
level of its military expenditure and an increase in 
the later military expenditure of country  B in an 
action–reaction sequence or arms race spiral.  
 center  The term used especially by many 
dependency theorists to refer to First World or the 
industrialized countries as constituting a core group 
within the global political economy—Japan and 
the countries in Europe and North America with 
advanced industrial or postindustrial economies. 
Also sometimes used to refer to the elites or dominant 
classes. See also  core and  periphery, economic 
structuralism.  
 city-state  A political entity composed of a city 
and its surrounding territory, as in the city-states 
of ancient Greece (Sparta, Athens, Corinth, etc.) or 
Renaissance Italy (Florence, Venice, Padua, etc.).  
 civil society  Term associated with the rule of law 
and includes networks of relationships among people 
and the groups or organizations to which they 
belong. See also  international civil society.  
 civil war  See  war. 
 class  An analytical component of society with an 
identifiable characteristic or set of characteristics that 
differentiate it from other components. In Marxian 
usage, the term is defined by relations to the means 
of production. Under capitalism the  bourgeoisie 
is defined by its ownership of capital (not only 
money or finance capital but also the factories and 
machinery that are the means of production), and 
the  proletariat, or working class, is defined by its 
labor. Under feudalism, the  aristocracy is defined by 
its ownership of land, and the  serfs, or peasants, by 
their labor. As such,  class is different from a  stratum 

444
Glossary
Communism is a classless society in which each 
person produces according to his or her ability and 
receives or consumes according to need. In Marxist 
thought, given the absence of classes, the state 
as an instrument of class domination ceases to 
exist. See also  economic structuralism, modes of 
production.  
 communist  An individual committed to the 
eventual attainment of communism, particularly 
through revolutionary means that would lead to 
the overthrow of capitalism. See also  economic 
structuralism, modes of production.  
 comparative advantage  The concept holds that 
countries specialize in the production of those goods 
and services they produce more efficiently. In a free 
trade environment there would be, according to 
theory, a global specialization or division of labor 
with aggregate productivity maximized. As critics 
point out, however, free trade theory does not 
address such matters as equity in the distribution 
of wealth. Some dependency theorists see free trade 
theory as the vehicle by which Third World countries 
are kept in a status of dependency and precluded 
from development.  
 compellence  Word created by game theorist 
Thomas Schelling to refer to using threats of force by 
one state to force or compel another state to change 
its course of action or to do something the compelling 
state wants. It is referred to by Alexander George as a 
kind of  coercive diplomacy as, for example, when the 
United States threatened the Soviet Union in an effort 
to force withdrawal of missiles from Cuba in 1962. 
This is in contrast to  deterrence in which one state 
threatens another to keep it  from doing something the 
deterring state does not want to see happen, as when 
states with nuclear weapons arsenals use them to 
deter others from attacking by threatening retaliation. 
See also  coercive diplomacy, deterrence.  
 complex interdependence  A term developed by 
Robert Keohane and Joseph Nye that refers to 
the multiple transnational channels that connect 
societies, including interstate, transgovernmental, 
and transnational relations among both state and 
non-state actors. The resulting relations are extremely 
complex, with economic interests assuming far 
greater importance than in classical realism. See also 
 interdependence, globalization.  
 comprador class  A term referring originally to those 
in the business stratum who served as local agents for 
foreign, colonial business interests. In contemporary 
such discordant information in such a way as to 
support their preconceptions.  
 collateral destruction  Damage to human beings and 
property coincident to or following the intentional 
destruction of military targets; the damage is not 
confined to the intended targets, but spills over to 
harm other victims and property.  
 collective conscience, collective 
consciousness  Concept associated with Emile 
Durkheim referring to shared meanings or commonly 
held moral understandings in a society.  
 collective defense  A function performed by alliances 
that pool power or capabilities of state members to 
balance or countervail against the power of other 
states, alliances, or other coalitions. The right to 
individual and collective defense is legally recognized 
by Article 51 of the UN Charter. See also  collective 
security.  
 collective goods theory  Relates to the allocation of, 
and payment for, goods that, once provided, cannot 
easily be denied to others and whose use does not 
deny their use to others. Providing national security 
or international security through alliances has been 
described by some theorists as collective goods. 
Collective goods are referred to by some as public 
goods. See also  public choice theory.  
 collective security  The term is used commonly as if 
it were synonymous with  collective defense ; however, 
such usage overlooks the important distinction 
that, in principle, collective security is based on 
international law enforcement obligations, whereas 
collective defense is merely a form of balance-of-
power politics. Under collective security, states agree 
to enforce international law by confronting any 
aggressor with the preponderant power that comes 
from pooling their collective efforts. A variety of 
diplomatic, economic, and other measures including 
the use of force may be employed. Unlike  collective 
defense or  balance-of-power policies, collective 
security is understood as a law-enforcement or 
police activity. Unlike an  alliance that is directed 
against adversaries, the goal in collective security is 
to encourage international law-abiding behavior by 
states, dissuading them from committing aggression 
or other illegal actions taken against other states. 
See also  collective defense.  
 colonialism  See  imperialism. 
 communism  A mode of production in Marxist 
thought that is to be achieved after the passing 
of capitalism and a socialist transition period. 

Glossary
445
 correlation  An association between two, or among 
more than two, variables, of such a nature that a 
change in one seems to be tied or related to a change 
in another. A correlation among variables, however, 
does not necessarily mean that they are causally 
linked. See also  causality, variable.  
 cost  A loss as opposed to a benefit; something paid 
as opposed to something received. The concept is 
central to rational choice or game theory, including 
coalition and alliance formation. Costs may be 
distributed asymmetrically or unevenly among the 
actors in interdependence relations.  
 counterforce  See  targeting. 
 counterintuitive  Against, or contrary to, what is 
thought to be true. See also  intuition, intuitive. 
 countervalue  See  targeting. 
 covering laws  See  deductive-nomological. 
 crisis  A situation characterized by surprise, high 
threat to values or interests, and short decision time.  
 critical theory  Associated with Jürgen Habermas 
and others in the “Frankfurt School” in Germany 
that offers a theory of social reality based on the 
dialectic of knowledge and power, arguing that 
theory must be connected to practice. This also 
entails a critique of positivist–empiricist approaches 
to knowledge, critical theorists claiming all 
knowledge is historical and political in nature. 
Current “dissidents” in the field of international 
relations have also drawn from, among others, 
Antonio Gramsci’s own version of critical theory, 
Ludwig Wittgenstein’s work on linguistics and 
hermeneutics, and the post-structuralist perspective 
of such writers as Michel Foucault. Critical theory 
challenges the stated and unstated assumptions and 
alleged objectivity of mainstream social science. 
Ideologies that represent particular interests, while 
masquerading as “theories,” are especially suspect. 
Such theories are depicted deceptively as if they 
were objective portrayals of sociopolitical time 
and space. Critical theorists reject the pretense 
to objective knowledge—the logical positivism 
of the “Vienna Circle” advanced in the interwar 
period and followed by many social scientists in 
subsequent decades. The rigid division between 
normative and empirical theory is illusory. 
Moreover, what we think we know really is a 
function of language and sociopolitical context. 
Critical theory calls for interpretive understanding 
of time and space, an insight drawn originally from 
Max Weber’s work in social science methodology. 
usage, it refers to the aggregate of business elites 
in a Third World country or countries who 
maintain close links with their counterparts in the 
industrial countries of the First World. Particularly 
in Marxist usage, the term is used to explain 
relations of exploitation of Third World workers 
and peasants by the local  bourgeoisie , linked as it is 
to the international  bourgeoisie . See also  economic 
structuralism.  
 concept  An idea of a general or abstract nature; 
sometimes referred to as a  construct. Such concepts 
as  power, interdependence, order, justice, and  peace 
are used in the construction of international relations 
theories.  
 condition  A set of circumstances or state of being. 
An underlying condition of international politics, for 
example, is the absence of a single or central source 
of authority. When a given population has established 
a sense of community, this can be described as a 
condition. 
 conflict  Disagreement; the opposition or clash of 
units. Conflicts may be nonviolent or at varying 
degrees or levels of violence. Some theorists see the 
management of conflicts that cannot be resolved 
as being central to maintaining peace. Conflict of 
interest among states or other actors is a widely used 
concept.  
 consciousness  Refers to one’s inner self, being, or 
awareness.  
 constant  A factor that does not vary. See also 
 variable. 
 constitutionalism  The liberal idea that individual 
freedom is served by constraining the power or 
authority of government and setting formal limits, 
whether written or unwritten.  
 constitutive  From the constructivist perspective, 
defines the set of practices or means by which any 
particular consciously organized social activity or 
institution comes to be. See also  regulative rules. 
 construct  Used synonymously with  concept. 
A construct can be understood as an abstraction 
created or put together often out of simpler elements. 
See also  concept.  
 constructivism  See  social constructivism.  
 core  A term sometimes used synonymously with 
 center, a reference to the industrialized countries 
in the global political economy. The term is also 
sometimes used to refer to the elites or dominant 
classes. See also  center and  periphery.  

446
Glossary
balanced economic development. See also  economic 
structuralism. 
 dependent variable  The thing that is to be explained 
or accounted for. Some theorists have tried to 
explain, or find the causes of, war, which is their 
dependent variable. See also  variable, independent 
variable, intervening variable. 
 description  A verbal statement that provides an 
understanding or meaning. Description is often 
differentiated from  explanation or  prediction, which 
are understood to be  theoretical tasks. Thus,  theory 
is considered to be different from mere  description. 
From this perspective, description is a necessary but 
pre-theoretical task.  
 détente  An easing or relaxation of tensions, as when 
the relations between major powers are said to be less 
tense. The Cold War, for example, was said to have 
given way in the late 1960s and 1970s to a period of 
détente.  
 determinism, deterministic  A philosophical view that 
what we observe inevitably occurs as the consequence 
of factors over which human beings have no volition 
or control. Most social theorists who accept the 
characterization or who can be labeled as  determinists  
do not reject totally the role of human will, as the 
strict definition of determinism would imply, but they 
do allow much less freedom of action for individuals 
to affect outcomes than those theorists labeled as 
 voluntarists. The determinism–voluntarism issue among 
social-science theorists has its analog in theological 
disputes over determinism or predestination on the 
one hand and free will on the other. Critics consider 
 structural realists and  Marxist class analysts and other 
 economic structuralists to be overly deterministic, but 
this claim is often rejected by these theorists. See also 
 voluntarism, economic structuralism.  
 deterrence  Psychological effect on an opponent 
that results in a decision not to take some act such as 
attacking or starting a war. Deterrence is thought to be 
achieved either through fear of retaliatory punishment 
or through rational calculation that taking this action 
will not succeed in achieving intended objectives 
or that the costs of doing so will be too high. 
See  compellence, coercive diplomacy, dissuasion.  
 development  The process associated with the 
industrialization of societies.  Modernization is a term 
sometimes used synonymously with  development,  
but some theorists differentiate between the two. 
For some,  modernization refers to societal values 
and processes that undergo major changes from 
See also  interpretive understanding, postmodernism, 
post-structuralism.  
 customary international law  Established practice 
by states over time gives a customary base for 
international law. For example, centuries of practice 
had established immunities and other diplomatic 
rights long before they were codified formally in 
a treaty. 
 decision  Making a choice among often-competing 
alternatives or options; making a judgment or 
drawing a conclusion. A  rational decision-making 
process is one in which alternative means to achieve 
certain objectives are evaluated and the option or 
options best (or at least satisfactorily) leading to the 
attainment of these objectives are selected. See also 
 policy, which can be understood as being composed 
of both  decisions and  actions. 
 decision making  See  decision.  
 deconstruct  See  postmodernism.  
 deduction  Conclusions drawn logically and 
necessarily from specified premises; reasoning from 
general rules to particular cases See also  induction. 
 deductive-nomological  Formal approach to 
scientific explanation often associated with work by 
Carl Hempel and others who focus on  covering laws 
that relate the  explanans (explanatory sentences) to 
the  explanandum (what is to be explained). See also 
 deduction, nomology, nomothetic.  
 democratic peace  That democracy or republican 
forms of governance are propitious to peace are 
central to Kantian thought. This hypothesis has 
generated a great deal of research and further 
theorizing. The Wilsonian idea of making the 
world safe for democracy as the principal remedy 
for ending warfare is often referred to by critics of 
democratic-peace theory (viz., President Woodrow 
Wilson’s representation of World War I as the “war 
to end all wars” and thus “make the world safe 
for democracy” to flourish). For his part, Michael 
Doyle’s claim is not that democracies are inherently 
less prone to war, but rather that they tend not to go 
to war with other democracies. See also  Kantian.  
 dependency  A situation in which the economies 
of Third World countries are conditioned by 
and subordinate to the economic development, 
expansion, and contraction of the economies 
of advanced capitalist states. It is a situation of 
exploitation and is examined in an historical 
context. Domestic constraints and structures (such 
as land tenure patterns) are also critical in inhibiting 

Glossary
447
other measures understood to be part (or tools) 
of diplomacy. Diplomacy is the state’s political or 
policy element in the conduct of its foreign relations. 
Beyond finding common interests, successful 
diplomatic efforts typically seek to accommodate the 
often diverse interests (and objectives) of different 
parties. The terms  diplomat and  diplomatic have a 
positive connotation, referring in common parlance 
to peaceful, non-warlike approaches. As a technical 
term,  diplomacy includes the threat or imposition 
of punishment or sanctions as tactics that may be 
employed by the diplomat in addition to (or in place 
of) more positive inducements.  
 disaggregation  See  aggregation.  
 discourses  See  social constructivism.  
 dissuade, dissuasion  From a position of strength to 
persuade other states not to do something they might 
otherwise do; dissuasion is usually seen as using both 
positive and negative measures to persuade. See also 
 coercive diplomacy, deterrence.  
 distributive justice  The question of the rightness of 
(or moral criteria associated with) the allocation of 
scarce resources, particularly material or economic 
resources. The rightness of a particular distribution of 
wealth or profit is subject to normative standards of 
distributive justice. See also  justice, normative, social 
contract.  
 dual or double-effect principle  See  just war.  
 dyad, dyadic  As between two units. See also 
 interdependence.  
 East  During the Cold War years,  East referred 
to the Soviet Union and other Marxist-Leninist 
countries, mainly those in Eastern Europe. A more 
traditional meaning is the Orient or countries of 
Asia. Variants are the Far East (the countries of East 
Asia, including China, Japan, and the Koreas), the 
Middle East (originally referring to such south Asian 
countries as India and Pakistan, but now more 
commonly used to refer to Egypt, Israel, Jordan, 
Syria, Saudia Arabia, and neighboring countries), 
and the Near East (originally referring to countries 
in North Africa and Arabia; now more commonly 
referred to as the Middle East). See also  East–West.  
 East–West  During the Cold War years,  East–West 
referred to conflict between capitalist, industrial 
democracies of the First World or West (including 
Western Europe, North America, and paradoxically 
even Japan) and the Marxist-Leninist countries of 
the Second World, or East (including the former 
preindustrial traditional society, including the effects 
of industrialization, whereas  development refers to the 
building of societal or governmental administrative 
infrastructure more capable of coping with increasing 
demands brought on by the modernization process. 
 Economic development requires investment of capital 
formed by domestic savings or accumulated from 
positive trade (exports greater than imports) and 
payments balances from foreign investments, loans, or 
aid of one kind or another.  Autonomous development 
occurs in isolation, or independent of what is going on 
outside a given country, a circumstance more difficult 
to achieve in the contemporary period of globalization 
than may have been true in the nineteenth century. 
 Reflexive development, when and if it occurs, is 
responsive to external economic conditions and 
may well be dependent on them. Development is 
also affected by experiences or examples in other 
countries that policymakers can try to emulate or 
avoid—sometimes referred to as an international 
demonstration effect (IDE).  
 diachronic  Refers to a study over a period of time; 
sometimes referred to as a  longitudinal study, as in a 
study of the causes of war between 1815 and 1945. 
See also  synchronic.  
 dialectic, dialectical materialism  A form of reasoning 
or argument that juxtaposes contradictory ideas 
with the goal of resolving the contradiction and thus 
moving closer to the truth. The term is associated 
with the ancient Greek philosophers, the German 
philosopher Hegel, and Karl Marx. In his dialectical 
materialism Marx substituted materially based class 
conflict and the contradictions between relations and 
modes of production for the clash of ideas found 
in Hegel. Whereas Hegel argued that the dialectical 
clash of ideas moved history forward, Marx focused 
on the importance of material forces as technology 
historically has driven changes in the mode of 
production. See also  class conflict, proletarian 
revolution, Marxism, relations of production, modes 
of production.  
 diffuse  Dispersed widely; not concentrated or 
narrowly focused. When a state is said to be a 
functionally diffuse actor, it performs a multitude of 
functions. The opposite of functionally diffuse is to 
be functionally specific or more narrowly focused.  
 diplomacy  The process or art of communication 
among states and their statesmen in international 
relations, negotiation, including positive inducements 
or persuasive tactics, compromise, threats, or 

448
Glossary
senses. Consistent with the philosophical view that 
knowledge is rooted in experience, empiricists adopt a 
scientific focus on observation of facts and hypothesis 
testing as the virtually exclusive source of knowledge.  
 endogenous factor  See  system.  
 English School  Scholars influenced by the earlier 
work of Herbert Butterfield, Martin Wight, Hedley 
Bull, and others. The school focuses on the societal 
aspects of international relations rather than seeing 
politics in purely abstract, systemic terms. Power, 
law or rules based on enlightened self-interest, and 
emergent global norms are all part of an anarchical 
international society. In this volume we represent 
English School as an image that combines aspects of 
realism and liberalism in the context of international 
society. English School understandings have also been 
seen as a middle way between realism and idealism 
and between realism and liberalism as images. 
See also  image.  
 epistemic community  Term used by Peter Haas, 
Emanuel Adler, and others to refer to expert elites 
who operate transnationally or globally, often 
affecting policy outcomes on issues in which their 
particular knowledge makes them relevant. Scientists 
and other technical elites (though not referred to 
as  epistemic communities ) were also the subject of 
earlier policy-related studies by the late Ernst Haas. 
See also  functionalism and the reference there to 
 neofunctionalism. 
 epistemology  The study of how one knows or how 
one acquires knowledge.  
 equilibrium  When various elements of a system are 
in balance. When disturbed, some systems are said 
to have an inherent tendency to restore this balance 
or equilibrium. For example, when a state or group 
of states upsets the balance of power, other states 
respond in opposition, restoring the balance.  
 ethnocentrism  An inward-looking tendency or 
favorable disposition toward the people or nation 
with which one identifies, particularly when it is 
seen as superior to others. In the negative extreme, 
this orientation can become xenophobic—deep fear 
or hostility toward foreigners or other “outsiders.” 
See also  xenophobia . 
 European Union (EU)  A collaborative association of 
European states previously known as the European 
Communities (EC)—the European Coal and Steel 
Community (ECSC), European Economic Community 
(EEC), and European Atomic Energy Community 
(EURATOM). Since agreeing at a summit meeting 
USSR and other Marxist-Leninist countries, mainly 
those in Eastern Europe, but sometimes including 
China, particularly in the Maoist years). The more 
traditional meaning of East–West refers to Europe 
and the Americas as “West” and Asia as “East”—the 
meaning in Kipling’s observation that East is East and 
West is West and never the twain shall meet. See also 
 East and  West. 
 econometrics  Quantitative techniques used in 
economic analysis.  
 economic development  The sustained expansion of 
production of goods and services or, more precisely, 
the productive capacity of an economy that raises 
the overall standard or level of living citizens enjoy 
(assuming the gains from development are distributed 
beyond elites or privileged classes). Investment of 
capital is an essential component—the “fuel” that 
drives economic development. See also  development.  
 economic structuralism, structuralist  As used in this 
volume,  economic structuralism refers to an image of 
politics. To understand the overall economic or class 
structure in world captalism, one must examine more 
than the distribution of power among states (realism), 
chart the movements of transnational actors and 
the internal political processes of states that cross 
national borders (liberals), or a combination of 
the two (English School). Economic structuralism 
focuses on the importance of economy—material 
factors, especially capitalist relations of dominance or 
exploitation—to understanding world politics. The 
economic-structuralist image is influenced by Marxist 
analyses of exploitative relations, although not all 
economic structuralists are Marxists. Dependency 
theory, whether understood in Marxist or 
non-Marxist terms, is categorized here as part of the 
economic-structuralist image. Also included is the 
view that international relations are best understood 
if one sees them as occurring within a capitalist 
world-system. See also  postcolonialism, image, 
dependency.  
 efficient cause  See  causality. 
 elite  The upper stratum or strata of a society.  
 empirical, empirically  Factual or known through 
observation. Propositions or hypotheses may be 
subject to empirical or factual tests to determine 
whether observed “facts” are consistent with what is 
predicted.  
 empiricism, empiricist  The epistemological position 
that the only grounds for making truth claims is 
through direct observation of the world using our 

Glossary
449
account the constructive and collaborative potential 
of human beings, often rejecting such cold, abstract 
analysis as found in neorealist and other structural 
explanations; the focus is more on human dimensions 
of international relations, also multilateral relations 
rather than unilateral or hegemonic dominance. 
In the policy realm, feminism also seeks the 
empowerment of women, putting women on an equal 
plane with men.  
 feudal, feudalism  A system of political, social, 
and economic organization that existed in Europe 
from approximately the ninth to approximately the 
fifteenth centuries. Reciprocal rights and duties were 
expected between the lord and his vassals—for 
example, protection of the vassal by the lord in 
return for the vassal’s giving up a percentage of 
his crops. Serfs or peasants live and work on lands 
owned by lords and their vassals. Feudalism is 
viewed in Marxist usage as a labor-intensive mode 
of production dominant in the Middle Ages and that 
preceded capitalism. See also  modes of production.  
 First World  See  Third World.  
 force  Usually refers to efforts undertaken by states 
in an attempt to compel others to take a certain 
course of action or to cease an action. The term 
usually means the use of armed or military force.  
 foreign policy  Refers to external affairs, particularly 
to decisions and actions taken by states in their 
dealings with other states or such “external” actors as 
international organizations, multinational corporations, 
and other transnational or non-state actors.  
 functionalism, functionalist  A focus on purposes 
or tasks, particularly those performed by 
organizations. Some theorists have explained the 
growth of organizations, particularly international 
organizations, as a response to an increase in the 
number of purposes or tasks demanding attention. 
 Neofunctionalism as a theory of regional integration 
emphasizes the political calculation and payoff by or 
to elites who agree to collaborate in the performance 
of certain tasks. See also  integration, spillover.  
 functionally diffuse  See  diffuse.  
 fungibility  The condition that exists when one 
element or unit has no unique identity and can easily 
be exchanged or replaced by another of like nature. 
Money is said to be fungible (for example, funds 
in a national budget can easily be shifted from one 
account to another when cuts are made in one area of 
the budget to fund increases in another). Whether the 
power of states, like money, is fungible and can be 
in December 1991 in the city of Maastricht in the 
Netherlands to move beyond a customs union and 
common market toward a full economic and monetary 
union, the association of states is now referred to as 
the European Union.  
 existentialism  An approach that believes 
philosophical thinking begins with the human subject; 
much of academic philosophy, in both style and 
content, is viewed as too abstract, superficial, and 
remote from actual human experience.  
 exogenous factor  See  system. 
 expected utility, expected utility theory 
(model)  Rational-choice concept in which actors 
compare the relative attractiveness of options and 
choose the alternative that maximizes expected gains 
or minimizes expected losses. Concept sometimes 
used to understand conflict situations that may lead 
to war. The expected utility model also addresses how 
policy positions emerge in the presence of competing 
interests, leading to predictions and strategic 
opportunities for altering them. See also  rational-
choice theory.  
 explanandum  See  deductive-nomological.  
 explanans  See  deductive-nomological.  
 explanation  See  theory. 
 externality  When an international actor takes an 
action that has an intended or unintended impact 
(positive or negative) on another actor.  
 factor analysis  A quantitative technique by which 
the analyst tries to identify underlying and related 
elements or factors (usually as part of a causal 
explanation of some observed phenomenon or 
phenomena). 
 falsifiability  Associated with Karl Popper’s thought, 
to be “scientific” propositions or hypotheses have 
to be stated in a form that, if they are false, they 
can be shown to be false through empirical tests. 
When empirical tests fail to show a proposition or 
hypothesis is false, we gain greater confidence that it 
may be true.  
 federalism  See  world federalism. 
 feedback  A concept in systems theory and 
communication theory (or cybernetics) by which 
responses to decisions or actions taken are returned 
by affected elements to the sender or taker of these 
decisions or actions, thus allowing for corrective 
actions.  
 feminism, feminist  An interpretive, “gendered” 
understanding or approach to theory that takes into 

450
Glossary
 governance  As defined by Robert Keohane, 
governance involves the processes and institutions, 
both formal and informal, that guide and restrain the 
collective activities of groups. Globally, the question 
of governance (or “partial global governance”) is 
one of how the various institutions and processes of 
global society could be meshed more effectively in a 
way that would be regarded as legitimate by attentive 
publics controlling access to key resources.  
 government  The lawmaking, judicial, 
administrative, and enforcement apparatus of a state.  
 Grotian  Refers to the influence of Hugo Grotius, 
seventeenth-century Dutch scholar usually identified 
as the father of international law. The Grotian view is 
that international relations, although lacking central 
authority, can be subject to rules or norms, some of 
which have the binding character of law, that are 
expressly or tacitly agreed to by states.  
 groupthink  According to Irving Janis: a “mode of 
thinking that people engage in when they are deeply 
involved in a cohesive in-group, when the members’ 
strivings for unanimity override their motivation to 
realistically appraise alternative courses of action.” 
Indicators of groupthink include social pressure 
to enforce conformity, limiting discussion to a few 
alternatives, failing to reexamine initial decisions, 
and making little attempt to seek information from 
outside experts who may challenge a preferred policy.  
 guerrilla warfare  See  war.  
 hard power  See  power.  
 hegemonic stability  The view that stability in 
international relations stems from the presence of 
hegemony or dominance. The absence of hegemony 
or hegemons would imply a lack of order in the 
relations among states whether in commercial 
activities (trade, the exchange of money, and 
investment), social issues, or security concerns. 
See also  hegemony.  
 hegemony, hegemon  Relations of dominance, 
as when a major power exercises hegemony over 
countries within its sphere of influence. A state 
exercising hegemony is sometimes referred to as a 
 hegemon. An alternative characterization reflecting 
preeminent position for a state, but not necessarily 
implying dominance, is to refer to it as a leader 
exercising leadership of other states within its sphere. 
The difference between hegemony and leadership is 
often a subtle distinction and perhaps more a matter 
of nuance or connotation intended by the user of the 
terms. See also  hegemonic stability.  
readily transferred from one issue area to another is a 
point of some dispute among international relations 
theorists.  
 game theory  A decision-making approach based on 
the assumption of actor rationality. Each actor tries 
to maximize gains or minimize losses often under 
conditions of uncertainty and incomplete information, 
which requires each actor to rank order preferences, 
estimate probabilities, and try to discern what the 
other actor is going to do. In a competitive, two-
person  zero-sum game, what one actor wins the other 
loses; if  A wins 5,  B loses 5, and the sum is zero. In 
a two-person,  non-zero-sum or  variable-sum game, 
gains and losses are not necessarily equal; it is possible 
that both sides may gain. This is sometimes referred to 
as a  positive-sum game in which the parties effectively 
cooperate. In some games, both parties can lose, 
and by different amounts or to a different degree. 
Gains or losses may be asymmetric—not evenly 
distributed between or among the parties. So-called 
 n-person games include more than two actors or sides. 
Game theory has contributed to the development of 
models of deterrence and arms race spirals, but it is 
also the basis for work concerning the question of 
how collaboration among competitive states in an 
anarchic world can be achieved: The central problem 
is that the rational decision for an individual actor 
such as a state may be to “defect” and go it alone 
as opposed to taking a chance on collaboration 
with another state actor. Dealing with this problem 
is a central concern of much of the literature 
on international regimes, regional integration, 
and conflict resolution. See also  anarchy, rational, 
rational-choice theory, theory.  
 gender  Refers to masculine, feminine, or 
transgendered identities people have. As such, gender 
can be differentiated from sex as a biological category 
and sexual preference or orientation as another 
form of identity. A person’s underlying sexual 
orientation—hetehrosexual, homosexual, bisexual, 
or asexual—may differ from that person’s private or 
public identity. Gender is the core factor contributing 
to feminist interpretive understandings.  
 general theory  See  theory.  
 global civil society  See  international (global) civil 
society. 
 globalization  The continued increase in 
transnational and worldwide economic, social, and 
cultural interactions that transcend the boundaries of 
states, aided by advances in technology.  

Glossary
451
been codified in treaties and conventions. Intellectual 
foundations of human rights may be found in 
normative theories associated with Kantian, utilitarian, 
and social contract as well as Aristotelian virtue-based 
modes of thought. See also  natural rights, Kantian, 
utilitarian, social contract, virtue-based ethics.  
 hypothesis, hypotheses (plural)  A proposition 
usually relating two or more variables (such as 
“Arms races cause wars”) but subject to empirical or 
factual tests. In one view, hypotheses may be verified 
or confirmed to the extent that tests do not show 
the hypotheses to be false. Repeated tests, including 
 replication of earlier work, increase confidence in 
the correctness of the original hypothesis, although 
it is always subject to being shown to be false in 
subsequent tests and thus can never be confirmed 
with 100% certainty. A  null hypothesis, the starting 
point, is a proposition in which no relation between 
or among variables is specified (as in “there is no 
relation between arms races and the onset of war”) 
in contrast to a  working hypothesis in which such a 
relation is specified. If one’s empirical tests show no 
relation, then the null hypothesis is retained and the 
working hypothesis is rejected.  
 idealist, idealism  One who sees such values or human 
preferences as justice or a desire for world peace 
as potentially decisive and capable of overcoming 
obstacles to their realization. Referred to by critics as 
utopian in that the idealist does not always understand 
the political or other realities that influence or constrain 
human choice. An idealist considers ideas as having 
important causal effects as opposed to others who see 
power or material factors as being the determinants 
of political outcomes. A classic debate within 
international relations pits idealism against realism.  
 ideal (pure) type  A concept developed by the 
German sociologist Max Weber to describe an 
extreme, or pure, case that is not found in this form 
anywhere but that serves as an analytical benchmark 
useful in comparing real-world cases. Strictly defined, 
ideal types for democracy, modern and traditional 
societies, and such markets as “pure” competition, 
monopoly, and oligopoly are constructed by theorists 
even though the actual cases they examine are, at 
best, only approximations of the conditions they 
specify. Natural scientists also construct ideal types 
as, for example, in Newtonian mechanics when free-
body diagrams assume the absence of friction or 
gravity or an “ideal” gas is used to specify conditions 
that apply to Boyle’s law.  
 hermeneutics  Subordinates explanation and 
description to interpretation and understanding of 
meaning. As a field of study it owes much to Ludwig 
Wittgenstein’s work on how human beings interpret 
or draw meanings, as is reflected in the language they 
construct and use. Social facts are constituted by the 
structures of language.  
 geuristic  Refers to the illustrative value of some 
device or schematic presentation. Such a presentation 
is not intended as an actual or precise, empirically 
verified representation of relations among variables 
in a model, but it is useful for gaining a better 
understanding of some concept or set of concepts 
under investigation.  
 high politics  Refers to matters of security, 
particularly the strategic interests of states. Realists 
have tended traditionally to draw a distinction 
between such high political concerns and those 
dealing with socioeconomic or welfare issues 
supposedly of lesser interest to goverment leaders or 
diplomats—the so-called  low politics. 
 historical materialism  Economically oriented 
methodological approach to the study of society 
and history that was first articulated by Karl Marx 
(1818–1883). Historical materialism looks for the 
causes of developments and changes in the means 
by which people in societies live and are organized. 
The starting point is the economic base, with 
everything else (social classes, political structures, 
ideologies) influenced by this material base.  
 historical sociology  Study of a society’s past 
(particularly its social structure and culture) usually 
intended to shed light on how what we observe now 
developed over time, oftentimes centuries.  
 Hobbesian (or Hobbist)  Deriving from the 
influence of Thomas Hobbes, seventeenth-century 
English philosopher, who characterized anarchic 
politics—the absence of a sovereign or central 
authority—as producing grave threat to individual 
security. The absence of central authority in 
international relations in this Hobbesian view 
poses a security threat to all states to which they 
may respond internally by strengthening their 
power positions, or externally by forming alliances. 
International security in the Hobbesian view rests, 
therefore, more on power and the balance of power 
than on law and other rules or norms.  
 human rights  Regardless of culture, national, state, 
or other identity, human beings possess certain rights 
by virtue of being human. Many of these rights have 

452
Glossary
not making a decision would foreclose certain options 
and thus, in effect, be a decision in itself).  
 independent variable  A factor used to explain some 
outcome. See also  variable, dependent variable, 
intervening variable.  
 indeterminacy  The degree to which an 
outcome cannot be predicted with a reasonable 
degree of confidence or is subject to seemingly 
random influences. There may be a great deal of 
indeterminacy in voluntarist theories that maximize 
the effect of human choice or volition. See also 
 determinism, voluntarism. 
 indeterminate solution  Refers to problems in which 
the outcome cannot be predicted with much, if any, 
confidence, as when the influence of variables appears 
to have random effect. See also  indeterminacy. 
 individualism  Associated with  liberalism, individuals 
have particular value in themselves and for what 
they can do—that people as individuals have more 
importance than the groups, tribes, communities, or 
societies to which they may belong. See also  liberalism. 
 induction, inductive  Logical and inferential process 
by which we posit general statements based on 
observation of only a part or sample of a class of 
facts; the general statement is an answer to the 
question posed in this text by James Rosenau: 
“Of what is this an instance?” Induction lacks the 
logical certainty of deduction. See also  deduction. 
 INGO  An abbreviation sometimes used to designate 
international, nongovernmental organizations, 
those in which membership is composed of private 
individuals and groups, but usually  not states or their 
governments. Examples are the International Red 
Cross and the World Council of Churches. See also 
 IGO, NGO. 
 institution, institutionalism  See  neoliberal 
institutionalism. 
 institutionalized  As used by constructivists, 
collective ideas are expressed in actual social orders 
(termed structures or institutions) and in established 
practices and identities.  
 insurgency  See  war. 
 integration  The coming together of separate states 
or other political units under a common authority. 
Integration may occur as an international or regional 
phenomenon with varying degrees of authority given 
to institutions established to deal with common issues 
or problems facing member states. Integration can be 
viewed either as  process or as  outcome that reflects 
 identity  See  social constructivism.  
 ideology  A belief system or set of ideas or values 
usually held as a matter of conviction. Ideological 
views are usually not subjected to the same standards 
of empirical test as are theories and associated 
hypotheses. Marxism–Leninism as ideology offers not 
only explanation and prediction of world politics, 
but also a means for interpreting social relations. 
Liberalism as ideology leads some, for example, to 
advocate free or open trade and commerce.  
 idiographic  A detailed study of a particular case or 
event. See also  nomothetic. 
 IGO (or IO)  An abbreviation used to designate 
international governmental organizations in which 
membership is composed of states—for example, 
the United Nations and its affiliated agencies. 
These are usually referred to simply as international 
organizations. See also  INGO, NGO. 
 image  As used in this book, an image refers to a 
general perspective of international relations and 
world politics that consists of certain assumptions 
about actors and processes. See also  realism, 
liberalism, English School, economic structuralism. 
 imperialism  In its classic meaning, a position or 
policy of preeminence or dominance with respect 
to foreign elements, as in the Roman, Ottoman, 
or British empires. Imperialism in earlier centuries 
involved the establishment of colonies, which led 
to so-called  colonialism. Although most of these 
colonies have become formally independent states, 
the relations of economic, social, cultural, and even 
political dominance by the former colonial power 
remain—so-called  neocolonialism. Some theorists 
also contend that contemporary imperialism 
involves economic and other forms of exploitation 
or dominance by multinational corporations in less 
developed countries. Postcolonial studies assess 
the ongoing effects of colonial and neocolonial 
experiences. Marxist theories of imperialism tend 
to emphasize the economic dynamics of capitalism 
and associated class relations. Rather than 
territorially defined, present-day imperial relations 
are more commonly understood as a function of the 
management or control of capital and capital flows 
on a regional or global basis.  
 incrementalism  A step-by-step rather than a 
comprehensive, all-encompassing, sweeping 
approach. In an incremental decision-making process, 
decisions are often deferred until information on 
which to base a choice has been maximized (or until 

Glossary
453
 interest group liberalism  An approach to politics 
that emphasizes competing groups or institutions. 
Not only is interest group liberalism thought to 
be an accurate description of democratic politics, 
particularly in the United States, but it is also thought 
by many to be the way politics  should be conducted. 
See also  liberalism. 
 international  Specifically, relations between 
or among states. More loosely, it is a reference 
to matters outside a state, which has led to the 
synonymous usage by many persons of the terms 
 international politics and  world politics. 
 international (global) civil society  Just as the rule 
of law is central to domestic understandings of 
civil society, so it is with international law in what 
some see as an increasingly global, civil society 
beyond the borders of particular states. This society 
includes networks of relationships among people 
around the world that are not necessarily associated 
with the state  per se as well as organizations that 
aggregate individual interests below the level of the 
state, but operate across the border of any single 
state. Nongovernmental organizations (NGOs) are 
an example. The role of institutions and norms are 
associated with the English School and liberal images 
of international relations. For the English School, the 
concept of  international society is heavily associated 
with Hugo Grotius,  world society with the idealized 
form anticipated by Immanuel Kant in his writings on 
 Perpetual Peace . See also  civil society. 
 International Court of Justice  Located in the Hague; 
a principal organ of the United Nations. See also 
 international law. 
 international governmental or intergovernmental 
organizations (IGOs)  See  international organization. 
 international law  A body of rules considered to 
be binding on states and other actors even though 
there is no central enforcement authority to assure 
compliance. Sources of international law include 
treaties or covenants made by states, customary 
practice, generally accepted principles, and the 
writings of jurists. International courts such as the 
International Court of Justice interpret international 
law and apply it to individual cases brought by states. 
National courts and enforcement systems (those of 
individual states) are the primary mechanisms for 
dealing with international law. International law 
(particularly that based on treaty commitments) may 
have precedence over domestic laws that conflict with 
such international obligations.  
and encourages cooperation among states operating 
under conditions of international anarchy (i.e., lack 
of common government). Research on integration has 
tended to focus on the assignment of economic and 
social tasks to regional or international authorities. 
Earlier theories of regional integration saw political 
union as a possible outcome of collaboration in 
economic or social issues. See also  functionalism, 
ramification, spillover. 
 interaction  An exchange between two, or among 
more than two, units, as in the  interactions of states, 
groups, classes, or individuals. By contrast,  actions 
do not refer to the back-and-forth of an exchange but 
to steps or measures taken by a state, group, class, 
individual, or other unit. See also  action. 
 interdependence, interdependent  A relation or 
relations between two (a  dyadic relation) or among 
more than two units in which one is  sensitive or 
 vulnerable to the decisions or actions of the other or 
others. The flow of capital or money to or from one 
country may respond to (or be  sensitive to) changes 
in the interest rates in other countries—so-called 
 sensitivity interdependence. To the extent that one 
unit may be adversely affected by decisions or actions 
of another, it is said to be  vulnerable to the other unit 
or units, as when State  A depends on State  B as the 
principal source of its oil supply and thus is vulnerable 
or would be adversely affected by its cutoff. To many 
theorists, such  vulnerability interdependence is to be 
minimized or avoided altogether. Interdependence 
may be  symmetric (affecting both or all sides more 
or less equally), but it is more likely to be  asymmetric  
(with effects varying substantially from actor to 
actor). State  A may be more or less dependent on 
a supply of oil from State  B than State  B is on the 
security of its investments in State  A. See also  complex 
interdependence, balance of power.  
 interest  That which is of importance to a unit (state, 
class, group, or individual), usually including, as a 
minimum, its survival.  National interest refers to 
matters of importance to a state. Some theorists have 
found the concept of national interest to be too vague; 
they prefer to substitute the notion that states do 
formulate certain objectives that can be identified more 
easily. Others view the national interest as little more 
than what leaders say it is. What realists and liberals 
have tended to take for granted as given, constructivists 
see as actually quite malleable—constructed and 
subject to change by the actors themselves as they 
interact with others.  

454
Glossary
actions. See also  rationality, society, world society, 
international civil society. 
 international system  An aggregation of similar or 
diverse entities united by regular interaction that 
sets them apart from other systems; for example, the 
 interstate or  international system of states or  world 
politics understood as a system composed of both 
state and non-state actors. See also  system. 
 interpretive understanding  An approach to 
knowledge that assumes that what we know is based 
on an interpretation of what we think we see, alerting 
us to the subjective character of all human beings, 
the institutions or units they construct, and the 
processes in which they engage. Try as we might to 
reduce bias, we remain subjective creatures. Pursuit 
of objectivity and value-free scholarship is therefore 
an elusive goal. That concepts are constructs 
defined by the meanings we give them is a view 
that owes much to the thinking of Max Weber. In 
this volume we identify interpretive understandings 
associated with feminism, social constructivism, 
critical theory, and postmodernism. Elements of 
interpretive understanding can also be found among 
some scholars associated with liberalism, the English 
School, and postcolonial theorists. See also  feminism, 
social constructivism, critical theory, postmodernism. 
 intersubjective, intersubjectivity  Interpretations 
or understandings one derives from reflecting on 
exchanges or interactions with others. The idea that 
shared knowledge results from the exchange of ideas, 
depiciting the social world in terms of collectively 
meaningful understandings or identical structures—
itself an ontological assumption. See also  subjective, 
subjectivity, objective, objectivity. 
 intervening variable  Variable that may come 
between the cause(s) or independent variable(s) 
and the effect or dependent variable, thus affecting 
the outcome. See also  variable, dependent variable, 
independent variable. 
 intervention  Interference in the domestic affairs of 
another state by diplomatic, economic, military, or 
other means.  
 intuition, intuitive  That which is held, assumed, 
or seems to be true  a priori (beforehand). The term 
refers to a view that usually has not been subject to 
formal or empirical tests but merely seems to make 
sense. See also  counterintuitive. 
 irredentism  National or ethnic concern for “lost” 
territories in what is understood to be unjust takings 
by others, for example, states or empires. Irredentism 
 international law of war, international law of armed 
conflicts  International law governing warfare and 
the use of force in international relations requires 
legitimate reasons for using force and places specific 
limitations on the actual use of force. See also  just war. 
 international organization  An institution composed 
of states as members (for example, the United 
Nations [UN], European Union [EU], and the North 
Atlantic Treaty Organization [NATO]). More 
broadly, the term refers to patterns of behavior or 
structures and actors that cross or go beyond national 
frontiers. See also  IGO. 
 international politics  The  political focus is on 
choices made by actors with authority to do so on 
issues external to states or that cross the frontiers or 
boundaries of state jurisdiction.  International politics 
is often used synonymously with  world politics 
or  international relations, although these terms 
do have separate, more precise meanings. See also 
 international relations, world (or global) politics. 
 international regimes  See  regime. 
 international relations  The total of political, social, 
economic, cultural, and other interactions among 
states (and even non-state) actors.  International 
politics can be understood to be a part (or 
subset) of international relations, although the 
terms  international relations, world politics, and 
 international politics are often used synonymously. See 
also  international politics, world (or global) politics.  
 international security  In its narrowest construction, 
the term refers to defense matters among states and 
their respective societies. In the broadest sense, it 
encompasses a very wide range of issues that affect 
the welfare of human beings—not just defense, but 
also economics, health, environment, human rights, 
and other social or “human security” questions that 
cross national boundaries. Critics of broad definitions 
argue that if  security as a concept can be construed to 
mean so many things, then as a practical matter does 
it really mean anything? Their preference is to retain 
the more traditional distinction that sees  security and 
related defense issues as separate from  welfare issues.  
 international society  Term used within the English 
School that sees relations among states and other 
actors subject to rules or law, a perspective that 
owes much to insights drawn from Dutch legal 
writer Hugo Grotius. This Grotian position is 
sometimes referred to as “rationalist”—seeing order 
and justice in international politics as a function of 
rules that both facilitate and constrain decisions and 

Glossary
455
whose duty-bound ethics writings emphasized certain 
 categorical imperatives as universal, morally binding 
norms or maxims to include the obligation to treat 
other human beings as ends important in themselves 
and not merely as means to one’s own ends. In 
normative international relations theory, the Kantian 
preference was for a cosmopolitan world society, 
perhaps a league or world federation of republics 
based on universal values in which perpetual 
peace would be maintained. Kantian thought is 
foundational to much democratic-peace theory. 
See also  categorical imperative, democratic peace. 
 laissez–faire  The classical liberal idea that 
governments ought not intervene in markets—that 
they should be left alone because competitive markets 
are understood to be self-regulating.  
 law  In domestic and international politics, the term 
refers to authoritative rules that are binding on those 
subordinate to them. In the natural sciences, the 
term refers to a general statement that specifies some 
regularity, as in Newton’s second law of motion that 
force is equal to the time derivative of momentum: 
 F   d ( mv )/ dt   m ( dv / dt )   ma . Such specificity of 
relations among variables and constants has been 
elusive in the social sciences, and theorists have 
had to be content with identifying tendencies and 
generating what are at best “lawlike” statements.  
 LDC  Abbreviation for  less-developed country . 
In some usages, LDC refers to  lesser- developed 
country. See also  Third World, South. 
 learning  Inferences or lessons drawn from the 
experiences of states (and statesmen) that guide future 
policy choices. For example, correctly or incorrectly 
(the inference is disputed by some), statesmen 
“learned” that appeasement of aggressors does not 
make such states less aggressive, but may actually 
whet their appetites for more aggressive behavior; the 
case usually cited is appeasement of Hitler’s Germany 
in 1938 when diplomats, meeting in Munich and 
wishing to avoid war, allowed the Germans to annex 
that portion of western Czechoslovakia inhabited 
primarily by Germanic peoples. Statesmen may 
“learn” the benefits of international collaboration 
as opposed to going it alone, an inference that 
might lead them to create new (and expand existing) 
international organizations.  
 legitimacy  The implication of the existence of  right, 
as when a government is said to have, or to have 
been granted, a right to govern based on such criteria 
as its popular acceptance, the legal or constitutional 
can become  revanchism as when this concern 
becomes a vengeful quest to restore these territories 
by war or other forceful means.  
 jus ad bellum   See  just war. 
 jus gentium  The law of nations—the idea that 
laws are applicable to all of humanity, nations, and 
individuals, which is a core concept in international 
law. Associated with the Roman Empire but its basis is 
also to be found in the universalism in Greco-Roman 
Stoic thought. See also  Stoicism, international law.  
 jus in bello  See  just war. 
 justice  In common usage, that which is right, fair, 
or equitable for (or pertaining to relations among) 
individuals, groups, classes, states, or other units. 
See also  distributive justice, just war. 
 just war  Normative theory referring to conditions 
under which (1) states rightfully go to war ( jus ad 
bellum ) with just cause, as in self-defense in response 
to aggression, when the decision to go to war is made 
by legitimate authority in the state, as a last resort 
after exhausting peaceful remedies,  and with some 
reasonable hope of achieving legitimate objectives; 
(2) states exercise right conduct in war ( jus in bello ) 
when the means employed are proportional to the 
ends sought, when noncombatants are spared, 
when weapons or other means that are immoral 
in themselves are not used (typically those that are 
indiscriminate or cause needless suffering),  and when 
actions are taken with a  right intention to accomplish 
legitimate military objectives and to minimize 
collateral death and destruction. Sometimes the same 
actions in warfare can have both positive, morally 
legitimate effects (as in destroying a military target 
without any unnecessary loss of life or property) 
and morally negative or evil effects, as when there 
is also  collateral damage —loss of life or destruction 
of property. According to the  principle of dual or 
double-effect such actions are legitimate only if the 
positive or legitimate purpose is intended, efforts 
have been taken to minimize collateral damage, the 
collateral damage caused is not disproportionate, 
and it occurs at the same time or after the positive 
effect (a provision to assure that positive or morally 
legitimate ends do not rely on evil means, but that 
evil consequences are merely another effect). Many 
of these principles of just war are part of the body 
of international law and thus are legally binding on 
states and their agents.  
 Kantian  Deriving from the influence of Immanuel 
Kant, eighteenth-century East Prussian philosopher 

456
Glossary
free trade policies and unconstrained commercial 
activities both at home and abroad. In contemporary 
American political usage, influenced by President 
Franklin Roosevelt and those who have followed him, 
 social liberalism usually means enhancing individual 
rights and well-being through government action or 
government programs—a substantial departure from 
the  laissez-faire of classic liberalism. In this volume 
we use the term  liberalism to describe an image of 
international relations that includes both state and 
non-state actors as principal players in a wide diversity 
of issues. In earlier editions of this volume, we used 
the term  pluralism to capture this more complex or 
even fragmented image of multiple kinds of actors 
operating in multiple channels on diverse issues. Some 
of the original formulations of the liberal image put 
emphasis on non-state actors, discounting the relative 
importance of the state. By contrast,  neoliberals  
brought the state back in as principal actor, adding 
a focus on institutions, hence, the term  neoliberal 
institutionalism. See also  interest group liberalism, 
ideology, image, neoliberal institutionalism, pluralism. 
 linkage  Coupling among units or issues as in 
ties that cross state boundaries and thus link 
internationally or transnationally the domestic 
elements (corporations, groups, individuals, etc.) of 
various states. In another sense, various policies may 
be tied to one another in such a way that international 
trade policy is affected by changes in international 
monetary policy (linkages sometimes referred to as 
“policy interdependence”). The term  linkage has also 
been used to describe foreign policy connections, as 
when a government ties negotiations with another 
government in one field (such as progress in arms 
control) to behavior by that government in another 
field (such as demonstration that it will not intervene 
in the affairs of some third state).  
 Lockean  Constructivists such as Alexander Wendt 
use this term as a shorthand to refer to John Locke’s 
understanding of people in society coming together by 
contract or agreement. Unlike Hobbes, Locke does not 
see the anarchic state of nature—“want of a common 
judge,” government or central authority—as necessarily 
warlike. In applying Locke’s insight to international 
relations we need not see states as necessarily in a 
state of war with one another. Moreover, states (as if 
they were persons in a state of nature) may reach 
agreements with one another to maintain the peace, 
whether they remain in a state of nature or leave it by 
forming a community.  
processes that brought it to, or maintains it in, a 
position of authority, traditional grounds as in the 
divine right of kings, or the charismatic quality 
of its leadership that commands a following and 
thus contributes to its popular acceptance. See also 
 authority. 
 less developed country, lesser developed country 
(LDC)  A country in Latin America, Africa, Asia, or 
the Pacific that is in the early stages of industrialization 
or that has not yet industrialized to the extent that 
Japan and most of the countries in Europe and North 
America have. See also  North–South.  
 levels of analysis  Individuals, groups, state and 
society, international system or society as separate 
points of focus. Such levels help scholars to be 
systematic in their approach to understanding 
international relations. In explaining a phenomenon 
such as war, for example, the theorist may identify 
possible causes as being some characteristic or 
characteristics of the international system, states and 
their societies, groups or individuals. In accounting 
for or explaining such a phenomenon, one may look 
both within a unit such as a state, as well as to how 
the unit relates to its external environment, which 
are different levels of analysis. In current usage, 
“unit level” factors such as state, society, interest 
groups, bureaucracies, and individuals are contrasted 
to structural factors operating at the system level. 
See also  structure, system. 
 Leviathan  The biblical beast of gargantuan 
proportions (Job 41:1-34) used as a metaphor by 
Thomas Hobbes to refer to the state—the supreme 
authority that provides order and security to 
individuals living under its sway; also the title of 
Hobbes’s classic work. See also  Hobbesian. 
 liberal institutionalism  See  neoliberal 
institutionalism. 
 liberalism, neoliberalism (liberals and 
neoliberals)  Political philosophy (sometimes referred 
to as an ideology) with origins in the seventeenth 
and eighteenth centuries that emphasizes individual 
liberty to be achieved through a minimal state. 
A  laissez-faire government, one that provides for 
law and order (sometimes referred to as a “night 
watchman” state) but otherwise constrained or 
not granted authority to infringe on the rights of 
individuals, is said to be a liberal government. 
In both domestic and international economy, this 
classic liberalism implies commitment to free market 
principles without government intervention, including 

Glossary
457
importance of economic and material forces and 
 class analysis. It predicts that contradictions inherent 
in each historical epoch eventually lead to the rise 
of a new dominant class. The era of capitalism, 
according to Marx, is dominated by the  bourgeoisie 
and will give way to a  proletarian, or working-class, 
revolution and an era of  socialism in which the 
workers own the  means of production and move 
toward a classless,  communist society in which the 
state, historically a tool of the dominant class, will 
wither away. A number of contemporary theorists 
have drawn on Marxian insights and categories 
of analysis—an influence most evident in work on 
 dependency and the  capitalist world-system. See 
also  dialectic, means of production, proletarian 
revolution, class, capitalist world-system, bourgeoisie, 
socialism, economic structuralism. 
 materialism  In many realist and liberal accounts, 
explanation of IR phenomena is grounded in terms 
of material objects (such as money and the economy 
as a whole, weapons systems and warfare-oriented 
organizational structures, and both demographic 
and geographic factors) as having decisive impact 
on outcomes unmediated by the ideas people have 
concerning these objects.  
 means of production  A concept particularly 
associated with Marxist analyses that refers to factors 
essential to the production of goods—combinations 
of land, labor, and capital. Classes are defined 
in Marxian terms as relations to the means of 
production: The feudal aristocracy owned land, the 
bourgeoisie owns capital (including factories and 
machines), and the proletariat is defined by its labor. 
See also  class, modes of production, relations of 
production, Marxism. 
 mercantilism, mercantile  A theory in early 
capitalism that saw the wealth of a nation as a 
function of the amount of gold and other treasure 
that could be accumulated. Accordingly, running 
trade surpluses (exports more than imports), while 
finding new gold in mines or accepting it in payment 
for goods or services sold became national economic 
policy. In his  Wealth of Nations (1776) Adam Smith 
challenged this view, arguing that the true wealth of 
a nation was to be found in its productive capacity, 
not its treasure. Present-day  neomercantilist policies 
pursued by some states try to maximize trade surplus, 
accumulating large monetary-reserve balances.  
 metaphysics  The study of the fundamental nature of 
reality and being which is outside objective experience.  
 logical positivism  Pursuit of a pure science that 
would separate fact from value and achieve the 
precision of mathematics, a perspective identified 
with scholars in the “Vienna Circle” of the 1930s.  
 logic of appropriateness  A concept associated 
with social constructivism in which it is assumed 
human actors follow norms and rules with which 
they identify, not just narrow understandings of 
self-interest. These norms become embedded in 
organizations and institutional settings. Changes 
in these “rules of the road” may require norm 
“entrepreneurs” willing to take actions that may 
be seen as inappropriate by defenders of existing, 
generally accepted norms.  
 longitudinal  See  diachronic. 
 low politics  See  high politics. 
 Machiavellian, Machiavellianism, 
Machiavellism  Deriving from an interpretation of 
Niccolò Machiavelli, the sixteenth-century Florentine 
political philosopher. In its pejorative meaning, the 
term refers to unprincipled behavior by statesmen 
or other state agents who aim to achieve certain 
objectives deemed to be in the state’s interest. In 
this view, the ends of the state (its survival and its 
continuing security) may justify means or actions 
taken for these purposes, even though the same 
means might otherwise be considered immoral 
or illegal. Contrary to popular understandings, 
Machiavelli did not actually say that the end justifies 
the means. What he argued was that political leaders 
should be aware of the consequences of their actions 
( si guarda al fine ), harmful or otherwise, that may 
be necessary to assure the security.  
 macrotheory  See  theory. 
 Madisonian  Deriving from the influence of James 
Madison, often referred to as the “father of the U.S. 
Constitution.” Madison’s ideas (along with those of 
such other Federalists as Alexander Hamilton and 
John Jay) on the separation of powers among various 
branches of government and the division of powers 
between central and state (and local) governments 
were central to framing the U.S. Constitution. 
A conservative framework, introducing major 
changes is, more often than not, a slow process that 
at times stalls in gridlock.  
 Marxism  A body of thought inspired by the German 
Karl Marx (1818–1883). It emphasizes the  dialectical 
unfolding of historical periods—changes in modes 
and relations of production over time. It stresses the 

458
Glossary
the terms  nation, state, and  nation-state are often used 
synonymously. It is possible for there to be a nation 
without a single state—for example, a  non-state 
nation such as the Palestinian and Kurdish peoples 
in the Middle East. Some states such as India contain 
more than one nation and are sometimes referred to 
as  multinational states. Another example is Canada 
with three “nations”—one English-speaking, another 
French-speaking, and a third composed of indigenous 
peoples referred to as “first nation.”  
 national interest  See  interest. 
 nationalism  Promoting national identity usually 
to the exclusion of other, competing identities and 
legitimizing actions of a state taken for national 
purposes. Nations without states often solidify 
movements to establish a nation-state around 
nationalist themes.  
 national security  Issues dealing with the survival, 
welfare, and protection of a state.  
 national self-determination  The view that a 
people with a common identity have the right 
to be independent from outside control, as in 
establishing a state for such a national group. 
National self-determination has been an important 
rallying cry for Third World countries that 
demanded an end to colonial rule.  
 nation-state  See  nation. 
 NATO  The North Atlantic Treaty Organization; 
a mutual defense organization founded in 1949 by 
the United States, Canada, and Western European 
countries. There are currently twenty-eight members.  
 natural law, universal law  A philosophical view 
dating back at least to the time of the ancient Greeks 
and developed further by the Romans that posits 
there are laws inherent in nature that transcend any 
laws made by mere mortals. All leaders and all forms 
of government, it is argued, are bound by these laws, 
and they should not be violated. Some scholars have 
dealt with natural law as a means to develop a body 
of international law to govern the relations among 
states.  
 natural rights  Reference is to a theory that finds 
human rights in nature that can be discovered 
through reason. Social-contract theorists such as 
Locke and Rousseau saw rights in this naturalist 
understanding; however, utilitarians such as Bentham 
and Mill argued that human rights rested on other 
grounds also discoverable through reason—the 
greatest good or happiness for the greatest number. 
See also  human rights, utilitarian. 
 methodology  The approach one takes to an academic 
study; modes of research and analysis, as in the use of 
historical case and comparative case studies, or the use 
of statistics, as in formal hypothesis testing or causal 
modeling of variables. See also  causal modeling.  
 microtheory  See  theory. 
 minimum winning coalition  The smallest number of 
actors needed to agree to a policy or course of action 
in order to put it into effect. See also  game theory. 
 MNC  See  multinational corporation. 
 modernism, modernist  See  postmodernism. 
 modernization  See  development. 
 modes of production  The organization of the 
economy for the production of goods, as in such 
historical epochs identified by Marx as slavery, 
feudalism, and capitalism. According to Marx, as 
technology has advanced, the mode of production 
has also changed—feudalism being a more productive 
mode than slavery and capitalism being more 
productive than feudalism.  
 monopoly  Occurs when a firm has solitary or 
complete control of a market. Marx noted an 
increasing concentration of capital or a tendency 
toward monopoly in advanced capitalism.  
 moral  Principles of right and wrong in one’s 
behavior. 
 multilateralism  Refers to an effort to cooperate or 
collaborate with other states rather than trying to go 
it alone. See also  unilateralism. 
 multinational corporation (MNC)  A firm usually with 
headquarters in one country but with production 
facilities in more than one country. Because they 
operate across national borders, MNCs are among 
those units referred to as transnational actors. See 
also  transnational. 
 multipolar, multipolarity  A distribution of power in 
the international system with more than two centers 
or “poles,” such as a world in which there are five 
principal or major powers.  
 mutual constitution  For constructivists, there is 
a reciprocal relation between agency (actors) and 
structure. Structures are not objects that simply 
influence actors in a unidirectional manner. Rather, 
agents have the ability to change structures and 
escape from situations that encourage and replicate, 
for example, conflictual practices such as war.  
 nation  A group of people with a common identity. 
A nation coterminous with state boundaries is referred 
to as a  nation-state, although in common language 

Glossary
459
occurring at multiple levels of the world-system. 
The study of international relations, therefore, is not 
limited to foreign policy or patterns of distributions 
of capabilities, nor confined to reducing international 
relations to economic variables. Influences include 
Fernand Braudel, Karl Polanyi, and Antonio Gramsci.  
 neutrality, neutral  The situation in which states 
announce they do not take sides in an international 
dispute or war nor join an alliance. Some, like 
Switzerland, claim  permanent neutrality. Others 
choose to be neutral, perhaps more accurately, 
 nonaligned as a tactical choice that serves their 
interests at a particular time.  
 newly industrializing country (NIC)  Countries such 
as Taiwan, Singapore, South Korea, or Malaysia whose 
rapid economic growth over recent decades made the 
label  Third World inappropriate. All such countries 
exhibited strong  market orientations, developed 
industrially, and heavily emphasized exports.  
 NIC  Newly industrializing country.  
 nomology  Study relating to discoverable scientific 
laws that contribute to human understanding. See 
also  deductive-nomological. 
 nomothetic  Related to finding general or universal 
laws that cover numerous, different cases over time. 
See also  idiographic. 
 nongovernmental organization (NGO)  Transnational 
organizations that have a standing independent of 
governments, often with diversified members that 
work to fulfill specific political, social, or economic 
objectives that may benefit or have some positive 
or negative impact on a wide range of persons. 
Examples include human rights organizations; 
multinational corporations and banks; labor unions; 
privately owned telecommunications, newspaper, 
and other print media firms; churches and other 
religious organizations; etc. See also  international 
organization. 
 non-state actors  International actors other than 
governments, such as international organizations, 
multinational corporations, international banks, 
terrorist groups, and the Red Cross. Liberals with a 
transnationalist perspective on international relations 
emphasize the importance of such non-state actors. 
See also  transnational. 
 non-zero-sum  See  game theory. 
 normative, norm  A principle of right action; a 
standard to guide behavior, as in norms or obligations 
governing the conduct of war, transit on the high 
 neoclassical realists  These scholars, while 
appreciating the insights of neorealism and the 
importance of systemic structure, have attempted to 
incorporate international institutions and explanatory 
factors at the state-society level of analysis to explain 
war. They tend to take their cue from classical 
realists. 
 neocolonialism  See  imperialism. 
 neofunctionalism  See  functionalism, spillover. 
 neoliberal institutionalism  Like realism, neoliberal 
institutionalism is utilitarian and rational in 
orientation—states are treated as rational egoists 
and interstate cooperation occurs when states have 
significant interests in common. The goal is to 
discover how, and under what conditions, institutions 
matter. As such, neoliberal institutionalism addresses 
both security and nonsecurity or welfare issues. 
In this regard, institutions provide information, 
reduce transaction costs, make commitments more 
credible, establish focal points for coordination, and 
aid in the operation of reciprocity and multilateralism 
among states. The term  institution may also refer 
not just to organizations, but also to such accepted 
patterns of recurrent or institutionalized relations as 
 multilateralism —a meaning advanced by John Ruggie 
and others. The concept is particularly associated 
with Robert Keohane, although he rejects the 
“neoliberal” adjective.  
 neoliberalism, neoliberal  Critical of liberal theories 
that discount the relative importance of states, the 
neoliberal position is that states also matter alongside 
a wide array of non-state actors. See also  neoliberal 
institutionalism. 
 neorealism  A label applied to  structural realists 
or those realists who are interested in explaining 
state behavior under conditions of anarchy and who 
emphasize the importance of the structure of the 
international system and how this influences and 
constrains state behavior. The term may also have 
negative connotations in the eyes of some critics 
who claim that the neorealists have neglected the 
importance of values and norms as stressed by earlier 
realists such as Hans Morgenthau and E. H. Carr. 
Neorealists deny the validity of such charges, 
and some even reject the neorealist label. See also 
 structure, structural determinist, structural realist. 
 neostructuralism  Associated with economic 
structuralism, neostructuralism is interested in 
understanding how global processes interact with 
other processes of state and social transformation 

460
Glossary
 optimal  In the context of decision making, the best 
possible outcome.  
 order  From the perspective of the English School, 
order results not simply from power and the 
balance of power, but also from the acceptance 
of rules and institutional arrangements that are in 
the enlightened, rational self-interest of states and 
other actors. This allows English School theorists 
to speak of an “international society” rather than a 
“system of states,” which is associated with the realist 
perspective on IR. Following the Kantian view held 
by some within the English School, agreement on and 
acceptance of universal norms of state behavior are 
foundation stones for order in “world society.”  
 organizational process  A model developed by 
Graham Allison to distinguish  bureaucratic politics 
from organizational process—the institutional 
perspectives, routines, standard procedures, and 
processes of particular bureaucracies.  
 pacta sunt servanda  Latin for “treaties are binding”; 
the idea that treaties or formal covenants are legally 
binding even in the absence of a central authority to 
enforce adherence to them.  
 paradigm  A pattern, model, or perspective that helps 
one organize and guide research. A paradigm may 
include key assumptions about the world and the best 
way to go about understanding it. The concept was 
central in Thomas Kuhn’s influential  The Structure 
of Scientific Revolutions (1962) and has since been 
applied to the social sciences. According to Kuhn, a 
scientific era is characterized by a dominant paradigm 
that represents “normal science”; the majority of 
scholars work within this paradigm, often accepting 
the assumptions of the paradigm in an unquestioning 
manner. These assumptions have an impact on how 
research is conducted and the resultant scholarly 
work. See also  research program. 
 parsimonious theory  A theory that contains only a 
few elements yet can explain or predict a wide variety 
of phenomena. See also  theory, hypothesis. 
 partial theory  See  theory. 
 peace  A wide variety of definitions exist, including 
the absence of war; a situation of security, order, or 
stability; harmonious relations among states. For 
some theorists, it means worldwide collaboration to 
solve common global problems.  
 Peace of Westphalia  Two peace treaties signed 
in 1648 that ended both the Thirty Years’ War in 
Germany and the Eighty Years’ War between Spain 
seas, diplomacy, trade, and commerce. Normative 
judgments are often equated to value judgments 
and the idea of what  ought to be; some norms may 
have the binding character of international law. 
For constructivists and many liberals, norms define 
standards of appropriate behavior. For constructivists 
they are part of international structure. In the English 
School, reflecting a Kantian view, norms are essential 
to the construction of world society.  
 normative theory  Value-oriented or philosophical 
theory that focuses on what ought to be. As such it is 
usually differentiated from  empirical theories that try to 
explain the way things are or predict what they will be.  
 North  See  North–South. 
 North–South  Terms meant to distinguish between 
the advanced industrialized, capital-rich states of 
the northern hemisphere and the capital-poorer 
states of the southern hemisphere. The South is also 
referred to as the Third World. Debate and discussion 
revolve around the question of how the North–South 
economic gap can be bridged and what, if any, 
obligation the North has toward the South.  
 n-person game  See  game theory. 
 objective, objectivity  Aim in positivism is to test 
propositions empirically and reduce bias as much 
as possible. The idea that there is a truth “out 
there” that we are equipped to find even though 
we are essentially subjective persons. See  subjective, 
intersubjective, intersubjectivity. 
 oligopoly  An economic market in which a few 
firms control the production (or distribution) of 
certain goods or services. Marx and Lenin argued 
that capitalism tended to move toward greater 
concentration of capital, resulting in oligopolies or 
monopolies. See  monopoly. 
 ontology  Consists of our assumptions (often unstated) 
of what the world ultimately consists of—how we 
see or understand the essence of things around us. 
A philosophical term referring to the study of existence 
or being or, in Kant’s terms, “the more general 
properties of things.” Are there, for example, actual 
“structures” out there that influence the behavior of 
actors? If so, are they essentially materially based (a 
view associated with structural realism) or ideationally 
based (a view associated with constructivism). 
Dialectical materialism as universal law or set of laws 
with historical implications for humanity is an example 
of a materialist ontology central to Marxist thought.  
 operationalize, operationalization  See  variable. 

Glossary
461
composed of a multitude of competing bureaucracies, 
individuals, and groups. The agenda of world 
politics is extensive and goes well beyond security 
concerns. Much of the work on decisionmaking and 
transnationalism falls within this liberal image that 
captures the pluralism we find in a multiplicity of 
factors and actors. In the English School,  pluralism 
is a term used to describe a condition in which states 
have little in common other than the calculations of 
interest that drive the behavior of states—a “thin 
morality” with cooperation among states based 
almost entirely on calculations of mutual advantage. 
 Pluralism in English School usage stands in contrast 
to the  solidarism one finds in international society. 
See also  image, liberalism, solidarism. 
 policy  A decision or a course of action chosen from 
alternatives.  
 political culture  Those norms, values, and 
orientations of a society’s culture that are politically 
relevant; for example, many societies have a tradition 
of deferring to political authorities in the making 
of domestic and foreign policies. Other, more 
participant political cultures reflect a public interest 
in political matters and attempt to influence political 
decisions.  
 political economy  There are at least two major ways 
in which this term is used in international relations 
research: (1) the view that politics and economies 
are inextricably linked, leading one to study the 
interrelations of political and economic variables, 
and (2) the use of economic models of rationality 
to explain political actions. For example, some 
theorists use economic models of rationality in order 
to determine under what conditions international 
collaboration can be achieved among states.  
 politics, political  Numerous definitions have been 
offered, including the processes that determine who 
gets what, when, and how (Harold Lasswell), the 
authoritative allocation of values (David Easton), or 
simply authoritative choice.  
 polity  In common usage, a political system such as 
the American polity or the Canadian polity. In the 
original Aristotelian usage, the term referred to an 
ideal form of government.  
 positive-sum game  See  game theory. 
 positivism  A view of scientific inquiry that assumes 
(1) the unity of the natural and social sciences—we 
can study society as we study the natural world; 
(2) we can draw a distinction between facts and 
and the Netherlands. The Peace initiated a new 
order in central Europe based on the concept of state 
sovereignty.  
 perception, perceptual  Awareness of the world 
through the medium of the senses. In international 
relations, the literature on deterrence and crisis 
situations, for example, often deals with the 
importance of perception and misperception.  
 periphery  The less developed countries or areas of 
Asia, Latin America, and Africa. In the dependency 
literature, the periphery is dominated by the  center, 
which consists of the economically and politically 
dominant countries of the world (usually viewed as 
those in North America and Europe, and Japan). 
The literature on the capitalist world-system has 
applied the concept of periphery back to the origins 
of capitalism in Europe. The periphery plays a 
subordinate but important role in a worldwide 
capitalist division of labor by providing raw materials 
and cheap labor. As capitalism expanded, countries 
that at one time were part of the center slipped 
into peripheral or semiperipheral status. See also 
 semiperiphery, core, center. 
 permissive cause  See  causality. 
 phenomenology  A philosophical term referring 
to a subjective or interpretive understanding in 
human consciousness of what we observe or 
think we see— phenomena in the world around 
us. Classification and description of phenomena, 
including identifying their formal structures, have 
been part of an attempt to establish their scientific 
foundations. Following Edmund Husserl and others, 
the focus is on carefully describing the phenomena 
we experience—an interpretive approach to human 
understanding and the categories of understanding 
we construct. For our purposes in this volume, we 
see phenomenology contributing to constructivism, 
critical theory, postmodernism, and other interpretive 
understandings.  
 phenomenon, phenomena (plural)  An observed or 
observable occurrence.  
 pluralism, pluralist  As used in the first three editions 
of this book, pluralism referred to an image of 
international relations that assumes that non-state 
actors are important entities in international relations. 
In the fourth and this edition we have adopted the 
more commonly used term  liberalism and refer to 
a  liberal image of international relations. The state 
is not necessarily a rational and unitary actor but is 

462
Glossary
the terms  postmodernism and  post-structuralism are 
sometimes used synonymously.  
 power  Capabilities, or the relative capabilities, 
of actors such as states. The ability to control or 
influence outcomes or the actions of others. Central 
to realist works on international relations. Joseph 
Nye introduces the distinction between hard and 
soft power, the former referring to military and 
economic capabilities, the latter to values and 
culture that define a country, the image it projects, 
and the expectations it generates abroad. “Smart” 
power is the optimal combination of hard and soft 
components. For more detailed discussion of power, 
see discussion in the text, particularly  Chapter  2 on 
realism.  
 practices  See  social constructivism. 
 prediction  See  theory. 
 progressive theory  A theory is considered 
progressive if it leads researchers to ask new and 
interesting questions.  
 proletarian  See  proletarian revolution, proletariat. 
 proletarian revolution  A Marxist concept referring 
to the rising up of the working class, or proletariat, 
and the overthrow of the capitalist system dominated 
by the bourgeoisie who own capital—the factories, 
industries, and banks. The revolution is, theoretically, 
the result of contradictions internal to the nature 
of capitalism, particularly between the mode and 
relations of production.  
 proletariat  A Marxist concept referring to a 
particular class of people, in this case the working 
class. The proletariat is usually viewed as being in 
opposition to the bourgeois class, which owns the 
means of production. See also  Marxism, means of 
production. 
 prophecy  See  self-fulfilling prophecy. 
 proposition  In theory, a statement that affirms 
or denies something. Example: “Arms races cause 
conflict.”  
 public choice theory  The use of economic methods 
to analyze what are essentially political problems 
(issues involving choices or decisions by political 
authorities). See also  collective goods theory, rational 
choice theory. 
 pure type  See  ideal type. 
 ramification  A concept developed by David Mitrany 
(1888–1975) in his work on functionalist integration: 
Successful collaboration by states in one particular 
values; (3) regularities exist in the social as well 
as the natural world and they can be identified; 
and (4) empirical validation or falsification is the 
hallmark of “real” inquiry. Hence, knowledge comes 
from empirical testing of propositions or hypotheses 
against evidence or facts. In terms of both domestic 
and international law, the view that laws stem 
only from the actions of those having the political 
authority to make them (as in domestic statutes 
or international treaties) rather than, for example, 
general principles derived from understandings of 
natural law.  
 postcolonialism  An interdisciplinary perspective 
that encompasses economic, political, social, and 
cultural aspects of decolonization and afterward, 
highlighting the importance of race, gender, and 
ethnicity in understanding anticolonial struggles. 
Postcolonialism would include the literature on 
dependency and the capitalist world-system. Not 
surprisingly, many postcolonial scholars are critical 
theorists.  
 postmodernism, postmodernist  A rejection 
of scientific or “modernist” epistemology, 
postmodernism  deconstructs or takes apart the 
meanings embedded in what we say and write, 
looking for underlying meanings or  subtexts ; in 
the extreme, some postmodernists adopt a purely 
relativist position—that no knowledge or truth is 
possible apart from the motivations and purposes 
people put into their construction. See also  critical 
theory, hermeneutics. 
 post-structuralism, post-structuralist  A deconstruction 
of the dominant readings of reality. Going beyond or 
not being bound by the accepted symbols or established 
structures that effectively channel our understandings, 
it is a reaction to the universal claims we find in the 
structuralism of both French philosophical thought 
and the branch of anthropology called semiotics. 
Particularly objectionable to post-structuralists is 
the attempt to unify the social sciences with a single 
structuralist methodology based on identifying linguistic 
or cultural signs and differences. For their part, 
Francois Lyotard (1924–1998) and his followers have 
rejected grand meta-narratives employed purportedly 
to explain all of the world in scientific terms. 
Post-structuralists raise similar objections to balance 
of power and other meta-narratives in IR they see 
masquerading as scientifically based theoretical 
explanations. Post-structuralists can be understood as 
a category within postmodernist thought, although 

Glossary
463
of conflict and collaboration under conditions of 
anarchy or lack of common government. Security 
issues are usually the most important for realists. 
 National interest or objectives,  power, and  balance 
of power are key concepts for most realists.  Classical 
realists see power and power relations as important, 
but also put greater emphasis on values or norms 
than  structural realists who see the distribution of 
power or material capabilities as having primacy. 
See also  image, neorealism (structural realism), 
classical realists, neoclassical realists. 
Realpolitik  A German term referring to power 
politics. It emphasizes policies based more on 
practical power considerations and less on moral 
or ethical considerations. The attainment and 
maintenance of state security in a hostile world 
through power or balance-of-power politics is viewed 
as the primary goal of leaders.  
 reductionism  An analytic approach leading to 
oversimplification and incompleteness of explanation. 
In some usages, the term refers to explanations 
that look only within a unit, such as state or 
individual, ignoring the environment within which 
the unit is immersed and the interaction of that 
unit with elements in its environment. Reducing 
the explanation of some phenomenon such as 
war among states to something deep within the 
human psyche (as being, for example, at the level 
of synapses between nerve endings) is an extreme 
example of  reductio ad absurdum —explanation 
reduced to an absurd degree of oversimplification 
and incompleteness—as if one could explain the 
recurrence of war among states purely in neurological 
terms. Similarly, theorists who have tried to explain 
revolution solely in social or social-psychological 
terms, ignoring economic, political, and other factors, 
have been criticized for reductionism.  
 reflectivism, reflectivist  As opposed to a 
purely rationalist view as in abstract cost-benefit 
calculations, reflectivists take into account the ideas, 
understandings, or consciousness in relation to 
interests that influence the decisions we make and the 
actions we take. See also  cognition. 
 reformism  The idea that revolution or the violent 
overthrow of an existing capitalist political-economic 
order is not necessary, but that change can occur 
incrementally and nonviolently. The possibility of 
evolving toward socialism by peaceful means such 
as parliamentary methods or the creation of trade 
unions is a tenet of reformism. The issue of reformism 
technical area would encourage the expansion of 
collaboration into other areas. Mitrany hypothesized 
that if states became increasingly integrated in a 
number of technical or functional areas, the cost 
of breaking these ties (such as by going to war) 
would be high enough to prevent such actions from 
occurring in the first place. See also  functionalism, 
spillover. 
 rational, rationalist  To act rationally requires a 
rank ordering of preferred goals, consideration 
of all feasible alternatives to attain those goals in 
the light of existing capabilities, and consideration 
of the costs and benefits associated with using 
particular methods to attain particular goals. This 
is  instrumental rationality or what Max Weber 
(1864–1920) in German called  Zweckrationalität. 
The assumption is often made in international 
relations research that actors do indeed act rationally 
in this way. The assumption is made in order to 
develop hypotheses and to produce insights on 
world politics. On the other hand, one can as Weber 
did refer in German to  Wertrationalität or value 
rationality—subscription to values like duty, loyalty 
or commitment, courage or bravery, trust, and the 
like. Thus, following value rationality, risks are taken 
and losses suffered that would not have been willfully 
taken were instrumental rationality the driving 
criterion. Institutional or bureaucratic rationality 
is yet another form of rational action identified by 
Weber in the procedures and routines that enhance 
organizational or bureaucratic efficiency in the way 
decisions are made, recurrent tasks are pursued, and 
follow-up actions are taken. Finally, we take note of 
rationalism or the  rationalist position in the English 
School that refers to rules or laws that are mechanisms 
for providing order and justice in international society. 
See also  decision, action, policy, rational choice 
theory, English School, international society.  
 rational choice theory  Theory that assumes actor 
rationality in economics and politics, focusing on 
the instrumentally rational dimension—maximizing 
interest or utility—in the development of explanatory 
and predictive theories. See also  collective goods 
theory, decision, expected utility, game theory, 
rational. 
 rationality  See  rational. 
 realism, realist  A perspective on international 
relations that focuses on the state as unitary and 
rational actor and on the actions and interactions 
of states. Realists attempt to understand patterns 

464
Glossary
underlying much of IR theorizing. If, for example, one 
believes the international system is composed of states 
that are satisfied as long as everyone receives some 
positive pay-off (absolute gains), then stability or 
peace seems more likely. If, however, states are driven 
by relative gains and both gain but one more than the 
other (thus changing their overall positions relative to 
each other), then conflict may be more likely.  
 relativism  Humans can understand and evaluate 
beliefs and behaviors only in terms of their historical 
or cultural context; truth is always relative to some 
particular frame of reference.  
 relativist, relativism  A view that what is true varies 
from individual to individual, group to group, and 
context to context. See  natural law. 
 research program  A term developed by Imre Lakatos 
(1922–1974) to identify work within a particular 
school of thought or understanding. Lakatos used 
the English spelling for  research programme , the 
American-English spelling for  program used more 
commonly in the United States.  
 revanchism  See  irredentism. 
 satisficing  A less-than-optimal choice that does 
not completely maximize the values or goals one 
is pursuing but is good enough; work on decision 
making shows that people often choose the first 
viable option that is minimally acceptable.  
 scientific method  An approach to explaining 
and understanding the natural and social world. 
To accept the scientific method is to adopt positivist 
assumptions that assume (1) the unity of the natural 
and social sciences—we can study society as we study 
the natural world; (2) we can draw a distinction 
between facts and values; (3) regularities exist in the 
social as well as the natural world and they can be 
identified; (4) empirical validation or falsification is 
the hallmark of “real” inquiry. Hence, knowledge 
comes from empirical testing of propositions or 
hypotheses against evidence or facts.  
 scientific proposition  See  falsifiability. 
 Second World  See  Third World. 
 security  For realists, the basic survival and 
protection of the state. Liberals have a more expansive 
definition, also applying the concept to individuals 
and groups of people. In fact, from this perspective 
the state may not even be a provider of security, but 
rather a threat to the security of many people.  
 security dilemma  A term coined by John Herz 
(1908–2005): In an anarchic international system, 
is one reason the socialist movement split in the late 
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries. V. I. Lenin 
(1870–1924) and Rosa Luxemburg (1871–1919) 
argued that the reformist policies of Karl Kautsky 
(1854–1938), Eduard Bernstein (1850–1932), and 
others were wrong. Lenin believed that capitalism 
could not be reformed to benefit the working class, 
that a revolution was required. See also  proletarian 
revolution. 
 regime, international regime  In its domestic context, 
an existing governmental or constitutional order 
defined in terms of sets of rules and institutions 
established to govern relations among individuals, 
groups, or classes within a state. In its international 
context, the term is defined as voluntarily agreed-upon 
sets of principles, norms, rules, and procedures around 
which actor expectations converge in a given area of 
international relations. The literature on international 
regimes blossomed in the 1970s. Scholars argued 
that international collaboration was obviously not 
restricted to formal international organizations such 
as the United Nations—cooperation was necessary 
in monetary and trade areas, telecommunications, 
maritime and air traffic control, and a whole host of 
areas of greater and lesser importance.  
 regulative rules  For constructivists, formal 
or informal practices that influence behavior. 
See  constitutive. 
 reified, reification  Giving a concrete reality to 
what is in fact an abstract concept of analysis. For 
example, some critics claim that realists have reified 
the state, attributing to it human characteristics such 
as rationality, or treating the state as if it operated in 
the international arena like an actual human being. 
The concept of system, used by some realist, liberal, 
English School rationalist, and economic-structuralist 
theorists, has also been criticized on similar grounds.  
 relations of production  In Marxist usage the term 
refers to classes and the roles they play in economic 
or productive activities—for example, the bourgeoisie 
or owners of capital in the dominant position over the 
working classes in a capitalist  mode of production.  
A contradiction with revolutionary implications 
occurs, for example, when the mode of production has 
moved from feudalism to capitalism, but the feudal 
aristocracy remains in power, the newly emergent 
 bourgeois or capitalist class still held in a subordinate 
position. See also  class, mode of production.  
 relative and absolute gains  This distinction is 
important as it can be viewed as a key assumption 

Glossary
465
are social rather than strictly material or capabilities, 
as neorealists would have it. These social structures 
shape actors’ (agents’) identities and interests, not just 
their behavior. According to Alexander Wendt, social 
structures are made up of collective meanings, shared 
knowledge and material resources and practices. 
What makes ideas (and thus structure) “social” 
is their intersubjective quality. Material resources 
only acquire meaning for human action through the 
structure of shared knowledge. Habitual actions that 
result from these interpretations are often referred 
to as  practices. The combination of language and 
techniques employed to maintain these practices is 
referred to as  discourses. Identities are relatively 
stable, role-specific understandings and expectations 
about one’s self that are acquired by interacting 
with a structure composed of social relationships, 
collective meanings, beliefs, and rules.  
 social contract  A philosophical idea used by 
theorists such as Thomas Hobbes, John Locke, and 
Jean-Jacques Rousseau to justify their preference 
for a particular type of political order. Living in an 
imaginary “state of nature”—a condition without any 
social or political structure—individuals contract with 
one another to create a political community or society 
governed by certain rules. For Hobbes, the social 
contract resulted in the establishment of a sovereign or 
central authority that is given the task of maintaining 
order. In international relations, however, no such 
sovereign exists. The late-twentieth-century writings of 
John Rawls (1921–2002) on the bases of a just society 
apply social contract theory to the question of how 
decisions on society’s rules and how it is organized 
likely would be made by individuals making these 
choices behind a  veil of ignorance —not knowing how 
they would individually be affected by outcomes from 
these decisions. See also  self-help, security dilemma.  
 socialism  Ownership of the means of production and 
distribution of goods by the society or the people as a 
whole (the public) rather than by private individuals. 
In a more limited form of socialism, only major 
industries and utilities are publicly owned. In some 
usages, socialism refers not only to public ownership 
of the means of production; it also includes public 
welfare programs and government acts in the name of 
the people in carrying out these programs. In Marxist 
thought, socialism is a stage or mode of production 
between capitalism and communism.  
 social structure  Typically refers to the arrangement 
or relative position within a particular society of 
State  A may sincerely increase its level of defense 
spending only for defensive purposes and self-
preservation, but it is rational for other states to 
assume the worst and impute aggressive intentions 
to State  A. They therefore also increase their level of 
arms, leading State  A to feel insecure and contemplate 
a further increase in military spending. Hence, by 
initially trying to enhance its own security, State 
 A  sets in motion a process that results ironically in its 
feeling less secure. In another usage, the term merely 
refers to the security problem faced by all states in a 
world without central authority or lack of common 
government among states. See also  anarchy, self-help. 
 self-fulfilling prophecy  To predict a particular 
outcome and then choose policies or actions that 
help to bring about the predicted outcome even 
though this is not the intended effect. For example, 
predicting that State  B will increase support for a war 
of national liberation against an ally of State  A,  State 
 A provides its ally with more military assistance 
to combat rebels, resulting in State  B ’s feeling it is 
necessary to increase its support for the guerrillas. 
State  A ’s prophecy that State  B will increase support 
for the guerrillas, hence, becomes self-fulfilling.  
 self-help  In the international arena, there is no 
superordinate authority, world government, or 
“Leviathan” to ensure order or to see that all parties 
to an agreement keep their end of a bargain. Each 
state must look after its own security and not assume 
the help of other states. See also  anarchy. 
 semiotics  The signs and symbols people use in 
communications with each other, which have been 
particularly important in anthropological studies of 
culture. 
 semiperiphery  As used by capitalist world-system 
theorists (see  Chapter  4 ), the term refers to those 
countries or regions that occupy an intermediate 
position between core and peripheral areas. The 
semipheriphery is engaged in a mix of activities, some 
associated with the core and some with the periphery. 
It serves as an outlet for investment when wages, and 
thus the cost of production, in core areas become too 
high. The semiperiphery may at one time have been 
a core or peripheral area, or it may be moving into 
either status. See also  bourgeoisie, class conflict. 
 sensitivity interdependence  See  interdependence. 
 social constructivism  Social theories that attempt 
to explain the formation and transformation of 
identities and interests, in particular those of states. 
The fundamental structures of international politics 

466
Glossary
is more or less stable. Stable deterrence relations 
are said to depend on maintaining second-strike 
capabilities that would allow either party to absorb 
a first strike prior to choosing whether and how to 
retaliate. By contrast, when one party fears it has lost 
(or will lose) its second-strike capability, this may be 
 destabilizing because it may be prone in a crisis to 
launch first or to launch on warning of an attack even 
before it has confirmed that an attack has actually 
taken place. See also  system, equilibrium, deterrence. 
 state  A legal entity composed of territory, a 
population, and an administration or government. 
It possesses sovereignty recognized by other states. 
See also  government, sovereignty. 
 state of nature  A philosophical construct referring 
to a time prior to the creation of civil society—a 
world without governmental authority. An analogy 
to the  anarchic structure of the international system. 
An important concept, particularly for realists who 
follow the thinking of Hobbes (1588–1679), as 
it raises the issue of how order and stability can 
be achieved in an international system of states 
competing for power and prestige.  
 Stoicism  An ancient Greco-Roman philosophy that 
saw humankind in universal, unifying terms. Our 
similarities, particularly our common ability to reason, 
outweigh any differences among us. Stoicism also 
counseled acceptance of things not easily changed and 
promoted inner discipline or self-control, the fortitude 
one displays especially when in difficult circumstances. 
Among the Stoics are Seneca (1 b.c.–65 a.d.), Paul 
of Tarsus—the Christian St. Paul (c. 5–65 a.d.), and 
Emperor Marcus Aurelius (121–180 a.d.). Early 
Christian universalism was also influenced by Stoic 
thought; beyond the common human ability to reason 
was added the idea of a soul or spirit—another aspect 
seen as shared by human beings wherever they might 
be, whatever language they spoke, or however different 
their appearance. Liberalism as philosophy or ideology 
also has Stoic roots.  
 structural  See  structure. 
 structural determinist  One who believes that 
the structure of the international system largely 
determines the behavior of individual states and that 
there is very little effective choice for leaders of states. 
The term is usually used in a negative or critical sense 
against realists, neorealists, and some Marxists. Few, 
if any, theorists would admit to complete structural 
determinism in their theories, but some do assign 
greater weight to structure as a determinant of the 
such units as classes, elites and masses, patrons 
and clients, tribes, and extended families or clans. 
As adapted to the international context, it has both 
social and material meanings. Can include class or 
material-based understandings as well as networks of 
individuals and organizations.  
 society  Term in domestic usage referring to the 
people, typically within a state but sometimes across 
two or more states. Analytically we can understand 
 society as including state or political régime, 
economy, social structure, and culture. The concept 
is used in the English School to describe international 
or world society. See also  international society, world 
society, international civil society. 
 society of states  The view that at certain times in 
history states have agreed upon basic rules, norms, 
and international laws to govern their relations. 
The nineteenth-century Concert of Europe is one 
example. See also  English School. 
 sociology  The study of society, particularly social 
groups and classes and relations among them.  
 soft power  See  power. 
 solidarism  Term used in the English School to 
describe a cosmopolitan “thick morality” among 
states in international society that goes well beyond 
ephemeral calculations of mutual advantage in a 
pluralist world. Shared norms, rules, and institutions 
among states define this solidarist understanding of 
international society. See also  pluralism. 
 South  See  North–South. 
 sovereign, sovereignty  The supreme, independent, 
and final authority. The attribute of a state that 
refers “internally” to its right to exercise complete 
jurisdiction over its own territory. In international 
relations, states as sovereign units have a right 
“externally” to be independent or autonomous with 
respect to other states. States may differ in their 
power, but as sovereign entities all are legal equals.  
 spillover  In the regional integration literature, a 
concept referring to a process whereby successful 
collaboration by states in one technical area leads to 
the realization by state authorities that it is in their 
rational self-interest to expand collaboration into 
related fields. Thus, progress in reducing barriers to 
trade may depend on, and lead to, further progress in 
rules facilitating the exchange of money among states.  
 stability, destabilizing  An attribute of a system. 
Some theorists compare unipolar, bipolar, and 
multipolar international systems in terms of which 

Glossary
467
 suboptimal  Less than the best choice or outcome, 
although it may be deemed good enough. See also 
 optimal. 
 subsidiarity  The principle of leaving authority or 
tasks to be performed at lower, often more local 
levels rather than centralizing them. In the European 
Union (EU), for example, not all tasks are directed 
centrally by the Commission or other institutions in 
Brussels. Most tasks are left to lesser EU institutions 
within the European region, member states, and their 
local governments or institutions.  
 subtext  See  postmodernism. 
 supranational  Beyond or above the state. 
For example, a world government would be a 
supranational authority that governs the relations 
among states. European courts have  supranational 
authority to the extent that they exercise judicial 
authority that supersedes rulings by national courts.  
 surplus value  In Marxist usage, the value of goods 
and services produced comes from the labor put into 
their production. After paying wages (which tend 
toward subsistence or minimum levels) and other 
costs, the remainder is  surplus that can be pocketed 
or invested by the owners of land or capital.  
 synchronic  Refers to a study of phenomena at a 
given point in time as opposed to over a period of 
time. See also  diachronic. 
 synthesis  Putting together parts, analysis having 
broken the whole into parts. Alternatively, the 
outcome of conflict or tension between thesis and 
antithesis. See also  dialectic. 
 system  A set of interrelated parts or an arrangement 
of units connected in such a way as to form a unity or 
whole; an abstract concept used by many theorists to 
bring order to their work. The use of the term varies. 
For example, some theorists see the  international  
system as being composed of states and other actors, 
whereas some authors see world capitalism as a system 
composed of classes with conflicting interests. Some 
systems are said to be  open to external influences, 
whereas others are  closed systems. Factors external 
to a system that may affect it are  exogenous, whereas 
those internal to the system are often referred to as 
 endogenous factors. Some systems are said to have 
certain inherent qualities or attributes, such as a 
tendency toward balance or equilibrium, although not 
all systems theorists assign such automaticity to systems. 
Some theorists use systems merely as taxonomies, or 
frameworks, for organizing research and analysis.  
 systemic  See  system. 
behavior of states and other actors. See also  system, 
structure, neorealism, realism, Marxism, structural 
realism, neoclassical realists. 
 structural realism, structural realist  A term preferred 
by Kenneth Waltz and other neorealists because in 
their view it more accurately describes neorealism’s 
focus on structure (the distribution of power) as a 
principal determinant of the behavior of states, the 
principal units in the international system. See also 
 neorealism. 
 structural transformation  As used by economic 
structuralists, the historical and geographical 
expansion of the capitalist world-system, 
incorporating new areas of the globe and 
nonintegrated sectors of the world economy.  
 structure  The arrangement of parts of a whole, 
as in the structure of the international system being 
defined by realists in terms of the distribution of 
capabilities or power among states. The international 
system structure, following this usage, may be 
bipolar, multipolar, or unipolar. Some theorists 
look for underlying structure associated with the 
anarchy of the system—the lack of central authority. 
For others, structure refers to observed patterns 
of behavior, as among states, although still others 
contend that such a definition confuses underlying 
 structure with  behavior, or the interactions of 
states—concepts that are, and should be, kept 
analytically separate. Some theorists of dependency 
and the capitalist world-system use the term  structure 
to describe relations or mechanisms of dominance, 
dependence, and exploitation. From the perspective 
of the English School, structure is defined in terms 
of rules, laws, and institutional arrangements states 
have established to provide some degree of order 
to an anarchic international society. For social 
constructivists, structure is made up of shared 
meanings, practices, rules, and norms. Structures 
thus may be ideational or cultural, not just material. 
Finally, structure may be defined as exogenous or 
external to agents, whether these agents are units like 
states or individuals. See also  social structure, system, 
behavior, bipolar, multipolar, structural determinist, 
structural realism. 
 subjective, subjectivity  Term(s) refer to the 
human dimension—that people or subjects are 
conscious and thinking, forming their views based 
on their own interpretations and understandings. 
See also  intersubjective, intersubjectivity, objective, 
objectivity. 

468
Glossary
considerable differences about the use of the terms 
 microtheory and  macrotheory. Most theorists use 
the term  microtheory to refer to partial theories 
and  macrotheory to refer to grand theory that 
would, for example, explain all of international 
relations. Strutural realists draw from microtheory in 
economics and refer to relations among component 
units—instead of firms in a market, states in an 
international system. For English School scholars, 
theory may mean nothing more than developing a 
set of interrelated concepts and categories to guide 
research and help structure questions. Positivist-
influenced causal theories are contrasted in this 
book with interpretive understanding approaches to 
knowledge. For a more extensive discussion, see the 
chapters in Part Two. Normative theory deals with 
norms or values—what  ought to be done. See also 
 parsimonious theory, hypothesis. 
 Third World  A term developed in the 1960s 
referring to the economically less developed (or 
underdeveloped) states of Asia, Africa, and Latin 
America. Some French sociologists saw the term as 
analogous to “third estate” in French history—a 
usage that had positive or hopeful implications for 
the masses of people in the world who do not now 
enjoy the levels of living enjoyed by those in the “first 
world.” The  First World includes the more industrially 
developed states in North America and Europe, 
Japan, Australia, and New Zealand; the  Second 
World consists of the few remaining Marxist-Leninist 
countries (although this designation is rarely used 
in the post–Cold War period). Some theorists have 
identified the poorest of the less developed countries 
as constituting a  Fourth World. See also  North–South, 
East, West, and  East–West.  
 traditionalism  A mode of thinking about 
international relations that emphasizes the studying 
of such disciplines as diplomatic history, international 
law, and philosophy in an attempt to develop better 
insights. Traditionalists tend to be skeptical of 
behavioralist approaches that are confined to strict 
scientific standards that include formal hypothesis 
testing and, usually, the use of statistical analysis. See 
also  behavior, methodology. 
 transformation, system transformation  A  fundamental 
change in the system, as in a shift from a multipolar to 
a bipolar world, or vice versa. The creation of a world 
government to replace an anarchic system of sovereign 
states would be such a system transformation. In a 
domestic context, the overthrow of the bourgeoisie by 
 taxonomy, taxonomies  A classification as in a 
categorization of states as democratic, socialist, or 
fascist. 
 teleology, teleological  That phenomena are to be 
explained by the purposes they serve. In systems 
theory, for example, it is teleological to argue that the 
need for a system to return to some natural state of 
equilibrium causes units within the system to behave 
the way they do. It may be that unit interactions 
within a system have a tendency to produce 
equilibrium, but it is teleological in effect to reverse 
the causal flow and argue that this systemic purpose 
(equilibrium) somehow causes the behavior of actors 
within the system to occur so as to achieve this result. 
Similarly, some functionalist theories have been 
criticized to the extent that they are also teleological.  
 terms of trade  The ratio of a country’s average 
export prices to its average import prices, especially 
regarding merchandise trade. When import prices rise 
faster than export prices, the terms of trade worsen. 
This is said to be the case for most less developed 
countries since the 1950s; the prices of raw materials 
have generally lagged behind the prices of imported 
manufactured goods from developed countries.  
 terrorism, terror  Rational or purposive, intentional 
use of the “irrational” or intimidating effects of 
violence or other means, usually for political purposes. 
Terror is among the tactics that insurgents may choose 
to use to advance their goals. See also  war.  
 theory  For positivists and those who seek causal 
theories such as neorealists and neoliberals, theory 
is an intellectual construct composed of a set of 
interrelated propositions that helps one to identify 
or select facts and interpret them, thus facilitating 
explanation and prediction concerning the 
regularities and recurrences or repetitions of observed 
phenomena with the goal of making the world more 
intelligible.  Explanation involves accounting for, 
or understanding causes of, such phenomena as 
war, arms races, and regional integration. In a loose 
sense,  prediction amounts merely to forecasting, but 
in a strict sense it implies explanation sufficient to 
anticipate outcomes, given the presence of certain 
variables or conditions (for example, theories 
that would predict war as the outcome of arms 
races).  General theories attempt a comprehensive 
or complete explanation of some phenomenon, 
whereas  partial theories are often understood as 
initial steps or attempts to explain narrower aspects 
of the phenomenon under investigation. There are 

Glossary
469
 universalism  A Kantian, cosmopolitan view 
consistent with Greco-Roman Stoicism portraying a 
world in which principles or values have applicability 
everywhere—a perspective that also has influence 
among liberal and English School scholars in 
particular.  
 utilitarian, utilitarianism  An ethical or philosophical 
doctrine developed in the nineteenth century that 
postulated that the greatest happiness or greatest 
good for the greatest number should be the aim of 
all action. The term can also mean a belief that the 
value of anything is determined solely by its utility. 
Utilitarian thinking as applied to theory building 
tends to emphasize a rational decision-making 
process in which actors seek to maximize benefit or 
minimize cost.  
 utopian  See  idealist. 
 values  Refers to the way things  ought to be quite 
apart from the way things  are. Political values would 
include preferences with respect to liberty, equality, 
order, and so on. A value is an estimate made of the 
worth or goodness of a goal or action. Also refers to 
measures as in numerical values. See also  normative. 
 variable  A characteristic of an object or class 
of objects that may take on different values. The 
variable may be quantitative (such as height) or 
qualitative (such as marital status). In international 
relations research, for example, the class of objects 
may be states and the variable military power. 
Researchers wish to  operationalize a variable, which 
means finding a way to measure the variable. Military 
power may be operationalized, for example, by 
using such indicators as number of nuclear weapons, 
amount of the gross national product devoted to 
military expenditures, or number of persons under 
arms. A  dependent variable is simply what one is 
trying to explain, such as the frequency and intensity 
of war since 1800.  Independent variables are factors 
that may help to explain or predict the dependent 
variable. See also  independent variable ,  dependent 
variable ,  intervening variable . 
 variable-sum game  See  game theory. 
 veil of ignorance  See  social contract. 
 Verstehen  See  interpretive understanding. 
 virtue-based ethics  Associated with Aristotelian 
thought that good attributes—often the mean 
between extremes—are the bases of good conduct. 
Thus, rather than be either wasteful or stingy, one 
is generous; rather than profligacy or withdrawal 
the proletariat would be considered a transformation 
of the political, social, and economic order.  
 transgovernmental  Relations involving links, ties, 
or even coalitions among bureaucratic, institutional 
or other official actors of different states. To the 
extent that these are effective, they may be a means 
for bypassing central government authorities in 
each state, although some theorists consider such 
circumvention of authority more an exception to the 
usual pattern in which the state remains unitary and 
speaks with one voice. See also  transnational. 
 transnational, transnationalism  Interactions and 
coalitions across state boundaries that involve such 
diverse nongovernmental actors as multinational 
corporations and banks, church groups, and terrorist 
networks. In some usages, transnationalism includes 
both nongovernmental as well as  transgovernmental  
links. The term  transnational is used both to label 
the actor (for example, a transnational actor) or a 
pattern of behavior (for example, an international 
organization that acts  transnationally —operates across 
state borders). Theorists focusing on transnationalism 
often deemphasize the state as primary and unitary 
actor. See also  transgovernmental.  
 transnational civil society  See  international civil 
society. 
 uneven development  A concept used by Marxists 
and other theorists that emphasizes capitalism’s 
unequal spread of global economic benefits. In 
Lenin’s  Imperalism (1916, published 1917), 
for example, he argued that the increasing 
concentration of capital in advanced capitalist states 
led to monopolies and cartels that sought foreign 
investments once national markets were exhausted. 
This spread of capitalism inevitably resulted in the 
exploitation of colonies. In the present period, uneven 
development continues to characterize not only 
individual national economies but the capitalist world 
as a whole. Both domestically and internationally, 
benefits accrue to the few.  
 unilateralism  Refers to a propensity for a state to 
go it alone rather than cooperate or collaborate with 
other states.  
 unipolar, unipolarity  See  structure. 
 unitary  Undivided, whole. In many realist analyses, 
states are viewed as unitary actors that speak 
ultimately with one voice.  
 unit of analysis  That which is being studied, such as 
a state or a class.  

470
Glossary
 welfare issues  Socioeconomic and other issues 
associated with improving the living conditions and 
standards of people.  
 West  Generally, the countries of North America 
and Europe (and, paradoxically, Japan because of its 
level of industrial development and its links to other 
advanced capitalist states). See  East–West. 
 world federalism  The goal of individuals favoring 
a world government that would have authority in 
certain areas over constituent states.  
 world (or global) politics  The term favored by those 
who emphasize the multidimensional or pluralist 
nature of international relations today, which 
includes not simply states, but also a wide diversity 
of international and nongovernmental, transnational 
organizations, other groups, and individuals; not 
simply the physical security of the state, but also 
environmental, human rights, and demographic issues. 
See also  international politics, international relations.  
 world society  In ordinary usage the term suggests 
 global or  worldwide, but in the English School it 
refers to a Kantian world in which agreed norms or 
principles are the source of order and justice. See also 
 society, international society. 
 xenophobia  Deep fear or hostility toward foreigners 
or other outsiders—strangers. See also  ethnocentrism. 
 zero-sum game  See  game theory. 
from life’s pleasures, one opts for temperance; rather 
than either cowardice or recklessness when facing 
danger, one is courageous; etc. Reason and judgment 
are central to this moral or ethical understanding. If 
one wishes to be good, one approach is to emulate 
virtuous persons as role models.  
 voluntarism, voluntarist  A philosophical position 
that reality is created by human will; that humans can 
affect, if not control, their destinies. In international 
relations, it generally means that decisionmakers have 
effective choice and are able to influence outcomes. 
As used in this volume, voluntarism is in opposition 
to the philosophical idea of determinism.  Social 
constructivism, for example, can be understood as 
a voluntarist formulation. One also finds theories 
premised on voluntarism among most liberals and 
English School rationalists and many classical realists. 
See also  determinism, social constructivism, realism, 
liberalism. 
 vulnerability interdependence  See  interdependence. 
 war  To engage in hostilities and military operations, 
usually for some political purpose. War among 
states is  interstate war; war between opposing 
parties within a state is  civil war or  insurgency. War 
involving irregulars and unconventional, hit-and-run 
tactics is  guerrilla warfare to which insurgents may 
resort. Insurgents may also use terror or other tactics. 
The explanation of war is traditionally the primary 
concern of many realist scholars of international 
relations. 

 Absolute gains, 58  
 Abstraction, 8  
 Adler, Emanuel, 146, 291, 292, 299  
 Adorno, Theodor, 331  
 After Hegemony (Keohane), 148  
 Agents, 287  
 Agent-structure problem, 11, 78, 299  
 Alker, Hayward R., Jr., 208, 326  
 Allison, Graham, 158  
 American Civil War, 406  
 American scholarship, 243–244  
 Analysis levels.  See Levels of analysis  
 Anarchical Society: A Study of Order in World 
Politics, The (Bull), 245, 410  
 Anarchy 
 game theory, 55–58 
 liberalism, 161–162 
 realism, 39, 48 
 world-system theory, 204  
 Anglo-American scholarship, 243–244  
 Anomalies, 214  
 Anthony, Susan B., 362  
 Application theory, 8  
 Aquinas, 394, 397  
 Aristophanes, 360  
 Aristotle, 360  
 Armed interventions, 405–410 
 civil wars, 406–407 
 humanitarian intervention criteria, 407–410. 
 See also War 
 Armstrong, William, 245  
 Ashley, Richard, 333  
 Assemblywomen (Aristophanes), 360  
 Astell, Mary, 361  
 Aurelius, Marcus, 132, 393  
 Balance of payment, 199  
 Balance of power 
 distribution capabilities, 58–68 
 nonsystemic factors, 65–68 
 offense-defense balance, 63–65 
 polarity/system structure, 62–63 
 realism, 40, 52 
 realists, and, 77–78 
 voluntarism-determinism debate, 60–62  
 Balance-of-power theory, 66, 69  
 Balancing, 66  
 Bananas, Beaches, and Bases (Enloe), 364  
 Bandwagoning, 66  
 Barnett, Michael, 299  
 Behavioralists, 2  
 Behnke, Andreas, 299  
 Bentham, Jeremy, 133, 135, 395  
 Bentley, Arthur F., 136  
 Bernstein, Eduard, 197, 198  
 Between Peace and War (Lebow), 157  
 Bhashkar, Roy, 292  
 Bill of Rights (U.S.), 402  
 Billiard ball model, 143  
 Bipolar system, 62, 67  
 Blackhawk Down firefight, 159  
 Bloc, 198, 199  
 Booth, Ken, 339–348  
 Bourgeoisie, 197  
 Braudel, Fernand, 209  
 British scholarship, 243–244  
 Brooks, Stephen G., 153, 167–176  
 Bruck, H. W., 156  
 Brzezinski, Zbigniew, 74  
 Bull, Hedley, 240, 241, 243, 244, 245, 246, 248, 
251, 267–269, 410  
  Burton, John W., 143  
 Bush, Barbara, 222–226  
 Butterfield, Herbert, 245  
 Buzan, Barry, 247–249, 250  
 Campbell, David, 292, 348–355  
 Capitalism, 191, 203–207  
 Capitalist world-system, 190  
 Capital-owning bourgeois, 190  
 Cardoso, Fernando Henrique, 202, 208  
 Carr, Edward Hallett, 42, 50, 74, 242–243, 245, 
397, 421–424 
 Cause-effect relations, 325–328  
I NDE X 
471

472 
Index
 Causes of War (Van Evera), 7  
 Causes of Wars, The (Howard), 7  
 CFC emissions, 151  
 Change 
 economic structuralism, 207–209 
 English School, 246–249 
 liberalism, 160–161 
 realism, and, 68–70, 78  
 Charles I, 47  
 Chase-Dunn, Christopher, 206  
 Chlorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions, 151  
 Cicero, 393, 397  
 Civil wars, 406–407  
 Class conflict, 194  
 Classical liberalism, 132, 133  
 Classical realist, 41  
 Clausewitz, Carl von, 49–50, 398  
 Cobden, Richard, 135  
 Cobweb model, 143  
 Coercive diplomacy, 41  
 Cognition theorists, 146  
 Collateral destruction, 400  
 Collective defense, 138, 405  
 Collective security, 137, 405  
 Colonialism, 210  
 Communism, 194  
 Communist countries, 191  
 Comparative advantage, 195  
 Comprador class, 202  
 Comte, Auguste, 323  
 Condition of the Working Class 
in England, The (Engels), 361 
 Congress of Vienna (1815), 59  
 Constitutive dimension, 146  
 Constitutive rules, 285–286  
 Constructivism 
 affinities, broader IR field, 297 
 agents, 287 
 criticism of, 297–299 
 Durkheim, 281 
 identity, 287–289 
 intellectual precursors/influences, 279–281 
 interests, 290–291 
 intersubjectivity, 281–284 
 Kant, 279–280 
 Locke, 280 
 logic of appropriateness, 289–290 
 major actors and assumptions, 278–279 
 norms, 286 
 rules, 285–286 
 structure, 284–285 
 thought diversity, 291–293 
 Weber, 281 
 Wendt’s naturalist constructivism, 293–297  
 Conventions, 147  
 Copeland, Dale, 66, 67, 68  
 Copernicus, 327  
 Core, 190, 191, 203  
 Counterforce targets, 399  
 Countervalue targets, 399  
 Covering-law approach, 5  
 Cox, Robert, 199, 332, 333  
 Creative theory principles, 19–26  
 Critical theory 
 Booth, 339–348 
 criticism of, 335–337 
 major assumptions, 331–333 
 Wendt, 302  
 Critique of Pure Reason (Kant), 329  
 Cross-national, nongovernmental organizations, 147  
 Dahl, Robert, 136  
 de Medici, Lorenzo, 45  
 de Mesquita, Bruce Bueno, 7, 62  
 de Victoria, Francisco, 397  
 Decision-making 
 liberalism, 130, 156–160 
 Thompson’s matrix, 151–152  
 Declaration of the Rights of Man (France), 402  
 Deduction, 323  
 Defensive realism, 63–65, 67  
 Democratic peace, 154–156  
 Dependency, 191  
 Dependent variable, 9  
 Depravity, 4  
 DerDerian, James, 292  
 Derrida, Jacques, 330, 334  
 Descartes, René, 323  
 Dessler, David, 292  
 Détente, 142  
 Determinism, 12, 60–62, 75–76  
 Deterrence, 40  
 Deutsch, Karl, 62, 139  
 Dialectic, 194  
 Dialectical materialism, 4  
 Discourse, 288  
 Domestic forces, 202  
 Double-effect principle, 400  

Index
473
 Doyle, Michael, 7, 154  
 Dual-effect principle, 400  
 Dunne, Tim, 245, 260–266  
 Durkheim, Emile, 281  
 ECLA, 199–200  
 Economic Commission on Latin America (ECLA), 
199–200  
 Economic structuralism, 12 
 capitalist world-system, 203–207 
 change, and globalization, 207–209 
 dependency theorists, 199–202 
 Gramsci, 198–199 
 Hobson, 195–196 
 intellectual precursors/influences, 193–199 
 justice, and foreign policy, 411 
 Lenin, 196–197 
 Luxemburg, 197–198 
 major actors and assumptions, 189–193 
 Marx, 193–195 
 postcolonialism, 209–212  
 EEC, 138–139, 140  
 Einstein, Albert, 327  
 Elshtain, Jean Bethke, 291, 366  
 Empirically based theories, 8  
 Empiricism, 3  
 End of History (Fukuyama), 163  
 Endogeneous sources, 288  
 Engels, Friedrich, 194, 361  
 English School, 12, 14 
 British/American scholarship, 243–244 
 Carr, 242–243 
 change, 246–249 
 criticism of, 250–252 
 foreign policy choice, 410 
 genesis of, 244–245 
 Grotius, 241–242 
 intellectual precursors/influences, 241–243 
 Kant, 242 
 levels of analysis, 246 
 liberalism/social constructivism, compared, 
249–250 
 major actors and assumptions, 239–241  
 Enloe, Cynthia, 364  
 Environmentally friendly measures, 150–152  
 Epistemic communities, 146  
 Epistemic realism, 349  
 Epistemology, 2–3, 362  
 Essence of Decision (Allison), 158  
 EU, 141 
 EURATOM, 140  
 European Economic Community (EEC), 138–139, 140  
 European Union (EU), 141  
 Evolution of International Society, The (Watson), 247  
 Existentialism, 329  
 Exogeneous sources, 288  
 Expected utility models, 41  
 Explanation, theory, 5–8  
 Exploitation, 4  
 Failing to Win: Perceptions of Victory and Defeat 
in International Politics (Johnson/Tierney), 158  
 Falk, Richard, 411  
 Federalist Papers, The, 137 
 Feminism 
 criticism of, 369–370 
 gender, war and security studies, 365–367 
 gendered understandings, 368 
 intellectual precursors/influences, 360–362 
 international organizations, and gender, 367–368 
 major assumptions, 362–363 
 strands, 364–365  
 Festinger, Leon, 157  
 Feudal system, 194  
 Fine-grained structural realism, 66  
 Finnemore, Martha, 250, 290, 291, 299, 309–316  
 First World, 191  
 Foreign policy choice, 410–412  
 Foreign Policy Decision-Making (Snyder et al.), 156  
  Formal intergovernmental organizations, 147  
  Foucault, Michel, 330, 334  
 Fox, William T. R., 244  
 Frankfurt School, 331, 332  
 Free trade area, 139–140  
 Freedom of the Seas (Grotius), 49  
 Fukuyama, Francis, 163  
 Functionalism, 138, 139  
 Gains, 58  
 Galileo, 327  
 Galtung, Johan, 206, 208  
 Game theory, 40, 55–58, 131  
 Gender, 362.  See also Feminism 
 feminism, 360 
 international organizations, 367–368 
 war/security studies, 365–367  
 Generalizing approach, 5  
 Genocide, 283, 404  

474 
Index
 Gilpin, Robert, 68, 69, 70, 78  
 Global capitalism.  See Economic structuralism  
 Global civil society, 130  
 Global governance, 149–152  
 Global level, 10  
 Global politics, 1 
 Global warming, 150–151  
 Globalization, 1, 71 
 economic structuralism, and change, 207–209 
 liberalism, and change, 160–161 
 postcolonialism, 212 
 realism, and interdependence, 71–72  
 Goldstein, Joshua, 366  
 Goldstein, Judith, 149, 158  
 Gramsci, Antonio, 198, 206, 209  
 Green politics, 150–152  
 Gregor, A. James, 324  
 Grotian rationalism.  See English School  
 Grotius, Hugo, 48–49, 50, 59, 132, 241–242, 
254–260, 394  
 Group level, 10  
 Guantánamo Bay, 404 
 Gulliver’s Travels (Swift), 143  
 Gurr, Ted Robert, 326  
 Haas, Ernst, 61, 139, 141, 142, 146, 158, 291  
 Haas, Peter, 146  
 Habermas, Jürgen, 330, 332, 333  
 Hamdan v. Rumsfeld, 404 
 Hamilton, Alexander, 4, 46  
 Hard power, 53, 109–117  
 Hegel, Georg W. F., 329, 366  
 Hegemonic stability, 73  
 Hegemony, 199  
 Heidegger, Martin, 329, 330  
 Heilbroner, Robert L., 194  
 Hempel, Carl, 327  
 Hermeneutics, 330  
 High politics, 40 
 Hilferding, Rudolph, 196  
 Hinsley, F. H., 245  
 Hiroshima, 401  
 Historical bloc, 198, 199  
 History of the Peloponnesian War (Thucydides), 42, 332  
 Hobbes, Thomas, 4, 47–48, 50, 90–93, 134, 241, 
280, 394, 395, 402  
 Hobson, John A., 195–196, 219–222  
 Hoffmann, Stanley, 53  
 Holsti, Ole, 157 
 Hopkins, Terence, 208  
 Horkheimer, Max, 331  
 Howard, Michael, 7, 245  
 Hudson, Valerie, 156, 157  
 Human condition, 409  
 Human rights, 402–405, 409  
 Humanitarian interventions, 309–316, 407–410  
 Hume, David, 133, 323  
 Husserl, Edmund, 329  
 Hypothesis 
 cause-effect relations, 326 
 empirically based theories, 8 
 positivism, 3, 5  
 ICC, 403 
 ICJ, 403  
 Ideal types, 13  
 Idealism 
 Carr critique, 50 
 stoicism, 132  
 Idealists, 2, 74  
 Identities, 287–289  
 Ideological bloc, 198  
 Images, 4, 12  
 Immoral weapons, 400  
 Imperialism 
 culture, and, 222–226 
 economic taproot, 219–222 
 Galtung, 206 
 Hobson, 195 
 Lenin, 196–197 
 postcolonialism, 210  
 Imperialism: The Highest Stage of Capitalism 
(Lenin), 196  
 Independent variable, 9  
 Individual level, 10  
 Induction, 323  
 Inside-out view, 130  
 Institutionalization, 281  
 Integration, 137–142  
 Interdependence 
 liberalism, 144 
 realism, 71–72 
 as vulnerability, 71–72  
 Interest-group liberalism, 135–137  
 Interests of actors, 290–291  
 International cooperation, 72–74  
 International Court of Justice (ICJ), 403  
 International Criminal Court (ICC), 403  

Index
475
 International institutions, 147  
 International organizations (IOs), 144, 367  
 International politics, and women, 380–385  
 International régimes, 144–147, 249  
 International relations (IR) 
 globalization era, 1–2 
 images, 12–14  
 International society, 240, 260–266.  See also 
English School  
 International Studies Quarterly, 54 
 International–world (global) level, 10  
 Interpretive understandings, 14–16  
 Intersubjectivity, 281–284  
 IOs, 144, 367  
 IR.  See International relations (IR)  
 Ismay, Lord, 288  
 Janis, Irving, 157  
 Jay, John, 46  
 Jefferson, Thomas, 395  
 Jervis, Robert, 157  
 Johnson, Dominic, 158, 159  
 Jus ad bellum, 397  
 Jus gentium, 396  
 Jus in bello, 397  
 Just war, 242  
 Just war theory, 397–401  
 Kant, Immanuel, 132, 134–135, 149, 155, 242, 
279–280, 329, 331, 394, 415–420  
 Katzenstein, Peter, 291, 293  
 Kennedy, Paul, 73  
 Keohane, Robert O., 143, 144, 147, 148, 149, 150, 
158, 162, 176–180, 297, 369  
 Kissinger, Henry A., 59, 60, 61, 74, 76  
 Knowledge-based cognitive regime theories, 146  
 Kosovo, 407  
 Krasner, Stephen, 145  
 Kratochwil, Friedrich, 291, 292, 293  
 Kugler, Jacek, 70  
 Kuhn, Thomas S., 327, 328  
 Lakatos, Imre, 156, 328  
 Lasswell, Harold, 136  
 Law of peoples, 396, 425–430  
 Law of Prize and Booty (Grotius), 49  
 Law of War and Peace (Grotius), 49, 241  
 Layne, Christopher, 42  
 LDCs, 199–200  
 League of Nations, 405  
 Lebow, Richard Ned, 157  
 Lenin, V. I., 196–197  
 Less-developed countries (LDCs), 199–200  
 Levels of analysis 
 constructivism, 292–293 
 economic structuralism, 190 
 English School, 246 
 feminism, 363 
 IR theory, 9 
 normative theory, 392–393 
 Waltz, 96–109  
 Leviathan (Hobbes), 47–48  
 Liberal feminism, 364  
 Liberalism, 12 
 change, and globalization, 160–161 
 Cobden, 135 
 criticism of, 161–164 
 decision making, 156–160 
 defined, 132 
 democratic peace, 154–156 
 economic interdependence and peace, 152–153 
 English School, compared, 249–250 
 foreign policy choice, 410–411 
 global governance, 149–152 
 integration, 137–142 
 intellectual precursors/influences, 131–137 
 interdependence, 144 
 international regimes, 144–147 
 Kant, 134–135 
 major actors and assumptions, 129–131 
 neoliberal institutionalism, 147–149 
 Schumpeter, 135 
 transnationalism, 142–143  
 Linklater, Andrew, 332, 336  
 Locke, John, 132, 280, 294, 394, 395, 402  
 Logic of appropriateness, 289–290  
 Logical positivism, 326  
 Long cycle, 69–70  
 Low politics, 40  
 Lowi, Theodore, 136  
 Luxemburg, Rosa, 197–198  
 Lyotard, Jean-François, 330, 334  
 Lysistrata (Aristophanes), 360  
 Machiavelli, Niccolò, 4, 45–46, 50, 74, 88–90, 
241, 332, 333, 361  
 Machiavellianism, 45  
 Mackinnon, Donald, 245  
 Madison, James, 4, 137  

476 
Index
 Magna Carta (England), 402  
 Man, the State and War (Walt), 7  
 Marcuse, Herbert, 331  
 Marx, Karl, 11, 189, 193–195, 331, 332, 361  
 Marxism, 189, 197–198  
 Masculinist protection, 371–379  
 Masculinity, 362, 365–366  
 Material structures, 282  
 Materialist view, 52  
 McGowan, Patrick, 206  
 Means of production, 194  
 Mearsheimer, John, 13, 42, 64, 65, 152, 298  
 Measurement of power, 53–54  
 “Melian Dialogue” (Thucydides), 46, 83–87  
 Men, Militarism, and UN Peacekeeping (Whitworth), 367  
 Metaphysics, 296  
 Metapolitics: A Brief Inquiry into the Conceptual 
Language of Political Science (Gregor), 324  
 Methodology, 2 
 positivism, 3 
 realism, 41  
 Military power balance.  See Balance of power  
 Mill, John Stuart, 133, 135, 323, 361, 395  
 Mill’s canons of causality, 323–324  
 Minorities rule, 136  
 Mitrany, David, 138, 139  
 MNCs.  See Multinational corporations (MNCs)  
 Modelski, George, 69, 70  
 Monroe Doctrine, 210  
 Montesquieu, 135  
 Montreal Protocol, 151  
 Moral relativism, 393  
  Morality, and weaponry, 400–401  
 Morgenthau, Hans J., 13, 41, 42, 47, 51–52, 61, 
65, 76, 77, 78, 162, 244, 297  
 Multilateralism, 288, 409–410  
 Multinational corporations (MNCs) 
 dependency theorists, 201 
 economic interdependence and peace, 153 
 transnationalism, 143  
 Multipolar balance of power, 62, 67  
 Murphy, Craig, 199  
 Mutually constituted agents/structures, 287  
 N -person games, 55  
 Nagasaki, 401  
 National interests, 290, 408–409  
 National level, 10 
 National self-determination, 210  
 NATO, 288  
 Natural law, 241  
 Natural rights, 395  
 Naturalistic constructivism, 292, 293–297  
 Neocolonialism, 211  
 Neoliberal institutionalism, 12, 130, 147–149  
 Neo-realist, 41  
 Neostructuralism, 208–209  
 Neurath, Otto, 326  
 Newton, Isaac, 327  
 Niebuhr, Reinhold, 244  
 Nietzsche, Friedrich, 330, 334  
 Nitze, Paul, 244  
 Nonsystemic factors, 65–68  
 Normative theory, 16–17 
 alternative perspectives, 392–397 
 armed intervention and state sovereignty, 405–410 
 foreign policy choice, 410–412 
 human rights, 402–405 
 norms, ethics and morality, 391–392 
 value choices and theory, 412–413 
 war, 397–401  
 Norms, 286  
 North Atlantic Treaty Organization (NATO), 288  
 Noumena, 279, 329  
 Nuclear primacy, 73  
 Nuclear weapons, 401  
 Nye, Joseph S., Jr., 53, 109–117, 143, 144  
 Obama, Barack, 430–436  
 Offense-defense balance, 63–64  
 Offensive realism, 63–65, 67  
 On War (Clausewitz), 49  
 One-way advantage, 201  
 Ontology, 2, 3  
 Onuf, Nicholas, 291, 292  
 Order, 240, 267–269  
 Organization theory, 66  
 Organski, A. F. K., 70  
 Origin of the Family, Private Property 
and the State, The (Engels), 361  
 Origins of Major War, The (Copeland), 66  
 Ostrom, Elinor, 176  
 Overconfidence and War (Johnson), 158  
 Overproduction, 196  
 Paradigms, 327  
 Paul of Tarsus, 132, 393  
 Peace of Augsburg (1555), 282  

Index
477
 Peace of Westphalia (1648), 59, 282  
 Peasant class, 190  
 Peloponnesian War, 42–44  
 Perception and Misperception in International 
Politics (Jarvis), 157  
 Periphery, 190, 191, 203  
 Perpetual peace, 134  
 Perspectives of international relations, 12–14  
 Phenomena, 279, 329  
 Phenomenology, 15, 322, 323, 328–331  
 Phenomenology of Spirit (Hegel), 329  
 Philosophical Investigations (Wittgenstein), 330  
 Plato, 329, 360, 397  
 Pluralist view, 248  
 Polanyi, Karl, 209  
 Polarity, balance of power, 62  
 Political economy, 191  
 Politics Among Nation (Morgenthau), 51  
 Popper, Karl, 326, 327  
 Posen, Barry, 66  
 Positive-sum game, 131, 193  
 Positivism, 3, 323–328 
 cause-effect relations, 325–328 
 defined, 337 
 Mill’s canons of causality, 323–324 
 social-contract theory, 396  
 Postcolonial theory, 365  
 Postcolonialism, 189, 209–212.  See also 
Economic structuralism  
 Postmodern constructivism, 292  
 Postmodernism 
 criticism of, 335–337 
 feminism, 365 
 major assumptions, 333–335  
 Post-structuralism, 322  
  Power, 40, 52–54  
 Power and Interdependence: World Politics 
in Transition (Keohane/Nye), 144, 147  
 Power balance.  See Balance of power  
 Power transition, 68–69  
 Power-based realist theories, 145  
 Power-transition theory, 69, 70  
 POWs, 404  
 Practices, 288  
 Prebisch, Raúl, 200  
 Prediction, theory, 5–8  
 Prince, The (Machiavelli), 45, 74  
 Prison Notebooks (Gramsci), 198  
 Prisoners of war (POWs), 404  
 Process of Government, The (Bentley), 136  
 Producing Security: Multinational Corporations, 
Globalization, and the Changing Calculus of 
Conflict (Brooks), 153  
 Progressive research program, 156  
 Proletarian revolution, 194  
 Ptolomy, 327  
 Pure types, 13  
 Quantum, 295, 296  
 Rational-choice theorizing, 41  
 Rationalism, 49, 240, 241  
 Rationality, 411–412  
 Rawls, John, 396, 411, 425–430  
 Realism, 12 
 actors and assumptions, 39–42 
 Carr, 50–51 
 change, 68–70 
 Clausewitz, 49–50 
 criticism of, 74–80 
 globalization and interdependence, 71–72 
 Grotius, 48–49 
 Hobbes, 47–48 
 intellectual precursors/influences, 42–52 
 international cooperation, 72–74 
 Machiavelli, 45–46 
 Morgenthau, 51–52 
 power, 52–54 
 system, 54–68 
 Thucydides, 42–44  
 Realists, 2  
 Realpolitik, 43, 45  
 Reconstructive positivist strategy, 6  
 Reductionism, 295  
 Reflective school, 298  
 Reformism, 197  
 Régime, 145  
 Regime theory, 147  
 Regulative rules, 285–286  
 Reification, 55  
 Relative gains, 58, 131  
 Relativism, 327  
 Representative democracy, 155  
 Research programs, 6  
 Review of International Studies, 369 
 Revolution and War (Walt), 7  
 Ricardo, David, 133  
 Rice, Condoleeza, 74  

478 
Index
 Richardson, Lewis, 7  
 Rise of the Trading State, The (Rosencrance), 152  
 Rosenau, James, 7, 19–26, 142  
 Rosencrance, Richard, 152  
 Rousseau, Jean-Jacques, 57, 93–96, 134, 135, 149, 402  
 Ruggie, John, 141, 160, 286, 291, 293  
 Rules, 285–286  
 Rummel, Rudolph, 154  
 Rusk, Dean, 244  
 Russett, Bruce, 154  
 Sapin, Burton, 156  
 Sartre, Jean-Paul, 329  
 Satisficing choice, 40  
 Schlick, Moritz, 326  
 Schumpeter, Joseph, 135  
 Schweller, Randall, 42, 76, 336  
 Scientific method, 3  
 Scowcroft, Brent, 74  
 Second Treatise on Government, 132  
 Second World, 191 
 Security dilemma, 56, 161  
 Security studies, 88–90, 348–355, 365–367  
 Self-help, 56 
 Semiperiphery, 191, 203  
 Singer, J. David, 9, 62  
 Slavery, 283  
 Smart power, 53  
 Smith, Adam, 133, 135  
 Snyder, Jack, 5 
 Snyder, Richard, 156  
 Social constructivism.  See Constructivism  
 Social contract, 48  
  Social liberalism, 133  
 Social Theory of International Politics (Wendt), 293  
 Social-contract theory, 395, 396  
 Socialist countries, 191  
 Soft power, 53, 109–117  
 Solidarist view, 248  
 Sovereign state, 48  
 Sovereignty 
 human rights, 403–405 
 humanitarian intervention criteria, 408 
 intersubjectivity, 282, 283  
 St. Augustine, 397  
 Stag hunt fable, 57–58  
 Stanton, Elizabeth Cady, 362  
 State 
 realism, and, 39–42, 76–77 
 sovereignty, 48, 282, 283, 403–405, 408.  See also 
Sovereignty  
 State and societal (national) level, 10  
 State security, 88–90  
 Statistics of Deadly Quarrels (Richardson), 7  
 Stewart, Maria, 362  
 Stoicism, 132, 393–394  
 Structural realist, 41  
 Structural transformation, 207  
 Structures, 190, 282, 284  
 Study of War, A (Wright), 7  
 Suárez, Francisco, 397  
 Subjection of Women (Mill), 361  
 Suboptimal choice, 40  
 Subsidiarity, 140  
 Swift, Jonathan, 143  
 Sylvester, Christine, 335  
 System, realism, 39, 52, 54–68  
 Tammen, Ronald L., 70  
 Taxonomies, 54  
 Terms of trade, 199  
 Territorial integrity, 283  
 Theoretical rigidity, 214  
 Theory, 4–12 
 abstraction/application, 8 
 creative, 19–26 
 explanation/prediction, 5–8 
 levels of analysis, 8–12  
 Theory building, liberalism, 162–163  
 Theory of International Politics (Waltz), 143, 294  
 “Theory of International Relations” (Waltz), 143  
 Theory of Justice, A (Rawls), 396  
 Third estate, 191  
 Third World, 189–193  
 Thompson, J. D., 150, 151  
 Thompson, Kenneth, 244, 245  
 Thompson’s matrix, 151–152  
 Thucydides, 4, 42–44, 50, 56, 59, 83–87, 246, 332  
 Tickner, J. Ann, 369, 380–385  
 Tierney, Dominic, 158, 159  
 Tocqueville, Alexis de, 137  
 Toiling (working or peasant) class, 190  
 Top-down view, 130  
 Torture, 405  
 Toulmin, Stephen, 328  
 Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus (Wittgenstein), 326  
 Traditionalists, 2  
 Transformation, 207  

Index
479
 Transition of power, 68–69  
 Transnational Relations and World Politics 
(Nye/Keohane), 143  
 Transnationalism, 142–143, 193  
 Triple transformation, 332  
 Trotsky, Leon, 197, 198  
 True, Jacqui, 251  
 Truman, David, 136 
 Twenty Years’ Crisis, The (Carr), 50–51, 74  
 UN, 367–368  
 U.N. Charter, 407  
 UNCTAD, 199–200  
 Underconsumption, 196  
 Uneven development, 191  
 Unipolarity, 63  
 United Nations (UN), 367–368  
 United Nations Conference on Trade and 
Development (UNCTAD), 199–200  
 Units of analysis 
 constructivism, 287 
 economic structuralism, 195 
 IR theory, 9 
 realism, 39  
 Universal Declaration of Human Rights, 403, 409  
 Utilitarians, 133, 395  
 Utopians, 50, 74  
 Van Evera, Stephen, 7, 66  
 Variable, 9  
 Variables, 5  
 Vasquez, John, 7  
 Verstehen, 2 
 Victimization, 4  
 Victims of Groupthink (Janis), 157  
 Vienna circle, 326  
 Vietnam War, 407  
  Vindication of the Rights of Women (Wollstonecraft), 361  
 Voluntarism 
 agent–structure problem, 12 
 balance of power, realism, 60–62 
 liberalism, 163–164  
 Vulnerability, 71–72  
 Walker, R. B. J., 292  
 Walker, Thomac C., 27–32  
 Wallerstein, Immanuel, 203, 204, 205, 207, 208, 
213, 214, 227–233  
 Walt, Stephen, 7, 13, 65, 66  
 Waltz, Kenneth N., 4, 6, 7, 8, 42, 47, 60, 61, 62, 
63, 65, 77, 78, 96–109, 143, 152, 244, 245, 
293, 294, 299, 333  
 War, 397–401 
 civil, 406–407 
 just war theory, 397–401 
 morality and weaponry, 400–401  
 War and Change in World Politics (Gilpin), 68  
 War and Gender (Goldstein), 366  
 War Puzzle, The (Vasquez), 7  
 War Trap, The (de Mesquita), 7  
 Washington, George, 46  
 Watson, Adam, 240, 245, 246, 247  
 Ways of War and Peace (Doyle), 7  
 Weaponry, 400–401  
 Weber, Max, 2, 14, 15, 45, 158, 281  
 Weldes, Jutta, 290  
 Wendt, Alexander, 78, 280, 291, 292, 293–297, 
299, 302–308 
 When Knowledge is Power (Haas), 158  
 Whitworth, Sandra, 367, 368  
 Wight, Martin, 240, 241, 242, 245, 246  
 Williams, Desmond, 245  
 Wilson, Woodrow, 210  
 Wittgenstein, Ludwig, 326, 330  
  Wohlforth, William, 6  
 Wolfers, Arnold, 42, 76, 162, 244  
 Wollstonecraft, Mary, 361  
 Women and War (Elshtain), 366  
 Working class, 190  
 World hegemony, 199  
 World of Our Making (Onuf), 291  
 World politics, 1  
 World society, 143, 240  
 World-system theory, 190, 203–207 
 political/economic/social factors, 206–207 
 system, 204–205 
 Wallerstein, 227–233  
 Wright, Quincy, 7  
 “You Just Don’t Understand: Troubled Engagements 
between Feminist and IR Theorists” (Tickner), 369  
 Young, Iris Marion, 371–379  
 Yugoslavia, 407  
 Zero-sum 
 realism, 58 
 liberalism, 131 
 economic structuralism, 193  

Terrorism
Combs, Terrorism in the Twenty-First Century, 6/e
©2011  9780205778744
Nacos, Terrorism and Counterterrorism, 4/e
©2012  9780205005802
Ethnic Conflict
Taras & Ganguly, Understanding Ethnic Conflict, 4/e
©2010  9780205742301
Research Methods
Brians, et al., Empirical Political Analysis, 8/e
©2011  9780205791217
Shively, The Craft of Political Research, 8/e
©2011  9780205791200
Supplemental Texts
Roselle & Spray, Research and Writing in International Relations
©2012  9780205060658
Snow, Cases in International Relations
©2012  9780205005826
See what we publish for these and many other 
political science courses. You can:
j Find out more about a book and order an exam copy: 
www.pearsonhighered.com/polisci.
j Preview the book now on CourseSmart: www.coursesmart
.com.
j Contact your local Pearson representative: 
www.pearsonhighered.com/replocator.
International Relations Theory
Keohane & Nye, Power & Interdependence, 4/e
©2012  9780205082919
Viotti & Kauppi, International Relations Theory, 5/e
©2012  9780205082933
Global Issues/Globalization
Hebron & Stack, Globalization, 2/e  ©2011  9780205779703
Kelleher & Klein, Global Perspectives, 4/e
©2011  9780205779055
Payne, Global Issues, 3/e  ©2011  9780205779086
International Political Economy
Balaam & Dillman, Introduction to International Political Economy, 5/e  
©2011  9780205791385
Cohn, Global Political Economy, 6/e  ©2012  9780205075836
Oatley, International Political Economy, 5/e
©2012 9780205060634
Oatley, Debates in International Political Economy 
©2012  9780205060610
International Organizations
Pease, International Organizations, 5/e  ©2012  9780205075874
International Law
Von Glahn & Taulbee, Law Among Nations, 9/e
©2010  9780205746897
American Foreign Policy
Hastedt, American Foreign Policy, 6/e  ©2011 9780205791224
National Security
Snow, National Security in a New Era, 4/e
©2011  9780205779031
Solutions for All Your Courses
The Newest Books from Longman

