
Catarina I. Reis
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal
Marisa da Silva Maximiano
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal
Internet of Things and 
Advanced Application in 
Healthcare
A volume in the Advances in 
Medical Technologies and 
Clinical Practice (AMTCP) 
Book Series 

Published in the United States of America by
IGI Global
Medical Information Science Reference (an imprint of IGI Global)
701 E. Chocolate Avenue
Hershey PA 17033
Tel: 717-533-8845
Fax:  717-533-8661 
E-mail: cust@igi-global.com
Web site: http://www.igi-global.com
Copyright © 2017 by IGI Global.  All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced, stored or distributed in any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, including 
photocopying, without written permission from the publisher.
Product or company names used in this set are for identification purposes only. Inclusion of the 
names of the products or companies does not indicate a claim of ownership by IGI Global of the 
trademark or registered trademark.
	
	
	
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
British Cataloguing in Publication Data
A Cataloguing in Publication record for this book is available from the British Library.
All work contributed to this book is new, previously-unpublished material. The views expressed in 
this book are those of the authors, but not necessarily of the publisher.
Names: Reis, Catarina, 1976- editor. | Silva Maximiano, Marisa da, 1979- 
   editor. 
Title: Internet of things and advanced application in healthcare / Catarina  
   Reis and Marisa da Silva Maximiano, editors. 
Description: Hershey, PA : Medical Information Science Reference, [2017] |  
   Includes bibliographical references and index. 
Identifiers: LCCN 2016043804| ISBN 9781522518204 (hardcover) | ISBN  
   9781522518211 (ebook) 
Subjects: | MESH: Medical Informatics Applications | Internet--trends |  
   Electronics, Medical--trends | Remote Sensing Technology--trends 
Classification: LCC R855.3 | NLM W 26.55.C7 | DDC 610.285--dc23 LC record available at 
https://lccn.loc.gov/2016043804 
 
This book is published in the IGI Global book series Advances in Medical Technologies and 
Clinical Practice (AMTCP) (ISSN: 2327-9354; eISSN: 2327-9370)

Advances 
in Medical 
Technologies 
and Clinical 
Practice (AMTCP) 
Book Series
IGI Global is currently accepting 
manuscripts for publication within this 
series. To submit a proposal for a volume in 
this series, please contact our Acquisition 
Editors at Acquisitions@igi-global.com or 
visit: http://www.igi-global.com/publish/.
Coverage
The Advances in Medical Technologies and Clinical Practice  (AMTCP) Book Series (ISSN 2327-9354) is 
published by IGI Global, 701 E. Chocolate Avenue, Hershey, PA 17033-1240, USA, www.igi-global.com. This 
series is composed of titles available for purchase individually; each title is edited to be contextually exclusive 
from any other title within the series. For pricing and ordering information please visit http://www.igi-global.
com/book-series/advances-medical-technologies-clinical-practice/73682. Postmaster: Send all address changes to 
above address. Copyright © 2017 IGI Global. All rights, including translation in other languages reserved by the 
publisher. No part of this series may be reproduced or used in any form or by any means – graphics, electronic, 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording, taping, or information and retrieval systems – without written 
permission from the publisher, except for non commercial, educational use, including classroom teaching purposes. 
The views expressed in this series are those of the authors, but not necessarily of IGI Global.
Mission
ISSN:2327-9354 
 EISSN:2327-9370
Medical technological innovation continues to provide avenues of research for faster 
and safer diagnosis and treatments for patients. Practitioners must stay up to date with 
these latest advancements to provide the best care for nursing and clinical practices.
The Advances in Medical Technologies and Clinical Practice (AMTCP) Book 
Series brings together the most recent research on the latest technology used in areas 
of nursing informatics, clinical technology, biomedicine, diagnostic technologies, 
and more. Researchers, students, and practitioners in this field will benefit from this 
fundamental coverage on the use of technology in clinical practices.
•	Diagnostic Technologies
•	Biometrics
•	E-Health
•	Clinical Studies
•	Clinical Nutrition
•	Biomechanics
•	Telemedicine
•	Nursing Informatics
•	Patient-Centered Care
•	Medical Informatics

Titles in this Series
For a list of additional titles in this series, please visit: www.igi-global.com
Integrating Biologically-Inspired Nanotechnology into Medical Practice
B.K. Nayak (K.M. Centre for Post Graduate Studies, India) Anima Nanda (Sathyabama 
University, India) and M. Amin Bhat (Sathyabama University, India) 
Medical Information Science Reference • copyright 2017 • 394pp • H/C (ISBN: 
9781522506102) • US $190.00 (our price)
Recent Advances in Drug Delivery Technology
Raj K. Keservani (Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki Vishwavidyalaya, India) Anil K. Sharma (Delhi 
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research, India) and Rajesh Kumar Kesharwani 
(National Institute of Technology, Warangal, India) 
Medical Information Science Reference • copyright 2017 • 510pp • H/C (ISBN: 
9781522507543) • US $215.00 (our price)
Advancing Medicine through Nanotechnology and Nanomechanics Applications
Keka Talukdar (Nadiha High School, India) Mayank Bhushan (Pondicherry University, 
India) and Anil Shantappa Malipatil (Guru Nanak Dev Engineering College – Bidar, India) 
Medical Information Science Reference • copyright 2017 • 359pp • H/C (ISBN: 
9781522510437) • US $195.00 (our price)
Pattern and Data Analysis in Healthcare Settings
Vivek Tiwari (Maulana Azad National Institute of Technology, India) Basant Tiwari (Devi 
Ahilya University, India) Ramjeevan Singh Thakur (Maulana Azad National Institute of 
Technology, India) and Shailendra Gupta (AISECT University, India) 
Medical Information Science Reference • copyright 2017 • 358pp • H/C (ISBN: 
9781522505365) • US $215.00 (our price)
Novel Approaches for Drug Delivery
Raj K. Keservani (Rajiv Gandhi Proudyogiki Vishwavidyalaya, India) Anil K. Sharma (Delhi 
Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences and Research, India) and Rajesh Kumar Kesharwani 
(National Institute of Technology, Warangal, India) 
Medical Information Science Reference • copyright 2017 • 515pp • H/C (ISBN: 
9781522507512) • US $210.00 (our price)
Emerging Research in the Analysis and Modeling of Gene Regulatory Networks
Ivan V. Ivanov (Texas A&M University, USA) Xiaoning Qian (Texas A&M University, 
USA) and Ranadip Pal (Texas Tech University, USA) 
Medical Information Science Reference • copyright 2016 • 418pp • H/C (ISBN: 
9781522503538) • US $195.00 (our price)
701 E. Chocolate Ave., Hershey, PA 17033
Order online at www.igi-global.com or call 717-533-8845 x100
To place a standing order for titles released in this series, 
contact: cust@igi-global.com
Mon-Fri 8:00 am - 5:00 pm (est) or fax 24 hours a day 717-533-8661

Preface;..................................................................................................................xii;
Acknowledgment;...............................................................................................xvii;
Chapter 1;
Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems;..............................................1;
Amina Hameur Laine;, University of Constantine 2, Algeria;
Samiha Brahimi;, University of Constantine 2, Algeria;
Chapter 2;
The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with 
Disabilities: Applications, Trends, and Issues;......................................................32;
Hwa Lee;, Bradley University, USA;
Chapter 3;
IoT for Ambient Assisted Living: Care4Me – A Healthcare Support System;......66;
Fulvio Corno;, Politecnico di Torino, Italy;
Luigi De Russis;, Politecnico di Torino, Italy;
Alberto Monge Roffarello;, Politecnico di Torino, Italy;
Chapter 4;
Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems;.............................98;
Li Xie;, Thin Film Electronics ASA, Sweden;
Lirong Zheng;, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden;
Geng Yang;, Zhejiang University, China;
Chapter 5;
Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things;....................................138;
Ilze Black;, Queen Mary University of London, UK;
Graham White;, Queen Mary University of London, UK;
Table of Contents

Chapter 6;
Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-
Based SOA 2.0;....................................................................................................170;
Juan Boubeta-Puig;, University of Cádiz, Spain;
Guadalupe Ortiz;, University of Cádiz, Spain;
Inmaculada Medina-Bulo;, University of Cádiz, Spain;
Chapter 7;
The Role of Time in Health IoT;..........................................................................197;
Lambert Spaanenburg;, Comoray AB, Sweden;
Chapter 8;
Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes;......................................214;
Dulce Domingos;, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal;
Ana Respício;, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal;
Ricardo Martinho;, Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal;
Chapter 9;
Thing Theory: Connecting Humans to Smart Healthcare;..................................249;
Sally A. Applin;, University of Kent – Canterbury, UK;
Michael D. Fischer;, University of Kent – Canterbury, UK;
Chapter 10;
Social Internet of Things in Healthcare: From Things to Social Things in 
Internet of Things;................................................................................................266;
Cristina Elena Turcu;, University of Suceava, Romania;
Corneliu Octavian Turcu;, University of Suceava, Romania;
Compilation of References;...............................................................................296;
About the Contributors;....................................................................................339;
Index;...................................................................................................................346;

Preface;..................................................................................................................xii;
Acknowledgment;...............................................................................................xvii;
Chapter 1;
Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems;..............................................1;
Amina Hameur Laine;, University of Constantine 2, Algeria;
Samiha Brahimi;, University of Constantine 2, Algeria;
This chapter is consecrated to provide background information that encompass the 
basic concepts of context-aware pervasive computing systems. The major challenges 
that researchers need to consider when conducting research in context-aware pervasive 
computing systems and the most interesting approaches that can be used in order 
to deal with these challenges are reviewed. This chapter describes also the basic 
design principles of context-aware pervasive systems and depicts different models 
for representing and reasoning upon contextual information and an overview of the 
most known development frameworks of context-aware systems and application 
adaptation is presented too. Moreover, this chapter describes the usefulness of 
using context-awareness in ubiquitous healthcare domain and the major challenges 
in using context-awareness in this domain. The well-known works that have been 
proposed in the field of Ubiquitous healthcare are discussed too.
;
Chapter 2;
The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with 
Disabilities: Applications, Trends, and Issues;......................................................32;
Hwa Lee;, Bradley University, USA;
With the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the past two decades have seen 
a proliferation of Assistive Technology (AT) and its enabling impact on the lives 
of people with disabilities in the areas of accessing information, communication, 
and daily living activities. Due to recent emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), 
the fields of rehabilitation, healthcare, and education are challenged to incorporate 
Detailed Table of Contents

the IoT applications into current AT services. While IoT applications continue to 
be developed and integrated into AT, they are still at a primitive stage where clear 
guidelines are yet to be developed and benefits are yet to be substantiated to ensure 
the quality of lives of people with disabilities. This chapter provides an overview 
of the IoT and AT integrated applications based on the building blocks of the IoT, 
along with recent trends and issues relevant to accessing technology for people 
with disabilities.
;
Chapter 3;
IoT for Ambient Assisted Living: Care4Me – A Healthcare Support System;......66;
Fulvio Corno;, Politecnico di Torino, Italy;
Luigi De Russis;, Politecnico di Torino, Italy;
Alberto Monge Roffarello;, Politecnico di Torino, Italy;
Research activities on healthcare support systems mainly focus on people in their 
own homes or nurses and doctors in hospitals. A limited amount of research aims 
at supporting caregivers that work with people with disabilities in assisted living 
facilities (ALFs). This chapter explores and applies the Internet of Things to the 
ALF context. In particular, it presents the design, the implementation, and the 
experimental evaluation of Care4Me, a system supporting the daily activities of 
assistants. The requirements for designing and implementing Care4Me derive 
from a literature analysis and from a user study. The solution combines wearable 
and mobile technologies. With this healthcare support system, caregivers can be 
automatically alerted of potentially hazardous situations. Furthermore, inhabitants 
can require assistance instantly and from any point of the facility. The system was 
evaluated in two ways. The authors performed a functional test with a group of 
professional caregivers, and deployed the system in an ALF in Italy, collecting the 
opinions of caregivers and inhabitants.
;
Chapter 4;
Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems;.............................98;
Li Xie;, Thin Film Electronics ASA, Sweden;
Lirong Zheng;, Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden;
Geng Yang;, Zhejiang University, China;
Personalized and pervasive healthcare devices help seamlessly integrate healthcare 
and wellness into the daily life, independent of time and space. Silicon Integrated 
Circuit (IC) has been used in many advanced healthcare applications due to the 
compact size and ultra-low power consumption. Meanwhile, printed electronics 
(PE) is considered as a promising approach enabling cost-effective manufacturing of 
thin, flexible, and light-weight devices. A hybrid integration of IC and PE provides 
a new solution for the future wearable healthcare devices. In this chapter, firstly a 

customized bio-sensing IC is demonstrated, which can detect and process various 
bio-signals; secondly, the feasibility and performance of using inkjet printing 
technology as enabling technology has been examined for the fabrication of flexible 
bio-sensing devices. Finally, a wearable and flexible Bio-Patch is presented by 
leveraging hybrid integration of PE and bio-sensing IC. In-vivo test results show 
that the flexible Bio-Patch provides high quality ECG signal comparable with the 
one gained by bedside ECG machine.;
Chapter 5;
Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things;....................................138;
Ilze Black;, Queen Mary University of London, UK;
Graham White;, Queen Mary University of London, UK;
This chapter discusses the emergence of the Internet of Things, using a case study 
of a citizen science initiative, focusing in particular on issues involved in measuring 
air quality. The core of the citizen science initiative was formed by a world-wide 
network of early adaptors of the Internet of Things who, motivated by public health 
issues, set out to create widely available tools for air quality measuring. With these 
tools, they established a global, citizen-led, air quality measurement network. 
Besides highlighting a number of social and technological issues which are involve 
any such enterprise, this chapter engages with the discourse surrounding the use 
of IoT in collective sensing projects. Two questions are salient here. Firstly, can 
IoT technology be used in a citizen science context to monitor air quality? And 
secondly, does the construction of these devices lead to a successful mobilisation 
around issues of air quality?;
Chapter 6;
Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-
Based SOA 2.0;....................................................................................................170;
Juan Boubeta-Puig;, University of Cádiz, Spain;
Guadalupe Ortiz;, University of Cádiz, Spain;
Inmaculada Medina-Bulo;, University of Cádiz, Spain;
Air quality has been a recurrent issue in recent years since it can seriously impact 
citizens’ health and their life quality. Nowadays, the different ways to provide end 
users with air quality information do not provide real-time data and lack accessibility. 
Besides, they do not automatically adapt to the particular circumstances of each 
citizen. In this chapter, an event-driven service-oriented architecture is proposed 
for detecting air quality changes in real time as well as making this information 
available to end users in a user-friendly way, notifying them with customized alerts 
upon detecting any potentially hazardous level for their health, thereby helping to 
prevent health risks.;

Chapter 7;
The Role of Time in Health IoT;..........................................................................197;
Lambert Spaanenburg;, Comoray AB, Sweden;
As the biological processes in the body change constantly, comparable measurements 
should be taken simultaneously in time and place. In practice, this is hard to achieve. 
Synchronicity is required to certify medical accuracy for a new device by reference to 
a certified one. In a typical health IoT, synchronicity cannot be enforced procedurally 
and timing needs to be part of the network architecture. Popular examples are in 
blood pressure measurement. Putting the blood flow in a known pinch-off situation 
performs synchronization. But this principle cannot be extended to other non-invasive 
measurements. Hence the chapter proposes to synchronize on basis of the heart rate 
extracted from the blood flow at arbitrary positions on the body. This models the 
blood flow in the body and relates all to the rhythm of the heart. It brings existing 
phenomena into a single, multi-level model that allows wireless networked wearables 
into a single health-monitoring scheme. ;
Chapter 8;
Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes;......................................214;
Dulce Domingos;, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal;
Ana Respício;, Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal;
Ricardo Martinho;, Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal;
BPMN (Business Process Model and Notation) has become the de-facto business 
process modelling language standard. Healthcare processes have been increasingly 
incorporating participants other than humans, including Internet of Things (IoT) 
physical devices such as biomedical sensors or patient electronic tags. Due to its 
critical requirements, IoT-aware healthcare processes justify the relevance of Quality 
of Services aspects, such as reliability, availability, and cost, among others. This 
chapter focuses on reliability and proposes to use the Stochastic Workflow Reduction 
(SWR) method to calculate the reliability of IoT-aware BPMN healthcare processes. In 
addition, the chapter proposes a BPMN language extension to provide processes with 
reliability information. This way, at design time, modellers can analyse alternatives 
and, at run time, reliability information can be used to select participants, execute 
services, or monitor process executions. The proposal is applied to an Ambient 
Assisted Living system use case, a rich example of an IoT-aware healthcare process.;

Chapter 9;
Thing Theory: Connecting Humans to Smart Healthcare;..................................249;
Sally A. Applin;, University of Kent – Canterbury, UK;
Michael D. Fischer;, University of Kent – Canterbury, UK;
As healthcare professionals and others embrace the Internet of Things (IoT) and 
smart environment paradigms, developers will bear the brunt of constructing the IT 
relationships within these, making sense of the big data produced as a result, and 
managing the relationships between people and technologies. This chapter explores 
how PolySocial Reality (PoSR), a framework for representing how people, devices 
and communication technologies interact, can be applied to developing use cases 
combining IoT and smart environment paradigms, giving special consideration to the 
nature of location-aware messaging from sensors and the resultant data collection 
in a healthcare environment. Based on this discussion, the authors suggest ways to 
enable more robust intra-sensor messaging through leveraging social awareness by 
software agents applied in carefully considered healthcare contexts.
;
Chapter 10;
Social Internet of Things in Healthcare: From Things to Social Things in 
Internet of Things;................................................................................................266;
Cristina Elena Turcu;, University of Suceava, Romania;
Corneliu Octavian Turcu;, University of Suceava, Romania;
This chapter presents a future vision for healthcare, which will involve smart devices, 
Internet of Things, and social networks, that make this vision a reality. The authors 
present the necessary background by introducing the Social Internet of Things 
paradigm. Agent technology seems to be a promising approach in the adoption of 
the Social Internet of Things in collaborative environments with increased autonomy 
and agility, like healthcare is. Also, it is examined challenges to the adoption of the 
Social Internet of Things in healthcare in order to facilitate new applications and 
services in more effective and efficient ways.
;
Compilation of References;...............................................................................296;
About the Contributors;....................................................................................339;
Index;...................................................................................................................346;

xii  
Preface
The National Intelligence Council (National Intelligence Council, 2008) predicted 
that “everyday things” such as food packages, furniture, and paper documents will 
have their own internet nodes by 2025. And, according to Cisco, by 2030 there will 
be 500 billion connected devices to the Internet (CISCO, 2016).
The Internet of Things (IoT) will allow people and things to be connected any-
time, anyplace, with anything and anyone, ideally using any path or network, and 
any service. This can and will be accomplished through a worldwide network of 
interconnected objects uniquely addressable, based on standard communication 
protocols (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, The Internet of Things: A survey, 2010). Ad-
vances in the underlying technology are providing opportunities for new applica-
tions to evolve and, at the same time, their widespread use, is generating concerns 
that are quite distinct from the ones currently addressed on the Internet, namely the 
ones regarding security issues (Sundmaeker, Guillemin, Friess, & Woelfflé, 2010; 
Gubbi, Buyya, Marusic, & Palaniswami, 2013).
IoT aims to improve the quality of human life by automating some of the basic 
tasks that humans must perform. Creating and deploying smart objects allows offices, 
homes, industrial plants or even leisure environments to become “intelligent” and 
smart environments. These smart environments and spaces and self-aware things 
will largely contribute to the improvement of the general population’s healthcare 
and wellbeing (Miller, 2015).
As the IoT continues to develop, new opportunities that result in applications 
for the healthcare domain can be grouped into tracing and tracking of objects and 
people (ubiquitous identification of patients, health professionals, equipment and 
medicine), identification and authentication of people, automatic data collection and 
sensing (continuous communication improvements) (Islam, Kwak, Kabir, Hossain, 
& Kwak, 2015), among others.
Technology is changing and improving industry, with a significant potential and 
impact in healthcare. An extension of these emerging new approaches is tracking, 
which identifies a person or object in motion. For instance, patient identification 
enables an adequate and updated electronic medical record and allows for the re-

  xiii
duction of harmful incidents such as wrong drug, or dose, or procedure. Sensors 
and multiple wireless technologies will enable real-time information monitoring 
on patient health indicators. Currently they can be applied to both inpatient and 
outpatient care, reaching for patients when in mobility and ensuring personalized 
medicine (Baldauf, Dustdar, & Rosenberg, 2007). Whereas, automatic data collec-
tion aims to reduce the amount of form processing time and process automation.
In fact, IoT proposes assisted living scenarios where sensors support the moni-
toring environment to ensure that both patients and the elderly have the desired life 
quality (Rashidi & Mihailidis, 2013; Calvaresi, et al., 2016). Furthermore, solutions 
that include wearables enables people to call for immediate assistance and provide 
real-time data collection. This is becoming a fashion trend that will be able to im-
prove health quality and wellbeing (Gatzoulis & Iakovidis, 2007; Hiremath, Yang, 
& Mankodiya, 2014).
Heating systems that adapt to custom preferences and to weather conditions, energy 
savers that switch off electrical equipment when they are not needed, improve our 
wellness and well-being. In the last decades, air quality issues are gaining exposure 
and the overall population is more conscious of the burden and health impact of the 
air pollution (World Health Organization, 2016; Kullenberg & Kasperowski, 2016).
On the other hand, spending some leisure time at a museum or at the gym is an 
experience that can be improved with the use of IoT. This also relates to the personal 
and social domain where you establish and maintain relationships with friends. 
The potential impact that IoT has in our everyday life must be measured in terms 
of personal needs and social interaction (Atzori, Iera, Morabito, & Nitti, 2012).
ORGANIZATION OF THE BOOK
The book is organized into 10 chapters. A brief description of each of the chapters 
follows:
Chapter 1 reviews context-aware pervasive computing systems and ubiquitous 
healthcare systems. Smart systems include smart devices that need to adapt them-
selves automatically in response to a dynamic change of context. Some key chal-
lenges in the subject are presented and include topics such as context acquisition, 
modelling and reasoning, amongst others. The basic principles behind the design of 
such systems are presented, including several models for representing and reasoning 
upon contextual information and some frameworks specifically used for context-
aware applications.
Chapter 2 analyzes the impact of current IoT in the current proliferation of As-
sistive Technology (AT). Some clear guidelines and the specific benefits to ensure 
the quality of lives of people with disabilities are yet to be developed and integrated 

xiv  
in existing and future applications. Furthermore, recent trends and issues relevant 
to accessing technology for people with disabilities, are provided.
Chapter 3 presents Care4Me, an Assisted Living Facility (ALF) system, that 
supports the daily activities of caregivers that work with people with disabilities. 
This solution combines wearables with mobile technologies, and enables inhabitants 
to call for immediate assistance (anywhere and at any time) and provides automatic 
alerts of potential hazardous situations to assistants. Care4Me was assessed in the 
field, both by professional caregivers and inhabitants of an ALF in Italy.
Chapter 4 reviews the current wearable healthcare systems. Furthermore, the 
authors present existing customized integrated circuits (IC) for bio-sensing and 
distinct printed electrodes (PE) available nowadays. Then, a hybrid integration of 
flexible circuits, joining bio-sensing IC with PE assumes the shape of a Bio-Patch, 
whose implementation is provided. This wearable and flexible Bio-Patch provides 
an accurate electrocardiography (ECG) signal, similar to the one measured by a 
bedside machine.
Chapter 5 provides a case study of a citizen science initiative that uses the Inter-
net of Things (IoT) to measure air quality. The citizen’s network is formed by early 
adopters of the IoT that created tools available for measuring air quality. Several 
issues regarding motivation, data reliability and accuracy, and the effective use of 
the results are provided to question the success of this type of citizen mobilization 
around public health concerns.
Chapter 6 also approaches the air quality issue bringing it to the next level. By 
designing an integrated system that has an architecture that includes IoT as the data 
source, uses Complex Event Processing (CEP) and a Service Oriented Architecture 
(SOA) to detect certain event patterns and send real-time alerts to the interested par-
ties. A case study uses simulated sensors, made available through ThingSpeak, then 
published through a Mule Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) application that converts 
them into events sent to Esper, the CEP engine responsible for the real-time alerts.
Chapter 7 introduces one of the major concerns regarding IoT: synchronicity. 
Particularly in healthcare contexts, synchronicity is fundamental to certify medical 
accuracy when considering a new device. The chapter presents a model to measure 
blood pressure, using the heart rate collected from arbitrary positions on the body, 
and then relating the data to the rhythm of the heart. Thus, allowing wireless network 
wearables to become a single health-monitoring scheme.
Chapter 8 analyzes the reliability of services provided in healthcare contexts 
and introduces an extension to the Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) 
that provides reliability information to healthcare processes. Thus, designers of 
IoT based systems are able to make informed decisions and choose from a set of 
alternatives, using reliability information to select participants, execute services or 

  xv
monitor process executions. The proposal is applied to an Ambient Assisted Living 
system, with an IoT-aware healthcare process.
Chapter 9 depicts a framework that represents how people, devices and com-
munication technologies can interact, the PolySocial Reality (PoSR) framework. 
Developing systems that include IoT and smart environment paradigms, with 
location-aware messaging from sensors, can be ease by the direct application of this 
framework. In specific healthcare contexts, leveraging social awareness of software 
agents allows a more robust intra-sensor messaging.
Chapter 10 presents the Social Internet of Things (SIoT) paradigm and its ap-
plication to the healthcare context. Through the usage of multi-agent technology, it 
is possible to develop a new generation of applications where the human-to-device 
social relationship is explored. A description of a specific condition, asthma, is 
presented to show how the access to exact and real-time information enable patients 
to be more aware of their close environment. Thus, with SIoT it becomes possible 
to address several challenges to improve efficiency in healthcare.
Catarina I. Reis
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal
Marisa da Silva Maximiano
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal
REFERENCES
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2010). The internet of things: A survey. Com-
puter Networks, 54(15), 2787–2805. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010
Atzori, L., Iera, A., Morabito, G., & Nitti, M. (2012). The social internet of things 
(SIoT) – When social networks meet the internet of things: Concept, architecture and 
network characterization. Computer Networks, 56(16), 3594–3608. doi:10.1016/j.
comnet.2012.07.010
Baldauf, M., Dustdar, S., & Rosenberg, F. (2007). A survey on context-aware sys-
tems. International Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing, 2(4), 263–277. 
doi:10.1504/IJAHUC.2007.014070
Calvaresi, D., Cesarini, D., Sernani, P., Marinoni, M., Dragoni, A. F., & Sturm, A. 
(2016). Exploring the ambient assisted living domain: a systematic review. Journal 
of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 1-19.

xvi  
CISCO. (2016, Jan 1). At-a-glance: Internet of things. Retrieved from http://
www.cisco.com/c/dam/en/us/products/collateral/se/internet-of-things/at-a-glance-
c45-731471.pdf
Gatzoulis, L., & Iakovidis, I. (2007). Wearable and Portable eHealth Systems. 
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, 26(5), 51–56. doi:10.1109/
EMB.2007.901787 PMID:17941323
Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., & Palaniswami, M. (2013). Internet of Things 
(IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Future Generation 
Computer Systems, 29(7), 1645–1660. doi:10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010
Hiremath, S., Yang, G., & Mankodiya, K. (2014). Wearable internet of things: 
Concept, architectural components and promises for person-centered healthcare.4th 
International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare (Mobi-
Health2014) (pp. 304-307). Athens: IEEE. doi:10.4108/icst.mobihealth.2014.257440
Islam, S. R., Kwak, D., Kabir, H., Hossain, M., & Kwak, K.-S. (2015). The inter-
net of things for health care: A comprehensive survey. IEEE Access, 3, 678–708. 
doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2015.2437951
Kullenberg, C., & Kasperowski, D. (2016). What is citizen science? A sciento-
metric meta-analysis. PLoS ONE, 11(1), 1–16. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0147152 
PMID:26766577
Miller, M. (2015). The internet of things: How smart TVs, smart cars, smart homes, 
and smart cities are changing the world. Pearson Education.
National Intelligence Council. (2008). Six technologies with potential impacts on 
US interests out to 2025. National Intelligence Council.
Rashidi, P., & Mihailidis, A. (2013). A survey on ambient-assisted living tools for 
older adults. Biomedical and Health Informatics, 17(3), 579–590. doi:10.1109/
JBHI.2012.2234129 PMID:24592460
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., & Woelfflé, S. (2010). Vision and chal-
lenges for realizing the internet of things. Brussels: CERP-IoT – Cluster of European 
Research Projects on the Internet of Things.
World Health Organization. (2016, September 27). Burden of disease from ambient 
and household air pollution. Retrieved September 27, 2016, from World Health 
Organization: http://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases/en/

Acknowledgment
  xvii
The editing task that now reaches its final phase involves the organization and in-
tegration of the contents within the book, contacts with authors and reviewers, and 
the discussion of different experiences.
As editors, we would like to acknowledge the help of all the people involved in this 
project and, more specifically, to the authors and reviewers that took part in the 
review process. Likewise, the edition of this book would not have become a reality 
without the ongoing professional support of the team of professionals of IGI-Global.
The editors would like to thank each one of the authors for their contributions. 
Our sincere gratitude goes to the chapters’ authors who contributed their time and 
expertise to this book.
Finally, the editors wish to acknowledge the valuable insights of the reviewers re-
garding the improvement of quality, coherence, and content presentation of chapters. 
Several authors also served as referees; we highly appreciate their double task.
A special greeting to those authors that submitted work to contribute to this project, 
some with very high quality chapter proposals and scientific merit, but unfortunately, 
due to several constraints could not have seen their work published.
Thank you.
Catarina I. Reis
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal
Marisa da Silva Maximiano
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch001
Chapter 1
1 
Background on 
Context-Aware 
Computing Systems
ABSTRACT
This chapter is consecrated to provide background information that encompass the 
basic concepts of context-aware pervasive computing systems. The major challenges 
that researchers need to consider when conducting research in context-aware per-
vasive computing systems and the most interesting approaches that can be used in 
order to deal with these challenges are reviewed. This chapter describes also the 
basic design principles of context-aware pervasive systems and depicts different 
models for representing and reasoning upon contextual information and an overview 
of the most known development frameworks of context-aware systems and applica-
tion adaptation is presented too. Moreover, this chapter describes the usefulness of 
using context-awareness in ubiquitous healthcare domain and the major challenges 
in using context-awareness in this domain. The well-known works that have been 
proposed in the field of Ubiquitous healthcare are discussed too.
Amina Hameur Laine
University of Constantine 2, Algeria
Samiha Brahimi
University of Constantine 2, Algeria

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
2
INTRODUCTION
Nowadays, with Ambient Intelligence paradigm (AmI)(Marzano, 2003) we are sur-
rounded by a multitude of embedded and smart devices, including sensors, actua-
tors, smart phones, tablets, cameras, etc. which interact and exchange information 
using wireless communication technology. This paradigm involves the fields of 
ubiquitous/pervasive computing (Weiser, 1991) and context awareness (B. N. Schilit 
& Theimer, 1994). The later has been recognized as an important characteristic of 
pervasive systems where a multitude of smart devices and sensors collects data, 
interact, exchange information and provide various significant services in our life 
(Agoston, Ueda, & Nishimura, 2000): controlling our home, monitoring our health, 
alerting in case of dangerous conditions, assisting us in driving, supervising our 
children on their way to school, organizing our shopping lists and taking care of 
time-tabling. Context-aware applications are becoming increasingly more prevalent 
and can be found in the areas of wearable computing, mobile computing, robotics, 
adaptive, intelligent user interfaces, augmented reality, adaptive computing and 
intelligent environments. Implementing a context-aware system requires addressing 
many issues still faced with enormous challenges in both research and practice. The 
most interesting challenges are: How to acquire context, how to represent context, 
and how to reason upon context. Also, the adaptation to the changing computing 
and networking environment is a major challenge. Besides, the complexity of this 
kind of systems is steadily increasing.
Ubiquitous or pervasive healthcare (U-Healthcare) (J.-H. Kim et al., 2009) 
represents one of the main application areas of pervasive computing that provides 
several services; such as monitoring health and wellbeing of patients anytime and 
anywhere by using intelligent environment technologies. With the progress of ubiq-
uitous technologies, it is becoming possible to provide more smart and pervasive 
healthcare services in a smart home environment. These services allow patients to 
live safely and independently in their own homes. In order to provide such services, 
those systems must be able to learn about their environment over time, and react 
rapidly even if they encounter a new situation in which behavioural adaptation is 
required. This means that they have to adapt their behaviour to the dynamic change of 
context. In computer science, this kind of concern is known as “context-awareness”.
This chapter provides background information regarding the most important 
aspects related to the context-aware pervasive computing and ubiquitous healthcare 
systems. Several definitions existing in literature for both pervasive computing 
systems and context-aware computing systems are given in the second section. The 
third section presents an overview of the most important challenges facing the design 
and the development of this kind of systems. In the same section, well-known works 
related to this field are discussed. Finally the last section concludes the chapter.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
3
Pervasive/Ubiquitous Computing
The most profound technologies are those that disappear. They weave themselves 
into the fabric of everyday life until they are indistinguishable from it.
These words were written by Mark Weiser, in his paper “The Computer for the 21st 
Century” (Weiser, 1991) in order to describe his new vision of an embedded comput-
ing world. Within this world computers would be an invisible part of our everyday 
lives; and computing was going to change from desktop, personal computing to a 
more distributed, mobile and embedded form.
Weiser and his colleagues have used the terms “ubiquitous” and “pervasive” 
computing to describe their vision.
What Do the Terms ‘Pervasive’ and ‘Ubiquitous’ Mean?
Although in computer science community and among the scientists, ubiquitous 
computing and pervasive computing are used interchangeably, there is a nuance 
between them.
Ubiquitous means “existing or being everywhere”, while pervasive means 
“spread throughout”1.
In computing terms, those seem like somewhat similar concepts. Ubiquitous 
computing would be everywhere, and pervasive computing would be in all parts 
of your life. According to (McCrory, 2000), pervasive computing involves devices 
like small handhelds, easy-to-use devices, through which we will be able to get 
information on anything and everything. That’s the sort of thing that Web-enabled 
cell phones promise. Ubiquitous computing, though, eschews our having to use 
computers at all. Instead, it is computing in the background, with technology em-
bedded in the things we already use. That might be a car navigation system that, 
by accessing satellite pictures, alerts us to a traffic jam ahead, or an oven that shuts 
off when our food is cooked.
According to (Dillon, 2006), ubiquitous computing is best considered as the in-
visible underlying framework, the embedded systems, networks and displays found 
everywhere, allowing us to ‘plug-and-play’ devices and tools. Pervasive computing, 
on the other hand, would be all the physical parts of our life; our mobile phone, 
hand-held computer or our smart jacket, which changes with our body temperature. 
Pervasive computing therefore refers to the distributed set of tools within our envi-
ronment, through which we access information anytime and anywhere.
As (Weiser, 1991), the authors of this chapter consider that “Pervasive comput-
ing” and Ubiquitous computing” refer to the same thing, so those terms are used 
interchangeably.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
4
Many aspects of Weiser’s visions have already become reality in the past two 
decades. Furthermore, one of his primary ideas has recently evolved into a more 
general paradigm known as context awareness. Detailed information about context-
aware computing is given in the following section.
Context-Aware Computing
Context-aware computing is a mobile computing paradigm in which applications 
can discover and take advantage of contextual information such as user location, 
time of day, neighbouring users and devices, user activity, and user environment 
(Musumba & Nyongesa, 2013).
The notion of context-awareness has been recognized as an important character-
istic of pervasive systems where a multitude of smart devices and sensors collects 
data, interact and exchange information and provide several services. The concept 
of context-awareness has increasingly gained importance in the area of distributed 
systems since the 90’s. Since that, it seemed to be a promising solution for a lot of 
problems engendered by the use of mobile terminals in ever-changing environments 
(Tahir, 2013).
Context and Context-Awareness
Several definitions are proposed for the terms “context and context-aware computing”.
Schilit and Theimer were first to define context and context-awareness (in their 
1994’s paper (B. N. Schilit & Theimer, 1994)) as the ability of applications to discover 
and react to changes in the environment (i.e., location, identity of people, nearby 
devices, and objects) they are situated in. Two months later, (B. Schilit, Adams, & 
Want, 1994) stated that context has three important aspects consisting of responses 
to the questions: Where are you? Who are with you? And what resources are nearby 
you? They define context as constantly changing environment of people, places, 
and devices. They defined context-aware application as an application that changes 
or adapts its behaviour dynamically, based on the context of application and user.
In 1998, Dey (Dey, Abowd, & Wood, 1998) initially defined context as any in-
formation about the user and the environment that can be used to enhance the user’s 
experiences. This included data such as: the user’s physical, social, emotional, or 
informational state. (Abowd et al., 1999) have defined a context as any information 
that can be used to characterize the situation of an entity (person, place or object), 
that is considered relevant to the user, the application and the interaction between 
the user and the application. They have also defined a context-aware system as fol-
lows: “a system is context-aware if it uses context to provide relevant information 
and / or services to the user”. (Miraoui & Tadj, 2007) proposed a service-oriented 

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
5
definition of context for a pervasive computing system as follows: “Any informa-
tion that triggers a service or changes the quality of a service if its value changes.” 
Furthermore, the latter authors affirmed that: “A system is said to be context-aware 
if it can automatically change the form of its services or can provide a service in 
response to the change in the value of information or a set of information that char-
acterizes those services”.
The authors of this chapter conclude that the terms “context and context-awareness” 
do not have a precise definition, each author defines them based on his proposed 
work. Nevertheless, they all agree that the context-awareness consists mainly in 
collecting information, modelling the context, and making the necessary adaptation, 
which present one of the most challenges in the field of context-aware pervasive 
systems (see Figure 1). More details are given in the next section.
Key Challenges in Context-Aware Pervasive Computing
Implementing a context-aware system requires addressing many issues still faced 
with enormous challenges in both research and practice. In (Xu, 2013), (Malik, 
Mahmud, & Javed, 2007) and (Kang & Pisan, 2006), authors have discussed the 
major challenges that researchers need to consider when conducting research in 
context-aware computing and the difficulties in developing a promising system. 
The most interesting challenges are: How to acquire context information? How to 
model context information? How to reason upon context information? and How 
to provide the most attractive services? Also, the adaptation of applications and 
services to changing computing and networking environment is a major challenge.
Figure 1. The main phases for context-awareness

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
6
Context Acquisition
To be able to use context in applications, there must be a mechanism to sense the 
current context and provide it to the application. Context acquisition is the first 
process for all context-aware systems. It refers to an ability to detect contextual in-
formation from diverse context sources, including heterogeneous physical sensors/
devices and software entities that provide raw data from the device or the environ-
ment to the system. Generally, the context is detected through the sensors that are 
locally built into the mobile devices or presented in the environment and is gathered 
by the acquisition modules of the context-aware systems. The data generated by the 
sensors are dynamic and voluminous. By analyzing raw data acquired from sensors, 
devices and services can recognize the context of a user, and surrounding environ-
ment (Yamabe, Takagi, & Nakajima, 2005).
In ubiquitous computing environments, there are a variety of kinds of context 
with different data formats. Therefore, context acquisition process requires under-
standing what type of contextual information the sensors provide, communicating 
with context sources by diverse communication protocols: HTTP, REST, SOAP, etc. 
The extracted raw data will be dispatched to different parts for further processing 
at a later stage. Moreover, it is very important that context-based systems filter any 
unnecessary information (redundant information) to allow for more effective use 
of context information or more effective operations of the system as more relevant 
information can be put together.
Context Modelling
One of the greatest challenges of context-aware computing is modelling context 
information. The raw data cannot be employed directly by context-aware systems 
since it is obtained from various heterogeneous context sources, and has their own 
expressions and models (Xu, 2013). Therefore, it requires an approach that can 
define and organize context in order to be understood by the systems. The context 
model is in charge of representing and organizing context. It allows representing and 
storing context data in a machine processable form (Baldauf, Dustdar, & Rosenberg, 
2007). Owing to the diversity of context sources, providing a uniform and extensible 
context model is needed to facilitate the other component of context-aware systems 
to access and handle context. It is a fundamental design question how to most appro-
priately design a model for a pervasive computing system being able to capture and 
encapsulate a large amount of information in the environment. Finding the answer 
of the question is quite important, because such a model provides computational 
support for constructing, describing, implementing, and analyzing the patterns of 
the interaction and coordination among context (Kang & Pisan, 2006).

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
7
Context Reasoning
Context-aware systems can be executed on light-weight systems such as mobile 
phones or sensor nodes, and they have to react within milliseconds when detecting 
a context (Schmidtke, 2012). The key idea of using context data and being able 
to react to the context in an intelligent way, often referred to context reasoning, is 
one of the most challenging contemporary research task. Context reasoning, also 
known as context inference, is one of the crucial parts of context processing that 
has a brain-like role, designed to automatically infer high-level, implicit context 
requested by context-aware intelligence services from related, low-level, explicit 
context (Xu, 2013). The high-level context is defined as the context that cannot be 
directly extracted from the context source.
Context reasoning also may play the role of a decision making mechanism 
(Bikakis, Patkos, Antoniou, & Plexousakis, 2007). Based on the collected context 
information, the system can be configured to change its behaviour, whenever certain 
changes are detected in its context. It is therefore important that the context model-
ling techniques must be able to support reasoning techniques. These techniques can 
be used to derive new context facts from existing context facts and/or reason about 
high-level context abstractions that model real world situations (Bettini et al., 2010). 
The reasoning techniques should be computationally efficient.
Providing the Most Attractive Services
In (Kang & Pisan, 2006), authors have considered that providing the most attractive 
services to the users is one of the pervasive systems challenges. In fact, pervasive 
computing is a user-centric view of computing. This means the best services must 
be supported to all the users in a pervasive environment. Further, those services 
should not be contradicted with user preferences. For example, if the dynamic 
configuration is not consistent with user preferences, the user may be confused or 
surprised by that change. User preferences are invisible and seamlessly shift over 
time, it is a significant challenge. User has different preferences or makes different 
decisions about the same context. This implies that a particular user might intrude 
or distract other’s preferences intentionally or accidentally.
Adaptation of Mobile Applications and Services
Finally, adaptation to changing computing and networking environment is also very 
important in the ubiquitous computing systems (Varshney, 2009). In these systems, 
users use devices that have different set of computing and communication resources. 
For context-aware applications running on mobile devices, it is vital to deal with 
the dynamically changing environments and to efficiently exploit the context infor-
mation within limited resources of the device and mobile communication system. 
Applications will need to adapt continuously to highly dynamic operating environ-
ments, heterogeneous device capabilities, and limited resource availability. When 

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
8
deployed on a low-end device, they often need to adapt to smaller screen sizes, less 
powerful processors or low bandwidth. Applications and services require a modular 
design that supports runtime adaptation and reconfiguration. This design should 
make explicit what functional variations are possible in the composition: i.e. what 
the deployment constraints are for each component in the composition and how 
components should be reconfigured for a given context. Runtime support is needed 
in order to facilitate the dynamic reconfiguration of applications and consistency 
checking to avoid conflicting adaptations among two or more simultaneously run-
ning applications (BERBERS & PREUVENEERS, 2009).
Design Principles of Context-Aware Pervasive Systems
In this section, authors describe the basic design principles of context-aware systems 
and depict different models for representing and reasoning upon contextual informa-
tion. An overview of the most known development frameworks of context-aware 
systems and application adaptation is presented too.
Architecture of Context-Aware Systems
Context-aware systems can be implemented in many ways (Baldauf et al., 2007). 
The architectural style and design is usually dependent on special requirements and 
conditions such as the location of sensors (local or remote), the amount of possible 
users (one user or many), the available resources of the used devices (high-end-PCs 
or small mobile devices) or the facility of a further extension of the system. Fur-
thermore, the method of context-data acquisition is very important when designing 
context-aware systems because it predefines the architectural style of the system at 
least to some extent.
Generally, context information can be acquired through two different approaches 
(Baldauf et al., 2007):
1. 	
Direct Sensors access without any additional layer for processing sensor data, 
or
2. 	
Middleware Infrastructure that encapsulates low-level sensing details (see 
Figure 2).
Compared to direct sensor access, middleware infrastructure technique eases 
extensibility since the client code does not have to be modified anymore and it 
simplifies the reusability of hardware dependent sensing code due to the strict en-
capsulation. Direct sensor access is not suited for distributed systems due to its 
direct access nature which lacks a component capable of managing multiple concur-

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
9
rent sensor accesses. Thus, a separation of detecting and using context is necessary 
to improve extensibility and reusability of systems.
Several design architectures for context-aware systems have been evolved during 
the last years. Most of them differ in functional range, naming layers, and the use of 
optional agents or other architectural concerns. In (Baldauf et al., 2007), authors have 
analyzed a various design approaches, and a common layered conceptual architecture 
in modern context-aware applications is presented. From the functional viewpoint, 
context-aware systems can be represented as a layered framework (see Figure 3), 
composed from bottom to top of sensors, raw data retrieval, pre-processing, storage 
or management, and an application layer.
Figure 2. Context acquisition approaches
Figure 3. A sample layered context-aware framework
Source: Baldauf et al., 2007.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
10
The first layer consists of a collection of different sensors. It is notable that the 
word ‘sensor’ not only refers to sensing hardware but also to every data source which 
may provide usable context information. These sensors can be classified in three 
categories: physical sensors, virtual sensors, and logical sensors. The most fre-
quently used sensors are physical sensors which are capable of capturing almost 
any physical data, such as thermometers, bio-sensors, cameras, microphones, etc. 
Unlike physical sensor, virtual sensors capture context data from software applica-
tions or services. For example, the user’s activity is a context data that can be sensed 
by checking the mouse-movement and keyboard input. Logical sensors combine 
information from physical and virtual sensors with additional information from 
databases or other sources in order to make other information. For example, a 
logical sensor can be constructed to detect an employee’s current location by ana-
lyzing logins at desktop PCs and magnetic card readers.
The second layer is responsible for the retrieval of raw context data by using 
specific application programming interfaces or protocols to request data from the 
sensor layer. The third layer, Pre-processing, is responsible for reasoning and in-
terpreting contextual information. In context-aware systems consisting of several 
different context data sources, the single context atoms can be combined to high-level 
information in this layer. This process is also called ‘aggregation’ or ‘composition’.
The fourth layer, Storage and Management, organizes the gathered data and 
makes them available to the application and stores them for later use. This storage 
can be centralized or distributed (Chaari, 2007). The centralized solution is the 
most common and most used option since it facilitates the management of updates 
and changes in context values. The distributed management context is much more 
complex since it inflicts additional functions resource discoveries and updating 
context of values.
Finally, the Application layer presents applications that offer significant services 
and functionalities to the customer, where the necessary reactions to context changes 
are implemented (e.g. displaying text in a higher colour contrast if illumination is 
bad). Each application subscribes to the previous layer in order to access different 
contextual information and be informed of any change. Applications may access 
information in two different ways, synchronous and asynchronous. In case of syn-
chronous access, the application requests context information from the previous 
layer. This is usually accomplished by remote method calls. In case of asynchro-
nous communication, the application subscribes to specific events that correspond 
to changes in context values. Once an event is triggered, the application is notified 
using call-back functions.
Existing architectures do not give more details about the Application layer. The 
realization of this layer depends on the application area whereas services are really 
dependent on the needs of the application users.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
11
Context-Awareness Models
Developing context-aware systems in pervasive context-aware computing should 
be supported by adequate context information modelling and reasoning techniques 
(Bettini et al., 2010). These techniques reduce the complexity of those systems and 
improve their maintainability.
Several researchers working in the area of pervasive and context-aware computing 
have developed different kinds of context models and each model brings along some 
reasoning techniques. In this section the authors present the most interesting context 
modelling approaches in the literature (Strang & Linnhoff-Popien, 2004), (Bettini 
et al., 2010) and (Nalepa & Bobek, 2014). These models are: Key-value models, 
Mark-up scheme models, Graphical models, Object oriented models, Logic-based 
models, Spatial models, Ontology-based models and Rules model.
Key-Value Models
Key-value models represent the simplest data structure for modelling context 
information as a couple (attribute, value) which allows providing contextual data 
to applications in the form of variables. The key is usually a name that defines a 
context property. For instance, it can denote location (e.g. room) or time (e.g. day-
time). The value represents current state of the context property (e.g. kitchen, etc.). 
These models are easy to implement but they are not convenient for complicated 
structure and do not allow a good reasoning on the context. The reasoning is usually 
supported by a simple matching engine. When the keys match the actual context 
values, an action is triggered. The inference is supported usually by a very simple 
matching algorithm that does not allow a more sophisticated reasoning form (Nalepa 
& Bobek, 2014). The key-value model is used in early context-aware systems, such 
as (B. Schilit et al., 1994).
Markup Scheme Models
Markup scheme models are based on XML and use hierarchical data structure 
consisting of markup tags with attributes and content. Profiles are typical repre-
sentatives of this kind of context models. They usually base upon a serialization of 
a derivative of Standard Generic Markup Language (SGML), the super class of all 
markup languages such as the popular XML. The Composite Capabilities/Prefer-
ence Profile (CC/PP) (W3C, 1999) and User Agent Profile (WAPFORUM, 2001) 
which are encoded in RDF/S are the most used profiles. Compared with the key-
value models, the markup scheme models provide a better context representation 
and can be used in structured and distributed computer systems. However, they have 

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
12
difficulty in describing the complex relationships between contextual information, 
and lack an effective resolution mechanism for processing incomplete, dynamic 
contextual data. In addition, they have limited capabilities on supporting reasoning 
on context, context uncertainty and higher context abstractions.
Graphical Models
Graphical models are also used to model the context due to their generic structure. 
They use graph-oriented modelling tools; such as UML (Unified Modelling Language) 
and ORM (object-relational mapping); to describe contextual information (Sheng 
& Benatallah, 2005). These models are intuitive and have powerful presentation 
skills for relational databases in information management systems. They are simple 
but less formal than the Markup scheme models.
Object-Oriented Models
Common to object oriented context modelling approaches is the intention to employ 
the main benefits of any object oriented approach namely: encapsulation and reus-
ability, and to represent contextual information. The context details are encapsulated 
in objects and the object provides methods to access the contextual information. 
A representative for this kind of models is the cues (Schmidt, Beigl, & Gellersen, 
1999) developed within the TEA project (Schmidt & Van Laerhoven, 2001). Object 
oriented models require low level execution agreements between applications to 
ensure interoperability. They are not adapted for knowledge sharing in open and 
dynamic environments.
Logic-Based Models
Logic-based models define context as a set of facts, expressions and rules. Usually 
contextual information is added too, updated in and deleted from a logic-based 
system in terms of facts or inferred from the rules in the system respectively. One 
of the first logic-based context modelling approaches has been published as For-
malizing Context by McCarthy and his group at Stanford (MCCARTHY, 1993). In 
general, logic-based models adopt a higher formal representation. They are often 
based on a centralized context management, which are not adapted to the principle 
of context distribution in a pervasive computing. The relations between continuous 
data cannot be easily described.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
13
Spatial Models
Spatial context models are well suited for context-aware applications that are mainly 
focused on location-based scenarios, like many mobile information systems (Topcu, 
2011). These models are based on the organization of context information by physi-
cal location, including the location of the real world entities which is described in 
the context information, or the location of the sensor that measures the context 
information (Bettini et al., 2010). They allow also reasoning about the location and 
the spatial relationships of objects. In addition, the use of spatial organizations in 
mobile systems would help to manage their large amount of context information 
where relevant context information can be easily preselected by using a spatial 
predicate (Bettini et al., 2010).
Ontology-Based Models
Ontology-based models use ontology to represent contextual information and rela-
tionships between context information. These models are the most comprehensive 
on the degrees of expression of information and its semantics. Their high and formal 
expressiveness can be used to describe complex context data that cannot be repre-
sented, for example, by simple languages like CC/PP (Strang & Linnhoff-Popien, 
2004). Ontology-based models adopt the formal representation of knowledge domains, 
support reasoning tasks in a better way than many other modelling approaches. In 
addition, they can import the other existing ontologies for reuse of knowledge. They 
also provide a good sharing of information with common semantics. In addition, 
most context modelling approaches are realized for a special application scenario 
and on that account many context information models are limited from the view 
of interoperability. Ontology-based context modelling can be used for different 
context-aware applications (Topcu, 2011).
Rule-Based Reasoning
In the Ambient Intelligence domain, rules are primarily used to express policies, 
constraints and preferences. Rule languages provide a formal model for context 
reasoning. They are easy to understand and widespread used. In addition, they al-
low for more complex reasoning than just a simple classification tasks provided 
by ontological approaches (Nalepa & Bobek, 2014). However, they cannot handle 
the highly changeable, ambiguous and imperfect context information (Bikakis et 
al., 2007).

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
14
Principal Existing Context-Aware Development Frameworks
In the last decade, various platforms and middleware to support context-aware de-
velopment have been developed in the literature. They adopt different architectural 
approaches mainly driven by the context acquisition, different methods of context 
representation and context reasoning.
In this section the most interesting context-aware frameworks (Context Toolkit, 
CoBrA, and SOCAM) are shortly described.
Context Toolkit
The Context Toolkit, developed by Dey (Dey, 2000), is a toolkit supporting the 
development of context-aware applications. The Context Toolkit provides a set of 
abstractions that can be used to implement reusable components for context sensing 
and interpretation. The toolkit enables application developers to build context-aware 
applications. This work has pioneered in proposing generic support for context-aware 
application development by means of a conceptual framework. It adopts the key-value 
pairs (encoded using XML for transmission) context modelling, and has storage 
support. In addition, the Context Toolkit can be used as a research test platform, 
supporting more complex studies of context-awareness, such as the development of 
high-level abstract programming, processing of unconcerned context information, 
and accessing control of user’s context information.
Context Broker Architecture: CoBrA
CoBra (Chen, Finin, & Joshi, 2003) is an agent-based architecture for supporting 
the development of context-aware applications in so-called intelligent spaces (physi-
cal places-meeting rooms, homes, corporate offices, and vehicles, populated with 
intelligent systems that provide pervasive computing services to the users). Central 
to this architecture is the presence of an intelligent context broker that maintains 
and manages a shared contextual model on behalf of a community of agents. These 
agents can be applications hosted by mobile devices that a user carries or wears 
(e.g., cell phones, PDAs and headphones), services provided by devices in a room 
(e.g., projector service, light controller and room temperature controller) and web 
services that provide a web presence for people, places and things in the physical 
world (e.g., services keeping track of peoples and object whereabouts). It adopts 
ontology to model context information, which is suitable for knowledge sharing and 
high-level context reasoning. Compared with the Context Toolkit, CoBrA provides 
better support for knowledge sharing and context reasoning using a common ontol-
ogy defined using Semantic Web languages (Chen et al., 2003).

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
15
Service-Oriented Context-Aware Middleware (SOCAM)
The Service-Oriented Context-Aware Middleware (SOCAM) is an architecture that 
enables the building and rapid prototyping of context-aware services in pervasive 
computing environments, developed in 2005 by (Gu, Pung, & Zhang, 2005). SOCAM 
provides efficient support for acquiring, discovering, interpreting and accessing 
various context to build context-aware services. SOCAM uses ontologies for context 
modelling and reasoning, as it aims at converting physical spaces into semantic ones.
SOCAM is similar to CoBrA, because it also aims to build a middleware for 
context-aware services and uses OWL to model its context, but SOCAM goes 
further than CoBrA. The context model proposed in SOCOM is designed on two 
hierarchical ontology layer which are common upper ontology for general concepts 
and the domain-specific ontology for different sub-domains.
Application Fields of Context-Aware Systems
The application areas of context-aware systems are primarily smart spaces where 
users can interact with each other and traditional systems using their mobile devices. 
As technology advances and context-awareness computing evolves, the number of 
areas where context-awareness is applied increases. Following some of them are 
listed (Hristova, 2008):
•	
Airports: Emergency response solutions are based on context-aware systems 
which can automatically deliver immediate security alerts to the relevant per-
sonnel at the airport, such as: security, maintenance, fire department, police 
etc. Services directly aimed to passengers, that are closely connected to the 
location of the passenger are developed as well. They adapt the notifications 
that are sent to the passengers’ mobile devices depending on the users’ loca-
tion and inform them about shopping zones nearby, exits, gates, arrivals and 
departures.
•	
Smart Homes: Context-awareness integrated with technology and services 
through home networking increases the quality of living and can help dis-
abled or elderly people lead safe and independent lives in their homes. It can 
provide:
◦◦
Security Functions: Generation of alerts in case of fire, gas leakage, 
open tap, detection of unknown persons present in the home. These 
alerts are sent to the user as graphical or audio information, but can be 
directly sent to the appropriate institution as well e.g. police, fire depart-
ment etc.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
16
◦◦
Appliances Functions: Monitoring and control of the appliances in the 
household such as turning on/off the light, opening/closing the window, 
turning on/off the air conditioner and heater, improving energy manage-
ment etc.
◦◦
Environmental Information: Overview of the situation in the domicile 
and the environmental parameters in each room.
◦◦
Healthcare Functions: Constant monitoring of the person’s biomedi-
cal functions, sending reminders about daily tasks he needs to perform 
e.g. medication intake and sending alerts to remote caregivers if an 
emergency situation is detected.
•	
Museums and Fairs: Context-awareness is closely related to detecting user’s 
position in a building and guiding them through it. It is commonly used to 
run applications on portable devices which are location sensitive and provide 
audio and video information to the user about art pieces in a museum or a 
gallery, give directions about the way to reach a specific place of interest dur-
ing a fair, etc.
•	
Offices: Usual services that can be found beneficial in office work is locating 
the position of employees in the company building, additional information 
about the office where they are located (whether there is a meeting in prog-
ress, how many people are present), environmental parameters measured in 
the office where a user is present, inferring the activity of the user depending 
on pending calendar entries, etc.
•	
Hospitals: Context-awareness can aid in improving the quality of service in 
hospitals by implementing interactive hospitals where doctors and nurses are 
provided information about the diagnosis, the treatment and medical history 
of patients in their proximity and they are able to carry out video conferences 
which enable collaborative feedback, discussion and diagnosis with other 
doctors. These interactive hospitals would also support reminders to patients 
for medication intake, verification that the nurse is carrying the right medi-
cine, closely monitor the patient’s state and raise emergency alerts if neces-
sary, carry out video conferences between a doctor and a patient at home, etc.
Ubiquitous or pervasive healthcare (U-Healthcare) represents one of the main 
application areas of pervasive computing. It provides several services; such as moni-
toring health and wellbeing of patients anytime and anywhere by using intelligent 
environment technologies. More details about this application domain are given in 
the following section.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
17
Ubiquitous Healthcare
In recent years, interests in U-healthcare which monitors man’s health conditions 
and provides specialized healthcare services whenever and wherever it is needed, 
have been increased. The U-healthcare stands for Ubiquitous healthcare that provides 
healthcare services using remote medical technologies without any limitations in time 
and space (J.-H. Kim et al., 2009). U-healthcare means a system that can monitor 
bio-information in real-time using certain devices and mobile equipments in a home 
network. U-Healthcare services provide medical and healthcare services continuously 
and generally for the “healthy life” of customers through active participation and 
cooperation in all members employed in industries based on wire and wireless IT 
technologies through merging it to other advanced technologies. U-Healthcare can 
be classified as sensing, monitoring, analyzing, and alert according to the role in a 
system. The sensing plays a role in the sense of the physical and chemical changes in 
patients. The monitoring is a step that first processes the measured bio-information 
and plays a role in the verification of patients’ information in real-time. The analyz-
ing is a step that obtains some information from the collected data and plays a role 
in the figuration of the state of patients. The alert plays a role in the notification of 
related information to users based on the obtained information.
In fact, health monitoring has received some attention from worldwide researchers 
in the last few years. This has resulted in several prototypes, systems, and applica-
tions of health monitoring in a variety of scenarios, especially for elderly persons 
or those that have severe mental or physical limitations living alone at homes.
Information Technologies can play a major role in how healthcare services are 
designed, offered and utilized. There are several suitable information and com-
munications technologies for healthcare among which we can distinguish four 
categories: implanted (inside human body), wearable, portable, and environmental 
(Varshney, 2009). The use of implanted technologies could include use of Radio 
Frequency Identification (RFID) and sensors inside the human body. The wearable 
technologies include the use of Smart Shirts, which are designed to wear for extended 
period of time for monitoring of health conditions. The portable devices, such as 
handheld computers and smart-phones, can be used in monitoring and recording 
health conditions. Finally, environmental technologies include adding computing 
and communication capabilities in the surrounding of patients such as a “Smart 
Home”, where appliances have smartness to assist people in their daily activities. 
With the progress of ubiquitous technologies, more smart services can be provided 
in a smart home environment that allows patients to live safely and independently 
in their homes. Additionally, telemedicine and mobile telemedicine technologies 
can be used to improve the overall quality of care.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
18
Context-Awareness in U-Healthcare Systems
Using context-awareness in ubiquitous or pervasive healthcare systems is being very 
useful for the following reasons (Varshney, 2009): First, there are a large number of 
situations and related tasks; mobility of patients, healthcare professionals and some 
equipments; limited financial and human resources; and the need to cut cost while 
improving the quality of service to an increased number of people.
In addition, the objective of using context information in a U-Healthcare envi-
ronment is to provide high-quality services by inferring all possible information 
related to users and that should provide active and intellectual services required by 
users (J. Kim & Chung, 2014).
In fact, the context information may come from multiple sources such as sensors, 
wearable and portable computers, some databases that may have information on the 
patient or from patient’s input in some cases. The type of information that could be 
collected include the type of health monitoring, vital signs, prescribed medicines, 
sensory information, activities, environmental variables, and patient history. The 
information on missing doses, recent labs, known handicaps, and unusual conditions 
would also be very useful in health monitoring.
Challenges in Context-Aware Pervasive Healthcare Systems
Some major challenges in using context-awareness in pervasive healthcare are 
(Varshney, 2009):
1. 	
Derivation of context, which could be evolving at different rates in different 
healthcare services,
2. 	
The need to adapt to changes in context as it evolves, and
3. 	
Corrective actions when something goes wrong in a context-aware system 
involved in healthcare delivery.
Additionally, there are some limitations of context and context-awareness in 
pervasive healthcare. In some healthcare services, the description of a situation by 
using what (activity), who (identity), where (location) and when (time) may not be 
enough, where more richness and higher reliability are required. This could include 
how (process), with whom (source), and so what (needed action). This will either 
increase the complexity of context-aware system or will result in higher chance of 
error in the delivery of healthcare services. The increased complexity could also lead 
to a slower operation of systems, not desirable for some services, such as emergency 
services in pervasive healthcare.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
19
Related Works
Several interesting works have been proposed in the field of U-Healthcare. The 
authors present here some initiatives that they consider most relevant.
Context-Aware Middleware for Personalized 
U- HealthCare (CAMPU)
In (Ko, Lee, & Lee, 2007) authors proposed a Context-aware system named, 
CAMPU, that permits to process the physical data of the user and provide suitable 
context to the healthcare service embedded system. They have also proposed an 
ontology-based context model and context reasoning for U-HealthCare in a ubiq-
uitous environment. As shown in Figure 4, CAMPU consists of the sensing device, 
context-aware framework, and the applications.
The Sensing Device senses the physical raw data information of the user and 
then transfers the raw data to the Context Provider in the Context-Aware Framework 
of a PDA using ZigBee protocol. The Context Provider generates low-level context 
according to the context model and then delivers the low-level context to the Context 
Integrator. The Context Integrator integrates the context coming from the different 
Context Providers and selects the most suitable context among the different context 
providers. The integrated context is delivered to the Context Interpreter. The pri-
mary purpose of the Context Interpreter is to generate high-level context from the 
integrated low-level context using an inference engine. The Inference Engine uses 
the knowledge base and ontology to infer context.
The Profile Manager manages the personal information of the user including 
name, age, weight, height, disease history and the normal range of the health condi-
tion. The Context Manager manages context store and context query. The healthcare 
service is automatically called by the context-aware framework or is selected by the 
user using the user interface on the PDA.
Context-Aware Rule-Based Healthcare Monitoring System
(Catarinucci, Colella, Esposito, Tarricone, & Zappatore, 2012) proposed a context-
aware infrastructure for ubiquitous and pervasive monitoring of heterogeneous 
healthcare-related scenarios. The system is based on the integration between three 
core implementation choices: ontology representation, multi-agent paradigm and 
rule-based logic. Ontologies are used to formalize contextual information in a 
reusable and sharable codification. The multi-agent paradigm acts as the unifying 
software backbone. It provides distributed software entities capable of communicat-
ing by means of ontologies and able to reason according to a rule-based paradigm.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
20
The proposed system allows patients to be continuously monitored by medical 
equipment. An alarm may be generated when patient data exceed some threshold. 
Information about patients (thresholds, history, etc.) and doctors (specialization, 
availability, telephone numbers, etc.) is used to identify the doctor best suited to 
manage an alarm situation. The doctor is alerted on his laptop/mobile and may 
request further information to best analyze the patient situation.
As shown in Figure 5, on one side there are data, on the other side there are the 
so-called monitoring entities. Data include both raw data provided by physical sources, 
such RFID, biomedical sensors and data codified into virtual storage entities, such 
as databases, documents, etc. Raw data are associated to monitored parameters (e.g. 
body temperature, heart rate, etc.). Monitored entities are notified when input raw 
data have some out-of-range behaviour. Several monitored entities, on their side, 
may be aggregated to form more complex monitored entities (e.g. several patients 
may be grouped into hospitals). The core of the entire system is the alert notification 
component, which is substantially responsible for: detecting alarm events; selecting 
the monitoring entities being best suited to manage the alarm event when it occurs; 
and sending data to the monitoring entity when needed.
Figure 4. The architecture of context-aware system CAMPU
Source: Ko et al., 2007.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
21
Ontology Model-Based Situation and Socially-Aware Health 
Care Service in a Smart Home Environment
In (Lee & Kwon, 2013), authors proposed a platform for the smart home healthcare 
systems that permits to: 1) handle wide range of context which generally occur in 
the house, 2) collect various types of sensor data and define what situations cur-
rently happen at the home space surrounding the specific user, 3) analyze historical 
context data and social data to recommend good health assistant services, 4) support 
transparent integration of a wide variety of devices to implement interoperability, 
remote monitoring, and remote programmability. The platform uses ontologies 
and rule-based approach to model context and reason upon which are generally 
distributed in smart home environment including person entities modelling care 
network members (i.e., user or patient, healthcare experts, family, and emergency 
technician) and location entities representing symbolic spaces (i.e., living room, 
kitchen, and bedroom).
The architecture of the proposed platform, shown in Figure 6, consists of three 
layers: physical space layer, context management layer, and service management 
layer.
The physical space layer presents a smart home environment that provides context 
data from its attached entities such as sensors or computing devices. The context 
management layer gathers data captured from sensors in the first layer, filters sensor 
data in order to maintain useful data, then translate these data into context which 
can explain which situation happens around the user. On top of this layer, context 
Figure 5. Schematic representation of alert generation systems
Source: Catarinucci et al., 2012.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
22
definition processor is implemented for services to acquire considered context 
data or subscribe to event notifications. Context definition processor interacts with 
the ontology manager for referring what’s mean of the currently captured context. 
The ontology manager refers to the knowledge base which is developed with the 
OWL-based model that describes context-based rules. Third, the service manage-
ment layer includes a context-aware reasoning module and an application interface. 
Context-aware reasoning module is based on the OWL-based model which describes 
context-based rules that can be used for constructing prioritized service lists. Also, 
this module provides a way for describing context-triggered actions, e.g., notifica-
tions or controlling home appliances. Services are triggered through the application 
interface with the situation aware-based reasoning results.
Personalized U-Healthcare Service System
In the work (J. Kim & Chung, 2014), authors proposed a U-healthcare service 
system and an ontology-based healthcare context information model to implement 
Figure 6. The platform of smart home-based healthcare system
Source: Lee & Kwon, 2013.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
23
a ubiquitous environment. In this system, contextual information will be extracted 
and classified to implement the healthcare services using the context information 
model. The healthcare context information model can be defined using the ontol-
ogy, and a common healthcare model will be developed by considering medical 
references and service environments. Application and healthcare service developers 
can use the sensed information in various environments by authoring device- and 
space-specific ontologies based on this common ontology.
The architecture of the U-healthcare service system is shown in Figure 7. The 
device environment related to human bodies is related to the parts that sense dy-
namic information according to the context of users and collects dynamic context 
information from devices. Service Provider is transmitted to the context-aware infer-
ence, which infers such context information, by transforming the collected context 
information. The Context Manager determines an item set through the inference rule 
after referencing a healthcare service ontology model with respect to the transmitted 
context information. After determining the item set, it is possible to obtain an item 
list presented in the content database. The obtained item list will be transformed 
to an environment that provides services through transmitting the obtained list to 
the Service Manager. Context-aware inference is a module that makes an inference 
based on the information received from Service Provider. Also, it determines an item 
set and recommends healthcare. Then, final services are provided to users through 
smart-phones, web portals, IPTVs, etc.
Figure 7. Architecture of U-healthcare service system
Source: J. Kim & Chung, 2014.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
24
DISCUSSIONS
In recent years, pervasive systems have become a very active area of research so 
that we are surrounded by a swarm of embedded and smart devices; including sen-
sors, smart phones, tablets, cameras, etc., interacting and exchanging information 
using wireless communication technology. U-healthcare systems are one of the 
main application areas of pervasive computing that provide us several services, 
such as monitoring health and wellbeing of patients anytime and anywhere using 
smart mobile devices. With the progress of ubiquitous technologies, more smart 
services can be provided in a smart home environment allowing patients to live 
safely and independently in their homes. For providing such services, this system 
has to react rapidly by analyzing dynamically not only the health measurements of 
patient, but also by analyzing his current location, his profile, his activities, and his 
physical environment. In fact, with the invasion of mobile devices in our life, per-
vasive healthcare systems can provide us mobile services or applications that allow 
monitoring the health and wellbeing of patients anytime and anywhere. However, 
the obstacles related to the limited resources of mobile devices, such as battery 
lifetime, hinder the service continuity in this kind of systems. Therefore, device 
resources have to be taken into account during the execution of these systems, and 
the service continuity on mobile devices must be assured. In order to deal with the 
different resources presented in the environments, this kind of system must adapt 
their behaviours according to the context change (Baldauf et al., 2007). They must 
be able to detect context information that comes from different and heterogeneous 
entities, infer new situations from this context, and provide the appropriate services 
to the user at the right time, in the right place and with the right manner.
Several researchers have been concerned about pervasive context-aware systems 
and context-awareness. Moreover, reports or white paper of many projects have 
been published increasingly. Various works in this field including context models, 
principal existing Context-aware development frameworks, and the most interesting 
works in pervasive healthcare systems are described in previous sections.
Context Models
Many researchers work in the area of pervasive and context-aware computing have 
developed different kinds of context models and each model brings along some 
reasoning techniques. In (Strang & Linnhoff-Popien, 2004) a comparison between 
Key-value models, Mark-up scheme models, Graphical models, Object oriented 
models, Logic-based models, and Ontology-based models, is presented. Authors 
concluded that Ontology-based models seem to be the most suitable tool for context 
modelling due to their high and formal expressiveness that can be used to describe 

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
25
complex context data. They also provide a good sharing of information with common 
semantics and they support reasoning tasks in a better way than the other modelling 
approaches. In addition, they can import the other existing ontologies for reuse of 
knowledge. However, according to (Nalepa & Bobek, 2014) Rule-based Reasoning 
allows for more complex reasoning than just a simple classification tasks provided 
by ontological approaches. Nevertheless, they cannot handle the highly changeable, 
ambiguous and imperfect context information (Bikakis et al., 2007). Spatial context 
models are well suitable for context-aware applications that are mainly focused on 
location-based scenarios. However, interoperability among different spatial models 
can be easily achieved when the location information is confined to very simple 
spatial data. For more complex spatial domains, interoperability can be obtained 
only by adopting expressive languages (e.g., coupling with a shared ontology of 
location) (Bettini et al., 2010).
It is obvious that until now, it is still a challenge to build a context model based 
on the complex heterogeneous information, ensuring that context is easily expressed, 
reasoned and shared. As there is no clear winner, the community nowadays considers 
hybrid models that combine different modelling techniques for different purposes 
to be the most beneficial such as the hybridization of ontology-based models with 
the rule-based reasoning in order to get most of their benefits.
Besides, a well-designed context model should provide an appreciable inter-
pretation of all kinds of context, easily shared with the required component and 
conveniently handled by designers. It is required to model different scenarios and 
to allow developers/designers to easily add new context to this model, or even to 
provide the ability to import and reuse some existing context from another context 
model. The context model should be simple, expressible, general, and flexible; since 
at design time, we do not know what information will be relevant to all systems or 
applications. New applications may require new types of contextual information.
Frameworks for Context-Aware Applications
As described in a previous section, various frameworks to support context-aware 
development have been developed in literature, the most known works cited in 
this chapter are: Context Toolkit, CoBrA and SOCAM. The authors analyze the 
aforementioned frameworks based on the following facets: the architecture of the 
context-aware system, types of context, context modelling and context reasoning. 
Also, if the works support a generic context model and dynamic adaptation of ap-
plications. Table 1 summarizes the different works according to these facts.
The Context Toolkit is based on Widgets architecture and represents context by 
a set of key-value pairs. However, it is weak in supporting knowledge sharing and 
context reasoning. Key-value models are not convenient for complicated structure 

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
26
and do not allow a good reasoning on context. CoBrA is an agent-based system 
where context is modelled using OWL ontology which is integrated with a rule-
based inference engine. However, this architecture has been developed to support 
applications that focus on spatial information. SOCAM is similar to CoBrA, since it 
also aims to build a middleware for context-aware services and uses OWL to model 
its context, but SOCAM goes further than CoBrA. The Ontology-based context 
model proposed in SOCAM defines an hierarchical approach for designing context 
ontologies. It provides ontology for general concepts in pervasive environments and 
domain-specific ontologies applied to different sub-domains. However, SOCAM 
uses the first order logic rules to determine high-level context, and is inadequate for 
dealing with complex context recognition in ubiquitous computing.
All these works proposed interesting architectures to support the development of 
context-aware application. Nonetheless, they do not support dynamic adaptation of 
applications to the mobile device constraint. In addition, almost all of those works 
Table 1. Summary of related works
Design 
Approach
Type of Context
Context 
Modelling
Reasoning 
Support
Generic 
Context 
Model
Adaptation 
of 
Application
Context 
Toolkit 
(2000)
Widget
• User 
• Location
Key-value 
pairs
Does not 
provide 
reasoning 
capabilities
-
-
CoBrA 
(2003)
Agent
• User 
• Location 
• Environment
OWL 
Ontology
Rules and 
inference 
engine
-
-
CASS 
(2004)
Object
• User 
• Location
Relational 
data model
Rules and 
inference 
engine
-
-
CAMPU 
(2007)
Modules
• User 
• Bio-sensor data 
• Environment
OWL 
Ontology
Rules and 
inference 
engine
-
-
(Catarinucci 
et al., 2012)
Agent
• User 
• Bio-sensor data
OWL 
Ontology
Rules and 
inference 
engine
-
-
(Lee & 
Kwon, 
2013)
Layered 
architecture
• User 
• Bio-sensor data 
• Location
OWL 
Ontology
Rules and 
inference 
engine
-
-
(J. Kim 
& Chung, 
2014)
Modules
• User 
• Bio-sensor data 
• Location 
• Environment
OWL 
Ontology
Rules and 
inference 
engine
-
-

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
27
do not provide a generic context model that can be used in other types of systems. 
They did not take into account the contextual information that can be gathered from 
bio-sensors; namely vital signs such as blood sugar and blood pressure measurements. 
Therefore, they cannot be used in healthcare field. In addition, those works do not 
hold the services selection and then, they do not allow providing the appropriate 
service to the user.
Ubiquitous Healthcare Systems
As described in the previous section, several interesting works are proposed in the 
field of pervasive healthcare system. The majority of these works have demonstrated 
the amenability of Ontologies and Rules for building context-aware pervasive 
computing systems. They have proposed interesting ontologies that can be used 
in the ubiquitous healthcare filed. However, these ontologies are more specific to 
the healthcare context-aware system. Authors have modelled context according to 
their point of view and they did not provide a generic context model that can be 
used for building another context-aware system. In addition, they did not take into 
consideration the obstacles related to the limited resources of mobile devices, such 
as battery life time. Furthermore, they did not propose solutions to ensure the service 
continuity on mobile devices.
After studying the state of the art on context models, context-aware systems, and 
U-healthcare systems, authors conclude that till know, there is no generic context 
model and design approach that facilitates the context modelling, the design and the 
development of context-aware pervasive systems in general and pervasive healthcare 
in particular. In previous works, each researcher has used its own way to model and 
reason upon the context and has not propose useful models that facilitate the design 
and the development tasks of this kind of systems.
Consequently, designing context-aware pervasive systems in general and U-
Healthcare in particular can be laborious mainly due to the challenges faced in both 
research and practice. The major challenges that researchers and developers need to 
consider in this field include: how to represent the context, how to reason upon the 
context, how to provide the appropriate services to the end-user and how to ensure 
the service continuity on mobile devices? The difficulty to solve these challenges 
consists mainly in providing a useful support that facilitates the design and the 
development of those systems. Moreover, the complexity of pervasive systems is 
steadily increasing since there is a growing variety of mobile computing devices, 
which are highly connective and can be used for different tasks in dynamically 
changing environments. Due to this complexity, innovative ideas for the design and 
the development of these systems must be found.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
28
CONCLUSION
Nowadays, the development of computing technologies has simplified the daily 
life tasks since the environment is improved by different applications. Pervasive 
computing is one of the most efficient computing areas which offer several smart 
systems aiming to provide various significant services in many areas of life such as 
healthcare, sport and education.
U-healthcare is one of the main application areas for pervasive computing which 
aim to provide several services that allow monitoring health and wellbeing of patients 
anytime and anywhere. This kind of mobile systems needs to adapt their behaviours 
according to the context change in order to deal with the different resources presented 
in the environments. Context-awareness is a central aspect of pervasive computing 
systems, characterizing their ability to adapt and perform tasks based on context.
This chapter was consecrated to provide background information about context-
aware pervasive computing systems and ubiquitous healthcare systems. The most 
important aspects related to this kind of systems have been described. The major 
challenges that researchers need to consider when conducting research in context-
aware pervasive computing systems have been reviewed. The well-known works 
in context-aware systems and Ubiquitous healthcare systems were discussed too.
Future work will focus on the proposition of a new design approach that facili-
tates the design and development of context-aware pervasive computing systems, 
especially pervasive healthcare systems.
REFERENCES
Abowd, G. D., Dey, A. K., Brown, P. J., Davies, N., Smith, M., & Steggles, P. (1999). 
Towards a better understanding of context and context-awareness. Paper presented 
at the Handheld and ubiquitous computing.
Agoston, T. C., Ueda, T., & Nishimura, Y. (2000). Pervasive computing in a net-
worked world. Paper presented at the Proceedings of INET.
Baldauf, M., Dustdar, S., & Rosenberg, F. (2007). A survey on context-aware sys-
tems. International Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing, 2(4), 263–277. 
doi:10.1504/IJAHUC.2007.014070
Berbers, Y., & Preuveneers, D. (2009). Support for context-driven applications in 
Ambient Intelligence environments. Academic Press.

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
29
Bettini, C., Brdiczka, O., Henricksen, K., Indulska, J., Nicklas, D., Ranganathan, 
A., & Riboni, D. (2010). A survey of context modelling and reasoning techniques. 
Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 6(2), 161–180. doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2009.06.002
Bikakis, A., Patkos, T., Antoniou, G., & Plexousakis, D. (2007). A survey of semantics-
based approaches for context reasoning in ambient intelligence. In Constructing 
ambient intelligence (pp. 14–23). Springer.
Catarinucci, L., Colella, R., Esposito, A., Tarricone, L., & Zappatore, M. (2012). 
RFID sensor-tags feeding a context-aware rule-based healthcare monitoring system. 
Journal of Medical Systems, 36(6), 3435–3449. doi:10.1007/s10916-011-9794-y 
PMID:22083369
Chaari, T. (2007). Adaptation d’applications pervasives dans des environnements 
multi-contextes. INSA de Lyon.
Chen, H., Finin, T., & Joshi, A. (2003). An ontology for context-aware pervasive 
computing environments. The Knowledge Engineering Review, 18(03), 197–207. 
doi:10.1017/S0269888904000025
Dey, A. K. (2000). Providing architectural support for building context-aware ap-
plications. Georgia Institute of Technology.
Dey, A. K., Abowd, G. D., & Wood, A. (1998). CyberDesk: A framework for pro-
viding self-integrating context-aware services. Knowledge-Based Systems, 11(1), 
3–13. doi:10.1016/S0950-7051(98)00053-7
Dillon, T. (2006). Pervasive and ubiquitous computing. Retrieved from http://
www2.futurelab.org.uk/resources/publications-reports-articles/web-articles/Web-
Article497
Gu, T., Pung, H. K., & Zhang, D. Q. (2005). A service‐oriented middleware for 
building context‐aware services. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 
28(1), 1–18. doi:10.1016/j.jnca.2004.06.002
Hristova, A. (2008). Conceptualization and Design of a Context-aware Platform 
for User-centric Applications. Academic Press.
Kang, Y.-B., & Pisan, Y. (2006). A survey of major challenges and future directions 
for next generation pervasive computing. In Computer and Information Sciences–
ISCIS 2006 (pp. 755–764). Springer.
Kim, J., & Chung, K.-Y. (2014). Ontology-based healthcare context information 
model to implement ubiquitous environment. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 
71(2), 873–888. doi:10.1007/s11042-011-0919-6

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
30
Kim, J.-H., Chung, K.-Y., Rim, K.-W., Lee, J.-H., Kang, U.-G., & Lee, Y.-H. (2009). 
Design of U-healthcare service system based on personalized model in smart home. 
In U-and E-Service, Science and Technology (pp. 104–111). Springer.
Ko, E. J., Lee, H. J., & Lee, J. W. (2007). Ontology-based context modeling and 
reasoning for U-HealthCare. IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, 90(8), 
1262–1270. doi:10.1093/ietisy/e90-d.8.1262
Lee, H., & Kwon, J. (2013). Ontology Model-based Situation and Socially-Aware 
Health Care Service in a Smart Home Environment. International Journal of Smart 
Home, 7(5), 239–250. doi:10.14257/ijsh.2013.7.5.24
Malik, N., Mahmud, U., & Javed, Y. (2007). Future challenges in context-aware 
computing. Paper presented at the IADIS International Conference WWW/Internet.
Marzano, S. (2003). The new everyday: Views on ambient intelligence. 010 Publishers.
McCarthy, J. (1993). Notes on formalizing contexts. Paper presented at the Thirteenth 
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
McCrory, A. (2000, March). Ubiquitous? Pervasive? Sorry, they don’t compute. 
Computer World.
Miraoui, M., & Tadj, C. (2007). A service oriented definition of context for pervasive 
computing. Paper presented at the 16th International Conference on Computing, 
Mexico City, Mexico.
Musumba, G. W., & Nyongesa, H. O. (2013). Context awareness in mobile comput-
ing: A review. International Journal of Machine Learning and Applications, 2(1).
Nalepa, G. J., & Bobek, S. (2014). Rule-based solution for context-aware reasoning 
on mobile devices. Computer Science and Information Systems, 11(1), 171–193. 
doi:10.2298/CSIS130209002N
Schilit, B., Adams, N., & Want, R. (1994). Context-aware computing applications. 
Paper presented at the Mobile Computing Systems and Applications.
Schilit, B. N., & Theimer, M. M. (1994). Disseminating active map information to 
mobile hosts. IEEE Network, 8(5), 22–32. doi:10.1109/65.313011
Schmidt, A., Beigl, M., & Gellersen, H.-W. (1999). There is more to context than loca-
tion. Computers & Graphics, 23(6), 893–901. doi:10.1016/S0097-8493(99)00120-X
Schmidt, A., & Van Laerhoven, K. (2001). How to build smart appliances? Personal 
Communications, IEEE, 8(4), 66–71. doi:10.1109/98.944006

Background on Context-Aware Computing Systems
31
Schmidtke, H. R. (2012). Contextual Reasoning in Context-Aware Systems. Paper 
presented at the Intelligent Environments (Workshops).
Sheng, Q. Z., & Benatallah, B. (2005). ContextUML: a UML-based modeling lan-
guage for model-driven development of context-aware web services. Paper presented 
at the Mobile Business. doi:10.1109/ICMB.2005.33
Strang, T., & Linnhoff-Popien, C. (2004). A context modeling survey. Paper presented 
at the Workshop Proceedings.
Tahir, R. (2013). Context aware mobile computing as a challenge for developers 
and software engineers: a review. European Scientific Journal.
Topcu, F. (2011). Context Modeling and Reasoning Techniques. Paper presented at 
the SNET Seminar in the ST.
Varshney, U. (2009). Pervasive healthcare computing: EMR/EHR, wireless and health 
monitoring. Springer Science & Business Media. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-0215-3
W3C. (1999). Composite Capability/Preference Profiles (CC/PP). World Wide Web 
Consortium. Retrieved from http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-CCPP/
WAPFORUM. (2001). User Agent Profile (UAProf). Wireless Application Protocol 
Forum. Retrieved from http://www.wapforum.org
Weiser, M. (1991). The Computer of the Twenty-First Century. Scientific American, 
265(3), 94–100. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0991-94
Xu, T. (2013). The context-aware middleware in ambient intelligence. Ecole Cen-
trale de Lyon.
Yamabe, T., Takagi, A., & Nakajima, T. (2005). Citron: A context information 
acquisition framework for personal devices. Paper presented at the Embedded and 
Real-Time Computing Systems and Applications. doi:10.1109/RTCSA.2005.32
ENDNOTE
1	
The Free On-line Dictionary of Computing - http://dictionary.reference.com.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch002
Chapter 2
32 
The Internet of 
Things and Assistive 
Technologies for People 
with Disabilities:
Applications, Trends, and Issues
ABSTRACT
With the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), the past two decades have seen a 
proliferation of Assistive Technology (AT) and its enabling impact on the lives of 
people with disabilities in the areas of accessing information, communication, and 
daily living activities. Due to recent emergence of the Internet of Things (IoT), the 
fields of rehabilitation, healthcare, and education are challenged to incorporate 
the IoT applications into current AT services. While IoT applications continue to 
be developed and integrated into AT, they are still at a primitive stage where clear 
guidelines are yet to be developed and benefits are yet to be substantiated to ensure 
the quality of lives of people with disabilities. This chapter provides an overview 
of the IoT and AT integrated applications based on the building blocks of the IoT, 
along with recent trends and issues relevant to accessing technology for people 
with disabilities.
Hwa Lee
Bradley University, USA

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
33
INTRODUCTION
The IoT is reshaping our society by changing many aspects of everyday life of potential 
users (Bandyopadhyay & Sen, 2011). Smart health, assisted living, smart homes, 
and enhanced learning are only a few examples of possible application scenarios in 
which this new technology will play a leading role in the near future for people with 
disabilities (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2010). The IoT for people with disabilities 
is likely to become more personalized to meet individual needs and user require-
ments. With large IT companies such as Intel, Cisco, Samsung, Google, and Apple 
developing the IoT ecosystems, newer and revolutionized IoT innovations for people 
with disabilities are emerging. The IoT allows medical devices and assistive devices 
to collect, store, send and receive patient and customer data and is likely to become 
an important part of their lives. While the IoT is one of the hot technologies of this 
decade and a large number of studies focus on the technical aspects of the IoT such 
as management of resource constraint devices and mechanisms of interconnection 
mechanisms (Bui, Castellani, Casari, & Zorzi, 2012; Gluhak et al., 2011; Atzori 
et al., 2010; Sehgal, Perelman, Kuryla, & Schonwalder, 2012), a paucity of studies 
exists on the use of the IoT for people with disabilities.
There is little doubt that the IoT is highly likely to enhance the use of Assistive 
Technology (AT) by increasing the accessibility and functional capabilities for people 
with disabilities in the areas of communication, self-care, independent living, health 
care, mobility and transportation, and education and learning (Lee, 2009). While 
the IoT is at the early stage of making a positive impact on the lives of people with 
various disabilities, the potentials for the range of benefits are unlimited. According 
to Gartner (2013), people with disabilities make up 15% of the world’s population. 
Assistive technology devices marketed to people with disabilities can also be sold 
to the other 85% of the population that is “situationally disabled” during some part 
of their day. With the growing population of elders, more attention needs to be 
given to the elderly citizens who require accommodations in the areas of cognitive, 
physical, and sensory abilities that are associated with aging (Morris, Mueller, & 
Jones, 2010). Hence, healthcare and related area professionals need to have a bet-
ter understanding of how people with disabilities may interact with various IoT 
innovations to help researchers and AT developers to develop more user-friendly 
and effective IoT-based AT applications. In the following, basic building blocks of 
the IoT architecture are explored for AT integration.

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
34
BASIC BUILDING BLOCKS OF THE IoT ARCHITECTURE
A suitable architecture for the Internet of Things (IoT) requires the implementation 
of several and distinct technologies in computing, communications, and data min-
ing (Lopes, Pinto, Furtado, & Silva, 2014). As architecture will have a significant 
bearing on the field itself and needs to be investigated (Gubbi, Buyya, Marusic, 
& Palaniswami, 2013), basic IoT architecture needs to be established and updated 
continuously to commission and decommission various IoT assets. Domingo (2012) 
suggests three layers of IoT architecture: perception, network, and application. This 
layer architecture represents a hierarchical structure of IoT systems. To complement 
this hierarchical view of the IoT systems, five technology building blocks of the 
IoT architecture can be examined: Radio Frequency Identification (RFID), sensors, 
sensor network, cloud computing, and applications. Recent IoT devices for people 
with disabilities represent at least three, if not all, of these building blocks. Figure 1 
shows the five technology building blocks with various technological components. 
These building blocks become the basis for AT that support independence, freedom, 
and dignity of people with disabilities in various environments.
Figure 1. The five technology building blocks

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
35
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID)
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) refers to the system of electronic and com-
puting devices which enables objects with an RFID tag embedded to be wirelessly 
identified and tracked. RFID use electromagnetic energy to wirelessly transmit data 
from the RFID tag to the RFID reader (Want, 2006). When the object embedded 
with the RFID tag passes near a reader, the electromagnetic energy emanated from 
the reader’s antennas creates electric power for the tag to transmit stored data by 
radio wave to the reader. Major applications of RFID have been developed in the 
manufacturing, healthcare, and transportation sectors. RFID has become an impor-
tant building block for the IoT (Lee & Lee, 2015). RFID tags can provide much of 
the essential data that the IoT devices need to provide. When used in hospital or 
homecare settings for people with disabilities, RFID-enabled AT applications allow 
care givers to identify the exact location of the people inside the premises of care 
services and monitor their movements in real-time. El-Basioni, El-Kader, and Elissa 
(2014) proposed a smart home that presents a complete solution for a supportive 
environment that utilizes the RFID system with AT applications for elderly citizens 
with disabilities. Also, a smart home with an RFID system allows people with dis-
abilities to make meaningful contributions by completing tasks without which would 
not be possible (Neßelrath, Haupert, Frey, & Brandherm, 2011; Mulfari, Celesti, 
Fazio, Villari, & Puliafito, 2014).
Sensors
One of the biggest drivers of the IoT revolution is the increasing number of low-cost 
sensors available for many different kinds of functionality (Swan, 2012). The sensor 
industry is accelerating technological innovations due to the market potential cre-
ated by the advent of the IoT. Sensors can be either wired or wireless, and are used 
to monitor and alert change in environments such as temperature, weight, altitude, 
chemicals, moisture, light, sound, motion, etc. Sensors are often embedded in ma-
chines and devices. Smart sensor-based technology has enabled home automation 
utilizing various devices including lighting and temperature control, home security 
management devices, and adaptive kitchens (Domingo, 2012). The application of 
sensors can be divided into two major categories: medical applications and non-
medical applications (Ameen, Liu, & Kwak, 2012). The medical applications of 
sensors can be of two types: wearable and implanted. Wearable devices are those 
that can be used on the body surface of a human or just at close proximity of the 
user to measure temperature and monitor blood pressure, respiration, heart rate, etc. 
The implantable medical devices are those that are inserted inside human body to 
monitor cardiac arrhythmia, brain liquid pressure, etc. (Ameen et al., 2012). The 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
36
sensor communicates with the other sensors to transmit collected data. A network 
of multiple sensors may be used to perform collaborative tasks. For example, a 
temperature sensor may work with a moisture sensor to keep the optimal level of the 
room condition for patients. Data generated by the sensor are used for data analysis 
and decision making. In another example, gathering patient medical data remotely 
helps provide emergency care, conduct diagnostics, and even administer preventive 
medical treatment. Accurate, automated, and real-time information reduce errors 
and improve quality and efficiency of medical services. Due to the miniaturization 
of IoT devices, sensors have the requirements of small size and energy efficiency. 
Various types of sensor devices are being utilized in smart environments for data 
gathering and management for people with disabilities (El-Basioni, et al., 2014; 
Joseph et al., 2015; Lambrinos & Dosis, 2013; Oniga & Sütö, 2014). Also, Busch 
et al. (2013) proposed a user-centered smart medicine cabinet with clear and self-
explanatory interface elements along with AT features such as text-to-speech output. 
A noteworthy feature of this technology is the enhanced privacy, security, and trust 
of people with cognitive and motor disabilities.
Sensor Network
A sensor network connects sensors with one another, and transmits signals. While 
wired sensor networks are used for some IoT applications, they reduce the location 
independence of the sensors or sensor-embedded devices. A wireless sensor net-
work (WSN) consists of a large number of tiny low-cost energy-efficient nodes that 
have small capacities of sensing, processing and communicating via radio medium 
(Demigha, Hidouci, & Ahmed, 2012). WSNs can be categorized into event-driven, 
time-driven, and query-driven (Barrenetxea, et al., 2008). While RFID is used for 
low-cost identification and tracking, WSNs bring IoT applications richer capabilities 
for both sensing and actuation (Lazarescu, 2013).
WSNs are gaining momentum in the IoT industry with the growth of IoT devices. 
Smart home, smart manufacturing, and smart city mostly depend on the WSN for 
the deployment of sensors and devices. Research in healthcare applications of sensor 
devices is currently under progress. Sensor networks applications in healthcare have 
potential for huge impacts. A wireless body sensor network (WBSN) with locally 
computational intelligence provides pervasive monitoring environment while at 
the same time guaranteeing the mobility of monitored patients (Aziz et al., 2008). 
These benefits can be realized through real-time, continuous vital monitoring to 
give immediate alerts to caregivers about patient status. As thousands of devices 
and sensors are connected, sensor networks need to be energy efficient, highly 
reliable, and secure.

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
37
Networking technologies in data collection allow users to control and monitor 
events in various settings. Sula, Spaho, Barolli, and Miho (2014) present an IoT 
based framework that utilizes a combination of robots, tablets, smart phones, laptops, 
and Playstation devices to help children with autism spectrum disorder accomplish 
various tasks. The integrated SmartBox device in this framework includes various 
sensors such as body sensor, chair or bed vibrator control, smell, sound, and re-
mote control socket. This device is combined with various visual systems, such as 
objects, photographs, pictures, realistic drawings, line drawings, and written words 
for children who can readily comprehend the visual representation. Children with 
autism are highly interested and motivated by computers and touch screen tablets. 
Therefore, the integrated SmartBox device allows children with autism to interact, 
make choices, respond, gain new communication skills and create peer-to-peer (P2P) 
communication between children, caregivers and therapists. This assistive environ-
ment along with the use of heuristic diagnostic teaching process is expected to iden-
tify learning abilities and creative traits of students with autism (Sula et al., 2014).
An attempt to bring the IoT and AT together with the use of neural networks 
yielded a system that can contribute to the independence of people with disabilities 
(Oniga & Sütö, 2014). They propose a human activity and health monitoring system 
composed of micro-controller development board, a 3 axes accelerometer sensor, a 
heart rate belt sensor and communication modules, all of which is part of a smart 
environment with IoT and AT features. This proposed system is reported to have 
obtained positive recognition rates but researchers indicate that tests across settings 
and personnel are required for further utilization.
Cloud Computing
Cloud computing is a computing paradigm that relies on sharing computing resources 
such as servers, storage, bandwidth, and applications for an organization’s computing 
needs. According to National Institute of Standards & Technology (Mell & Grance, 
2011), “Cloud computing is a model for enabling ubiquitous, convenient, on-demand 
network access to a shared pool of configurable computing resources (e.g., networks, 
servers, storage, applications, and services) that can be rapidly provisioned and 
released with minimal management effort or service provider interaction.” Cloud 
computing has five essential characteristics: on-demand self-service, broad network 
access, resource pooling, rapid elasticity, and measured service (Mell & Grance, 
2011). The three main services are provided by the cloud computing architecture to 
meet the various needs of users: Software as a Service (SaaS), Platform as a Service 
(PaaS), and Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS) (Buyya, Yeo, Venugopal, Broberg, 
& Brandic, 2009; Cusumano, 2010). The IoT devices generate enormous amount 
of data, which have to be stored, processed and shared (Gubbi et al., 2013). Main 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
38
deployment models include the public cloud, private cloud, community cloud, and 
hybrid. The community cloud is shared by multiple organizations with similar pur-
poses of cloud deployment. The hybrid cloud is a cloud environment in which an 
organization owns and manages their private cloud and leverages a public cloud or 
a community cloud provided externally. Cloud computing has been recognized as a 
building block of the IoT architecture, since it can support gigantic data storage and 
processing needs of the individual sensors and devices. For example, the IoT devices 
can feed data to cloud datacenters for analysis and share data through the datacenter 
with other devices connected on the sensor network. Cloud datacenters possess the 
ability to increase and decrease computing capacity according to demand, while 
remaining accessible anywhere from any device. High performance data processing 
algorithms, control methods, and learning techniques can be installed and run at 
the centralized datacenters. The integration of cloud into IoT systems will acceler-
ate the development of new IoT-based applications. With so much data generated 
by potentially billions of different sensors and devices, cloud computing will play 
the central role in filtering, analyzing, storing, and accessing data and applications 
in useful ways. Cloud computing can be one of the major potential enablers of the 
next generation smart environments for people with disabilities (Gubbi et al., 2013). 
Cloud-based IoT is considered a future trend (Dores, Reis, & Lopes, 2014). Cloud 
computing can decouple the AT devices from the computers by avoiding application 
installations on each available computer (Mulfari et al., 2015). IoT-based AT devices 
can make use of cloud computing to upgrade/expand functions without much of the 
user effort and time. Because cloud computing has such advantages as platform-
independence, high reliability, high efficiency and scalability, the construction of 
cloud centers at hospitals and medical facilities can promote resource sharing and 
facilitate the development of highly reliable medical monitoring and management 
systems (Liu et al, 2015). Figure 2 shows a platform independent cloud-based IoT 
environment for AT devices for people with variety of disabilities.
Applications
The IoT can be classified into three major areas of applications: monitoring and 
controlling, information sharing and collaboration, and big data and data analytics 
(Lee & Lee, 2015). IoT applications are the most visible part to the users in the IoT 
system. IoT applications perform specific functions such as monitoring machines 
remotely, informing a caregiver of the real-time medical condition of a person 
with disability, and analyzing environmental data collected from sensors. Smart 
healthcare which monitors patients’ living conditions and health status using small 
sensing devices and collecting their data over a network under daily life is expected 
as a new trend (Suzuki, Tanaka, Minami, Yamada, & Miyata, 2013). For example, 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
39
IoT-based applications for fall detection will provide help and security for elderly 
or disabled people living independently. IoT applications for collaboration will 
require constant communications and interactions between devices and devices, 
and devices and humans.
Monitoring and control can be part of a much larger collaboration application. 
For example, Nest has more than a dozen other IoT devices from various external 
developers that will collaborate with its thermostat in home automation applica-
tions. While monitoring and control devices may work independently of each other, 
collaboration applications require multiple devices working in sync for common 
purposes. For example, various sensing devices in building and facilities can per-
form collaboration for a smart building operation (Yu, Kim, Bang, Bae, & Kim, 
2015). Big data and data analytics is another promising area of IoT applications 
(Lee & Lee, 2015). IoT data can be very large when data is generated over a certain 
amount of time (Liu, Yang, Zhang, and Chen, 2015). These IoT data can also be 
put to cloud datacenters for processing (Ma et al., 2012). The capacity of cloud 
datacenters is growing exponentially and storage capacity is now less of a concern, 
and the proper use of it to add significant value to the users and organizations is 
a more concern. For example, analysis of the huge data stored at the datacenter 
Figure 2. A platform independent cloud-based IoT environment for ATs

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
40
may indicate certain patterns of when a person with disability is at health risk and 
may be able to alert health professionals of the impending problem. Busch et al. 
(2013) propose a user centered smart medicine cabinet that focuses on information 
sharing and collaboration. This technology provides a clear and self-explanatory 
interface elements along with AT features such as text-to-speech output function 
for communicating the system’s trustworthiness state. A noteworthy feature of this 
technology is the enhanced privacy, security, and trust of people with cognitive and 
motor disabilities. While the above discussions are general and applicable for wide 
areas of the communities, the following section focuses on the AT applications in 
the context of people with disabilities.
THE IoT-INTEGRATED STATE-OF-THE-
ART ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY
Assistive Technology (AT) has been developed to increase the quality of life of people 
with disabilities with improved services in education, rehabilitation, and healthcare 
(Alper & Raharinirina, 2006; Lee & Templeton, 2008; Scherer & Cushman, 2001). 
As the available features and options of AT have increased, their use has been more 
widely considered and recommended (Scherer & Cushman, 2001). According to 
the U.S. “Technology-Related Assistance of Individuals with Disabilities Act of 
1988” (P.L. 100-407), Assistive Technology is defined as “any item, piece of equip-
ment, or product system, whether acquired commercially off the shelf, modified, or 
customized, that is used to increase, maintain, or improve functional capabilities of 
individuals with disabilities.” Types of AT include communication tools including 
text-voice converter, education aides for reading and writing, daily living devices 
such as robotics for household maintenance, mobility, and home automation such 
as smoke detectors, remote lighting, and water control. Since the advent of the IoT, 
some of the traditional ATs have been gradually integrated into IoT capabilities. 
Types of disabilities that are currently supported with IoT-integrated ATs include 
hearing, vision, mobility, cognition, and learning disabilities. This section explores 
what IoT-integrated ATs have been developed and are under development to em-
power the people with disabilities. In the following, we discuss IoT-integrated ATs 
for people with hearing impairment, visual impairments, and mobility disabilities.
IoT Applications for People Who Are Deaf or Hearing Impaired
The IoT is improving the lives of the hearing impaired and deaf. People who are 
hearing impaired can benefit from external or internal (implanted in the ear) AT 
devices and sensors that helps improve hearing. The three major design features of 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
41
AT devices for the hearing impaired are: sound amplification, visual information 
output (e.g., flashing lights, sign language, and text output) and tactile output (e.g., 
vibrating alarm clock). In an IoT-based home automation setting, sensors monitor 
the surrounding environment and detect certain events such as heat, smoke or fire 
that triggers an alarm signal which in turn is sent to the control station. The control 
station forwards it to the AT device as an amplified alarm signal for the hearing 
impaired or flash signal for the deaf.
HandTalk is a low-cost, portable gesture-to-speech glove prototype designed to 
help the hearing impaired communicate with those who are not familiar with the 
American Sign Language (ASL) (Sarji, 2008). HandTalk has a simple mechanism 
to switch from standby to ready mode and back, and uses commercial-off-the-shelf 
applications compatible with standard cell phones and hand held devices. The glove 
is fitted with flex sensors which sense the position of the fingers and sends it to a 
monitoring station using Bluetooth. If the position data matches the set of values 
associated with an ASL sign of a stored database, the sign is converted into text 
and finally into speech.
The hearing aid market is one of the largest markets for the hearing impaired. 
A number of tech companies are competing to grab the hearing aid market with 
IoT integration. In the 2015 International Consumer Electronic Show, Siemens has 
introduced the EasyTek smart hearing aid system which adds functions and con-
nectivity of each hearing-aid via Bluetooth to an EasyTek disc that people wear 
around their neck. The EasyTek disc is used to control the volume in the device, or 
turn the hearing aid on or off. The device also connects via Bluetooth to the Siemens 
EasyTek app on iOS or Android devices to control the parameters of the hearing 
aid (iTunes, 2016). The device has noise cancellation technology that removes 
noise and amplifies the voice of the person who is directly in front of the hearing 
aid wearer. This system exemplifies the idea of the IoT-integrated monitoring and 
control. Smart Hearing Aid, a Bluetooth ear set with a hearing aid feature is another 
example of using smartphones for hearing aids. While wirelessly connected to users’ 
smartphones, Smart Hearing Aid provides basic ear set features such as hands-free 
voice calling and CD-quality music play and offers a four-channel hearing aid feature 
for people with hearing loss via a smartphone app (SK Telecom, 2015). Building 
on the existing Bluetooth standard that is widely supported in today’s smartphones, 
tablets and personal computers, the IoT will give hearing-impaired users the same 
choice of products and opportunities as everyone else.
The individual hearing aid system collects data about device setting, age, 
gender, audio preferences and their everyday listening environments. These data 
can be uploaded to the cloud datacenter for further analysis. Big data analytics of 
hearing aids is another example of a paradigm shift in the hearing science. The IoT 
enables the recording of personalized hearing adjustment and linking the data for 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
42
further remote analysis at the datacenters. In the near future, hearing aid users will 
get the opportunity to participate in hearing aid development. Results by hundreds 
of thousands of users will be submitted to big data analysis engines, aimed at al-
gorithm optimization for audiologists (de Vries, 2014). The IoT-integrated hearing 
aids fully realize the application of monitoring and control, information sharing 
and collaboration, and big data and data analytics. One of the more recent medical 
technologies, cochlear implant (CI) (American Academy of Audiology, n.d.), has 
been widely implemented for infants as young as 3 months old. The effectiveness 
of CI has been well-received but not without resistance from the deaf community. 
Considering the critical language acquisition period hypothesis, CI is considered 
most effective when done as early as possible for the acquisition of speech sounds. 
Whether CI is the miracle ear as some consider it is yet to be witnessed with further 
efficacy studies. The good news for the deaf is that recent CI technology has shifted 
from auditory based only system to an IoT-integrated system with additional text 
and image based output.
Another application of the IoT-integrated ATs for the hearing impaired and a 
deaf is in the area of home networking. LIFX pioneered a smart light with the wifi-
enabled, multi-colored LED that is controllable via a smart device (LIFX, n.d.). 
LIFX light bulbs flash red to let hearing impaired users know there might be danger 
from elevated smoke or carbon monoxide (CO) levels. The environment also has a 
multitude of Internet-connected displays, RFID, and other near field communication 
(NFC) scanners. The deaf person brings a tag which is continuously monitored by 
a scanner. As his identity and location and subsequent preferences are known to 
the LIFX systems, the connected displays in the person’s vicinity can adapt their 
signage to the appropriate modality.
IoT Applications for People Who Are Blind or Visually Impaired
The three main common design features of AT applications for people who are blind 
or visually impaired are: magnification (e.g., zoom text, large fonts), auditory output 
(e.g., screen reader, text to speech output devices), and tactile information output 
(e.g., braille, raised maps). Individuals who are blind have been less dependent 
upon other individuals due to AT applications that enable them to complete tasks in 
daily living skills. These include color and pattern analyzer for dressing and speech 
output applications for accessing information on the web, books, and emails. As 
a navigation tool for people who are blind, the white cane, a tactile based device, 
has been used for several decades. Multiple IoT-integration projects will give more 
options for people who are blind, and the white cane may become a thing of the 
past. The Indoor Navigation Project at Curtin University will enable people who 
are blind to sense their surroundings using special multi-sensor array technology 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
43
(Curtin University, 2013). The special multi-sensor array technology senses an 
entire room’s features, builds a virtual map of it and communicates this to the user. 
Unlike a cane with limited range of sensing, the multi-sensor device covers a wide 
range and types of sensing and mapping including the change of velocity, images, 
or noise in an indoor environment.
A 3-D navigation system for the blind was developed at the Institute of Intelligent 
Systems and Robotics at the Pierre and Marie Curie University in Paris, France 
(Jablonski, 2012). It consists of a pair of glasses equipped with cameras and sensors 
utilizing sensing systems for robots, and a handheld electronic Braille device. The 
system produces a 3-D map of the wearer’s environment and his/her position within it 
that is constantly updated and displayed in a simplified form on the handheld device 
and helps blind people to move about indoor and outdoor spaces independently. It 
uses a collection of accelerometers and gyroscopes that keeps track of the user’s 
location and speed. This information is combined with the image to determine the 
user’s position in relation to other objects, which are transmitted to the handheld 
Braille device to be displayed as a dynamic tactile map. Recently, a navigation system 
using a wearable sensor and social sensors to increase situational awareness for the 
blind utilizing real-time localization technologies was created (Joseph et al., 2013). 
This navigation system promotes independent traveling for the blind by utilizing 
the information of the events gathered from the Internet.
Another IoT-based new navigation system for the blind is MIT’s EyeRing, which 
uses a small camera worn as a ring which was developed by a team from the Fluid 
Interfaces Group at MIT’s Media Lab. This device translates images of objects 
captured through a camera into aural feedback to aid the blind. The ring takes a 
picture or a video that is then sent wirelessly to a mobile phone, where an applica-
tion analyzes the content and reads out an answer. It consists of a 3D-printed ABS 
nylon outer housing containing a small VGA camera unit, a 16 MHz AVR processor, 
a Bluetooth radio module and a 3.7V Li-ion battery (Ridden, 2012).
Many IoT applications utilize wearable technology such as smart watches, smart 
wristbands, and smart glasses. Many wearable devices are used to track how many 
steps the user takes, or even how many miles the wearer traveled, but has not been 
used for the visually impaired. A startup company called Ducere Technologies is 
looking to use wearable technology along with the IoT to make the lives of the vi-
sually impaired much easier. The company is developing a touch-based interactive 
footwear called Lechal (Lechal, n.d.). A specialized shoe insole vibrates to alert 
users when they’re supposed to make a turn, acting like a real-time GPS device for 
their feet, directing the wearer where he or she should go (Annear, 2014).
Like Bluetooth-based hearing aid, Bluetooth technology is also integrated to help 
people who are blind or visually impaired. An Austrian company called Indoo.rs and 
the San Francisco Airport (SFO) department are developing iOS assistive technolo-

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
44
gies with iBeacons sensors to create an indoor navigation system for the visually 
impaired at SFO Terminal 2 (Param, 2014). This innovative app uses a couple of 
hundred iBeacons installed throughout the terminal not only to facilitate physical 
movement through space, but also to provide intelligent navigation to people who 
are blind or visually impaired by speaking out various objects and locations in the 
terminal. The users download the indoo.rs app on their iPhone. iBeacons, which are 
placed near an object, use Bluetooth to transmit a unique identifier of an object to 
the user’s iPhone to look up information related to the ID over the Internet.
IoT Applications for Mobility Disability
AT for mobility/ambulation can also be referred to as ambulatory aids. Ambulatory 
aids clean floors and items, water plants, control light and temperature, open and 
close garages and perform other functions to ensure safety, comfort, and conve-
nience for the people with mobility disability. The IoT brings ambulatory aids new 
capabilities. A smart connected wheelchair is a concept designed by Intel interns 
as part of the Intel Collaborators program, and has been endorsed by the award-
winning theoretical physicist, Stephen Hawking (del Castillo, 2014). This wheelchair 
is capable of monitoring vitals of the person sitting in the chair, including blood 
pressure, heart rate, and body temperature. The wheelchair is also equipped with an 
application that allows wheelchair users to rate accessibility of different locations, 
further enhancing the user experience. It even informs the users of the wheelchair’s 
status, keeping them even more safe and comfortable wherever they may go. The 
IoT systems for the people with mobility disabilities need to collect, analyze, and 
apply recommendations autonomously and unobtrusively. This connected smart 
wheelchair enables monitoring and control, information sharing and collaboration, 
and big data and data analytics. An application called ‘use-case’ enables children 
with cerebral palsy to interact with their toys and their caregivers through a mobile 
device such as smart phone or tablet which has an installed learning game (Lopes, 
Pinto, Furtado, & Silva, 2014).
Brain-Computer Interfaces (BCI) systems help people with severe motor disabili-
ties to regain independence to some extent (Leeb et al., 2015). BCI systems use brain 
signals as a communication and control channel to perform navigation tasks through 
a bidirectional audio/video connections to a telepresence mobile robot. BCI users 
are able to have interactions with family members and friends at different locations 
from the users. While BCI technology significantly improves the quality of human 
to human interaction to some extent, authors caution that controlling the robots is a 
complicated task and that shared control can better facilitate the BCI operation than 
direct control. Lambrinos and Dosis (2013) propose a parking space management 
system for people with disabilities utilizing monitoring technology which integrates 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
45
sensor and smart phones, and wireless and mobile communications. This system can 
assist the parking authorities with usage monitoring to allow better parking space 
allocation used for people with mobility disabilities.
Cognitive info-communications (CogInfoCom) is used to help people with mobile 
disability. CogInfoCom is based on the research of virtual reality systems to create 
special three dimensional (3D) environments in the hope that through which people 
with disabilities can actively participate in the labor market (Juhasz, Juhasz, Steiner, 
& Kertesz, 2013). The use of 3D environments such as office environments with 
IoT applications should be given to careful examination of individual differences 
such as preferences, interests, and cognitive abilities. Home automation and security 
applications also offer benefits to people with disabilities or older adults. Home 
automation applications allow people with mobility disability to change thermostat 
settings remotely, adjust lighting, activate security alarms and cameras, control ap-
pliances, and control door locks, typically via smartphones and online monitoring. 
Smart transportation and self-driving cars are also helpful new options for people 
with mobility disability (American Association of People with Disabilities, 2015). 
El-Basioni, El-Kader, & Eissa (2014) propose a smart home wireless sensor networks 
called E/D-WSH system suitable for elders and people with disabilities. E/D-WSH 
system offers a complete solution for the whole home environment with entering 
system, fall detection system, RFID system, lighting system, microphone/speech 
recognition system, proximity sensor/sound synthesizer system, gas leakage detection 
system, electrical devices monitoring and home structure health system. As shown 
in various applications, IoT consistently help improve the safety of the people with 
mobility disability by gathering information on user patterns, environmental dangers, 
assessing the individual’s needs, and taking and proactive measures when a safety 
threshold has been breached. Table 1 summarizes various IoT studies reviewed.
TRENDS OF THE IOT TECHNOLOGIES FOR AT
A rapid advancement in the IoT technologies for AT has been made in network, 
software and algorithm, hardware, and data processing. Network technology is 
moving to unobtrusive wire-free communication technology and a context-aware 
autonomous network (Sundmaeker, Guillemin, Friess, & Woelfflé, 2010). While 
RFID tags and sensors have been the focus of hardware innovation, miniaturization 
of hardware and nanotechnology is leading the energy-efficient hardware evolution 
as shown in Smart Home technology for people with disabilities. Since processing 
a large amount of IoT data in real-time will increase workloads of data centers at 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
46
Table 1. IoT for people with disabilities: roles, application category, benefits, and 
future works
Authors 
IoT Roles
IoT 
Application 
Category
Benefits
Future Work
Busch et al. 
(2013)
• A user-centered smart medicine 
cabinet that informs about 
potential privacy and security risks 
along with helping users manage 
their life 
• Clear and self-explanatory 
interface elements, readable font 
size, and clear visual design 
• Acoustic reminder for taking 
medicine, haptic feedback for 
communicating the system’s 
trustworthiness state, using text-to-
speech functionalities
Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
Enhanced privacy, security, and 
trust of people with mental and 
physical disabilities
• Expansion of the cabinet 
to people with dyslexia or 
impaired vision to see how 
well they can use the cabinet 
and how trustworthy it is 
perceived by them 
• Publish guidelines about 
how best to present security 
information to people 
regardless of their disabilities. 
That way everyone can have 
a trustworthy experience in 
the IoT
Dores, 
Reis, & 
Lopes 
(2014) 
Machine to machine instant 
messaging platform useful in 
Integrating the cloud Internet 
platform and diverse IoT devices
Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
Care system for people 
with disabilities for more 
independence through cloud-
based communication systems
Various security technologies 
need to be tested and 
improved for quality of 
service
El-Basioni, 
El-Kader, 
& Eissa 
(2014) 
Elders/Disabilities Wireless Smart 
Home for assistive independent 
living (E/D-WSH)
Monitoring 
and control
• The home automation system 
which can be controlled locally 
using a remote control or an 
application on a PC or laptop, or 
remotely through the Internet 
• A complete solution for 
the whole home environment 
for elders and disabilities by 
designing entering 
• system, fall detection system, 
RFID system, lighting system, 
microphone/ speech recognition 
system, proximity sensor
• Realizing energy saving 
of smart home technology 
by using alternative power 
especially the solar power 
• Continuous measuring 
of power consumption of 
different devices to help 
home owners manage their 
use of electrical devices
Jablonski, 
C. (2012).
Sensing systems for robots to help 
for people with visual impairment 
navigate unknown terrains
Monitoring 
and Control 
application
The system produces a 3-D map 
of the wearer’s environment and 
his/her position within it that is 
constantly updated and displayed 
in a simplified form on the 
handheld device
Need to be integrated with 
mobile phones and voice-
assisted devices
Joseph et 
al. (2015) 
• Assistive navigation using 
wearable sensors and social 
sensors for people with visual 
impairment 
• Fusion of social media 
messages, wearable sensors, and 
real-time localization technologies
• Monitoring 
and control 
• Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
Enhanced situation awareness 
with crowdsourced social media 
data
• Need to improve the quality 
using more rules and patterns 
• Further research on 
obstacle objects recognition, 
such as recognizing chairs 
or stairs
Juhasz, 
Juhasz, 
Steiner, & 
Kertesz 
(2013) 
• Personal 3D environments for 
people with special needs or 
disabilities 
• The physical surroundings of 
the subject is combined with 
representations of virtual reality
Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
Provide people with disabilities 
to join in the workflow of a 
company
Need to do further testing in 
real life situations
Lambrinos 
& Dosis 
(2013) 
Parking space management for 
people with disabilities
• Monitoring 
and control 
• Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
• Better utilization and 
management of parking spaces 
allocated for use by people with 
disabilities 
• Assisting the authorities 
with usage monitoring for law 
enforcement as well as capacity 
planning purposes
Various improvements to the 
system concentrating on user 
verifications and reservation 
enforcement which will 
enable for reservations to be 
made for future time periods
continued on following page

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
47
an exponential rate, data processing will become more context-aware, optimized 
and cognitive. The challenge is to identify issues associated with data storage and 
processing as IoT technology is increasingly applied to AT.
Authors 
IoT Roles
IoT 
Application 
Category
Benefits
Future Work
Leeb et al. 
(2015) 
Brain-computer interfaces (BCI) 
systems with a telepresence robot 
for people with severe motor 
disabilities
Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
• Use brain signals as a 
communication and control 
channel to complete navigation 
tasks of a mobile robot 
• Empower people with severe 
motor disabilities to regain a 
degree of independence
More extensive comparisons 
with alternative systems
Lopes, 
Pinto, 
Furtado, 
& Silva 
(2014) 
Two use cases that are currently 
being deployed for people with 
visual impairment and people with 
neurologic impairment
• Monitoring 
and control 
• Information 
sharing and 
collaboration 
• Big Date and 
data analytics
Improving the independence of 
people with visual impairment 
and people with neurologic 
impairment for
Currently laboratory stage. 
Need to test the use cases 
with users and analyze their 
adaptation to the AT devices
Mulfari, 
Celesti, 
Fazio, 
Villari, & 
Puliafito 
(2014) 
The usage of embedded systems 
able to interface sensors and 
existing AT software tools running 
on user’s personal computing 
devices
Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
Decouple AT software tools from 
the accessed computer systems, 
allowing us to control various 
kinds of computer systems, in 
order to natively interact with 
many platforms
Integration of plugins with 
cloud computing platform is 
needed in order to natively 
interact with many computers
Neßelrath 
et al. 
(2011) 
A fusion of several systems 
comprising the intelligent 
medicament blister and the task-
based calendar
• Monitoring 
and control 
• Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
The intelligent medicament 
blister helps to increase a 
patient’s compliance and the 
task-based calendar assists people 
with cognitive disabilities in 
their activities of daily living like 
cooking tea
Seamless integration of 
multiple vendor systems 
based on open standards and 
architectures
Oniga 
& Suto 
(2014) 
An assistive assembly consisting 
of a smart and assistive 
environment, a human activity 
and health monitoring system, 
an assistive and telepresence 
robot, together with the related 
components and cloud services
• Monitoring 
and control 
• Information 
sharing and 
collaboration 
• Big Data and 
data analytics
Adaptive capability and learning 
behavior of AT devices for 
independent daily life assistance 
of elderly or persons with 
disabilities
• Further testing of the 
systems in different 
circumstances and with 
different people 
• Need for further simulation 
of more artificial neural 
networks types for activity/
health status recognition
Sarji 
(2008) 
“Smart glove” that can recognize 
basic hand gestures and convert 
them into written words
Information 
Sharing and 
Collaboration
A low-cost, portable gesture-to-
speech glove prototype
• Currently the device can 
convert only few words, 
suggests that sensor gloves 
can be used for partial sign 
language recognition 
• More sensors need to be 
employed to recognize full 
sign language
Sula, 
Spaho, 
Barolli, 
& Miho 
(2014)
An AT system combined 
consisting of the IoT, peer to 
peer technology and heuristic 
diagnostic teaching principles
• Monitoring 
and control 
• Information 
sharing and 
collaboration
• Use of the smart environment 
to support students that are 
diagnosed within Autism 
Spectrum disorder (ASD) 
• Better support the students 
during their learning by actively 
engaging the students during 
their learning and creating and 
maintaining their calm alert state
Need to evaluate the 
assessment results to design 
learning objectives and 
lessons for students with 
autism spectrum disorder
Table 1. Continued

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
48
Smart Sensors
Spencer, Ruiz-Sandoval, & Kurata (2004) define smart sensors with four features:
1. 	
On-board computing capability,
2. 	
Small size,
3. 	
Wireless communication, and
4. 	
Low cost.
According to WinterGreen (Kharif, 2013), the current size of the smart sensor 
market is about 65 million devices, but it is expected to reach 2.8 trillion devices 
by 2019. Advances in sensor technology have enabled miniature smart sensors to 
unobtrusively monitor physiological signals, body posture, type and level of physical 
activity, and environmental conditions (Milosevic, Milenkovic, & Jovanov, 2013). 
Due to the explosion of the data collected with the proliferation of the IoT devices, 
sensors need to monitor the data quality and perform preliminary data processing. A 
smart sensor includes a microprocessor that can be used for digital signal processing, 
data filtering, self-diagnosis, self-identification, and self-adaptation. Some smart 
sensors can be programmed to send alerts to users when predefined events take 
place. IBM is developing Secure Living project utilizing smart sensors (IBM, n.d.). 
The homes for senior citizens and people with disabilities equipped with remote 
sensors to monitor the environment in real time, checking for changes in temperature 
or potential dangers such as water leaks or high levels of carbon monoxide. Data is 
transmitted and displayed on a dashboard in an off-site central control room, and 
on an assigned operator’s Android mobile device via e-mail, SMS or Twitter. When 
problems arise and immediate action is required, alerts are sent to family members, 
volunteer ‘angels,’ members of the social services department or local emergency 
staff, based on the individual’s specific need. The smart sensors can also learn the 
user’s preferences and adjust its behaviors accordingly.
Self-Powered Sensors
Because of the large number, small sizes and complicated surrounding environ-
ments, powering wireless sensors with conventional batteries creates challenges in 
replacement or on-site charging of the batteries (Gheibi, Latifi, Merati, & Bagh-
erzadeh, 2012; Huang et al., 2010). Since batteries have a limited life and need to 
be maintained regularly, the consumption of electric power by the batteries of the 
wireless sensors limited the scope of the IoT applications for AT devices (e.g., patient 
monitoring). Self-powering of electronic devices has emerged as a viable solution 
by integrating a power generator that can scavenge and turn the surrounding local 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
49
energy into electrical energy to drive the electronic devices sustainably without 
any other electrical input (Gheibi et al., 2014). Self-powering sensor technology 
offers advantages of location independence, minimum space, and zero wired-power 
requirements. Self-powering sensors use a variety of methods to generate or store 
electricity such as inductive switches, solar cells, and thermo-energy harvesters. 
Wireless Body Area Networks (WBANs) medical applications are actively utilizing 
smart and self-powered sensor devices that can be attached, or even implanted into, 
humans to monitor their physiological parameters (e.g., temperature, blood pressure, 
heart pulse rate, etc.), body motion as well as their surrounding environment. All 
the monitored parameters are then transmitted wirelessly, using short-range on-body 
or Intra-WBAN communications, from the on/in-body sensors to the monitoring 
centers for further data processing and analysis (Alam & Hamida, E2104).
Nanotechnology Sensors
Nanotechnology encompasses various technologies that cross sectors, such as 
nanomaterials (NMs), medicine, devices, fabrication, electronics, communications, 
and energy. There has been a phenomenal development in nanotechnology during 
the last two decades (Leary, 2010; Weiss, 2010). Nanotechnology will be driving a 
strong force in developing miniaturized sensors and related AT devices. Operating 
on the scale of atoms and molecules at the measure unit of 0.001 microns, nano-
technologies promise dramatic improvements in sensor designs and capabilities. 
Nano-size materials display different properties from bulk (or micrometric and 
larger) materials as a result of their size. These differences include physical strength, 
chemical reactivity, electrical conductance, magnetism, and optical effects (Rai & 
Ingle, 2012). Nanotechnology sensors are tiny, lower weight, and energy efficient. 
Nanosensors and nano-enabled smart sensors have applications in biosensors, diag-
nostics, environmental monitoring, drug delivery, therapeutic, healthcare, medicine, 
etc. Considerable efforts are made to reduce the cost of nano-size materials, improve 
reliability, and create useful sensors. Zhu et al. (2015) propose a clustered-sensor 
system through a project called SPHERE to provide analytics-driven, data gathering 
platforms for the field of healthcare management. This proposed system, currently 
being implemented in a real house, aims to bridge e-health and IoT by processing 
the sensor based data in real time for health monitoring.
Context-Aware Computing
Context-aware computing has the capacity to be aware of environments and their 
characteristics through sensors. In the IoT environment, a large number of devices 
are connected with each other and it is not feasible to process all the streaming data 

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
50
available to those devices. Understanding the context makes it easier to perform 
machine-to-machine and machine-to-human communication as it is a core element 
in the IoT vision (Perera, Zaslavsky, Christen, & Georgakopoulos, 2014). Context 
is classified into a low-level context involving time, location, identity, and activity, 
which are the most utilized contextual information, and a high-level context, which 
involves any other information that can be derived from the low-level types (Abowd 
et al., 1999). The success of context-aware information delivery requires an effective 
localization solution, as context-aware applications need to know the location of the 
user/object to determine and provide relevant information and services. Bradley and 
Dunlop (2008) discuss how contextual information such as location and personal 
preferences can be embedded into user-computer interactions and how these facili-
ties and capabilities could be used to assist the visually impaired traveler on a long 
distance journey. Smart phones are a valuable platform that bears significant poten-
tial to support context-aware applications along with built in accessibility features 
(Li & Becerik-Gerber, 2012). Context-aware AT devices will possess a high level 
of intelligence in their control, actions and interactions with people with cognitive 
disabilities, offering them high level of comfort and functionality.
Interoperability of the IoT Systems
The IoT ecosystem needs to support interactions among many heterogeneous sources 
of data and many heterogeneous devices through the use of standard interfaces and 
data models to ensure mapping and cross-referencing among applications and ser-
vices in order to exchange data. Interoperability is significantly more challenging for 
the IoT as it is not only about connecting people with people, but about a seamless 
interaction between devices and devices. Two types of interoperability are identified:
1. 	
Technological Interoperability: The IoT devices can differ regarding their 
technological capabilities, and
2. 	
Semantic Interoperability: For full interoperability, it is necessary that the 
devices interpret the shared information correctly and act accordingly (Gazis 
et al., 2015).
Standards play an important role to create collaborative technological solutions 
both within a single service provider and across multiple providers. Standards 
remove ambiguity about the interpretation of the information they exchange. Stan-
dards regarding communication, data sharing, and application interfaces will ensure 
that the IoT devices collaborate with each other. Standards for interoperability are 
a prerequisite for the integration of the multi-vendor AT devices for people with 
multiple disabilities who need comprehensive support services.

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
51
Other Trends
The principle of universal design, which promotes product development to reach 
the widest range of individuals with varying abilities, has been the basis for the 
development of various AT applications (www.cast.org). One such example is the 
built-in accessibility features in products such as computers, tablets, and mobile 
phones. These seamless features allow people with disabilities to access information, 
participate in social media, and IoT applications. These built-in accessibility features 
enable customization for people with disabilities at no extra cost. For example, 
keyboard functions can be manipulated to control the rate of typing and manner of 
pressing keys for people with limited motor abilities; sound input can be controlled 
via amplification and speech recognition; and screen display modes include visual 
notifications, magnifiers, and different text sizes (Apple, n.d.; Microsoft, n.d.). It 
is expected that the principle of universal design is widely applied to the design of 
IoT devices to allow people with disabilities to access services with high-levels of 
comfort and ease.
Another significant trend that has been getting increasing attention is the devel-
opment of numerous smartphone-based applications for learning, mobility, com-
munication, information sharing, and monitoring. For example, the iPad is utilized 
as a platform for applications in various areas of learning and communication 
(Catlett & Turan, 2013; More & Travers, 2013). Naturally, many pages of recent 
technology journals cover the studies that examined the effectiveness of iPad apps 
for reading, attention, communication, and cognitive support. Exhibits at technol-
ogy conferences shift from small hardware devices to applications and software 
devices for learning, communication, and daily living. iPad-based applications are 
taking over other traditional AT devices, especially in the categories of education 
and communication.
ISSUES OF THE IOT-BASED ASSISTIVE TECHNOLOGY 
FOR PEOPLE WITH DISABILITIES
Barriers to accessing technology for people with disabilities have been addressed 
(Lee & Templeton, 2008). New issues arise when the IoT meets ATs. Based on the 
literature of AT practices, this section identifies several issues in the IoT-integrated 
AT development. There is an urgent need to address the issues in security, privacy, 
reliability, changing roles of health care professionals, and involvement of users and 
families to seamlessly integrate the IoT into the ATs.

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
52
Security
Security is defined as the subjective probability with which consumers believe that 
their personal information (private and monetary) will not be viewed, stored, and 
manipulated during transit and storage by inappropriate parties in a manner con-
sistent with their confident expectations (Flavián, & Guinalíu, 2006). Kalakota & 
Whinston (1996) define security threat as a circumstance, condition, or event with 
the potential to cause economic hardship to data or network resources in the form 
of destruction, disclosure, modification of data, denial of service, and/or fraud, 
waste, and abuse. Security threats also include data theft, resource theft, fire, natural 
disasters, burglaries, virus, and cyber-terrorism. Connected IoT devices are likely to 
fall victims in unsecure networks. A survey conducted by PricewaterhouseCoopers 
has indicated that the total number of security incidents has increased 48% over 
2013. According to a Hewlett-Packard (HP) report (Kovacs, 2014), a total of 250 
security holes have been found in tested IoT devices - on average, 25 per device. The 
issues are related to privacy, insufficient authorization, lack of transport encryption, 
inadequate software protection, and insecure web interfaces. With HP reporting that 
up to 70% of devices developed for the IoT are vulnerable to cyber-attacks, the need 
to ‘lock down’ mission critical’ data across multiple applications has never been 
greater. Vulnerabilities of the IoT will continue to arise as more and more devices 
are connected to the IoT world.
Privacy
Privacy is defined as a two-dimensional construct with physical space and informa-
tion (Goodwin, 1991). Any application that collects data from users has to be clear 
about what it collects and how it is used in order to build trust. Ackerman, Cranor, 
and Reagle (1999) gave participants four scenarios in which they had to indicate 
whether they were comfortable providing various types of personal information. A 
majority of users were very comfortable with providing general information (e.g., 
favorite food) and somewhat comfortable with providing directory-type information 
(name, address, e-mail), but they were uncomfortable with providing financial and 
health information (e.g., credit card, health status). For questions relating to the 
users’ general attitudes regarding providing personal information, Ackerman et al. 
(1999) concluded that users can be classified as:
1. 	
Marginally concerned,
2. 	
Privacy fundamentalists (users who are very concerned with privacy), or
3. 	
Pragmatic (users whose concerns vary as a function of the type of transaction 
being performed).

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
53
People with disabilities show various levels of privacy concerns when it comes 
to using ATs. With connected IoT devices deployed around users’ homes and bodies 
and potentially collecting data that government and other third parties can access, 
they may start to self-consciously protect their privacy. Government regulation of 
the IoT privacy is under way. The Article 29 Working Party, a European Union pri-
vacy body (Justice, n.d.), and the Article 5(3) of Directive 2002/58/EC as amended 
by Directive 2009/136/EC (the ePrivacy Directive) stipulates that Member States 
shall ensure that ”the storing of information, or the gaining of access to information 
already stored, in the terminal equipment of a subscriber or user” is only allowed 
on the condition that the subscriber or user concerned has given his or her consent, 
having been provided with clear and comprehensive information in accordance with 
Directive 95/46/EC6 (the Data Protection Directive), inter alia, about the purposes 
of the information processing. These documents say consumers should remain in 
control of their personal data throughout the life of the product. In some parts of 
Europe, such as the U.K, the industry is working closely with the government which 
is a desirable way of developing guidelines.
Reliability
In industrial environments or in emergencies, even temporary failure of AT devices 
is unacceptable. Hence, resilience and reliability issues in the AT devices need to 
be addressed from an overall system point of view and include such dimensions as 
availability, robustness, and flexibility of the devices to changing environmental 
conditions, and the robustness of data processing to uncertain information (Gazis et 
al., 2015). The IoT devices have to be resilient to communication errors by provid-
ing efficient mechanisms for information distribution especially in the multi-hop 
scenario (Maalel, Natalizio, Bouabdallah, Roux, & Kellil, 2013). System reliability 
is the result of a combination of individual reliabilities and the weakest component 
dominates the reliability of the entire system. The failures of the entire IoT system 
are experienced more frequently when there is a large number of deployed devices 
and sensors. Mathematical models of failure analysis may provide greater insight 
into the probability and costs of failures and requirements for minimum acceptable 
performance. There are multiple components in any IoT system. A well-designed 
system requires understanding of exactly what is a dominant reliability-related 
component in the IoT system and therefore needs redundancy and backups. For ex-
ample, a single sensor may cause the entire system to stop functioning, and therefore 
redundancy of the sensor can be warranted.

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
54
Changing Roles of Health Care Professionals
Implementing AT services in rehabilitation programs is a complex process. AT 
selection and services are influenced by the availability of AT options, knowledge 
and experience of professionals, and budget limitations (Okolo & Deidrich, 2014). 
While the effectiveness of AT on learning and daily lives for people with disabili-
ties across ages has been well documented, professionals face multiple challenges 
in providing effective AT services, especially in compliance with federal laws, 
funding, training, and collaboration. Due to the recent technological advancements 
in AT devices along with the IoT, healthcare professionals are faced with new 
challenges. The paradigm shift to the IoT-integrated AT will change the roles of 
various healthcare professionals. People with disabilities will be more empowered 
with more personalized and user-centered services. Many healthcare professionals 
may have doubts about their future position as the self-service component of the 
IoT-integrated ATs accelerates. To remain most valuable in the value chain of the 
AT industry, they need to retrain themselves for new value added services and new 
technologies and need to be willing to adapt to all possible changes in their area.
Involvement of Users and Families
AT services are typically provided by a number of multidisciplinary professionals 
including occupational therapists, physical therapists, speech therapists, teachers, and 
rehabilitation technologists. Families of people with disabilities should be included 
as meaningful partners in the implementation of AT applications. Yet, the key ele-
ments of the existing literature on the IoT-integrated AT do not necessarily include 
family as an integral member of the technology application process. Developing 
cultural sensitivity in the selection and use of AT devices and services is critical for 
people with disabilities and their families with diverse backgrounds. In addition, 
the use of AT devices may require extensive training and collaboration between 
the family members and the service providers. AT users and their family members 
may feel overwhelmed and reluctant to go through the training even when they 
do not understand the benefits of a new AT device and are cognitively challenged 
due to a technical complexity. Kling, Campbell, & Wilcox (2010) shows parents 
do not feel knowledgeable enough to utilize AT devices even though they believe 
AT is beneficial for their children’s physical development. Also, early intervention 
professionals do not feel confident enough to train parents for the utilization of AT 
devices at home. To prevent the abandonment of the acquired devices, professionals 
need to put family needs as a priority over their own agenda when considering the 
selection and utilization of a new IoT-integrated AT for individuals.

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
55
CONCLUSION
This chapter discussed various IoT applications which is a certainty of future tech-
nology that will makes positive differences in the lives of people with disabilities. 
Medical and technological advancement have made it possible for people with dis-
abilities to enjoy the quality and longevity of their lives, which in turn has required 
healthcare and rehabilitation professionals to utilize various types of AT and IoT-
integrated AT devices. Numerous IoT-integrated applications are being introduced 
into the AT market. However, the IoT being a relatively new development, has yet 
to see solid benefits of the IoT applications for people with disabilities. People with 
disabilities are a heterogeneous group and each individual case needs to be carefully 
examined when considering which applications should be utilized in under which 
circumstances. The field of special education has various AT service delivery models 
due to the AT federal legislation for children with disabilities. The healthcare field 
is faced with the following remaining tasks: including identifying or developing 
assessment instruments in order to identify which IoT-integrated AT applications 
will be used at which environment for which tasks, identifying funding sources 
and obtaining the devices, and securing qualified personnel for customization and 
implementation of the technology. The lack of valid information and unfamiliarity 
with the technology will make it difficult for professionals in healthcare and reha-
bilitation agencies to support people with disabilities in making informed decisions 
when adopting IoT-integrated AT applications. Research on the effectiveness of 
IoT-integrated AT applications that improve the quality of the lives of people with 
disabilities have a long way to go. However, the emergence of various IoT-integrated 
AT applications shed a promising light to the field; yet more attention should be 
given to security, trustworthiness, and reliability in the development and utilization 
of these applications. As noted by Busch et al. (2013), it is critical that technology-
related disciplines promote enhanced privacy, security, and trust of people with 
various types of disabilities. User experience surveys involving all stakeholders 
- developers, users, family members, healthcare providers, and caregivers - is criti-
cal. Also, collaborative, coordinated, multidisciplinary efforts are a must to see the 
true intent of the above mentioned technological advancement in order to support 
people with disabilities as independent and productive citizens.

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
56
REFERENCES
Abowd, G. D., Dey, A. K., Brown, P. J., Davies, N., Smith, M., & Steggles, P. 
(1999). Towards a better understanding of context and context-awareness. In HUC 
‘99 Proceedings of the 1st international symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous 
Computing, (pp. 304-307).
Ackerman, M. S., Cranor, L. F., & Reagle, J. (1999). Privacy in e-commerce: examin-
ing user scenarios and privacy preferences. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference 
on Electronic commerce (pp. 1-8). New York: ACM. doi:10.1145/336992.336995
Alam, M. M., & Hamida, E. B. (2014, May). Surveying Wearable human assistive 
technology for life and safety critical applications: Standards, challenges and oppor-
tunities. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 14(5), 9153–9209. doi:10.3390/s140509153 
PMID:24859024
Alper, S., & Raharinirina, S. (2006). Assistive technology for individuals with 
disabilities: A review and synthesis of the literature. Journal of Special Education 
Technology, 21(2), 47–64.
Ameen, M. A., Liu, J., & Kwak, K. (2012). Security and Privacy Issues in Wireless 
Sensor Networks for Healthcare Applications. Journal of Medical Systems, 36(1), 
93–101. doi:10.1007/s10916-010-9449-4 PMID:20703745
American Academy of Audiology. (n.d.). Cochlear Implants in Children. American 
Academy of Audiology. Retrieved from: http://www.audiology.org/publications-
resources/document-library/cochlear-implants-children
American Association of People with Disabilities. (2015). Retrieved January 23, 
2016, http://www.aapd.com/resources/power-grid-blog/iot-innovations.html
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-336, § 1, 104 Stat. 328 
(1990).
Annear, S. (2014). What the Tech? Lechal ‘Smart Shoes’ Help the Blind Get Around. 
Retrieved August 10, 2015, http://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/blog/2014/03/05/
lechal-insoles-mit-visually-impaired/
Apple. (n.d.). Accessibility. Retrieved from: http://www.apple.com/accessibility/
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2010). The Internet of Things: A survey. Com-
puter Networks, 54(15), 2787–2805. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
57
Aziz, O., Lo, B., Pansiot, J., Atallah, L., Yang, G.-Z., & Ara Darzim, A. (2008). From 
computers to ubiquitous computing by 2010: health care. Philosophical Transac-
tions A: Mathematical, Physical & Engineering Sciences, 366(1881), 3805-3811.
Bandyopadhyay, D., & Sen, J. (2011). Internet of Things: Applications and chal-
lenges in technology and standardization. Wireless Personal Communications, 58(1), 
49–69. doi:10.1007/s11277-011-0288-5
Barrenetxea, G., Ingelrest, F., Schaefer, G., Vetterli, M., Couach, O., & Parlange, 
M. (2008). SensorScope: Out-of-the-Box Environmental Monitoring. Information 
Processing in Sensor Networks, 2008. IPSN ‘08. International Conference on, (pp. 
332–343).
Bradley, N., & Dunlop, M. (2008). Navigation AT: Context-aware computing. In M. 
A. Hersh & M. A. Johnson (Eds.), Assistive Technology for Visually Impaired and 
Blind People (pp. 231–260). Springer London. doi:10.1007/978-1-84628-867-8_7
Bui, N., Castellani, A. P., Casari, P. M., & Zorzi, M. (2012). The internet of en-
ergy: A web-enabled smart grid system. IEEE Network, 26(4), 39–45. doi:10.1109/
MNET.2012.6246751
Busch, M., Hochleitner, C., Lorenz, M., Schulz, T., Tscheligi, M., Wittstock, E. 
(2103). All in: Targeting trustworthiness for special needs user groups in the Internet 
of Things. Lecture Notes in Computer Science, 7904, 223-231. DOI: 10.1007/978-
3-642-38908-5_17
Buyya, R., Yeo, C., Venugopal, S., Broberg, J., & Brandic, I. (2009). Cloud comput-
ing and emerging IT platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as 
the 5th utility. Future Generation Computer Systems, 25(6), 599–616. doi:10.1016/j.
future.2008.12.001
Catlett, C., & Turan, Y. (2013). Technology applications to support your work, Part 1& 
Part 2. Young Exceptional Children, 16(1), 46–50. doi:10.1177/1096250612473130
Coetzee, L., & Olivrin, G. (2012). Inclusion through the internet of things. Inclu-
sion Through the Internet of Things. In Assistive Technologies. InTech. Available 
from: http://www.intechopen.com/books/assistive-technologies/inclusion-through-
the-internet-of-things
Curtin University. (2013). New navigation gadget for people who are blind. Curtin 
University. Retrieved from: http://news.curtin.edu.au/media-releases/new-navigation-
gadget-for-people-who-are-blind/

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
58
de Vries, B. (2014). Introducing data science: Hearing aids on the brink of a 
paradigm shift. Audiology Worldnews. Retrieved on 11/13/15 from http://www.
audiology-worldnews.com/focus-on/1215-introducing-data-science-hearing-aids-
on-the-brink-of-a-paradigm-shift
del Castillo, M. (2014). Stephen Hawking endorses Intel’s souped up smart wheel-
chair. Retrieved July 28, 2015, http://upstart.bizjournals.com/multimedia/interac-
tives/2014/09/stephen-hawking-endorses-intel-s-souped-up-smart.html
Demigha, O., Hidouci, W., & Ahmed, T. (2012). On Energy Efficiency in Collabora-
tive Target Tracking in Wireless Sensor Network: A Review. IEEE Communications 
Surveys and Tutorials, 15(3), 1210–1222. doi:10.1109/SURV.2012.042512.00030
Domingo, M. C. (2012). An overview of the Internet of Things for people with 
disabilities. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 35(2), 584–596. 
doi:10.1016/j.jnca.2011.10.015
Dores, C., Reis, L. P., & Lopes, N. V. (2014). Internet of Things and Cloud Comput-
ing.Iberian Conference on Information Systems & Technologie (CISTI).
El-Basioni, B. M., El-Kader, S. M., & Eissa, S. E. (2014). Independent living for 
persons with disabilities and elderly people using smart home technology. Inter-
national Journal of Application or Innovation in Engineering and Management, 
3(4), 11–28.
Flavián, C., & Guinalíu, M. (2006). Consumer trust, perceived security and privacy 
policy: Three basic elements of loyalty to a web site. Industrial Management & Data 
Systems, 106(5), 601–620. doi:10.1108/02635570610666403
Gartner. (2013). Market Trends: New Technologies Benefit Employees and People With 
Disabilities. Retrieved August 1, 2015 from https://www.gartner.com/doc/2593617/
market-trends-new-technologies-benefit
Gazis, V., Goertz, M., Huber, M., Leonardi, A., Mathioudakis, K., Wiesmaier, A., 
& Zeiger, F. (2015). Short Paper: IoT: Challenges, projects, architectures. 2015 18th 
International Conference on Intelligence in Next Generation Networks (ICIN), (pp. 
145-147).
Gheibi, A., Latifi, M., Merati, A. A., & Bagherzadeh, R. (2014). Piezoelectric elec-
trospun nanofibrous materials for self-powering wearable electronic textiles applica-
tions. Journal of Polymer Research, 21(7), 469. doi:10.1007/s10965-014-0469-5

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
59
Gluhak, A., Krco, S., Nati, M., Pfisterer, D., Mitton, N., & Razafindralambo, T. 
(2011). A survey on facilities for experimental internet of things research. IEEE 
Communications Magazine, 49(11), 58–67. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2011.6069710
Goodwin, C. (1991). Privacy: Recognition of a consumer right. Journal of Public 
Policy & Marketing, 10(1), 149–166.
Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., & Palaniswami, M. (2013). Internet of Things 
(IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Future Generation 
Computer Systems, 29(7), 1645–1660. doi:10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010
Huang, J. (2013). Research on application of internet of things in nursing home. 
Applied Mechanics and Materials, 303-306, 2153-2156. DOI: 10.4028/www.sci-
entific.net/AMM.303-306.2153
IBM. (n.d.). A New vision for ‘social security’: Home healthcare smart sensors help 
keep Italian seniors living in place. IBM. Retrieved from: http://www-03.ibm.com/
able/news/homehealthcare.html
iTunes. (2016). easyTek. Apple. Retrieved from: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/
siemens-easytek/id893105249?mt=8
Jablonski, C. (2012). Sensing systems for robots could help blind navigate. Retrieved 
August 9, 2015, http://www.zdnet.com/article/sensing-systems-for-robots-could-
help-blind-navigate/
Joseph, S. L., Xiao, J., Zhang, X., Chawda, B., Narang, K., Rajput, N., & Subrama-
niam, L. V. et al. (2015). Being aware of the world: Toward using social media to 
support the blind with navigation. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, 
45(3), 399–405. doi:10.1109/THMS.2014.2382582
Juhasz, B., Juhasz, N., Steiner, H., & Kertesz, Z. (2013). Coginfocom in collaborative 
virtual working environments. In 4th IEEE International Conference on Cognitive 
Infocommunications, CogInfoCom 2013 - Proceedings, (pp. 475-480). doi:10.1109/
CogInfoCom.2013.6719294
Justice. (n.d.). Article 29: Working Party. Justice: Building a European Area of Justice. 
Retrieved from: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/article-29/index_en.htm
Kalakota, R., & Whinston, A. B. (1996). Frontiers of electronic commerce. Addison-
Wesley.
Kharif, O. (2013). Trillions of Smart Sensors Will Change Life. Retrieved July 26, 
2015, http://www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-08-05/trillions-of-smart-
sensors-will-change-life-as-apps-have

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
60
Kling, A., Campbell, P. H., & Wilcox, J. (2010). Young children with phyical 
disabilities: Caregiver perspectives about assistive technology. Infants and Young 
Children, 23(3), 169–183. doi:10.1097/IYC.0b013e3181e1a873
Kovacs, E. (2014). 70 Percent of IoT Devices Vulnerable to Cyberattacks: HP. Re-
trieved on July 28, 2015, http://www.securityweek.com/70-iot-devices-vulnerable-
cyberattacks-hp
Lambrinos, L., & Dosis, A. (2013). UbiComp 2013 Adjunct - Adjunct Publication of 
the 2013 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing. Doi:10.1145/2494091.2494162
Lazarescu, M. T. (2013). Design of a WSN Platform for Long-Term Environmental 
Monitoring for IoT Applications. IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in 
Circuits and Systems, 3(1), 45–54. doi:10.1109/JETCAS.2013.2243032
Leary, J. F. (2010). Nanotechnology: What is it and why is small so big? Canadian 
Journal of Ophthalmology, 45(5), 449–456. doi:10.3129/i10-089 PMID:20856270
Lechal. (n.d.). Lechal. Retrieved from: http://lechal.com/
Lee, H. (2009). Using assistive technology to ensure access to E-Learning for indi-
viduals with disabilities. In I. Lee (Ed.), Encyclopedia of E-Business development 
and management in the digital economy. Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing.
Lee, H., & Templeton, R. (2008). Ensuring equal access to technology: An overview 
of providing assistive technology services to students with disabilities. Theory into 
Practice, 47(3), 212–219. doi:10.1080/00405840802153874
Lee, I., & Lee, K. (2015). The Internet of things (IoT): Applications, investments 
and challenges for enterprises. Business Horizons, 58(4), 431–440. doi:10.1016/j.
bushor.2015.03.008
Leeb, R., Tonin, L., Rohm, M., Desideri, L., Carlson, T., & Millán, J. D. R. (2015). 
Towards independence: A BCI telepresence robot for people with severe motor disabili-
ties. Proceedings of the IEEE, 103(6), 969–982. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2015.2419736
Li, N., & Becerik-Gerber, B. (2012). Assessment of a Smart Phone-Based Indoor 
Localization Solution for Improving Context Awareness in the Construction Industry. 
Computing in Civil Engineering, 561-568.
LIFX. (n.d.). LIFX. Retrieved from: http://www.lifx.com
Liu, C., Yang, C., Zhang, X., & Chen, J. (2015). External integrity verification for 
outsourced big data in cloud and IoT: A big picture. Future Generation Computer 
Systems, 49, 58–67. doi:10.1016/j.future.2014.08.007

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
61
Liu, Y., Dong, B., Guo, B., Yang, J., & Peng, W. (2015). Combination of cloud 
computing and Internet of Things (IOT) in medical monitoring systems. Interna-
tional Journal of Hybrid Information Technology, 8(12), 367–376. doi:10.14257/
ijhit.2015.8.12.28
Lopes, N. V., Pinto, F., Furtado, P., & Silva, J. (2014). IoT architecture proposal for 
disabled people. 2014 IEEE 10th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile 
Computing, Networking and Communications, (pp. 152-158).
Ma, Y., Rao, J., Hu, W., Meng, X., Han, X., Zhang, Y., & Liu, C. et al. (2012). An 
efficient index for massive IoT data in cloud environment. In Proceedings of the 
21st ACM International Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. 
doi:10.1145/2396761.2398587
Maalel, N., Natalizio, E., Bouabdallah, A., Roux, P., & Kellil, M. (2013). Reli-
ability for Emergency Applications in Internet of Things.2013 IEEE International 
Conference on Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS), (pp. 361-366). 
doi:10.1109/DCOSS.2013.40
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing. NIST 
Special Publication 800-145, National Institute of Standards and Technology. Re-
trieved on January 26, 2016 from http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/
SP800-145.pdf
Microsoft. (n.d.). Microsoft Accessibility. Microsoft. Retrieved from: https://www.
microsoft.com/enable/
Milosevic, M., Milenkovic, A., & Jovanov, E. (2013). mHealth @ UAH: computing 
infrastructure for mobile health and wellness monitoring. XRDS: Crossroads. The 
ACM Magazine for Students, 20(2), 43–49. doi:10.1145/2539269
More, C. M., & Travers, J. C. (2013). What’s App with that? Selecting educational 
apps for young children with disabilities. Young Exceptional Children, 16(2), 15–32. 
doi:10.1177/1096250612464763
Morris, J., Mueller, J., & Jones, M. (2010). Tomorrow’s elders with disabilities: 
What the wireless industry needs to know. Journal of Engineering Design, 21(2/3), 
131–146. doi:10.1080/09544820903303431
Mulfari, D., Celesti, A., Fazio, M., Villari, M., & Puliafito, A. (2014). Using embed-
ded systems to spread assistive technology on multiple devices in smart environ-
ments. In Proceedings - 2014 IEEE International Conference on Bioinformatics 
and Biomedicine. doi:10.1109/BIBM.2014.6999234

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
62
Mulfari, D., Celesti, A., Fazio, M., Villari, M., & Puliafito, A. (2015). Achieving 
assistive technology systems based on IoT devices in cloud computing. EAI Endorsed 
Transactions on Cloud Systems, 1(1), e4. doi:10.4108/cs.1.1.e4
Neßelrath, R., Haupert, J., Frey, J., & Brandherm, B. (2011). Supporting persons 
with special needs in their daily life in a smart home. In Proceedings - 2011 7th 
International Conference on Intelligent Environments. doi:10.1109/IE.2011.75
Okolo, C. M., & Diedrich, J. (2014). Twenty-Five Years Later: How is technology used 
in the Education of students with disabilities? Results of a statewide study. Journal 
of Special Education Technology, 29(1), 1–20. doi:10.1177/016264341402900101
Oniga, S., & Süto, J. (2014). Human activity recognition using neural networks. In 
Proceedings of the 2014 15th International Carpathian Control Conference, ICCC 
2014. doi:10.1109/CarpathianCC.2014.6843636
Papetti, A., Iualé, M., Ceccacci, S., Bevilacqua, R., Germani, M., & Mengoni, 
M. (2014). Smart objects: An evaluation of the present state based on user needs. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-319-07788-8_34
Param. (2014). IoT iBeacons for the Visually Impaired at SFO. LyfeArts Blog. Re-
trieved from: http://www.lyfearts.com/iot-assistive-tech-and-living/
Perera, C., Zaslavsky, A., Christen, P., & Georgakopoulos, D. (2014). Context Aware 
Computing for the Internet of Things: A Survey. IEEE Communications Surveys 
and Tutorials, 16(1), 414–454. doi:10.1109/SURV.2013.042313.00197
Rai, M., & Ingle, A. (2012). Role of nanotechnology in agriculture with special 
reference to management of insect pests. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 
94(2), 287–293. doi:10.1007/s00253-012-3969-4 PMID:22388570
Ridden, P. (2012). Camera-toting EyeRing could help blind people to “see” objects. 
Retrieved August 9, 2015, http://www.gizmag.com/eyering-object-recognition-
aural-feedback-mit/23677/
Sarji, D. K. (2008). HandTalk: Assistive technology for the deaf. Computer, 41(7), 
84–86. doi:10.1109/MC.2008.226
Scherer, M. J., & Cushman, L. A. (2001). Measuring subjective quality of life 
following spinal cord injury: A validation study of the assistive technology de-
vice predisposition assessment. Disability and Rehabilitation, 23(9), 387–393. 
doi:10.1080/09638280010006665 PMID:11394589

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
63
Schulz, T., Fuglerud, K. S., Arfwedson, H., & Busch, M. (2014). A case study for 
universal design in the internet of things. Assistive Technology Research Series, 35, 
45–54. doi:10.3233/978-1-61499-403-9-45
Sehgal, A., Perelman, V., Kuryla, S., & Schonwalder, J. (2012). Management of 
resource constrained devices in the internet of things. IEEE Communications Maga-
zine, 50(12), 144–149. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2012.6384464
Spencer, B. F. Jr, Ruiz-Sandoval, M. E., & Kurata, N. (2004). Smart sensing tech-
nology: Opportunities and challenges. Journal of Structural Control and Health 
Monitoring, 11(4), 349–368. doi:10.1002/stc.48
Sula, A., Spaho, E., Barolli, L., & Miho, R. (2014). A proposed framework for 
combining smart environment and heuristic diagnostic teaching principles in order 
to assess students’ abilities in math and supporting them during learning. Mediter-
ranean Journal of Social Sciences, 5(2), 187–196. doi:10.5901/mjss.2014.v5n2p187
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., & Woelfflé, S. (2010). Vision and chal-
lenges for realising the Internet of Things, CERP-IoT – Cluster of European Re-
search Projects on the Internet of Things. Retrieved August 16, 2014 from http://
www.researchgate.net/publication/228664767_Vision_and_challenges_for_realis-
ing_the_Internet_of_Things
Suzuki, T., Tanaka, H., Minami, S., Yamada, H., & Miyata, T. (2013). Wearable 
wireless vital monitoring technology for smart health care. Medical Information 
and Communication Technology (ISMICT), 2013 7th International Symposium on, 
(pp. 1-4).
Swan, M. (2012). Sensor Mania! The Internet of Things, Wearable Computing, 
Objective Metrics, and the Quantified Self 2.0. Journal of Sensor and Actuator 
Networks, 1(3), 217–253. doi:10.3390/jsan1030217
Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities Act (Tech Act), 
P.L., 100-407 (1988, 1998, 2004).
Telecom, S. K. (2015). SK Telecom Rargets Global IoT Market with Lifeware. 
PRNewswire. Retrieved from: http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/sk-
telecom-targets-global-iot-market-with-lifeware-300043278.html
Turcu, C., Turcu, C., & Gaitan, V. (2012). Integrating robots into the internet of 
things. International Journal of Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing, 6(6), 430-
437. Retrieved from www.scopus.com

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
64
Vilarinho, T., Farshchian, B. A., Floch, J., & Mathisen, B. M. (2013). A commu-
nication framework for the internet of people and things based on the concept of 
activity feeds in social computing. In Proceedings - 9th International Conference 
on Intelligent Environments. doi:10.1109/IE.2013.24
Want, R. (2006). An introduction to RFID technology. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 
5(1), 25–33. doi:10.1109/MPRV.2006.2
Weiss, P. S. (2010). Nanoscience and nanotechnology: Present and future. ACS 
Nano, 4(4), 1771–1772. doi:10.1021/nn100710n PMID:20420466
Yu, J., Kim, M., Bang, H. C., Bae, S. H., & Kim, S. J. (2015). IoT as a applications: 
Cloud-based building management systems for the internet of things. Multimedia 
Tools and Applications. doi:10.1007/s11042-015-2785-0
Zhu, N., Diethe, T., Camplani, M., Tao, L., Burrows, A., Twomey, N., & Craddock, 
I. (2015). Bridging e-health and the internet of things: The SPHERE project. IEEE 
Intelligent Systems, 30(4), 39–46. doi:10.1109/MIS.2015.57
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Assistive Technology (AT): Technologies that assist individuals with disabilities 
in learning, communication, daily living, and accessing information.
Cloud Computing: A computing paradigm that relies on sharing computing 
resources such as servers, storage, bandwidth, and applications for an organization’s 
computing needs.
Context-Aware Computing: Computing with the capacity to be aware of en-
vironments and their characteristics through sensor.
IoT Applications: Various IoT-based technologies developed to perform specific 
functions such as monitoring machines remotely, informing a caregiver of the real-
time medical condition of a person with disability, etc.
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID): A system of electronic and comput-
ing devices which enables objects with embedded tag to be wirelessly identified 
and tracked.
Sensors: Wired or wireless devices used to monitor and alert change in environ-
ments such as temperature, light, sound, motion, etc.
Sensor Network: Sensors that are connected to one another to transmit signals 
to use for sensing, processing, and communicating via radio medium.

The Internet of Things and Assistive Technologies for People with Disabilities
65
Smart Homes: Homes with various features of ambient assisted living along 
with surveillance systems and control and optimization devices including lighting, 
window blinds, heating or alarm installations for people with disabilities.
Smart Sensors: Sensors with microprocessor that can be used for digital signal 
processing, data filtering, self-diagnosis, self-identification, and self-adaptation.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch003
Chapter 3
66 
IoT for Ambient 
Assisted Living:
Care4Me – A Healthcare 
Support System
ABSTRACT
Research activities on healthcare support systems mainly focus on people in their 
own homes or nurses and doctors in hospitals. A limited amount of research aims 
at supporting caregivers that work with people with disabilities in assisted living 
facilities (ALFs). This chapter explores and applies the Internet of Things to the 
ALF context. In particular, it presents the design, the implementation, and the 
experimental evaluation of Care4Me, a system supporting the daily activities of as-
sistants. The requirements for designing and implementing Care4Me derive from a 
literature analysis and from a user study. The solution combines wearable and mobile 
technologies. With this healthcare support system, caregivers can be automatically 
alerted of potentially hazardous situations. Furthermore, inhabitants can require 
assistance instantly and from any point of the facility. The system was evaluated 
in two ways. The authors performed a functional test with a group of professional 
caregivers, and deployed the system in an ALF in Italy, collecting the opinions of 
caregivers and inhabitants.
Fulvio Corno
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
Luigi De Russis
Politecnico di Torino, Italy
Alberto Monge Roffarello
Politecnico di Torino, Italy

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
67
INTRODUCTION
One of the challenges that the healthcare sector has been facing in the last decade 
is how to ensure full coverage of professional care for those who require special 
attention (e.g., the elderly, people with disabilities, or patients with chronic condi-
tions) containing the associated costs. To address this challenge, Ambient Assisted 
Living (AAL) systems have been researched extensively (Rashidi & Mihailidis, 
2012). AAL is a term used to describe a set of technical systems, infrastructures, 
and services to support elderly people or people with disabilities in their daily rou-
tine. It allows an independent and safe lifestyle via the integration of information 
technologies within homes and residences. Research in the field of healthcare sup-
port systems is mainly focused on addressing two problems: improving the quality 
of life for people in their own homes, especially the elderly, and supporting nurses 
and physicians in hospitals. However, less research has been done about systems to 
support caregivers that assist persons with disabilities within nursing homes and on 
how to design such systems to be effective. To fill this gap, Aced López, Corno, and 
De Russis (2015) presented a series of guidelines for designing systems that could 
effectively support caregivers in tasks such as monitoring nursing homes inhabitants 
and attending to their assistance requests. These design guidelines derive from a 
literature analysis and from the qualitative analysis of a comprehensive user study 
carried out in three different Italian Assisted Living Facilities (ALFs) for people 
with physical and cognitive disabilities. ALFs are health and social care facilities 
with the aim of providing hospitality, welfare benefits, and recovery to people in 
mental or physical conditions of dependency. They ensure adequate living conditions 
for the inhabitants, appropriate for their dignity, by promoting the maintenance or 
recovery of their residual capacities and the satisfaction of their relational and social 
needs. Healthcare assistants are the only professional figures employed full time in 
such houses, typically, so their point of view is central in designing a system that 
successfully operates in a ALF. The authors of the guidelines conducted three focus 
groups with a total of 30 caregivers, first focusing on the needs of the healthcare 
assistants and the overall user acceptance of a new healthcare support system, then 
on the features and capabilities of the devices used for its implementation. They 
concluded that a healthcare support system should be designed taking into account 
issues such as portability, ubiquity, unobtrusiveness, and automatic detection of 
hazardous situations.
This chapter aims at applying these guidelines and other specific requirements 
to an effective solution for a healthcare support system. In particular, the authors 
present the design, the implementation, and the experimental evaluation of an 
Internet of Things (IoT) system, named Care4Me, capable of supporting the daily 
activities of healthcare assistants that operate in ALFs and compliant with the 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
68
guidelines set forth in the work of Aced et al. (2015). The requirements for design-
ing and implementing Care4Me derive from a literature analysis and from a user 
study conducted with professional caregivers. The authors chose to adopt the IoT 
technology because this paradigm is being increasingly recognized: the potential of 
IoT can be used to enhance or at least to enrich healthcare support systems by sens-
ing physiological signals ubiquitously and unobtrusively. As the name suggests, the 
IoT is the network of physical objects that are supposed to be always connected to 
the Internet with the aim of sharing services and information with other connected 
“things”. In addition to connecting people, anytime and everywhere, IoT connects 
humans to smart objects, and puts these objects at the service of humanity. The 
system presented here involves mobile and wearable technologies to improve the 
modalities to provide and require assistance. Through it, caregivers can be automati-
cally alerted of potentially hazardous situations that happen to the inhabitants while 
these are out of sight. Furthermore, inhabitants can require assistance instantly and 
from any point of the facility.
The work was divided in several phases. First of all, the authors extracted the 
requirements from the study of Aced et al. (2015) and from the results of a user study 
with a group of professional caregivers. In this way, the authors based the design 
of the system on the needs of real users. Then, the solution was implemented and 
tested in laboratory. Finally, the system was evaluated in two ways: a) performing 
a functional test with a small group of professional caregivers, and b) deploying 
the system in an Italian ALF for 36 hours, collecting objective data as well as the 
opinions of the involved caregivers and inhabitants.
BACKGROUND
Within the AAL field, several systems, proposals, and investigations are present. 
However, as reported in the survey of Calvaresi et al. (2016), the domain of AAL is 
pretty new, and more studies are required. For example, most of AAL studies does 
not consider all the stakeholders that should be taken into account in a healthcare 
support system (e.g., the elderly, people with disabilities, caregivers, physicians, 
etc.). Some exceptions can be found, e.g., the CAALYX system (Rocha, et al., 2013), 
and the IoT infrastructure for AAL scenarios reported in (Dhor, Modre-Opsrian, 
Drobics, Hayn, & Schreier, 2010). Such systems propose monitoring systems to 
support all the people involved in the care of patients. Apart from these solutions, 
most of the healthcare support system in the AAL field focus only on elderly people. 
For instance, Verity (Winkley, Jiang, & Jiang, 2012) is an AAL platform for the 
monitoring of the elderly, which uses a wrist-wearable wireless sensor node and a 
mobile platform to form a remotely accessible body area network. Rashidi and Cook 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
69
(2013) present COM, a fully automated approach for discovering and monitoring 
patterns of daily activities of older adults in their smart home. Considering the same 
context, Suryadevara and Mukhopadhyay (2014), present a pervasive computing 
technology to determine the wellness of the elderly living independently in their 
homes, monitoring the use of household appliances using smart sensors. Other 
studies focus on building applications in structured environments, such as hospitals, 
to support medical and nursing staff only (Adamer et al., 2008; Sanchez, Tentori, 
& Favela, 2008).
According to another AAL survey (Acampora, Cook, Rashidi, & Vasilakos, 
2013), most of the healthcare support systems found in the literature focus mainly 
on AAL in terms of Emergency Detection or Continuous Monitoring. Such systems, 
like AMON (Anliker et al., 2004) and CARMA (Lau et al., 2010), aim at enabling 
people with special needs to stay at home and to be monitored remotely by medi-
cal staff, rather than being hospitalized with the costs this entails. Many of these 
systems were implemented by exploiting intelligent environments (Dawadi, Cook, 
Schmitter-Edgecombe, & Parsey, 2013) and mobile technologies (Bisio, Lavagetto, 
Marchese, & Sciarrone, 2015; Lau et al., 2010). Wearable technologies have also 
been researched as possible enabling technologies. Wearable systems can be broadly 
defined as miniature electronic devices unobtrusively embedded in outfits as part 
of clothing or as an accessory. Such systems should be usable without interfering 
with the user’s action in the physical world (Altakouri, Kortuem, Grunerbl, Kunze, 
& Lukowicz, 2010; Anliker et al., 2004), thus making them attractive for various 
applications. One of the most popular applications of wearable technology is the 
monitoring of physiological parameters, as demonstrated by the recent spread of com-
mercial devices and gadgets targeting the sport and recreational markets. However, 
few studies are available in the literature regarding the usage of wearable devices as 
core components of complex healthcare systems. Some exceptions can be found in 
system such as WearNET (Lukowicz, Junker, Stäger, von Büren, & Tröster, 2002), 
AMON (Anliker, et al., 2004), and in more recent tools that combine wearable and 
environmental sensing for long-term sleep studies, as in the work presented by 
Borazio and Van Laerhoven (2012).
In addition to the technologies used to implement a healthcare support system, 
a limited amount of AAL studies in the healthcare domain focuses on user needs 
and acceptance, rather than on the capabilities of the system and/or the devices. 
Among these studies, for example, the list of properties desirable in a commercial 
healthcare system reported by Bhadoria and Gupta (2013) is included. Mayora et 
al. (2013) present a reflection on non-functional requirements that are key in the 
development of technological solutions for personal health systems. Such require-
ments come from patients, since the system is intended to directly support them in 
the treatment of bipolar disorder. Altakouri et al. (2010) presents a Wizard-of-Oz 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
70
study at a geriatric care ward, conducted to verify the resulting hypothesis from some 
semi-structured interviews to nurses. Some similar interviews are also conducted in 
the study about elderly at home presented by Zulas, Crandall, Schmitter-Edgecombe, 
and Cook (2012), but the number of nurses is low, less than ten.
Many of the healthcare systems found in the literature aim at supporting doctors, 
patients, or the elderly, typically in a hospital or at home. Unfortunately, few studies 
and healthcare applications aiming at supporting healthcare workers in nursing homes 
are present. Among them, presented systems often are not based on IoT or wearable 
technologies (Bhadoria & Gupta, 2013), or aim at supporting specific activities only, 
such as the system for activity recognition to support nursing documentation realized 
by Altakouri et al. (2010). Due to the limited amount of research, design recom-
mendations for systems in the context of assisted living facilities are very limited. 
Moreover, the few recommendations available in the literature mainly identify the 
needs of persons with disabilities, neglecting the needs of their caregivers, even if 
Beeber et al. (2014) demonstrated that the quality of assistance in ALFs (and there-
fore the inhabitants’ quality of life) is highly related to caregivers’ attitudes and to 
their perception of their working environment. The recommendations reported by 
Morrison, George and Mosqueda (2008), for instance, enumerate some practical 
changes in primary care practices that can enhance disability care, such as promot-
ing positive images of disability (e.g., by hiring staff members with disabilities) 
and easier ways to contact the staff. In the work presented by Aced et al. (2015), the 
authors propose a series of guidelines for designing systems that could effectively 
support the caregivers of an ALF in their daily work. These guidelines are derived 
from the results of group interviews with the caregivers of three different Italian 
ALFs managed by the Cooperativa Sociale P.G. Frassati. The purpose of the focus 
groups consisted in identifying the needs and concerns that healthcare workers in 
ALFs have, understanding how they tackle problems and difficulties in their daily 
work, and how technology can help or support them. The interviews were held in 
three 90-minutes sessions that involved 30 professional caregivers, 22 female and 
8 male, with different years of expertise.
DESIGNING HEALTHCARE SUPPORT SYSTEMS
The Care4Me system stems from the guidelines reported by Aced et al. (2015); this 
section summarizes the most relevant points extracted from that study. The goal of 
such a study was to understand the needs and concerns that caregivers of assisted 
living facilities have, how do they currently tackle problems and difficulties, and 
how technology can help or support them in their daily work.
The addressed research questions were the following:

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
71
1. 	
How can the introduction of a healthcare support system based on mobile and 
wearable technologies support caregivers in their daily activities within an 
ALF?
2. 	
What are the current needs, concerns and desires that caregivers of assisted 
living facilities for people with disabilities have?
3. 	
What particular needs or issues can prevent (or foster) the adoption of any 
mobile/wearable device to support caregivers’ daily activities?
Aced et al. conducted three focus groups, one for each ALF. The focus groups 
took place in the nursing homes to enable better understanding of the context, 
needs, problems, and possible already used tools. A set of semi-structured interview 
questions were posed, focusing on caregivers’ daily activities, related problems and 
wishes. Participants were also asked to exemplify and expand on pain points, when 
needed, to provide a starting point for open discussion concerning different aspects 
of their experience. Previous studies mainly start from technological aspect and 
propose only a final evaluation of the system, focusing on validations driven by a 
small number of doctors and nurses (Anliker et al., 2004; Adamer et al., 2008; Zulas, 
Crandall, Schmitter-Edgecombe, & Cook, 2012). Aced et al., conversely, decided 
to interview a larger number of healthcare assistants to gather more comprehensive 
requirements. The interviews were held in three 90-minutes sessions that involved 
30 professional caregivers, 22 female and 8 male, with different years of expertise.
The first part of this section reports the context that emerges from the user study, 
describing the involved ALFs and the daily routines of caregivers and inhabitants. 
The second part of this section then summarizes the guidelines found by Aced et 
al. for designing effective solutions of healthcare support systems.
Context
Two of the nursing homes reported in the paper accommodate people with various 
degrees of mental disorders, while the third one houses people with motor impair-
ments. Each ALF hosts around ten people, and in each facility assistance is guaranteed 
24/7. During the day, two healthcare assistants are always present in the nursing 
home, performing various activities, from personal assistance (e.g., helping the 
inhabitants to brush their teeth), to drug administration, or help in housework (e.g., 
cooking or doing laundry). A nurse is present one hour per day, every day, while 
a doctor is available on request, only. During the night, one caregiver is present in 
the facility, performing some house-works and running ward rounds.
All the ALFs involved in the study share some characteristics. They have a 
backyard, a fully equipped kitchen, a laundry, an infirmary, a living room, a space 
used as an office by caregivers and single or shared bedrooms for the inhabitants. In 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
72
particular, two facilities have two floors, one for the bedrooms of the inhabitants, and 
one for kitchen and the living room, and all the involved nursing homes have several 
areas from which it is difficult to hear what happens in the inhabitants’ bedrooms. 
Moreover, within the three ALFs, no place allows caregivers to simultaneously see 
all the inhabitant bedrooms.
Common needs emerged from the caregivers across the three focus groups, 
with some minor differences due to the diverse type of disabilities. In fact, people 
with motor disabilities perform most of their activities inside the ALF, while many 
activities carried on by persons with cognitive disabilities are situated outside the 
house. However, the inhabitants with mental disorders have to be closely monitored, 
because they may suffer from epileptic seizures, or they may try to break or escape 
the ALF. Instead, the inhabitants with motor disabilities require assistance in order 
to perform daily activities that they would not be able to carry out otherwise.
Caregivers perform daily activities in assisted living facilities following a pretty 
fixed schedule. In this way, caregivers remember more easily the routines of each 
inhabitant and all the tasks that need to be carried out. These task include bathroom 
turns, medication, and diets. Routines are structured in such a way they indicate 
the caregivers what to do, with which inhabitant and at what time. For example, 
an ALF reported in the paper has a collective routine for establishing the order in 
which the inhabitants are woken up and transferred to their wheelchairs. Healthcare 
assistants, at the end of their shift, must compile a form reporting relevant issues and 
performed activities, on paper. Schedules are very useful to organize and simplify 
daily activities. However, caregivers encounter difficulties with some tasks that are 
out of the routine, such as one-off appointments or temporary drug administration. 
In some case, in the shift change, caregivers leave a post-it note to their colleagues 
to highlight some news (e.g., a guest got a flu) and changes in the expected activi-
ties (e.g., the swimming pool is unexpectedly closed, today).
ALF inhabitants can request the assistance of a caregiver by calling her by voice 
or using buzzers that are in fixed positions around the house. One buzzer is present 
inside each bedroom (near the bed, typically) and another is located in each bathroom, 
as required by the Italian law. However, there are situations in which caregivers can-
not hear the inhabitants, or where the buzzer is not reachable. These missed calls 
constitute the main problem for the healthcare assistants and, at the moment, this is 
an aspect that they consider not addressed. In fact, monitoring nursing homes is not 
an easy task, even in small structures of 10 or 15 residents, because caregivers are 
not always able to keep an eye on every resident, e.g., while they sleep or go to the 
bathroom. Since is not possible to monitor the inhabitants with video-cameras or by 
other means that could be privacy invasive, the only method with which caregivers 
count to monitor the residents is the ward round. A ward round is a simple method 
for monitoring residents in nursing homes which consists of periodically visiting 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
73
every resident to make physical visual confirmation of their status to determinate 
if assistance is needed. However, if the structure is large enough or if the number 
of people to be monitored is high enough, ward rounds may be not very effective. 
Furthermore, the use of the current system for assistance, composed of buzzers and 
light panels, is a source of discomfort: the loud noise produced by an alarm can 
upset the peacefulness of the facility.
Each caregiver brings with her a cordless phone, multiple keys and, in some cases, 
her personal smartphone. ALF inhabitants with cognitive disabilities, unlike those 
with motor impairments, do not own any technological tool, such as smartphones, 
tablets, or computers. Caregivers and inhabitants’ parents promote this situation, 
because of the possibility that such objects might be stolen, broken or forgotten 
outside the nursing home.
Guidelines
The results of the study of Aced et al. are 10 guidelines for designing a healthcare 
support system for an ALF. These guidelines, numbered from GL1 to GL10, are 
reported in Table 1.
In the focus groups, caregivers express the desire to bring with them less “ob-
jects” as possible: they need to have their hands free to be able to readily help and 
attend any person who requires their assistance (GL1). For this reason, the devices 
used by a healthcare support system should be easily taken around the assisted liv-
ing facility by the caregivers, without representing a source of discomfort (GL3). 
Furthermore, the system should not introduce unnecessary devices for the inhabit-
ants, because most of them do not actually own any technological tool, such as 
smartphones or tablets. Finally, all the objects and tools used by the caregivers 
should be resistant to water and shocks, given the fact that their attention has to be 
directed to the ALF inhabitants and not to devices integrity.
An important issue that emerged during the focus groups concerns the modalities 
used by inhabitants to consciously require assistance. Nowadays, they have to call 
caregivers by voice or using a buzzer in some fixed locations inside the environ-
ment. However, there are situations where caregivers cannot hear the inhabitants 
calls, or where the buzzer is not reachable. In fact, inhabitants may be outside the 
house, away from caregivers (e.g., in the backyard), or they may have fallen out 
of the wheelchair, unable to use the buzzer. These missed calls are a problem that 
currently is not tackled, but that caregivers perceive as “really important” since 
they are not able to timely intervene. For this reason, a healthcare support system 
should support caregivers and inhabitants regardless of their location inside the 
facility (GL2). Furthermore, the buzzer and its usage are sources of discomfort, in 
particular for the loud noise produced to notify a request for help. Thus, the system 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
74
should offer to the inhabitants a mechanism for requesting assistance that does not 
disturb other people within the assisted living facility (GL4).
However, caregivers fear that the implementation of new systems instead of 
the buzzers could negatively affect the quality and efficiency of the assistance that 
they provide to the inhabitants. In fact, there is a fear of increasing the number of 
missed calls by having the possibility of ignoring a request for help. For this reason, 
a healthcare support system must be able to confirm that at least one caregiver is 
properly addressing the assistance requests, as soon as possible (GL5).
A related problem in ALFs is how to monitor the inhabitants while they are out 
of sight in order to assist them in time, in case of need. In fact, inhabitants with 
Table 1. Guidelines for designing a healthcare support system
Number
Guideline
Description
GL1
Interfaces for operating 
in the periphery of 
caregivers’ attention
A healthcare support system should exploit devices and interfaces 
that can be operated hands-free and without engaging caregivers’ full 
attention in a stressful manner
GL2
System ubiquity
A healthcare support system should support caregivers through their 
daily activities, regardless of their location inside the assisted living 
facility
GL3
Portability of devices
The devices used as part of healthcare support systems should be 
easily taken around the assisted living facility by the caregivers, 
without representing a source of discomfort
GL4
Unobtrusiveness of 
the assistance request 
mechanism
A healthcare support system should offer to the inhabitants a 
mechanism for requesting caregivers assistance that does not disturb 
other people within the assisted living facility
GL5
Verification of 
assistance provision
A healthcare support system should verify that for each request 
received from inhabitants of the ALF, the proper assistance is actually 
provided
GL6
Self-direct caregivers’ 
attention to potentially 
hazardous situations
A healthcare support system should be able to indicate to the 
caregivers potentially hazardous situations in which the inhabitants 
may be involved without any explicit request
GL7
Emergency call option 
for caregivers
A healthcare support system should allow the caregivers an 
immediate way to call for help in case of necessity, either manually or 
automatically
GL8
In situ form filling
A healthcare support system should allow caregivers to fill notes and 
forms digitally around the facility, even if not at the end of the shift 
and in the office, to prevent them from forgetting the information to 
write in
GL9
Effective management 
of reminders
A healthcare support system should manage the caregivers’ routines 
and remind them effectively about special events or off plan tasks
GL10
Basic smart home 
capabilities
A healthcare support system for assisted living facilities should 
provide the caregivers with home automation capabilities to facilitate 
the management and operation of the facility building
Source: Aced et al. (2015)

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
75
either mental or physical disabilities may need quick assistance, but may not be able 
to request it, e.g., they may be in the middle of an epileptic seizure. Until now, the 
problem has been tackled by running overnight ward rounds to constantly check for 
potentially hazardous situations, while during the day it has not been tackled at all. 
Caregivers need a healthcare support system that helps them to monitor the ALF 
inhabitants when they are out of sight. Such a system should be able to recognize 
when some hazardous situation is taking place and then notify the caregivers (GL6). 
The accuracy of the detection process is not crucial: according to the caregivers, 
“false positives” are better that “false negatives”.
Regarding the schedules of daily activities and the paper work performed by the 
caregivers at the end of their shifts, the operations can be easily converted in digital 
format and integrated in an information system, maybe shared between more ALF 
structures, to provide complete information about the personal history of the nurs-
ing home inhabitants, if needed. In a similar way, the post-it notes that healthcare 
assistants exchange during the shift changes can be easily converted in “electronic 
post-it” notes and delivered to the right caregiver (in a suitable moment, possibly) 
by an ubiquitous system (GL8 and GL9).
As reported in the description of daily’s routine within an ALF, during the night 
only one caregiver is present in the facility. The reason is that during the day there 
are more activities to be carried out and the inhabitants require more attention than 
during the night, while they are asleep. However, caregivers fear that something 
bad could happen to themselves and no one could help them while they are alone 
(without a colleague nearby). Caregivers worry for themselves but also for the ALF 
inhabitants, because if a hazardous situation occurs, the inhabitants could suddenly 
remain without anyone to assist them. In the same way that caregivers expressed 
their desire to have “something” to allow the inhabitants to call them effectively 
in case of need, a healthcare support system has to provide some mechanisms to 
support caregivers when they are alone (GL7).
A common topic across the focus groups that was the need of better ways to con-
trol and operate the ALF building. Caregivers pointed out that it is very difficult to 
control the temperature of the facility in such a way that everyone is happy. Another 
issue related with the operation of the ALF building is opening and closing doors. 
In general, all doors are kept locked and the caregivers have to carry around a big 
bundle of keys. This situation is not comfortable, especially with regard to the main 
door. The main door, that gives access to the house, should be closed to prevent 
the inhabitants to escape, though cannot be locked for safety reasons. For now, the 
problem has been addressed with some bells that ring when the door is opened, but 
it is clear that this is not a sustainable solution. For this reason, a healthcare support 
system should use some Smart Home technologies to meet all other requirements 
of assisted living facilities (GL10).

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
76
Requirements Extraction for Care4Me
Starting from the general guidelines for designing healthcare support systems pre-
sented above, that are applicable to general AAL systems, for the Care4Me system 
some more specific requirements have been defined. Such requirements also cover 
the technical constraints, that will allow to define a specific hardware and software 
architecture suitable for deployment in the ALFs. While the general guidelines derive 
from previous works, systems requirements are described for the first time in this 
chapter. Requirements definition was conducted through a user study. Such a study 
was performed with a group of professional caregivers. The goal was to identify 
and adapt a subset of the general guidelines, applicable to the Care4Me scenario, 
yielding the specific set of requirements. In addition, starting from the expectations 
of the interviewed caregivers, the set of Care4Me requirements was expanded.
User Study
The user study in the requirements extraction phase was performed in one ALF 
for people with physical disabilities managed by the municipality of Turin. The 
participants were eight caregivers, all female, with different years of expertise. The 
study consisted in the analysis of the answers of the participants to a questionnaire 
of 12 questions. The questions were about two hypothetical scenarios describing 
two use cases of a possible healthcare support system.
The first scenario (Scenario 1) takes place in an ALF for people with mental 
disabilities. First, the scenario describes how the system works. Then, it presents 
a use case of a caregiver that is able to assist in time one of the ALF inhabitants 
thanks to a notification sent by the system after detecting automatically a hazardous 
situation. Among the questions of the questionnaire, the participants were asked 
to rate how useful they thought the system was, from 1 (“Not useful at all”) to 5 
(“Very useful”). The average rating for the system usefulness was 4.8 with many 
positive comments.
Scenario 1: Maria is a caregiver that has been assigned to the night shift of a nursing 
home at the outskirts of the city. She has 5 residents to care of, distributed in 
a two floor structure where they live. One of the patients, Pino, suffers from 
occasional epileptic seizures and must be attended in the shortest possible time 
once a seizure starts. Maria does not have to make ward rounds to check every 
resident conditions, including Pino’s, because all of them use a wristband that 
is continuously measuring acceleration and sending it to an intelligent system. 
Such a system is able to process such acceleration readings to determine if 
something with them, and point it to Maria. As soon as Maria is notified she 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
77
reads the message and knows where to go and who may be the one needing 
her help. When she arrives to the resident, she deactivates the alarm by tap-
ping the resident’s wristband and checks the situation. If she needs help from 
someone else she can just tap her own wristband and a predefined contact 
will be asked for help.
Last week, Pino started to shudder while sleeping and Maria that was in the 
coffee room was notified that “something” was happening with Pino at his room. 
She immediately reached him and attend him on time. Yesterday, Pino go up at the 
middle of the night and Maria was notified again that “something” was happening 
with Pino, so she checked that he only woke up to drink and went back to her office.
The second scenario (Scenario 2) takes place in a nursing home for people with 
physical disabilities. First, the scenario describes how the system works. Then, it 
presents a use case of a caregiver that reaches an inhabitant that have requested as-
sistance through a wearable device and presents what happens when multiple alerts 
are issued. Again, the participants were asked to rate how useful they thought the 
system was, with the same scale adopted before. This time, the average rating was 
only 3.5. The general comments were quite positive, while two volunteers suggested 
that requesting assistance through a device could be “less personal” than doing it 
by voice.
Scenario 2: Carlo works in a nursing home for people with motor disorder that hosts 
10 people distributed in a two floor structure. Until a month ago, inhabitants 
could call a caregiver in case of need thanks to a buzzer in a fixed position of 
their room, only. Recently, it has happened that an inhabitant has fallen out 
from the wheelchair in the backyard in such a way that is unable to operate 
any buzzer, not even the horn embedded in the wheelchair. The inhabitant was 
rescued after an hour, when a caregiver noticed her absence. For this reason, 
caregivers decided to adopt a technological system to mitigate this type of 
situations. With such a system, all inhabitants have a wearable bracelet with 
a button for requesting help, and all caregivers have a wearable device for 
managing the request for help of the inhabitants.
Recently, Carlo has received on his device a request for help from Gloria, one of 
the inhabitants of the nursing home. Carlo reached Gloria and helped her to open 
the door of the computer room, in which Gloria wanted to enter. In the same time, 
Carlo was notified of a request from another inhabitant. Another caregiver accepted 
the request for help, and Carlo was notified of the situation on his wearable device.
The answers of the questionnaires highlight that caregivers are primarily inter-
ested in the inhabitants’ safety. In fact, the main goal of the caregivers is to provide 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
78
assistance every time is needed. In addition, when asked about the acceptance of 
the hypothetical healthcare support system, according to the described scenarios 
and their own experience, the eight healthcare assistants expressed very positive 
comments, especially about the choice of a wearable device like a wristwatch instead 
of smartphone or similar. In term of guidelines existing in literature, the focus is 
on issues such as portability of the devices, usability of the system, and real time 
monitoring of the inhabitants’ conditions. Other guidelines (e.g, relating to smart 
home capabilities) are secondary for the caregiver, and, for this reason, were not 
considered.
Starting from these considerations, and thinking to the ALFs context, a general 
goal was the need of designing a ubiquitous system allowing new methods for requir-
ing and providing assistance. To accomplish this need, the authors chose to adopt 
the IoT technology, and defined specific requirements about the communication of 
the involved devices.
Requirements of Care4Me
The requirements to design and implement Care4Me, numbered from R1 to R10, 
are reported in Table 2. They summarize the most important aspects followed to 
design and implement the system.
The first requirements regard the choice of the devices to be used. The system 
should be designed taking into account issues such as ubiquity and portability (R1 
and R2, derived from GL2 and GL3). It is clear that a natural consequence is the 
use of mobile and wearable technologies. In particular, all the observations ex-
tracted from the focus groups can be easily addressed with wearable devices. The 
robustness of the used devices is another important requirement (R3, derived from 
GL3). The devices should be resistant to water and shocks, as reported in all focus 
groups.
Five requirements were defined to design the modalities for requiring and pro-
viding assistance. First, the system should allow the inhabitants to instantly require 
caregiver assistance (R4, derived from the results of the user study). In addition, the 
system should offer an automatic detection process of hazardous situations, at least 
for what concerns epileptic seizures and falls, two of the most common problems 
suffered by inhabitants (R5, derived from the results of the user study and from GL6). 
The system should confirm that the assistance requests are addressed properly by at 
least one caregiver (R6, derived from GL5), and the new mechanism for requesting 
caregiver assistance should not use noising buzzers. Indeed, the system should not 
disturb the peacefulness within the assisted living facility (R7, derived from GL4). 
The last requirement about the assistance mechanism is specific for the caregivers. 

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
79
The system should provide the caregivers with an immediate way to call for help in 
case of need (R8, derived from GL7).
Finally, the authors established two specific requirements regarding the commu-
nication between the devices. First, a general but not less important point concerns 
reliability (R9). The transmission of a request for help through the system must be 
reliable, because the ultimate goal of this system is to help caregivers to provide 
assistance to the inhabitants whenever it is needed. Second, the system requires an 
Internet connection (R10) because the system is based on the IoT technology and 
it uses the Internet as a communication network.
Summarizing, the authors defined 10 requirements to design a healthcare sup-
port system. These requirements concern issues such as ubiquity (R1), reliability 
(R9), and portability (R2). The authors chose to apply the IoT paradigm and use 
Internet as a communication network (R10). The goal is to improve the modalities 
for requiring and providing assistance through a new mechanism (R4, R5, R6, and 
Table 2. Requirements followed in the design of the system
Number
Requirement
Description
R1
System ubiquity
The system should support caregivers through their daily activities, 
regardless of their location inside the assisted living facility
R2
System portability
The used devices should be easily taken around the assisted living 
facility by the caregivers and the inhabitants, without representing a 
source of discomfort
R3
Robustness of the 
devices
The used devices should be resistant to water and shocks
R4
Smart assistance
Thanks to the system, an inhabitant should be able to instantly require 
the caregiver assistance
R5
Automatic detection
The system should be able to detect potentially hazardous situations 
in which the inhabitants may be involved without any explicit request. 
Caregivers should be alerted without the need of constantly running 
ward rounds or using privacy invasive methods (e.g., video recording)
R6
Assistance delivery 
confirmation
The system should verify that for each request received from 
inhabitants of the ALF, the proper assistance is actually provided
R7
Unobtrusiveness of 
the assistance request 
mechanism
The system should offer to the inhabitants a mechanism for requesting 
caregivers assistance that does not disturb other people within the 
assisted living facility
R8
Emergency call 
option for caregivers
The system should allow the caregivers an immediate way to call for 
help in case of necessity
R9
Reliability
The system must be intrinsically safe and reliable, in particular for 
what concerns the communication between the devices
R10
Internet availability
The system is an IoT solution and it uses the Internet as a 
communication network

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
80
R7) that involves robust and wearable devices (R3 and R2). In particular, Care4Me 
introduces an anomaly detection process for the inhabitants (R5) and an emergency 
call option for the caregivers (R8).
SYSTEM DESIGN
General Architecture
The general architecture of the system is shown in Figure 1. The system can be 
divided into two main areas: user devices and central server.
Each caregiver and inhabitant of the ALF is equipped with a wearable device, 
which ensures system portability (R2). Thanks to the wearable devices, users can 
use the system regardless of their location inside the ALF (R1). Inhabitants are 
monitored through their wearable accessory, in particular for what concerns seizures 
and falls (R5). Furthermore, they may require assistance voluntary and instantly, 
from any point of the facility (R4). Through the wearable devices, caregivers are 
able to manage the help requests. In this way, the unobtrusiveness of the assistance 
request mechanism is ensured (R7).
Figure 1. System architecture

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
81
The solution provides a central server in charge of managing the overall system. 
In partnership with a relational database, the central node performs some impor-
tant operations, such as user management, authentication process and persistence 
of information. Furthermore, the server manages the communication between the 
devices. In fact, in Care4Me none of the wearable devices interacts directly with 
the others. To better understand the communication process, think of an inhabitant 
who wants to get help: through her wearable device, she can send a message to the 
server, which will propagate the information to all registered caregivers on duty, in 
the form of notifications.
Employed Wearable Devices
Care4Me uses smartwatches as wearable devices because they are more accessible 
than other devices one may carry (Raghunath & Narayanaswami, 2002), and, in 
addition, a wristwatch is ideally located for body sensors (Maurer, Rowe, Smailagic, 
& Siewiorek, 2006) and as a wearable display (Harrison, Lim, Shick, & Hudson, 
2009). Moreover, in the case of inhabitants with mental disabilities who do not 
accept anything that looks out of the ordinary, the form factor of a common object 
like a wristwatch is more than appropriate. Obviously, smartwatches should satisfy 
the defined portability and robustness requirements.
Use Cases
The behavior of the system can be described through three use cases:
1. 	
Voluntary request of an inhabitant.
2. 	
Automatic request of an inhabitant.
3. 	
Request of a caregiver.
Through her smartwatch, an inhabitant can voluntary request assistance (use case 
1). The same wearable device monitors the conditions of the inhabitant. It triggers 
an automatic request for help (use case 2) in case of falls or seizures. As shown in 
Figure 3, a notification is immediately sent to all caregivers on duty, which will 
display on their smartwatches the type of the problem and the involved inhabitant. 
The system, in particular for what concerns the monitoring of seizures and falls, is 
not designed to accurately identify potentially hazardous situations, but to detect 
some anomalous motion patterns. In other words, “false positives” are better than 
“false negatives” for this solution. Healthcare assistants required this type of behavior, 
since they prefer having to handle a false alarm than missing one.

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
82
In the last use case (use case 3), caregivers can contact their colleagues in case 
of need, even those at home (Figure 3). Through their smartwatches they can send 
a notification to all other healthcare assistants, even those at home. In this case, in 
order to instantly catch the attention of all caregivers, notifications are shown on 
their smartphones.
The system primarily focuses on the assistance for inhabitants. In particular, the 
first two use cases are composed of three phases:
Figure 3. Use case 3
Figure 2. Use cases 1 and 2

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
83
1. 	
Generation of the request.
2. 	
Acceptance of the request.
3. 	
Termination of the request.
Phase a: Generation of the request.
The generation of the request is the first step in the assistance process. In this 
phase, an inhabitant reaches all the caregivers on duty with a notification (Figure 4).
In detail, if the smartwatch of the inhabitant detects a request for help (thanks 
to the monitoring, or after a voluntary request), it generates an alarm and sends it 
to the server. The server interprets the received message and propagates the infor-
mation to the caregivers on duty. The smartwatch will periodically resend the alarm 
until the request is terminated.
Phase b: Acceptance of the request.
The acceptance of the request is the second phase of the assistance process. 
Thanks to the generation of the request, all caregivers on duty are informed of the 
danger situation. In this phase, at least one caregiver should take charge of the request 
Figure 4. Generation of the request

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
84
through her smartwatch (Figure 5). In this manner, all other healthcare assistants 
are informed that someone is taking care of the inhabitant.
Specifically, the smartwatch of the caregiver that performs the acceptance of the 
request sends an acceptance notification to the server, which will propagate the 
information to all other assistants on duty. The server turns off the propagation of 
the request alarm temporarily. However, it checks that the termination of the request 
is carried out within a customizable timeout time; otherwise, it resumes the alarm 
signaling.
Phase c: Termination of the request.
The last phase of the assistance process is the termination of the request (Figure 
6). With this phase, a caregiver can stop the alarm signaling and close the request.
To terminate the ongoing alarm, the caregiver who has accepted the request has 
to press a button on the inhabitant’s smartwatch. In this way, the system ensures 
that the proper assistance is actually provided. The termination is still accepted even 
if it comes from another caregiver. The system provides a proximity check to prevent 
accidental pressing and to ensure that the request of termination came from a care-
giver. If the assistant is sufficiently close to the inhabitant, the smartwatch of the 
Figure 5. Acceptance of the request

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
85
inhabitant sends the notification of termination to the server, and stops to periodi-
cally resend the alarm. The cycle of the request for assistance is finished.
Implementation
For what concerns the wearable devices for the inhabitants and caregivers, the de-
signed system has been realized with Pebble smartwatches (Figure 7).
Unfortunately, these types of devices do not provide a way to directly connect 
to the Internet, but they need an associated smartphone or tablet to bridge the con-
nection. Care4Me uses Android smartphones to perform this operation.
As shown in Figure 8, the elements of the system communicate with each other 
in several ways. A smartwatch is paired with its mobile device via Bluetooth. Mobile 
devices can reach the server through HTTP requests, while the same server can con-
tact the clients asynchronously with the Google Cloud Messaging (GCM) service.
Devices for Users
The authors implemented four applications for users: two Pebble applications, one 
for caregivers and one for inhabitants, and the two paired Android apps. The Android 
Figure 6. Termination of the request

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
86
applications for caregivers and inhabitants are quite similar. These applications are 
designed to be invisible for the user: they mainly work in background, except for the 
initial authentication. Perhaps, the idea is to allow caregivers to use their personal 
smartphones, and to hide the inhabitants’ smartphones (e.g., in their backpacks or 
wheelchairs), making them inaccessible. The applications intercept messages and 
Figure 7. Wearable devices used in Care4Me
Figure 8. The communication between devices

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
87
allow the communication, acting as intermediaries between the paired smartwatch 
and the server. Furthermore, they allow the Bluetooth Low Energy proximity check 
to ensure that the termination of an alarm is performed by a caregiver, only. To do 
that, the mobile device of a caregiver acts like a beacon to be discoverable from the 
mobile device of an inhabitant.
The implemented Pebble application for the inhabitant’s smartwatch enables 
the voluntary request, and performs the monitoring of epileptic seizures and falls 
in background. In this way, even users that are not able to directly interact with the 
device can benefit from the system. The anomaly detection process is done through 
the on board accelerometer. The application continuously collects, processes, and 
analyzes accelerometer data in order to detect seizures and falls. Considering that 
the accuracy of the detection process is not crucial, Care4Me implements a simple 
algorithm based on some thresholds (e.g., acceleration peaks and acceleration aver-
age). In this way, the monitoring can be done directly on the smartwatches, which 
have low computational capacity. Thus, no accelerometer data are transferred be-
tween the devices, and the Bluetooth communication between the smartwatch and 
the paired device is not burdened with too many messages. The two main screens 
of the application are shown in Figure 9.
The application for the caregiver’s Pebble presents a richer user interface. It is 
designed through a series of menus covering the main user cases: caregivers can 
view the ongoing alarms, communicate to their colleagues the availability to serve 
a request, and view all the alarms that they have taken under their control. From the 
same application a caregiver can send a request for help to her colleagues (use case 
3). Some screenshots of the application are shown in Figure 10.
Figure 9. The Pebble application for the inhabitant

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
88
Central Server
The server was implemented as a Java Enterprise Edition web application. The ap-
plication has been developed through the Model View Controller (MVC) pattern, 
which ensures modular and reusable code.
The main component of the server in Care4Me is a RESTFul web service. Repre-
sentational State Transfer (REST) is an architectural style that specifies constraints, 
such as a uniform interface, to increase the system performance, scalability, reus-
ability, and maintainability. In the REST style, data are considered resources and are 
accessed using Uniform Resource Identifiers (URIs). The resources represent the 
model of the application and they are managed by using a set of simple, well-defined 
operations. The REST architectural style is specific for a client/server architecture 
and is designed to use a stateless communication protocol. The RESTful web service 
manages the overall system and allows communication between devices. All smart-
phones contact the server through an HTTP request to communicate something to 
other devices. In agreement with the REST architecture, considering the type of the 
request and the URL, the server maps the request on a specific entity (or collection 
of entities) that describes the system environment. The web application acts on the 
model, applies the application logic, and produces a response for the client. Eventu-
ally, it can send an asynchronous message to other users through the GCM service.
In addition, the web application offers a web site that caregivers can use to 
administer the system. Through it, they can manage user accounts, view the his-
tory of all the alarms generated in the facility, and manage alarms (e.g., force the 
Figure 10. The Pebble application for the caregiver

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
89
termination of an alarm) in case of system failures. Following the MVC pattern, 
the web site is the view of the server application. A screenshot of the home page 
is shown in Figure 11.
Experimental Evaluation
The experimental evaluation of the proposed system was performed along two 
directions. First, after some in-lab tests, the authors assessed the user acceptance 
and the perceived usefulness of the system with a functional test. In this phase, a 
group of healthcare assistants working in an ALF in Turin (Italy) tried the system. 
Second, the authors performed an operational test. The Care4Me was deployed in 
an ALF near Turin for 36 hours, collecting objective data as well as the opinions of 
the involved caregivers and inhabitants. Both tests were held in Italian, the native 
language of participants. In total, in the functional and operational tests, eleven 
people were involved. Nine of them were professional caregivers, while two of them 
were inhabitants with cognitive disabilities.
Functional Test
For measuring the user acceptance of Care4Me the authors performed a functional 
test with two caregivers working in one Italian ALF. This facility, called “Officina 
delle Idee” (Citta di Torino, n.d.) is managed by the municipality of Turin (Italy) and 
hosts six people with physical disabilities, only. It employs two caregivers during the 
Figure 11. The web site for system administration

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
90
day, and one healthcare assistant during the night, similarly to the ALFs involved 
in the focus groups reported in the work of Aced et al. (2015).
Before the test, the authors distributed an initial questionnaire to the caregivers, 
to collect some information about their age, their experience in the field of health-
care assistance and their knowledge of technological devices. The participants were 
two professional caregivers more than 50 years old, each with more than 10 years 
of healthcare experience. Only one caregiver was familiar with mobile devices and 
PCs. Furthermore, neither was not familiar with wearable devices.
The functional test of Care4Me consisted in simulating some common scenarios, 
where the two volunteers acted like a caregiver and an inhabitant, respectively, 
equipped with one Pebble smartwatch each. The authors simulated a voluntary 
request from the inhabitant, with all the operations required for its termination, and 
the monitoring of hazardous situations. In this last case, the volunteer acting as the 
inhabitant moved his arm in such a way that the smartwatch detected an epileptic 
seizure. After the test, the authors gave a final questionnaire to the participants, in 
order to collect their opinions about the system, whose results are summarized in 
the “Results” section.
Operational Test
The last and more important experimental evaluation consisted of the deployment 
of the system in one ALF hosting people with cognitive disabilities managed by the 
Cooperativa Frassati for 36 consecutive hours. The aim of this test with real users 
was to demonstrate the usefulness of the system, both for caregivers and inhabitants.
The authors repeated an extended version of the functional test reported above 
with all the seven caregivers working in the RAF, as training for using the system. 
Table 3 and Table 4 summarize the profiles of the participants, while Table 5 and 
Table 6 summarize their experience with mobile and wearable devices, respectively. 
In this phase, four volunteers acted like two caregivers and two ALF inhabitants, 
Table 3. Age of the participants
Age
Count
16-25
0
26-35
2
36-45
3
46-55
2
55+
0
Table 4. Year of expertise of the partici-
pants in their work
Years of Expertise
Count
<1
0
1-2
1
2-5
0
5-10
3
10+
3

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
91
respectively, while the rest of the group looked at the test. In addition to the opera-
tions for requesting and providing assistance, the authors introduced the caregivers 
to the administration web site. The training session was audio recorded for further 
analysis.
After the training phase, two inhabitants were equipped with a Pebble smartwatch 
and an associated smartphone, and the system was left running for 36 hours. The 
involved inhabitants were chosen by the caregivers of the facility, among those suf-
fering from mild cognitive disabilities. The test covered three day-shifts and one 
night-shift, involving six caregivers. During the evaluation, the authors collected 
data about the usage of the system. Finally, a final survey was distributed to the 
involved caregivers and inhabitants. The results of this analysis are summarized in 
the “Results” section.
RESULTS
Results of the Functional Test
The first results about the user acceptance and the perceived usefulness of the system 
were extracted thanks to the functional test.
A direct observation of the caregivers’ actions during the test determined that, 
after a first approach with the system, the participants performed the required op-
erations without any difficulty.
After the test, the participants expressed their first impressions in a brief dis-
cussion. They confirmed that the system might be useful, in particular for large 
facilities. However, they expressed the need of having a voice recognition feature in 
addition to the current methods for requiring assistance. In fact, not all inhabitants 
of the facility are able to use their hands to request assistance voluntary, because 
they suffer from severe physical disabilities.
Table 5. Experience of the participants 
with mobile technologies
Experience
Count
1 None
1
2 Little
3
3 Sufficient
2
4 Good
1
5 Excellent
0
Table 6. Experience of the participants 
with wearable technologies
Experience
Count
1 None
4
2 Little
2
3 Sufficient
1
4 Good
0
5 Excellent
0

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
92
A final questionnaire collected the qualitative opinions of the participants. Ques-
tions were based on a Likert scale with five responses ranging from “Not at all” 
(1) to “Very much” (5). As summarized in Table 7, both caregivers confirmed the 
usefulness of the system. They said that the system could improve their work and 
they expressed their satisfaction for the system portability, the intuitiveness of user 
interfaces, and system usability. Figure 12 reports the results of the functional test 
in a graphical form.
Results of the Operational Test
The operational test was the last and more important part of the experimental evalu-
ation. The functional test was repeated as training for using the system. Also in this 
facility, after a first approach, the involved caregivers did not have any difficulty 
to learn how to use the system. Considering that the same behavior was observed 
in the previous functional test, a possible conclusion is that the system learning 
process is very fast.
Table 7. Results of the functional test
Question Argument
Mean
Standard 
Deviation
System usefulness
4.00
0.00
System intuitiveness
4.00
1.00
System usability
3.50
0.50
System portability
4.00
1.00
Positive influence on daily work
4.00
1.00
Figure 12. Graphical representation of functional test results

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
93
After the training of the system, the caregivers chose two ALF inhabitants in 
order to try the system for 36 hours. This operational test covered three day-shifts 
and one night-shift, involving six caregivers. However, the inhabitants used the sys-
tem sparingly. For this reason, it is not possible to draw quantitative considerations 
from the generated data.
The final questionnaire compiled by the caregivers, an extended version of the one 
used for the functional test, gave more results. As reported in Table 8, the involved 
caregivers evaluated the system usefulness, usability, and portability on a Likert 
scale with five responses ranging from “Not at all” (1) to “Very much” (5), with 
positive results. Furthermore, they gave an opinion about the intuitiveness of the 
user interfaces and about the possible influence of the system in their work. Figure 
13 reports the results of the functional test in a graphical form. In addition, three 
caregivers said that the modalities by which an inhabitant can request assistance 
are sufficient, while the other three would like more possibilities. Besides, three 
assistants were satisfied of the system features for providing assistance, while three 
confessed that they were not entirely satisfied.
Table 8. Results of the operational test
Question Argument
Mean
Standard 
Deviation
System usefulness
3.33
0.53
System intuitiveness
3.00
0.63
System usability
2.67
0.52
System portability
2.83
1.31
Positive influence on daily work
3.67
0.82
Figure 13. Graphical representation of operational test results

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
94
The questionnaires compiled by the two inhabitants confirmed their limited use 
of the system. The only relevant obtainable information is that an inhabitant would 
like a less complex wearable device, like a bracelet with a single button.
In conclusion, positive results were extracted from all the tests. With the in-lab 
tests, the authors demonstrated the system stability and reliability. Furthermore, both 
in the functional and in the operational test, all involved caregivers confirmed the 
usefulness of the system. They said that the system could improve the work in ALFs. 
The experimental evaluation was also useful to identify possible improvements, in 
particular for what concerns the system portability and usability. Unfortunately, the 
operational test involved two inhabitants, only, who used the system sparingly. For 
drawing more specific conclusions, advanced tests with more inhabitants are needed.
CONCLUSION
This chapter presented an IoT system capable of improving assistance requests and 
anomaly detection in an Assisted Living Facility through wearable devices. With 
this healthcare support system, caregivers can be automatically alerted of poten-
tially hazardous situations that happen to the inhabitants while these are out of 
sight. Furthermore, inhabitants can require assistance instantly and from any point 
of the facility. Requirements for building such a system were extracted by taking 
into account the guidelines set forth in a previous study (Aced López, Corno, & De 
Russis, 2015), which conducted a series of focus groups with professional caregiv-
ers. The design of the system focused principally on portability and ubiquity. The 
system was implemented and tested in two phases. First, the authors performed a 
functional test with two professional caregivers to verify the user acceptance and 
the perceived usefulness. Second, the system was deployed in an ALF for 36 hours, 
collecting the opinions of the involved caregivers and inhabitants.
Future work will concern the increase of the possibilities to request assistance 
for inhabitants. In fact, people with severe physical disabilities hardly interact with 
wearable and mobile devices. In parallel, the authors are planning to generalize the 
solution to other devices, thinking at the progress of wearable devices. Without 
the need of having a paired mobile device to connect to the Internet, the system 
portability can be improved. Finally, an operational test with more caregivers and 
inhabitants is planned to draw more conclusions about actual system usage.

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
95
REFERENCES
Acampora, G., Cook, D., Rashidi, P., & Vasilakos, A. (2013). A survey on ambi-
ent intelligence in healthcare.Proc IEEE Inst Electr Electron, (pp. 2470–2494). 
doi:10.1109/JPROC.2013.2262913
Aced López, S., Corno, F., & De Russis, L. (2015). Supporting Caregivers in As-
sisted Living Facilities for Persons with Disabilities: A User Study. Universal Ac-
cess in the Information Society, 14(1), 133–144. doi:10.1007/s10209-014-0400-1
Adamer, K., Bannach, D., Klug, T., Lukowicz, P., Sbodio, M., Tresman, M., & 
Ziegert, T. et al. (2008). Developing a Wearable Assistant for Hospital Ward Rounds: 
An Experience Report. The Internet of Things, 4952, 289–307. doi:10.1007/978-
3-540-78731-0_19
Altakouri, B., Kortuem, G., Grunerbl, A., Kunze, K., & Lukowicz, P. (2010). The 
benefit of activity recognition for mobile phone based nursing documentation: A 
Wizard-of-Oz study. Wearable Computers (ISWC), 2010 International Symposium 
on (pp. 1-4). Seoul: IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISWC.2010.5665866
Anliker, U., Ward, J., Lukowicz, P., Troster, G., Dolveck, F., Baer, M., & Coluccini, 
L. et al. (2004). AMON: A wearable multiparameter medical monitoring and alert 
system. Information Technology in Biomedicine. IEEE Transactions on, 8(4), 415–427.
Beeber, A., Cohen, L., Zimmerman, S., Gwyther, L., Washington, T., Cagle, J., & 
Reed, D. (2014). Differences in assisted living staff perceptions, experiences, and 
attitudes. Journal of Gerontological Nursing, 40(1), 41–49. doi:10.3928/00989134-
20130731-03 PMID:23937102
Bhadoria, S., & Gupta, H. (2013). A Wearable Personal Healthcare and Emergency 
Information Based On Mobile Application. International Journal of Scientific Re-
search in Computer Science and Engineering, 1(4), 24–30.
Bisio, I., Lavagetto, F., Marchese, M., & Sciarrone, A. (2015). Smartphone-centric 
ambient assisted living platform for patients suffering from co-morbidities monitoring. 
IEEE Communications Magazine, 23(1), 34–41. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2015.7010513
Borazio, M., & Van Laerhoven, K. (2012). Combining Wearable and Environmental 
Sensing into an Unobtrusive Tool for Long-term Sleep Studies.Proceedings of the 
2nd ACM SIGHIT International Health Informatics Symposium (pp. 71-80). Miami, 
FL: ACM. doi:10.1145/2110363.2110375

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
96
Calvaresi, D., Cesarini, D., Sernani, P., Marinoni, P., Dragoni, A. F., & Sturm, A. 
(2016). Exploring the ambient assisted living domain: a systematic review. Journal 
of Ambient Intelligence and Humanized Computing, 1-19. doi:10.1007/s12652-
016-0374-3
Dawadi, P., Cook, D., Schmitter-Edgecombe, M., & Parsey, C. (2013). Automated 
assessment of cognitive health using smart home technologies. Technology and 
Health Care, 21(4), 323–343. doi:10.3233/THC-130734 PMID:23949177
Dhor, A., Modre-Opsrian, R., Drobics, M., Hayn, D., & Schreier, G. (2010). The 
Internet of Things for Ambient Assisted Living. In Information Technology: New 
Generations (ITNG), 2010 Seventh International Conference on (pp. 804-809). 
doi:10.1109/ITNG.2010.104
Harrison, C., Lim, B., Shick, A., & Hudson, S. (2009). Where to locate wearable 
displays?: reaction time performance of visual alerts from tip to toe.Proceedings of 
the 27th international conference on Human factors (pp. 941-944). Boston: ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1518701.1518845
Lau, S. L., König, I., David, K., Parandian, B., Carius-Düssel, C., & Schultz, M. 
(2010). Supporting patient monitoring using activity recognition with a smartphone. 
Wireless Communication Systems (ISWCS), 2010 7th International Symposium on 
(pp. 810-814). York: IEEE. doi:10.1109/ISWCS.2010.5624490
Lukowicz, P., Junker, H., Stäger, M., von Büren, T., & Tröster, G. (2002). WearNET: 
A Distributed Multi-sensor System for Context Aware Wearables. UbiComp 2002: 
Ubiquitous Computing, 4th International Conference (pp. 361-370). Göteborg: 
Springer Verlag. doi:10.1007/3-540-45809-3_28
Maurer, U., Rowe, A., Smailagic, A., & Siewiorek, D. (2006). Location and Activity 
Recognition Using eWatch: A Wearable Sensor Platform. Ambient Intelligence in 
Everyday Life, 3864, 86–102.
Mayora, O., Arnrich, B., Bardram, J., Drager, C., Finke, A., Frost, M.,... Wurzer, 
G. (2013). {Personal health systems for bipolar disorder Anecdotes, challenges 
and lessons learnt from MONARCA project. Pervasive Computing Technologies 
for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2013 7th International Conference on (pp. 424-
429). Venice: EAI.
Morrison, E., George, V., & Mosqueda, L. (2008). Primary care for adults with 
physical disabilities: perceptions from consumer and provider focus groups. Family 
Medicine Journal, 645-651.

IoT for Ambient Assisted Living
97
Raghunath, M., & Narayanaswami, C. (2002). User Interfaces for Applications on 
a Wrist Watch. Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 6(1), 17–30. doi:10.1007/
s007790200002
Rashidi, P., & Cook, D. (2013). COM: A Method for Mining and Monitoring Human 
Activity Patterns in Home-based Health Monitoring Systems. ACM Transactions 
on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 4(4), 1–20. doi:10.1145/2508037.2508045
Rashidi, P., & Mihailidis, A. (2012). A Survey on Ambient-Assisted Living Tools 
for Older Adults. Biomedical and Health Informatics. IEEE Journal of, 17(3), 
579–590. doi:10.1109/JBHI.2012.2234129
Rocha, A., Martins, A., Freire Junior, J., Kamel Boulos, M., Vicente, M., Feld, R., 
& Rodriguez-Molinero, A. et al. (2013). Innovations in health care services: The 
CAALYX system. International Journal of Medical Informatics, 82(11), 307–320. 
doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2011.03.003 PMID:21481633
Sanchez, D., Tentori, M., & Favela, J. (2008, March). Activity Recognition for the 
Smart Hospital. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 23(2), 50–57. doi:10.1109/MIS.2008.18
Suryadevara, N., & Mukhopadhyay, S. (2014). Determining Wellness through an 
Ambient Assisted Living Environment. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 29(3), 30–37. 
doi:10.1109/MIS.2014.16
Winkley, J., Jiang, P., & Jiang, W. (2012). Verity: An ambient assisted living plat-
form. IEEE Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 58(2), 364–373. doi:10.1109/
TCE.2012.6227435
Zulas, A., Crandall, A., Schmitter-Edgecombe, M., & Cook, D. (2012). Caregiver 
needs from elder care assistive smart homes: Nursing assessment.Proceedings 
of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 56, 125-129. 
doi:10.1177/1071181312561003

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch004
Chapter 4
98 
Hybrid Integration 
Technology for Wearable 
Sensor Systems
ABSTRACT
Personalized and pervasive healthcare devices help seamlessly integrate healthcare 
and wellness into the daily life, independent of time and space. Silicon Integrated 
Circuit (IC) has been used in many advanced healthcare applications due to the 
compact size and ultra-low power consumption. Meanwhile, printed electronics 
(PE) is considered as a promising approach enabling cost-effective manufacturing 
of thin, flexible, and light-weight devices. A hybrid integration of IC and PE provides 
a new solution for the future wearable healthcare devices. In this chapter, firstly 
a customized bio-sensing IC is demonstrated, which can detect and process vari-
ous bio-signals; secondly, the feasibility and performance of using inkjet printing 
technology as enabling technology has been examined for the fabrication of flex-
ible bio-sensing devices. Finally, a wearable and flexible Bio-Patch is presented by 
leveraging hybrid integration of PE and bio-sensing IC. In-vivo test results show 
that the flexible Bio-Patch provides high quality ECG signal comparable with the 
one gained by bedside ECG machine.
Li Xie
Thin Film Electronics ASA, Sweden
Lirong Zheng
Royal Institute of Technology, Sweden
Geng Yang
Zhejiang University, China

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
99
INTRODUCTION
Consistent with the global aging, many countries are facing challenges of elderly 
care. In the meantime, chronic diseases are becoming the major causes of death 
(European Commission Eurostat, 2011; Kung, Hoyert, Xu & Murphy, 2008) the 
prevalence of chronic diseases inevitably increases the total expenditure on healthcare 
and poses a grim challenge to the current healthcare systems worldwide (Zhang, 
Yan, & Poon, 2007; Chen et al., 2015). Traditional healthcare and well-being ser-
vices are usually provided within hospitals or medical centers. People with chronic 
diseases as well as the patients in post-surgery state need continuous monitoring of 
their health condition, in particular the vital signs, until their health status becomes 
stable. Patients, as well as their families, also need to collaborate with their physi-
cians to get informed about their status. Until now, most of the monitoring of the 
health condition of such people is usually accomplished within medical centers or 
hospital environments. As a result, measurements of vital signs and the correspond-
ing diagnosis are carried out in controlled environments. However, this solution is 
costly and inconvenient for people with the need of routine checks, since the patients 
need to visit the hospital on a regular basis. Currently, several trends indicate that 
the healthcare is gradually moving from institutional care to a growing focus on 
the individual personalized healthcare at home (Dey & Estrin, 2011; Saranummi, 
2008; Yang et al., 2014).
Connected and personalized healthcare help seamlessly integrate healthcare 
and wellness into people’s daily life. Wearable medical or healthcare devices are 
the key elements that will catalyze the process to enable the paradigm shift from 
the clinic-centric approach towards a person-centric model. This paradigm shifts 
focuses on sustainable healthcare aiming to:
•	
Enable early detection for prompt medical care and healthcare;
•	
Improve the management of chronic diseases; and,
•	
Preventive medicine.
The relevance of this change is huge, and healthcare itself, as it can be seen, is 
changing. The prognosis of several conditions will improve considerably because 
of prompt intervention; the users will be empowered and more engaged in the 
management of their disease or even in maintaining their health with a healthy and 
active lifestyle. Hopefully in many cases this will happen just by wearing certain 
sensing devices or clothes.
With the developments in biomedical circuits and systems, nowadays, silicon 
based integrated circuits have shown great advantages in terms of compact size and 
ultra-low power consumption. As a result, they have been found in many advanced 

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
100
medical and healthcare applications. In the meanwhile, printed electronics is consid-
ered as a promising approach enabling cost-effective manufacturing of thin, flexible, 
and light-weight devices. A hybrid integration of integrated circuits and printed 
electronics provides a promising solution for the future wearable healthcare devices.
State-of-the-Art of Current Wearable Healthcare Systems
In the last decade, wearable healthcare systems have drawn considerable attention 
from the research community and healthcare industry as it is pointed out by the 
numerous and yearly increasing corresponding research and development activities 
(Pantelopoulos & Bourbakis, 2010; Gatzoulis & Iakovidis, 2007; Lymperis & Dit-
tmar, 2007). A variety of system prototypes and commercially available products 
have been designed and developed in recent years, with application scenarios of 
sports monitoring, elder healthcare, infants health monitoring, or smart rehabilitation 
etc., aiming at providing real-time or near-real-time feedback information regarding 
users’ health condition, either to the users themselves or their family members or 
to a medical center or straight to a supervising professional physicians, while being 
able to alert in case of possible imminent health threatening conditions (Fredericks 
et al., 2015; Bonato, 2005, 2003; Raskovic, Martin, & Jovanov, 2004). A variety of 
commercially available products have been produced in the course of recent years, 
which are able to provide real time feedback on the users’ physical conditions. Many 
manufacturers and healthcare companies like Philips Healthcare, Redding Medi-
cal etc. provide small, wearable, low power, and lightweight wearable systems for 
health-monitoring applications (Philips Healthcare, 2016; Nellcor, 2016; Agilent 
Technologies, 2016; Redding Medical, 2016). These wearables can provide real-
time display of users’ heart rate and blood oxygen saturation.
Wrist-worn devices have been developed to be easily applied on users’ wrists to 
collect physiological or ambient parameters. Wristcare (Vivago, 2016) has developed 
a watch-like device, which monitors skin conductivity, skin temperature, and the 
user’s movement. A similar device is offered by Myo, called Myo Armband (Myo 
armband, 2016). It is a gesture recognition device, worn on the wrist, which enables 
the user to wirelessly control paired smart gadgets in surroundings using various 
wrist and forearm motion patterns. It uses a set of electromyographic (EMG) sen-
sors that sense bio-electrical activity in the forearm, combined with a gyroscope, 
accelerometer and magnetometer to recognize user’s gestures which can be found 
quite useful for the postoperative rehabilitations for the brain disease related pa-
tients. Both aforementioned wrist-worn devices enable continuous physiological 
data collection outside the lab environment. Worn on the wrist or on the upper part 
of the arm, they utilize a unique combination of sensors allowing the user to gather 
physiological parameters such as skin temperature, body movement, muscle groups 

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
101
activities, and galvanic skin response. Both devices include a wireless transmitter for 
communicating the collected data and possible alarms to a base station for further 
analysis or evaluation by a professional clinician.
Other commercially available wearable devices can be found include chest-worn 
belts for more accurate heart rate monitoring, which are usually applied in sports 
or physical training scenarios. MyZone (2016), Tickr (2016), and Garmin HRM 
(2016) provide smart chest straps which are capable to record users’ heart rates in 
specific sports including running, rowing, cycling, or even swimming.
In the meantime, more new elements have been developed and brought into wear-
able systems, such as smart textiles or smart fabrics, which provide added value to 
the wearers (Perusquia-Hernandez, Chen & Feijs, 2015; Wang et al, 2015). Propelled 
by the recent technological advances in biocompatible textiles and materials, min-
iaturized bio sensing devices, micro- and nano-electronics, and hybrid integration 
technologies, the smart textiles based wearable healthcare system have showed its 
advantages in terms of high wearability and comfortableness to the users. Smart 
textile based wearable systems achieve a relatively high degree of reliability due to 
guaranteeing good contact between the skin and the sensing modules even when the 
subjects are in the motion (Pantelopoulos & Bourbakis, 2010). As a result, wearable 
healthcare systems which are based on vest or garment with biosensors integrated on 
are believed to have the potential to transform the future healthcare and constitute 
a new means to address the issues of monitoring and managing chronic diseases, 
elderly people, postoperative rehabilitation patients, and persons with special needs 
(Chen et al, 2015).
During the last years, the European Commission together with research funding 
agencies all over the world has implemented an intensive effort in the field of Smart 
Textiles and provided funding supports to a number of research projects covering 
a very broad spectrum of new concepts, new materials, new processes and new 
applications in the last decade. Among the implemented projects are some well 
recognized ones (EU Textiles, 2016):
•	
AVALON: Multifunctional textile structures driving new production and or-
ganizational paradigms in textile SME networks (Avalon, 2016);
•	
Digitex: Digital programmed jetting of fluids for multifunctional protective 
textiles (Digitex, 2016);
•	
Inteltex: Intelligent multi-reactive textiles integrating nano-filler based CPC-
fibers (Inteltex, 2016);
•	
Natex: Aligned natural fibers and textiles for use in structural composite ap-
plications (Natex, 2016);
•	
NoTeReFiGa: Novel temperature regulating fibers and garments 
(NoTeReFiGa, 2016);

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
102
•	
Microflex: Micro fabrication production technology for MEMS on new 
emerging smart textiles/flexibles (Microflex, 2016); and,
•	
PASTA: Integrating platform for advanced smart textile applications 
(PASTA, 2016).
Due to the significant research and development activities in the field of smart 
textiles, research organizations and textile industries have been able to create in-
novative technology from scratch, and further push the technologies from several 
aspects (basic textiles and materials, interconnects, embedding electrodes, electronic 
and optical devices, systems worn on the body, etc), leading to the successful imple-
mentation of smart textiles into all sort of prototypes, systems, and applications.
Take the PASTA project (2016) as an example, which is a European Commission 
supported project, aiming to bring electronics and textile closer together to realize 
smart textile. The project combines research on electronic packaging and intercon-
nection technology with textile research to realize a variety of innovative applica-
tions using smart textile. It introduces new approaches for electronic packaging and 
module interconnects, making seamless and robust integration of electronics in textile 
possible. By leveraging the newly developed interconnect technology (mechanical 
crimping), the PASTA project has realized bare die integration into a yarn by means 
of micromachining (PASTA, 2016). In addition, the project develops a stretchable 
interposer serving as a stress relief interface between the rigid component and the 
elastic fabric. In this way, the proposed solution for textile-electronics integration is 
able to cover a wide range of components, from ultra-small off-the-shelf components, 
distributed sensors, to complex multichip modules (PASTA, 2016). The underlying 
concept relies on the development of hybrid integration approach interconnecting 
conductive yarns or functional fibers with crimp flat electronic packages. The devel-
oped textile-electronics integration approach can be applied in many textile-enable 
& patient-specific personal healthcare applications. One example can be found is 
a textile sensor developed from PASTA project, which is capable of continuously 
measuring stress and strain under the liability of daily life. The textile sensor has 
been applied into customized leg prosthesis for proof-of-function purpose, where 
the implemented textile sensor is responsible to measure global and local stress or 
strain along the full length of surface of the composite between the user’s leg and 
the prosthesis. As reported in PASTA (2014), the developed textile sensor is not 
only applicable for prostheses, but in any smart textile based system where stress 
or strain needs to be monitored in composites.
Due to its favorable features, smart textile is taken as a promising alternative to 
the design of wearable healthcare systems, as it has the advantage of high wear-
ability and addresses quite a lot on the user comfort issues. However, several com-
mon issues have been identified by the study of smart-textile based systems, which 

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
103
constitute a set of challenges that will need to be addressed by further researches 
in order to make improvements from all aspects. These challenges include further 
miniaturization on sensor or system level, the improvement on reliability from both 
electrical and mechanical aspects, security issues of private information, clinical 
validation and standardization etc.
A Desirable Wearable Healthcare System
Wearable sensing devices will serve as the indispensable part of the future healthcare 
system, since they can continuously monitor users’ health status, considerably improve 
users’ life quality, and sometimes save their lives (Dey & Estrin, 2011; Mulder et 
al., 2009). A desirable wearable sensor device for personalized healthcare should 
be efficient, capable of detecting different bio-signals while also able to establish 
a wired or wireless network for multi biological parameters extraction. It is ideally 
free of cumbersome cables, and should be small in size, light in weight to address 
user comfort requirement. The ideal wearables should include the following features:
•	
Ultra-thin and light to make the device unobtrusive;
•	
Soft and flexible to fit to body curve;
•	
Ultra-low power consumption to achieve long battery life;
•	
Easy to apply; and
•	
Versatile sensing functions.
An example of desired wearable bio-sensing system which can be used for 
continuous personalized healthcare monitoring is illustrated in Figure 1 with an 
application scenario of a multi-channel ECG measurement. Intelligent Electrode 
is formed by embedding a System-on-Chip (SoC) in each electrode, which endows 
the electrode with local intelligence. In addition, by leveraging printed electronics 
technology, the whole sensing unit is implemented on a flexible substrate. As a result, 
user comfort issues are addressed when applying the implemented wearable devices 
on human body. The block diagram of the bio-sensing SoC is shown in Figure 2. 
With the integrated microchip, the Intelligent Electrode is able to obtain high qual-
ity bio-signal by conducting the bio-signal amplification, filtering, quantization, 
buffering, and transmission tasks directly on-site each electrode.
In this work the bio-signal acquisition and transmission tasks are distributed 
onto each electrode (distributed process). A body wired network is established by 
sharing a serial communication link (Active Cable); Intelligent Electrodes can com-
municate with each other in a serial manner. Intelligent Electrodes detect the bio-
signals on specific sites of human body. These bio-signals are converted to digital 
format and gathered in one Intelligent Electrode, then the collected data is wire-

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
104
lessly transmitted to the Cloud via a smart phone or personal health assistant (PHA) 
for further processing and analysis. The concept of Intelligent Electrode and Active 
Cable are firstly reported in the attached (Yang et al., 2009).
The advantages of this presented wearable healthcare system include:
•	
One-chip multi-sensor. The customized microchip is designed with capabil-
ity to sense a variety of bio-signals, which allows one Intelligent Electrode 
for multiple bio-signals sensing;
Figure 1. A wearable monitoring system based on flexible smart sensors connected 
via an active cable
Figure 2. Block diagram of bio-sensing SoC

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
105
•	
Largely reduce the number of connecting cables. All sensing electrodes are 
connected by sharing a single Active Cable. As a result, user comfort can be 
improved;
•	
On-chip implemented serial communication protocol enables the establish-
ment of a body area network over a group of Intelligent Electrodes; and,
•	
Non-invasive and unobtrusive Intelligent Electrodes are implemented by us-
ing inkjet printing technology and hybrid integration technologies, which 
makes the implemented sensor thin and flexible enabling further improve-
ment on users’ comfort.
To realize such a system, mainly two core research challenges are present: 1/
ultra low-power and high-performance integrated circuits design which is the key 
for sensing unit miniaturization; 2/heterogeneous integration of silicon-based rigid 
integrated circuits (IC) with printing-process based flexible electronics, which is 
the enabling technology to make the implemented sensor flexible and bendable.
The following part of this chapter is organized as follows. Firstly, a customized 
bio-sensing IC will be introduced. The designed IC can detect and process a selected 
type of bio-electrical signal emitting from human body, including Electrocardiogram 
(ECG), Electromyogram (EMG), Electrooculogram (EOG), and Electroencepha-
logram (EEG). Moreover, the feasibility of using highly accurate inkjet printing 
technology as enabling technology has been examined for the design and fabrication 
of flexible bio-sensing devices. Performance evaluation has been made to verify 
the electrical and mechanical reliability of the printed electrodes, and circuitry. The 
implementation of a flexible and wearable device by heterogeneous integration of 
silicon based bio-sensing IC with printed electronics will be explored. A wearable 
Bio-Patch has been implemented on flexible substrate by leveraging hybrid integra-
tion of printed electronics and silicon based bio-sensing IC. In-vivo test results show 
that the implemented flexible Bio-Patch provides high quality ECG signal which is 
comparable with the one gained by bedside ECG machine.
An implemented wearable sensor prototype will be demonstrated in this chapter, 
which are implemented by heterogeneous integration of the silicon based SoC and 
cost-effective printed electronics. The measurement results indicate the SoC operates 
smoothly with the printed electronics. The fully-integrated wearable device consist-
ing of ultra-low power compact IC technology and printed electronics provides a 
promising solution for future personalized and pervasive healthcare applications.

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
106
CUSTOMIZED INTEGRATED CIRCUITS 
FOR WEARABLE SENSORS
An ideal wearable sensor should be miniaturized, unobtrusive, and long lasting. As 
the heart of the wearable sensors, a fully integrated low-power silicon-based SoC 
has been designed and implemented. By using high-level integrated SoC technol-
ogy, a compact chip is achieved, which is a single-chip multi-sensor solution and 
is the key issue to realize bio-sensing electronic system miniaturization. The chip 
is a compact ultra-low power mixed-signal SoC, which is capable of concurrent 
measurements of multiple vital bio-signals (Yang, Wan & Zheng, 2011; Wan, Yang, 
Chen & Zheng, 2011).
State of the Art of SoC Technology
Silicon based SoC technology is playing an important enabling role in the advanced 
medical and healthcare systems: it serves as the core element of the sensing devices, 
and makes the devices smarter. Fully integrated design has shown great advantages 
in many advanced medical applications, in terms of low-power consumption, high-
level integration and compact size (Lee et al., 2011; Vidojkovic et al., 2011; Salam, 
Sawan & Dang, 2011; Wattanapanitch & Sarpeshkar, 2011). Comparing with its 
counterparts, the off-the-shelf components based solutions; the SoC based solu-
tion is capable of integrating more complex circuit blocks with much lower power 
consumption in a smaller circuit area.
Due to the high integration capability and compact size, a SoC based solution 
enables the further miniaturization of sensing devices, and drives wearable sensor 
systems less obtrusive and more autonomous. In the past decade, considerable 
efforts have been made on developing advanced biomedical SoC and systems to 
enable physiological monitoring in novel application scenarios such as personal-
ized healthcare applications. Due to the fact that these developed biomedical SoC 
are usually battery-operated or even wirelessly powered, great emphasis has been 
paid on ultra-low power design, enabling the sensing circuits to operate for days or 
even months using a small battery or even powered by wireless energy scavenger. 
In addition, since most of the sensing devices or smart sensors need to have direct 
skin contact for relatively long time, more emphases has been put on sensor min-
iaturization. The final goal with such miniaturization is that by making the sensing 
circuit as small as possible, the resulting sensor should be unobtrusive and easy to 
be attached on the human body or hidden into a wearable system. Examples can be 
found in battery-powered wearable or implantable medical devices: the bio-amplifier 
presented in (Burke & Gleeson, 2000; Zhaang, Qin & Hong, 2009; Liu & Tang, 
2011; Xu, Zou, Yao, & Lian, 2008) can sense ECG activity; the ASIC reported in 

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
107
Massagram et al (2010) can detect heart-rate variation; the implantable system in 
senses the EMG signal for intelligent prostheses control (Farnswroth, Taylor, Triolo 
& Young, 2009); acquisition of EEG is performed in (Yazicioglu, Merken, Puers & 
Van Hoof, 2007; Verma et al., 2010; Mohen, Kartikeya, Gert & Nitish, 2008; Fung, 
Liu, Yuan & Guo, 2009); neural recording and neural tissue stimulator are presented 
in Mollazedah, Muari, Cuawenberghs, and Thakor (2009), Harrison and Charles 
(2003), Shahrohki et al (2010), Gosselin, Sawan and Kerherve (2010), Miranda et 
al (2010), Lee et al (2010), Moosung et al (2008), Horiuchi, Swindell, Sander, and 
Abshier (2000) and Wattanapanitch, Fee, and Sarpeshkar (2000). Meanwhile, many 
world-leading research institutes, and biomedical industries have actively engaged 
in the development of customized SoC for biological sensing and bio-signals pro-
cessing, like Sensium by Toumaz (2016). The absence of connecting metal wires, 
the look and user-feel of these bandage-like devices helps Sensium gain better user 
acceptance than traditional Holter-type monitors. Some other types of SoC based 
medical or healthcare devices have been developed and successfully undergone 
clinical trials. However, there are still existing challenges hindering a wider use of 
these SoC-enabled systems.
Most of the healthcare wearables have so far been limited to the acquisition 
of a single specific bio-signal, such as cardiac bio-potential or skin temperature 
etc.; other complementary and useful sensing modalities are missing. In most of 
the foreseen clinical scenarios, personalized healthcare monitoring will look for 
devices that can do more, such as multi-sensorial or multi-parameter measurement. 
In the following parts of this section, an implemented multi-inputs and multi-mode 
SoC sensor will be introduced. The demonstrated SoC based sensor is capable of 
establishing a self-configured wearable network and capturing multiple biological 
signals through configurable sensing ports to meet the requirements imposed by 
personalized health monitoring.
Bio-Sensing SoC Architecture and Implementation
The implemented bio-sensing SoC is a mixed-signal microchip. From the functional 
perspective, the designed SoC can be divided into 3 parts:
1. 	
A bioelectrical analog front end (AFE), which is used to pick up and process 
the weak bio-signal from human body;
2. 	
A successive approximation register analog to digital converter (SAR ADC), 
which is implemented on chip to convert the analog signal to a digital format; 
and
3. 	
A reconfigurable digital core, which is the controlling unit responsible for a 
single wearable sensor management as well as the body network management.

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
108
The overall architecture of the bio-sensing SoC is illustrated in Figure 3. The 
front-end circuit with gain and bandwidth adjustment is quite useful in multi-
parameter recording systems, which enables the SoC to process a variety of bio-
potential signals, including ECG, EMG, EOG and EEG. The amplified bio-signal 
is converted to digital stream by the on-chip ADC, and stored in the on-chip RAM 
of the digital core (Mollazadeh, Murari, Cauwenberghs, & Thakor, 2009; Harrison 
& Charles, 2003; Shahrokhi et al, 2010; Gosselin, Sawan & Kerherve, 2010; Mi-
randa et al, 2010; Lee et al, 2010; Chae et al, 2008; Horiuchi, Swindell, Sander & 
Abshier, 2004; Wattanapanitch, Fee and Sarpeshkar, 2000; Toumaz, 2016; Yang, 
Mao, & Zheng, 2010, 2009).
Bio-potential signals exhibit weak amplitudes and low frequencies. These weak 
signals tend to be submerged in the environmental noises or interference by other 
noises such as motion artifacts. The nature of bio-potential signals brings consider-
able challenges to the bio-signal read-out circuit. A desirable analog front end 
processing circuit should be equipped with programmable gain and bandwidth; thus 
it can be configured to accommodate different bio-potential signals (Yang, Chen, 
& Zheng, 2009; Yang, Chen, Cao, & Zheng, 2008). The circuit is also required to 
fulfill the stringent needs for the bio-signal detection: high input impedance, ultra-
low power and low input-referred noise. The circuit should be able to pick up these 
weak signals from a noisy environment: amplify the target signal but effectively 
reject the unwanted noise (Hu et al, 2014).
A programmable three-stage AFE is implemented in this design. The block 
diagram of the AFE is illustrated in Figure 3. Stage1 is mainly composed of a cur-
rent balanced instrumentation amplifier and a common mode feedback circuit. The 
differential outputs of Stage1 are AC-coupled to Stage2. Stage3 provides a tunable 
gain by tuning the equivalent capacitance of its inner capacitor bank via three 
Figure 3. Overall architecture of the bio-sensing SoC

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
109
external switches. The in-band gain of the Stage3 can be configured to 8 different 
values ranging from 2 to 19.
According to simulation results, the three-stage front-end circuit can totally provide 
a tunable close-loop gain ranging from 45 dB to 64 dB. The low-pass frequency of 
the front-end can be tuned to 80 Hz, 260 Hz, 400 Hz or 1 kHz by varying the on-
chip load capacitance through the external switches. The three-stage gain-bandwidth 
tunable architecture allows the adjustment of the gain of the amplification chain to 
an optimum value, while avoiding saturation distortion. The AFE totally draws a 
current of 2.3 μA from a 1.2 V supply. Detailed schematics for each stage and the 
corresponding theory analysis can be found in Ynag et al (2012).
The bio-sensing SoC is fabricated in a standard 0.18-µm Mixed-Mode 1P6M 
CMOS process and totally occupies 1.5 mm × 3 mm silicon area with an adaptive 
operating voltage ranging from 1.2 V to 3.3 V. Since the high density integrated 
circuits is identified as the key enabling technology for device miniaturization, all 
indispensable processing circuits blocks, including digital controlling logic and 
analog circuits, are compactly implemented in a tiny area of 4.5 square millimeters. 
Figure 4 illustrates the implemented silicon based bio-sensing SoC (without chip 
package) on a finger for scale, which gives an intuitive vision on how far the wear-
able device miniaturization can reach. A chip microphotograph with all building 
blocks marked is shown in Figure 5.
Figure 4. Bio-sensing SoC on a finger

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
110
Analog Front End
In order to measure different bio-signals, gain and bandwidth are designed to be 
tunable on AFE, as shown in Figure 6. To make an intuitive comparison, AFE 
circuits simulation result and chip measurement results are given in Figure 6. The 
AFE gain-bandwidth measurement result from a fabricated SoC is plotted in Figure 
6, and gain-bandwidth post layout simulation result is plotted in Figure 7. The mea-
sured and simulated gain and frequency response of the AFE are quite in line with 
each other with small exception of measured gain slightly smaller than simulation 
result. For example, the maximum gain measured is 63 dB which is 1 dB smaller 
than the simulated value. One possible reason is the attenuation caused by the unit 
buffer which is connected to the end of AFE amplifier chain with the function to 
increase the AFE driving capability. The attenuation of the unit causes the slightly 
less measured gain. Both the gain and bandwidth can be independently configured 
via external pins. 8 different gains with range from 45 dB to 63 dB can be selected 
(three of them are illustrated in Figure 6 and Figure 7). For each gain setup, four 
3-dB bandwidths can be obtained by programming of bandwidth switches. The 
upper part of Figure 6 shows the case of 3-dB bandwidth adjustment with 0.3 Hz 
low cut-off frequency and adjustable high cut-off frequency ranging from 85 Hz to 
850 Hz at an almost consistent gain of 62dB.
Table 1 summarizes the amplitude and frequency characteristics of a specific 
bio-potential signal, and the bio-sensing SoC is configured accordingly via external 
switches for the specific measurement.
Figure 5. Chip microphotograph with its building blocks marked

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
111
Figure 6. AFE Gain-bandwidth measurement result
Figure 7. AFE Gain-bandwidth simulation result

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
112
Digital Core
The goal of intelligent wearable devices design is to support and simplify our daily 
life through embedding smart electronics and flexible sensors into clothes or skin-
attached devices. These smart wearables sense their environments, process informa-
tion, and communicate by wireless links. Electronics as basic elements disappear or 
are cleverly hidden, but their functionalities are available in a ubiquitous fashion.
In this design, the Digital Core serves as the controlling logic and is responsible 
for digital bio-signal collection, buffering and streaming out. In addition, the Digital 
Core also takes charge of communication between sensor nodes and the management 
of body area network. A 2-wire serial transmission protocol is on-chip implemented. 
According to specific requirement, broadcast commands or unicast commands can 
be issued to communicate with other sensing nodes attached on the body. With this 
protocol, a body area network can be established and managed.
A typical body area network requires at least two types of sensor nodes: one is 
responsible for sensing specific bio-signals from human body, and the other type 
operates as a controller to manage the whole network. In this work, the two operat-
ing modes are combined and implemented on the same chip.
The chip can be configured either to a Sensing Node (SN) or the Main Node 
(MN). The difference between the two operating modes exists in:
•	
SN Mode: The main function of a SN is to sample, process and buffer the 
bio-signal. Each SN has a 4-bit address. The bio-signal from the subject’s 
skin is amplified and digitized. Subsequently, the digital bio-signal is picked 
up and buffered temporarily in SN’s on-chip RAM. If one RAM is full, the 
Table 1. Bio-sensing SoC setup for different recording applications
Bio-Signal
Gain Pin Set
BW Pin Set
Gain of AFE
BW of AFE
ECG (0.5-150 HZ) 
(0.1-3 mV)
‘100’
‘000’
49 dB
0.35 Hz-1.5 kHz
EMG (14-250 Hz) 
(0.01-2 mV)
‘010’
‘000’
57 dB
17 hZ-1.5kHz
EOG (0-30 Hz) 
(0.1-1 mV)
‘010’
‘111’
57 dB
.25 Hz-190Nz
EEG (0.5-40 Hz) 
(10 µV - 0.1 mV)
‘111’
‘011’
62 dB
0.37 Hz-850 Hz

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
113
upcoming data are automatically switched to the second RAM. Before the on 
chip memory is full, the stored data will be periodically collected by the MN;
•	
MN Mode: The main role of the MN is to manage the whole network using 
a variety of commands. SN-Chain Scan (SNCS) process is initiated when the 
system is powered up or reset. During SNCS process, all SNs in the chain are 
scanned; the address of each active SN is stored in the MN’s address buffer. 
Soon after SNCS is completed, bio-signal data collection process is initiated: 
the MN visits each SN in a serial manner. Collected data are buffered in a 
MN’s on-chip RAM. Before the storage is full, the MN forwards these data 
to the outside world via an external wireless transmission module, and then it 
continues with the next round of data collection.
The SNCS flow is described in Figure 8. The MN broadcasts a command packet 
containing a target SN address to the Active Cable. If the target SN is available on-
line, it responds with an acknowledgement immediately. Otherwise, if the target SN 
does not exist, no acknowledgement will be generated before MN’s timer overflow. 
Subsequently, the MN skips current SN, and continues with the next visit until all 
SNs are scanned. The current system supports 14 SNs and 1 MN. Figure 9 illustrates 
the command structure. Figure 10 shows the screenshot of SCL and SDA on an 
oscilloscope during SNCS. The ‘start’ and ‘stop’ commands for the implemented 
serial communication protocol are compatible with Philips I2C, while the defini-
tions for the rest of commands, for instance, broadcast and unicast commands are 
custom-designed.
PRINTED ELECTRODES AND THEIR CHARACTERISTICS
Electrodes for bio-potential measurement are designed to record bio-electrical signals 
while reducing the potential picking up of artifact. Many practical considerations 
Figure 8. Command-based SN-Chain Scan (SNCS) process

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
114
suggest the electrode design should be pragmatic to address the capability of mas-
sive manufacturing and reliable long-term use. Also, requirements from specific 
application scenarios determine whether to choose high-quality reusable electrodes, 
or low-cost disposable electrodes (Xie, Ynag, Mantysalo, Jonsson & Zheng, 2012).
Electrode Technology
Most of bio-electrical signals acquisitions are made with the aid of electrodes which 
serve as the interface between human body and medical devices for the recording 
of a specific bio-electrical activity (Searle & Kirkuup, 2000). The standard silver/
silver chloride (Ag/AgCl) electrodes have been well-characterized and studied over 
many decades (Huigen, Peper & Grimbergen, 2002; Spach, Barr, Havstad & Long, 
1966). With proper preparation and electrodes deployment, they can provide good 
signal quality at a relatively low cost. Depending on if conductive gel is applied, the 
contact electrodes can also be divided into wet electrodes (Griffith, Portnoy, Sotts & 
Day, 1979; Bouwstra, Feijs, Wei & Oetomo, 2009; Kato, Ueno, Kataoka, Hoshino & 
Ishiyama, 2006) and dry electrodes (Sullivan, Deiss, Jung & Cauwenberghs, 2008; 
Figure 9. Packet structure for the command frame
Figure 10. Oscilloscope screenshot of the SCL and SDA during SE-chain scan

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
115
Merrit, Nagle, & Grant, 2009; Cho et al., n.d.). According to the degree of inva-
siveness, electrodes can be classified into different categories. Typically, they can 
be classified as invasive electrodes (which have to be surgically implanted into the 
human body, e.g. placed on the surface of the brain or implanted into muscle groups 
for stimulation) and non-invasive electrodes (usually skin-attached). Depending on 
if electronics is contained, the non-invasive electrodes can be further divided as: 
passive-electrode (without electronics), and active-electrode (with electronics). In 
this work, we focused on the non-invasive one, the surface-mounted electrodes, and 
propose the concept of Intelligent Electrode which is one type of active-electrode 
with local intelligence by embedding a SoC (Yang et al, 2012). Based on this concept, 
we further developed several prototypes of skin-friendly Bio-Patch by combining 
the technical advantages of the integrated circuits and printed electronics.
Active Electrode
In recent years, many attempts have been made to improve the traditional electrode 
technology. Several research groups are developing active electrode. The bio-signal 
amplification/buffering takes place locally inside the electrode. By doing so, an 
output signal with much better quality is expected. The relative usage of the active 
electrode, in contrast with the more widespread standard passive electrode, is usu-
ally tied to novel cardiac or neurological applications. Thomas Degen et al. presents 
a two-wired buffer electrode. Yu Mike Chi et al. developed a non-contact active 
electrode for ECG/EEG applications (Yang, Xie & Zheng, 2013; Sullivan, Deiss & 
Zauwenberghs, 2007; Chi & Cauwenberghs, 2009; Sullivan, Deiss, Tzzy-Ping & 
Cauwenberghs, 2008). Several attempts have been made to integrate active electrodes 
in chairs and beds (Yong Gyu, Keun & Suk, 2006; Yong Gyu, Keun, Kwang Suk, 
2007) to obtain the user’s cardiac signal.
Although active electrodes are featured with improved immunity against envi-
ronmental interferences, they are not used as often as expected. Firstly, a survey 
of published works shows that active electrodes are almost exclusively designed 
using off-the-shelf components, such as operational amplifiers. The use of many 
off-the-shelf components leads to a cumbersome sensor size. Moreover, as the 
components carrier, the Printed Circuited Board (PCB) itself is stiff. As a result, the 
active electrode’s wearability is low, and not suitable for long-term wearable devices. 
Secondly, extra wires (such as power supply and ground wires) are introduced in 
for each active electrode, which results in even more connecting cables comparing 
with the traditional methods. The resulting size and user comfort are the limiting 
factors when considering integrating more complex circuits into the active electrode 
using the off-the-shelf components.

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
116
Passive Electrode
Electrodes form electric paths between human body and the sensing/stimulating 
circuits. Taking bio-electrical sensing as an example, electrodes are regarded as 
a class of sensors that transducer bio-potentials from human body to the read-out 
circuits where the signals can be detected and processed. The conventional adhesive 
passive Ag/AgCl electrodes commonly find their applications in clinical and research 
applications today. The standard Ag/AgCl electrodes have been well-characterized 
and studied over many decades. With proper preparation and electrodes deployment, 
they can provide relatively good signal quality at low cost. Figure 11 presents a 
sample of commercially available pre-gelled electrode (ARBO).
Moreover, depending on if conductive gel is applied when attaching the electrodes 
onto the human skin, the passive electrodes can be categorized as dry electrodes 
(without electrolytic gel) and wet electrodes (with electrolytic gel applied). Dry and 
wet electrodes have their own cons and pros. Take the monitoring of chronic disease 
as an example; conventional Ag/AgCl wet/pre-gelled electrodes have the potential 
risk of irritating the skin due to the long time attachment on a specific location on 
the skin (for instance, burn units or neonatal care). In addition, the signal quality 
and system performance degrade when the electrolyte gel dries out, and it is incon-
venient to make skin pretreatment before the measurement taking place on hairy 
chest. Therefore, many attempts have been made to overcome the drawbacks of wet 
electrodes.
Dry Electrode
To address the challenges mentioned above, dry electrodes are proposed as alterna-
tives to the wet electrodes. Depending on the nature of the carrier substrate, coating 
Figure 11. Samples of different types of electrodes: a) commercial pre-gelled electrode 
b) a pair of inkjet printed electrodes on polyimide substrates, c) textile electrode, 
d) a pair of spiked electrodes

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
117
materials, and physical features, dry contact electrodes can be identified as conduc-
tive polymer/rubber electrodes, metal or carbon electrodes, needle/spike electrodes, 
and fabric-based electrodes etc. Due the unique feature of each type, dry electrodes 
can be selected as suitable solutions for a variety of medical or healthcare applica-
tions (Xie et al., 2013).
1. 	
Electrodes Based on Planar Metal Plate: The media could be standard rigid 
PCB, flexible etched copper plate or flexible substrate such as polyimide and 
photo paper using printing technology. One example is presented in Figure 
11b which is a pair of printed electrodes (PrinteE) implemented on polyimide 
substrate using conductive inks. By attaching the planar metal plate onto the 
skin, electrical path could be formed between the subjects under test and the 
medical devices. Isolated by dielectric layer, e.g. cloth, this kind of electrodes 
and the skin form parallel-plate capacitor and can be used for non-contact bio-
signal measurement.
2. 	
Textile Electrodes (TextE): The fabrication methods of TextE include: a) 
conductive yarns weaving, knitting or embroidering along with normal yarns, 
b) screen-printing conductive pastes on top of fabric. A TextE sample can be 
found in Figure 11c. The textile-based electrodes could increase the user com-
fort and be unobtrusively embedded in clothes such as t-shirts, and garment 
etc. Because TextE features lightweight, ductile, washable, resisting abrasion 
and moisture, it is suitable for long-term continuous monitoring.
3. 	
Spiked Electrodes (SpikE): For certain application scenarios, bio-electrical 
signal extraction or stimulation cannot be simply conducted via traditional 
electrodes, such as ECG measurement through hairy chests, EEG measure-
ment from the head with hairs, or bio-potential signal monitoring of animals. 
Unavoidably, wet electrodes encounter problems when applying them on the 
shaggy skin, since it leads to unstable skin-electrode attachment, which in 
return induces huge contact noise, and in most cases, results in measurement 
failure. One solution nowadays is skin pretreatment by shaving the hairs. The 
limitation of this approach is obvious, since it is inconvenient and time con-
suming, furthermore, patients may be unwilling to shave their hairs. For such 
application scenarios, SpikEs are quite useful, because the conductive spikes/
needles can easily penetrate the hair and make contact with the skin to form 
the electrical connection. A pair of SpikEs is illustrated in Figure 11d.
According to the requirement from specific applications, e.g. brain-computer 
interface, stimulator array of an artificial limb, etc., the diameter of electrodes, the 
number of electrodes, physical characteristic of the electrode and its substrate (e.g 

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
118
flexibility and stretchability, etc.), and the spacial density, need to be fully consid-
ered during the design
and manufacturing of electrodes or electrode array. Some performance evalua-
tion has been made on printed electrodes to further investigate its potential usage 
in the biomedical domain.
Several pairs of printed electrodes (PrintE) are implemented on the photo paper 
substrate. A pair of silver electrodes with an electrode distance of 12 cm is selected 
for test, as shown in Figure 12. The electrodes and connection traces are fabricated 
using inkjet-printing technology. Figure 13 shows the cross section view of the 
printed electrode. The sample was made by inkjet-printing nano-silver ink onto 
inkjetable photo paper and followed by oven-sintering. The paper substrate used is 
roughly 250 µm and sintered silver layer is around 25 µm. Inkjet-printing technology 
is selected due to the easy-prototyping. Various printing technology such as stencil 
printing or screen printing can also be used for high-volume production.
A bio-sensing SoC measurement board was employed to evaluate the performance 
of electrodes. The in-vivo test was applied by connecting the printed electrodes to 
Figure 12. Printed electrodes with electrode distance of 12 cm on a photo paper 
substrate
Figure 13. Cross section view of the printed electrode

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
119
the differential inputs of analog front-end (AFE) on SoC. A photo of the conducted 
in-vivo test is shown in Figure 14. For demonstration purposes, the oscilloscope 
was stopped with a captured ECG signal held on the screen, and the printed elec-
trodes were intentionally held outward of the chest which should be facing towards 
chest in real test. An elastic bandage was used to hold electrodes to the skin, a clean 
ECG waveform (the output of SoC’s AFE) can be observed on the oscilloscope 
shown in Figure 14.
In addition to the performance evaluation of PrintE, similar in-vivo tests are also 
applied to the other three types of dry electrodes, which are Commercial Electrodes 
(CommE), TextE, and SpikE. The tests are conducted by connecting the selected 
dry electrodes with the same bio-sensing SoC measurement board. All tests are 
under the same circuit setting (gain and bandwidth) for ECG recording, as shown 
in Figure 14.
The performance of these dry electrodes are evaluated and compared in terms 
of contact impedance, induced noise and captured ECG signal through in-vivo 
tests. The ECG signals recorded by the four types of electrodes are shown in Figure 
15 (raw signals only without any digital signal processing). ECG signal obtained 
from CommE is taken as a reference. The experimental results indicate that TextE 
and PrintE obtain similar quality of ECG signals comparing with CommE, while 
SpikE induces large noise. However, the QRS complex is visible and the signal 
quality could be improved by backend signal processing. From the user comfort 
point of view, TextE is comfort when applied on the chest of a test subject, but it 
Figure 14. ECG test with paper based printed electrodes connected with bio-sensing 
SoC

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
120
is sensitive to motion and pressure due to the comparatively unstable mechanical 
and electrical contact with the skin, which brings in more challenges for back end 
digital bio-signal processing.
Each type of bio-potential electrodes has its own distinct features. The selection 
of a specific type of electrode is up to application requirements. When it comes to 
the implementation of a user friendly wearable device, PrintE is selected for hybrid 
integration, because it has advantages fitting with project requirements as follows:
1. 	
It has stable performance which is comparable with CommE;
2. 	
It is thin, flexible and lightweight which can attach well to the human body 
with respect to skin convexity;
3. 	
Its manufacturing process is compatible with digital hybrid integration process.
In addition, the inkjet printing technique makes it easy to customize the electrode 
pattern. In the following section of this chapter, a flexible wearable sensor will be 
introduced which is implemented by hybrid integration of printed electrodes and 
silicon based bio-sensing SoC.
Figure 15. The oscilloscope screen shot of the ECG signal captured by a) CommE, 
b) PrintE, c) TextE, d) SpikE, and e) filtered ECG signal of d)

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
121
HYBRID INTEGRATION OF FLEXIBLE WEARABLE SENSORS
A desirable wearable sensing device for personalized and pervasive e-health should 
be efficient, capable of multiple vital bio-signals sensing while the user comfort 
and user experience are the issues that must be addressed (Yang et al, 2013; Shen et 
al., 2015; Anurag et al., 2014; Hiremath, Yang & Mankodiyda, 2014; Abtahi et al, 
2014). The work is aiming to create an unobtrusive sensing system for personalized 
health monitoring and treatment. It is ideally free of cumbersome cables, and should 
be small in size, light in weight, low power, low cost and disposable after use. A 
bandage like wearable sensor could be a good example for unobtrusive sensing. It 
is soft and flexible, can be unobtrusively attached to user’s skin and automatically 
collect user’s health information (Ji, Yang, KJang, & Zheng, 2015; Ji, Ouyang, Yang 
& Yang, 2015; Kanth et al, 2014; Hamed, Tenhunen & Yang, 2015). Advances in 
microelectronics, nano-materials, sensor technology, integration technology, and 
information and communication technologies have made possible the implementa-
tion of a soft and flexible sensing device to realize the concept of “wear and forget” 
(Yang, et al, 2013).
Figure 16. The concept of Bio-Patch for wearable personalized health monitoring 
system

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
122
The concept of the proposed Bio-Patch is illustrated in Figure 12. It integrates 
the bio-sensing SoC, a pair of printed electrodes and interconnections, and a soft 
battery on a flexible substrate. It can be directly attached on human skin to collect 
a specific bioelectric signal (in this section, ECG recording is taken for a straight 
forward demonstration). With the SoC sensor embedded inside, the Bio-Patch is 
featured with high quality bio-signal extraction by conducting the bio-signal am-
plification, filtering, quantization, buffering, and transmission tasks directly on-site 
each patch.
Flexible Circuits and Interconnections
Inkjet printing technology is employed in this design as the enabling approach to 
print conductive electrodes, passive components, circuit board, and integration 
interconnections. The advantages of using the inkjet printing technology to imple-
ment the proposed Bio-Patch include (Xie et al, 2015):
•	
A green technology for electronics assembly. Compared with conventional 
PCB manufacturing, inkjet printing tech is more environmental friendly, 
since it does not involve masks or etching steps, thus avoids the use of harsh 
chemicals. It is print-on-demand, avoiding material waste. Therefore, with 
this technology, it is more convenient to apply customized bio-sensing ele-
ments/patterns according to a specific requirement;
•	
Time efficient with less process steps. Inkjet printing tech supports roll-to-
roll massive production. The conductive electrodes and all the interconnec-
tions can be made at the same time on the same substrate; and,
•	
Devices miniaturization and steps towards new packaging technology. Inkjet-
printing of nano-metal particles can be used to connect chips to package (e.g. 
System-in-Package) or directly print circuits on boards (e.g. Chip-on-Board). 
More compact patch/sensor can be achieved due to the thin profile of printed 
electrodes/interconnections. The smaller/more unobtrusive the patch/sensor 
is, the more unobtrusive and comfortable for the user to use.
In this work, digital inkjet printing technology is employed to fabricate the 
printed electrodes and electrical interconnections on the patch. The digital inkjet 
deposition is a contact-free manufacturing technology, which does not involve any 
complicated process, so passive components can be easily made at relatively low 
cost. A Dimatix DMP inkjet printer is used to deposit small droplets (10 pl for 
each droplet) of silver nano-particle ink (NPS-JL) directly and accurately on the 
polyimide substrate to form electrodes and circuit interconnections. The process-
ing resolution is set to 1270 dpi with the drop spacing of 20 μm (center to center). 

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
123
The printed structure is sintered by heat in an oven, so that the solvents and other 
additives are effectively removed by thermal decomposition and evaporation, and 
at the meanwhile the nano-particles join together to form a continuous and uniform 
structure that enables formation of metal clusters/plate.
Silicon-on-Flex
By leveraging compact SoC technology, miniaturization of wearable sensing device 
can be achieved by packing all the indispensible electronic modules onto the same 
chip, which leads to the minimum need of peripheral electronic components to 
fulfill the functional requirement. However, the chip packaging, as the container of 
the silicon chip, usually takes a much larger space than the silicon die itself. In this 
work, we explore the potential to miniaturize the physical dimension of Bio-Patch: 
instead of using a standard-packaged SoC chip, investigations are made to directly 
integrate a bare silicon die onto flexible substrates, named Silicon-on-Flex.
This brings in great challenges to the integration technology and the following 
limitations must be overcome:
1. 	
The dimension of the pad on the silicon is quite tiny, as small as 65 µm × 65 
µm, with a pitch of 90 µm. The dimensional limitation directly influences the 
yield of printing the electrical connections with sufficiently low resistance. 
During the integration process, adjacent pads can easily get short-circuited 
with each other;
2. 	
The nature of flexible substrate is soft which brings high reliability require-
ment of the interconnections and the system.
Moreover, it cannot stand very high temperatures and high mechanical puncture 
or pressure. As a result, traditional integration methods, such as wire bonding and 
solder balls, are not applicable in this case. Owing to the features of high accuracy 
and fine resolution, inkjet printing technology can not only be used to manufacture 
electrodes and circuit boards, but also be used as an integration approach. There-
fore, the whole pattern could be printed at once, including the electrodes, the circuit 
board, and the interconnections connecting the pads on the die with the circuits 
on the flexible foil. It is worth mentioning that, by merging the steps of printing 
the circuit and electrodes into a single step, the whole manufacturing process for a 
device is further simplified.
To verify the silicon-on-flex concept and to optimize the printing setup, a test 
silicon chip with the pad size of 90 µm is employed. Figure 17 shows the inkjet 
printed electrical paths created between the pads on the silicon and traces on the 
substrate: top view (Figure 17a) and side view (Figure 17b). Owing to the merits 

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
124
of inkjet printing technology, such as accurate alignment and fine resolution, paral-
lel lines are successfully printed with a well-controlled line width. The lines form 
conductive interconnects from the bumps on chip to the flexible substrate.
Bio-Patch Implementation and Miniaturization
Figure l8 shows the microphotograph of a Bio-Patch prototype based on the hy-
brid Silicon-on-Flex integration. The width of inkjet-printed interconnects can be 
as thin as 50 祄. Totally 14 parallel interconnects have been successfully printed 
within a narrow space of 1.5 mm (one edge of a bare die) without any open-circuit 
or short-circuit.
By integrating the customized bio-sensing SoC, a pair of optimized electrodes, 
and a few peripheral passive components, miniaturized Bio-Patch prototype was 
implemented on polyimide substrate for single-channel ECG measurement. The 
prototype photo is illustrated in Figure 19 (Xie et al, 2012). Including the electrodes 
and the coin battery assembled on the backside, the total size of the Bio-Patch is 
4.5 cm × 2.5 cm with a thickness of 2 mm. The thickness could be further reduced 
to 1 mm if a soft battery (e.g., an Enfucell printed battery) is used. By integrating 
electrodes on the Bio-Patch as a whole, users or caregivers do not need to snap the 
electrodes one by one every time, thus save maintenance or operation time.
The hybrid integration approach of Silicon-on-Flex makes the developed Bio-
Patch small, ultra-thin, and bendable. With the help of bio-compatible adhesive 
tape, the implemented Bio-Patch can be easily attached on to the user’s chest. Due 
to the use of thin flexible polyimide substrate, it works like a ‘Band Aid’. The imple-
mented Bio-Patch aims to gain better user acceptance by significantly improving 
user’s comfort by addressing the “wear&forget” concept (Yang et al, 2013). As the 
Figure 17. An example of inkjet printed interconnects for bare die integration from 
a) top view, b) side view

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
125
key enabling technology, the silicon-on-flex hybrid integration technology is iden-
tified as one of the feasible solutions for wearable devices fabrication. The ECG 
signal captured by the Bio-Patch is shown in Figure 20. Influenced by 50 Hz 
power-line interference, a slight noise can be observed from the measured ECG 
signal (raw signal only), even without backend digital signal processing, the key 
features of ECG, including the PQRST complex, are clearly visible. The performance 
of the implemented Bio-Patch is summarized in Table 2.
Figure 18. Hybrid integration of Bio-Patch using inkjet printing technology
Figure 19. Miniaturized Bio-Patch for single-channel ECG measurement

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
126
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
In this work, the performance of printed electrodes and interconnections on flexible 
substrates has been studied. Inkjet printing technology has been employed to print 
these patterns. By connecting the printed electrodes to the bio-sensing SoC, high 
quality ECG signal has been successfully recorded. Experiment results show that 
Figure 20. ECG signal captured using the implemented Bio-Patch
Table 2. Performance summary
Parameter
This Work
SoC Process
UMC 0.18 µm 1P6M CMOS
Silicon area
1.5 mm x 3 mm
Supply voltage
1.2 V ~ 3.3 V
Patch size
4.5 cm x 2.5 cm
Conductive link
NPS-JL from Harima
Substrate
Polyimide
Electrode
Printed silver electrode
Front-end power
2.3 μA@1.2 V
ADC power
1.8 μA@1.2 V

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
127
the printed electrodes are compatible with the implemented SoC. Inkjet printing 
technology is identified as one feasible approach to integrate customized electrodes 
and other patterned electronics with silicon based IC on flexible substrates such as 
photo paper or polyimide substrate. Wearable device miniaturization and system 
integration using inkjet printing technology on flexible substrates has been further 
investigated. The hybrid integration concept of silicon-on-flex has been demonstrated 
through the implementation of a wearable device by combining a compact SoC with 
printed electronics. A proof-of-concept Bio-Patch prototype has been implemented 
on the polyimide substrate. Preliminary experiment results have shown that ECG 
signals are successfully measured through in-vivo tests.
The aim of this work is not limited to evaluating the performance of printed 
interconnects or comparing the characteristics of printed components with the com-
mercial ones, but addressing the user comfort issues by combining the “wear&forget” 
concept into the implementation of a wearable bio-sensing device. A workable Bio-
Patch prototype has been successfully implemented by utilizing the digital inkjet 
printing technology to integrate the customized SoC on a flexible substrate. The 
developed patch gets rid of cumbersome connecting wires and avoids complicated 
electrodes configuration/placement, therefore, maximizing user comfort. Prelimi-
nary measurement results show that ECG signals are successfully measured when 
applied on the subject’s chest. The implemented skin-attached Bio-Patch enables 
unobtrusive sensing in our daily life. Combined with the large health data collection 
and proper big data analysis of physiological change of an individual over time, the 
proposed wearable system provides a promising solution for personalized health 
monitoring and treatment.
Considering the implemented wearable patch in the design for continuous long 
term health monitoring, several practical issues should be taken into consideration 
for further improvements of the device from the aspects of users’ comfortableness 
and device’s performance reliability. As reported earlier in this chapter, the core 
electronic module, the bio-sensing SoC, has been designed to be ultra-low power 
consumption (tens of micro-Watt level), however, if the power consumption of a 
wireless data transmission module is counted in (tens of mili-Watt level in general), 
the continuous running of the system will cause heat dissipation problem. In order 
to solve the potential problem, the following two approaches have been identified. 
One is to improve the device’s heat dissipation capability by implementing arrays of 
tiny holes at the spare area of the patch’s substrate. With the help of the tiny holes, 
the skin part covered by the patch can be exposed to the external air, leading to a 
breathable substrate, as a result, heat and sweat can be efficiently dissipated. Since the 
wireless module is known as a power hungry module for a wearable device, another 
approach which can mitigate the patch’s heat problem is to leverage the re-scheme 
of wireless data transmission to further lower down the power consumption. Instead 

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
128
of continuously transmitting the collected raw data to the external receiver in real 
time, the measured data can be compressed first before being sent out via wireless 
link in the burst mode. Furthermore, in most cases, constant exposure to moisture 
and water, e.g. sweat, is one of the leading causes of electronic failure in wearable 
devices. The same situation applies to the implemented patch sensor proposed in this 
chapter. Further enhancement is needed during patch’s integration process to protect 
the inner electronic components against moisture and water. One straightforward 
and efficient approach is to encapsulate the electronic components and make them 
as a stand-alone module by using waterproofing liquid silicone solution.
In addition to the aforementioned approaches to further enhance a wearable de-
vice’s reliability and maximize the user’s comfort, more issues have been identified 
as potential challenges which need to be addressed by further researches in order 
to improve the security, the efficiency, and the interoperability of the wearable 
healthcare systems. These issues include: energy scavenging technology; security 
of private information; encryption and authentication of all communicated data; 
further improvements on sensor’s miniaturization and system’s wearability, etc. 
These issues may help researchers and developers in the field with possible direc-
tions for further research.
REFERENCES
Abtahi, Björlin, Yang, Seoane, & Lindecrantz. (2014). Bodykom mobile cardiac 
monitoring system: Current status and developments. 10th Medicinteknikdagarna 
(MTD 2014).
Agilent Technologies. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www.agilent.com/
Anurag, A., Moosavi, S. R., Rahmani, A.-M., Westerlund, T., Yang, G., Liljeberg, P., 
& Tenhunen, H. (2014). Pervasive Health Monitoring Based on Internet of Things: 
Two Case Studies. 4th International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication 
and Healthcare. doi:10.4108/icst.mobihealth.2014.257395
AVALON. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: www.avalon-eu.org
Bonato, P. (2003). Wearable sensors/systems and their impact on biomedical en-
gineering. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, 22(3), 18–20. 
doi:10.1109/MEMB.2003.1213622 PMID:12845812
Bonato, P. (2005). Advances in wearable technology and applications in physical 
medicine and rehabilitation. Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, 2(1), 
2. doi:10.1186/1743-0003-2-2 PMID:15733322

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
129
Bouwstra, S., Feijs, L., Wei, C., & Oetomo, S. B. (2009). Smart Jacket Design for 
Neonatal Monitoring with Wearable Sensors. Sixth International Workshop on in 
Wearable and Implantable Body Sensor Networks. doi:10.1109/BSN.2009.40
Burke, M. J., & Gleeson, D. T. (2000). A micropower dry-electrode ECG preampli-
fier. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 47(2), 155–162.
Chae, M., Liu, W., Yang, Z., Chen, T., & Kim, J. (2008). A 128-Channel 6mW 
Wireless Neural Recording IC with On-the-Fly Spike Sorting and UWB Tansmitter. 
In IEEE International Solid-State Circuits Conference, 2008.
Chen, W. (2015, May). Mimo Pillow - a Comfortable Cushion Designed with 
Maternal Heart Beat Vibrations for Comforting Newborn Infants. IEEE Journal of 
Biomedical Health Informatics, 19(3), 979–985. PMID:25148673
Chen, W., Augusto, J., Martinez, F., Lehocki, F., Wolf, K-H., Arends, J., … Wichert, 
R. (2015). Recent Advances on AAL - bridging Assistive Technologies, e-Health and 
Personalized Health Care. IOS Press.
Chi, Y. M. Deiss, S. R., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2009). Non-contact Low Power EEG/
ECG Electrode for High Density Wearable Biopotential Sensor Networks. In Wear-
able and Implantable Body Sensor Networks, 2009. BSN 2009. Sixth International 
Workshop on.
Chi, Y. M., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2009). Micropower non-contact EEG electrode 
with active common-mode noise suppression and input capacitance cancellation. 
In Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, 2009. EMBC 2009. Annual Inter-
national Conference of the IEEE.
Cho, G., Jeong, K., Paik, M. J., Kwun, Y., & Sung, M. (2011, December). Perfor-
mance Evaluation of Textile-Based Electrodes and Motion Sensors for Smart Cloth-
ing. IEEE Sensors Journal, 11(12), 3183–3193. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2011.2167508
Dey, A. K., & Estrin, D. (2011). Pervasive healthcare 2010: Two perspectives. 
IEEE Pervasive Computing / IEEE Computer Society [and] IEEE Communications 
Society, 10(3), 8–11. doi:10.1109/MPRV.2011.56
Dey, A. K., & Estrin, D. (2011). Perspectives on Pervasive Health from Some of the 
Field’s Leading Researchers. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 10(2), 4–7. doi:10.1109/
MPRV.2011.29
Digitex. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: www.digitex-eu.com

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
130
European Commission Eurostat: Causes of Death Statistics. (2011). Available 
from: http://epp.eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Causes_of_
death_statistics
Farnsworth, B. D., Talyor, D. M., Triolo, R. J., & Young, D. J. (2009). Wireless in vivo 
EMG sensor for intelligent prosthetic control. In International Solid-State Sensors, 
Actuators and Microsystems Conference, 2009. doi:10.1109/SENSOR.2009.5285488
Frederiks, K., Croes, M., Chen, W., Bambang Oetomo, S., & Sterkenburg, P. (2015). 
Sense - a biofeedback system to support the interaction between parents and their 
child with the Prader-Willi syndrome. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart 
Environments, 7(4), 449–459. doi:10.3233/AIS-150327
Fung, S. W., Liu, B., Yuan, J., & Guo, Q. (2009). A low-noise monolithic CMOS 
bio-potential detector. IEEE International Symposium on in Circuits and Systems, 
2009. doi:10.1109/ISCAS.2009.5117833
Garmin, H. R. M. (2016, Aug. 1). Retrieved from http://www.garmin.com/
Gatzoulis, L., & Iakovidis, I. (2007). Wearable and portable ehealth systems. 
IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, 26(5), 51–56. doi:10.1109/
EMB.2007.901787 PMID:17941323
Gosselin, B., Sawan, M., & Kerherve, E. (2010). Linear-Phase Delay Filters for Ultra-
Low-Power Signal Processing in Neural Recording Implants. IEEE Transactions on 
Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 4(3), 171–180. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2010.2045756 
PMID:23853341
Griffith, M., Portnoy, W., Stotts, L., & Day, J. (1979). Improved capacitive electro-
cardiogram electrodes for burn applications. Medical & Biological Engineering & 
Computing, 17(5), 641–646. doi:10.1007/BF02440910 PMID:316080
Gyu, Y. (2006). ECG measurement on a chair without conductive contact. Biomedi-
cal Engineering. IEEE Transactions on, 53(5), 956–959.
Gyu, Y. (2007). ECG Recording on a Bed During Sleep Without Direct Skin-Contact. 
Biomedical Engineering. IEEE Transactions on, 54(4), 718–725.
Hamed, Z., Tenhunen, H., & Yang, G. (2015). A Programmable Low Power Cur-
rent Source for Bioimpedance Measurement: Towards a Wearable Personalized 
Health. In IEEE 37th Annu.Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society(EMBC2015). doi:10.1109/EMBC.2015.7318787

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
131
Harrison, R. R., & Charles, C. (2003). A low-power low-noise CMOS amplifier for 
neural recording applications. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 38(6), 958–965. 
doi:10.1109/JSSC.2003.811979
Healthcare, P. (2016, Aug. 1). [Online]. Available: http://www.usa.philips.com/
healthcare/
Hiremath, S., Yang, G., & Mankodiya, K. (2014). Wearable Internet of Things: 
Concept, Architectural Components and Promises for Person-Centered Healthcare. 
4th International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare. 
doi:10.4108/icst.mobihealth.2014.257440
Horiuchi, T., Swindell, T., Sander, D., & Abshier, P. (2004). A low-power CMOS 
neural amplifier with amplitude measurements for spike sorting. In International 
Symposium on Circuits and Systems, ISCAS2004. doi:10.1109/ISCAS.2004.1328932
Hu, R., Qin, Y., Tian, Y., Hong, Z., Yang, G., Zheng, L.-R., & Wang, Y. et al. 
(2014). Biofeedback Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation Front-end for Dyspha-
gia Treatment. 10th Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference (BIOCAS2014). 
doi:10.1109/BioCAS.2014.6981800
Huigen, E., Peper, A., & Grimbergen, C. A. (2002). Investigation into the origin of 
the noise of surface electrodes. Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 
40(3), 332–338. doi:10.1007/BF02344216 PMID:12195981
Inteltex. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: www.inteltex.eu
Ji, G., Ouyang, W., Yang, K., & Yang, G. (2015). Skin-attached sensor and artifact 
removal using cloud computing. In 7th International Conference on e-Health (e-
Health2015).
Ji, G., Yang, G., Yang, K., & Zheng, L. R. (2015). A User-friendly Wearable Device 
Based on Plastic Substrate for Heart Disease Monitoring. In 4th International Con-
ference on Computational & Mathematical Biomedical Engineering (CMBE2015).
Kanth, R. K., Liljeberg, P., Westerlund, T., Kumar, H., Tenhunen, H., Wan, Q.,... 
Zheng, L.-R. (2015). Information and communication system technology’s impacts 
on personalized and pervasive healthcare: A technological survey. 2014/6/24, 
IEEE Conference on Norbert Wiener in the 21st Century (21CW). doi:10.1109/
NORBERT.2014.6893917

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
132
Kato, T., Ueno, A., Kataoka, S., Hoshino, H., & Ishiyama, Y. (2006). An Application 
of Capacitive Electrode for Detecting Electrocardiogram of Neonates and Infants. 
28th Annual International Conference of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2006.260362
H.-C. Kung, Hoyert, Xu, & Murphy, S.L. (2008). Deaths: final data for 2005. Na-
tional Vital Statistics Reports, 56(10), 5-9.
Lee. (2011). A Programmable Implantable Microstimulator SoC With Wireless 
Telemetry: Application in Closed-Loop Endocardial Stimulation for Cardiac Pace-
maker. Biomedical Circuits and Systems. IEEE Transactions on., 5(6), 511–522.
Lee, S. B., & Lee, H.-M. (2010). An inductively powered scalable 32-channel 
wireless neural recording system-on-a-chip for neuroscience applications. In IEEE 
International Solid-State Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC).
Liu, S.-C., & Tang, K.-T. (2011). A low-voltage low-power sigma-delta modula-
tor for bio-potential signals. In IEEE/NIH Life Science Systems and Applications 
Workshop (LiSSA). doi:10.1109/LISSA.2011.5754146
Lymperis, A., & Dittmar, A. (2007). Advanced wearable health systems and applica-
tions, research and development efforts in the european union. IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Magazine, 26(3), 29–33. doi:10.1109/MEMB.2007.364926 
PMID:17549917
Massagram, W., Hafner, N., Chen, M., Macchiarulo, L., Lubecke, V. M., & Boric-
Lubecke, O. (2010). Digital Heart-Rate Variability Parameter Monitoring and 
Assessment ASIC. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 4(1), 
19–26. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2009.2035555 PMID:23853306
Merritt, C. R., Nagle, H. T., & Grant, E. (2009). Fabric-Based Active Electrode Design 
and Fabrication for Health Monitoring Clothing. IEEE Transactions on Informa-
tion Technology in Biomedicine, 13(2), 274–280. doi:10.1109/TITB.2009.2012408 
PMID:19174357
Microflex. (2016, Aug.1). Available: http://microflex.ecs.soton.ac.uk
Miranda, H., Gilja, V., Chestek, C. A., Shenoy, K. V., & Meng, T. H. (2010). HermesD: 
A High-Rate Long-Range Wireless Transmission System for Simultaneous Multi-
channel Neural Recording Applications. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits 
and Systems., 4(3), 181–191. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2010.2044573 PMID:23853342

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
133
Mohsen, M., Kartikeya, M., Gert, C., & Nitish, T. (2008). From spikes to EEG: 
Integrated multichannel and selective acquisition of neuropotentials. In 30th Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.
Mollazadeh, M., Murari, K., Cauwenberghs, G., & Thakor, N. (2009). Micropower 
CMOS Integrated Low-Noise Amplification, Filtering, and Digitization of Multi-
modal Neuropotentials. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 
3(1), 1–10. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2008.2005297 PMID:20046962
Mulder, I., Schikhof, Y., Vastenburg, M., Card, A., Dunn, T., Komninos, A., & 
Eslami, Z. et al. (2009). Designing with Care: The Future of Pervasive Healthcare. 
Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 8(4), 85–88. doi:10.1109/MPRV.2009.71
Myo Armband. (2016, Aug. 1). Retrieved from https://www.myo.com/
MyZone. (2016, Aug. 1). Retrieved from http://www.myzone.org/
Natex. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: www.natex.eu
Nellcor. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www.nellcor.com/
NoTeReFiGa. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://extra.ivf.se/noterefiga
Pantelopoulos, A., & Bourbakis, N. G. (2010, January). A Survey on Wearable 
Sensor-Based Systems for Health Monitoring and Prognosis. IEEE Transactions 
on Systems, Man and Cybernetics. Part C, Applications and Reviews, 40(1), 1–12. 
doi:10.1109/TSMCC.2009.2032660
PASTA. (2016, Aug.1). Available: https://projects.imec.be/pasta/node/1
Perusquía-Hernández, M., Chen, W., & Feijs, L. M. G. (2015). Textile-integrated 
electronics for ambulatory pregnancy monitoring. In Advanced in smart medical 
textiles. Woodhead Publishing.
Raskovic, D., Martin, T., & Jovanov, E. (2004). Medical monitoring applications 
for wearable computing. The Computer Journal, 47(4), 495–504. doi:10.1093/
comjnl/47.4.495
Redding Medical. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www. reddingmedical.com/
Salam, M. T., Sawan, M., & Khoa, N. (2011). A Novel Low-Power-Implantable 
Epileptic Seizure-Onset Detector. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and 
Systems., 5(6), 568–578. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2011.2157153 PMID:23852554

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
134
Saranummi, N. (2008). IT Applications for Pervasive, Personal, and Personalized 
Health. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 12(1), 1–4. 
doi:10.1109/TITB.2007.913880 PMID:18270031
Searle, A., & Kirkup, L. (2000, May). A direct comparison of wet, dry and insulat-
ing bioelectric recording electrodes. Physiological Measurement, 21(2), 271–283. 
doi:10.1088/0967-3334/21/2/307 PMID:10847194
Shahrokhi, F., Abdelhalim, K., Serletis, D., Carlen, P. L., & Genov, R. (2010). The 
128-Channel Fully Differential Digital Integrated Neural Recording and Stimulation 
Interface. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 4(3), 149–161. 
doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2010.2041350 PMID:23853339
Shen, J., Mao, J., Yang, G., Xie, L., Feng, Y., Nejad, M. B., & Zheng, L.-R. et al. 
(2015). A 180 nm-CMOS Asymmetric UWB-RFID Tag with Real-Time Remote-
Monitored ECG-Sensing. 8th International Conference on Biomedical Electronics 
and Devices (BIODEVICE2014). doi:10.5220/0005286302100215
Spach, M., Barr, R., Havstad, J., & Long, E. (1966). Skin-electrode impedance and its 
effect on recording cardiac potentials. Circulation, 34(4), 649–656. doi:10.1161/01.
CIR.34.4.649 PMID:5921760
Sullivan, J., Deiss, S. R., Jung, T.-P., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2008). A brain-machine 
interface using dry-contact, low-noise EEG sensors. In IEEE International Sympo-
sium on. Circuits and Systems, 2008.
Sullivan, T. J., & Deiss, S. R. Tzyy-Ping, J., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2008). A brain-
machine interface using dry-contact, low-noise EEG sensors. In Circuits and Systems, 
2008. ISCAS 2008. IEEE International Symposium on.
Sullivan, T. J., Deiss, S. R., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2007). A Low-Noise, Non-Contact 
EEG/ECG Sensor. In Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference, 2007. BIOCAS 
2007. IEEE. doi:10.1109/BIOCAS.2007.4463332
Textiles, E. U. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www.textile-platform.eu/links/
Tickr, X. (2016, Aug. 1). Retrieved from http://eu.wahoofitness.com/
Toumaz. (2016, Aug. 1). Available http://www.toumaz.com/
Verma, N., Shoeb, A., Bohorquez, J., Dawson, J., Guttag, J., & Chandrakasan, A. P. 
(2010). A Micro-Power EEG Acquisition SoC With Integrated Feature Extraction 
Processor for a Chronic Seizure Detection System. IEEE Journal of Solid-State 
Circuits, 45(4), 804–816. doi:10.1109/JSSC.2010.2042245

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
135
Vidojkovic. (2011). A 2.4 GHz ULP OOK Single-Chip Transceiver for Healthcare 
Applications. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems, 5(6), 523–534. 
PMID:23852550
Vivago. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www.istsec.fi/vivago-pam
Wan, Yang, Chen, & Zheng. (2011). Electrical Performance of Inkjet Printed Flex-
ible Cable for ECG Monitoring. IEEE 20th Electrical Performance of Electronic 
Packaging and Systems (EPEPS 2011).
Wang, Q., Chen, W., Timmermans, A. A., Karachristos, C., Martens, J.-B., & 
Markopoulos, P. (2015). Smart rehabilitation garment for posture monitoring. In 
Proceedings of the 37th Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering 
in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC 2015). doi:10.1109/EMBC.2015.7319695
Wattanapanitch, Fee, & Sarpeshkar. (n.d.). An Energy-Efficient Micropower Neu-
ral Recording Amplifier. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems, 
1(2), 136-147.
Wattanapanitch, W., & Sarpeshkar, R. (2011). A Low-Power 32-Channel Digitally 
Programmable Neural Recording Integrated Circuit. IEEE Transactions on Bio-
medical Circuits and Systems, 5(6), 592–602. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2011.2163404 
PMID:23852555
Xie, L., Feng, Y., Yang, G., Chen, Q., & Zheng, L.-R. (2015, October). C-RF In-
terconnections for Paper Electronics. IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components 
Letters, 25(10), 684–686. doi:10.1109/LMWC.2015.2468572
Xie, L., Yang, G., & Linlin Xu, F. (2013). Characterization of Dry Biopotential 
Electrodes. IEEE 35st Annu.Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society(EMBC2013).
Xie, L., Yang, G., Mäntysalo, M., Jonsson, F., & Zheng, L.-R. (2012). A System-on-
Chip and Paper-based Inkjet Printed Electrodes for a Hybrid Wearable Bio-Sensing 
System. IEEE 34st Annu.Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Society (EMBC2012). doi:10.1109/EMBC.2012.6347122
Xie, L., Yang, G., Mäntysalo, M., Xu, L. L., Jonsson, F., & Zheng, L.-R. (2012, 
December). Heterogeneous Integration of Bio-Sensing System-on-Chip and Printed 
Electronics. IEEE Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 
2(4), 672–682. doi:10.1109/JETCAS.2012.2223554
Xu, X., Zou, X., Yao, L., & Lian, Y. (2008). A 1-V 450-nW fully integrated biomedi-
cal sensor interface system. In IEEE Symposium on VLSI Circuits.

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
136
Yang, Chen, Jonsson, Hannu, & Zheng. (2012). A Multi-Parameter Bio-Electric 
ASIC Sensor with Integrated 2-Wire Data Transmission Protocol for Wearable 
Healthcare System. Design Automation & Test in Europe (DATE 2012).
Yang, Xie, Mäntysalo, Chen, Hannu, & Zheng. (2012). Bio-Patch Design and 
Implementation Based on a Low-Power System-on-Chip and Paper-based Inkjet 
Printing Technology. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 
16(6), 1043-1050.
Yang, Xie, & Zheng. (2013). Evaluation of non-contact flexible electrodes connected 
with a customized IC-steps towards a fully integrated ECG sensor. Norchip 2013.
Yang, G., Chen, J., Cao, Y., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2008). A Novel Wearable 
ECG Monitoring System Based on Active-Cable and Intelligent Electrodes. IEEE 
Proc. of 10th International Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and 
Services (HealthCom2008).
Yang, G., Chen, J., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2009). Intelligent Electrode Design 
for Long-Term ECG Monitoring at Home. IEEE Proc. of 3rd International Confer-
ence on Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth 2009).
Yang, G., Chen, J., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2009). An ASIC Solution for Intel-
ligent Electrodes and Active-cable Used in a Wearable ECG Monitoring System. 
International Conference on Biomedical Electronics and Devices (BIODEVICES 
2009).
Yang, G., Chen, J., Jonsson, F., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2009). A 1V 78uW 
Reconfigurable ASIC Embedded in an Intelligent Electrode for Continuous ECG 
Applications. 31stAnnual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC 2009). doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5335120
Yang, G., Chen, J., Xie, L., Mao, J., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2013, May). A 
Hybrid Low Power Bio-Patch for Body Surface Potential Measurement. IEEE 
Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 17(3), 591–599. doi:10.1109/
JBHI.2013.2252017 PMID:24592461
Yang, G., Mao, J., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2010). Design of a Self-organized 
Intelligent Electrode for Synchronous Measurement of Multiple Bio-signals in a 
Wearable Healthcare Monitoring System. The 3rd International Symposium on 
Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies (ISABEL 2010).

Hybrid Integration Technology for Wearable Sensor Systems
137
Yang, G., Wan, Q., & Zheng, L.-R. (2011). Bio-Chip ASIC and Printed Flexible 
Cable on Paper Substrate for Wearable Healthcare Applications. The 4th International 
Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies 
(ISABEL 2011). doi:10.1145/2093698.2093774
Yang, G., Xie, L., Mantysalo, M., Zhou, X., Pang, Z., Xu, L., & Zheng, L.-R. et al. 
(2014, November). A Health-IoT Platform Based on the Integration of Intelligent 
Packaging, Unobtrusive Bio-Sensor and Intelligent Medicine Box. IEEE Transac-
tions on Industrial Informatics, 10(4), 2180–2191. doi:10.1109/TII.2014.2307795
Yazicioglu, R. F., Merken, P., Puers, R., & Van Hoof, C. (2007). A 60 uW 60 nV/
vHz Readout Front-End for Portable Biopotential Acquisition Systems. EEE Journal 
of Solid-State Circuits., 42(5), 1100–1110. doi:10.1109/JSSC.2007.894804
Zhang, H., Qin, Y., & Hong, Z. (2009). A 1.8-V 770-nW biopotential acquistion 
system for portable applications. In IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Confer-
ence, 2009. BioCAS.
Zhang, Y. T., Yan, Y. S., & Poon, C. C. Y. (2007). Some Perspectives on Affordable 
Healthcare Systems in China. In IEEE 29th Annual International Conference of the 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4353757

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch005
Chapter 5
138 
Citizen Science, Air 
Quality, and the 
Internet of Things
ABSTRACT
This chapter discusses the emergence of the Internet of Things, using a case study 
of a citizen science initiative, focusing in particular on issues involved in measur-
ing air quality. The core of the citizen science initiative was formed by a world-
wide network of early adaptors of the Internet of Things who, motivated by public 
health issues, set out to create widely available tools for air quality measuring. 
With these tools, they established a global, citizen-led, air quality measurement 
network. Besides highlighting a number of social and technological issues which 
are involve any such enterprise, this chapter engages with the discourse surrounding 
the use of IoT in collective sensing projects. Two questions are salient here. Firstly, 
can IoT technology be used in a citizen science context to monitor air quality? And 
secondly, does the construction of these devices lead to a successful mobilisation 
around issues of air quality?
Ilze Black
Queen Mary University of London, UK
Graham White
Queen Mary University of London, UK

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
139
INTRODUCTION
The study of atmospheric pollution is admittedly an untidy science. (Meetham, 1952)
While there are many environmental factors that can affect our health and well being 
the air all around us is often perceived as a matter of lesser importance. It is only 
in the case of major incidents, such as leaks from chemical factories, the explosion 
at Bhopal, or radioactive fallout like that from Chernobyl or Fukushima that raise 
public concerns and demand action. This apparent contentedness might be due to 
two factors – as a major environmental matter air is seen as universal, shared and 
paramount. Invisible in its nature, it can be perceived as something that cannot 
be affected by ones individual actions. Second, despite the evidence and growing 
concerns over the effects of air quality, one could argue (even if incorrectly) that we 
are living in a much cleaner environment, when compared to the not so distant past. 
In recent years, however, there has been a growing interest in and concern about 
air quality. As this research will argue, the conversation about air quality has been 
renewed by recent developments in technology and citizen science.
The data in this study is drawn from ethnographic research conducted in physical 
and virtual spaces, primarily between 2011 and 2013, of a group of early Internet of 
Things (IoT) developers and an evolving community of air quality activists. It uses 
theoretically informed analysis of data from interviews, mailing list exchanges and 
comments on online platforms. We augment the methods of traditionally qualita-
tive approach, with its desire to understand the social world and its meaning for 
its participants, with elements of discourse analysis in order to uncover the ways 
in which this world is produced. It is from such a viewpoint that this chapter will 
address the relation between the citizen science, IoT and the complexities involved 
in measuring the air quality.
AIR POLLUTION AND SOCIAL AWARENESS
The discourse around air pollution is centuries old, while the legislative process is 
slow and most often ineffective. In Britain, the first recorded effort to combat air 
pollution dates back to the reign of King Edward I in the year 1272, when at the 
request of some noblemen and clergy, the king banned the use of sea-coal. “Any-
one caught burning or selling the stuff was to be tortured or executed” (Urbinato, 
1994). The ban seemed to have little effect, as in the 14th and 15th centuries, other 
measures to regulate the use of sea-coal were introduced by subsequent kings (Kotin 
& Falk, 1964). In 1661, John Evelyn, a notable diarist of the days of King Charles 
II, published the anti-coal pamphlet: Fumifungium: or the Inconvenience of the 

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
140
Aer and Smoke of London Dissipated. Pleading with the King and Parliament to do 
something about the burning of coal in London and its effect on the health of the 
citizens he wrote: “Aer, that her Inhabitants breathe nothing but an impure and thick 
Mist accompanied with a fuliginous and filthy vapour...” (Evelyn, 1661). However, 
his message did not have any effect, and the pamphlet was forgotten for more than a 
century (Staniforth, 2013). In the 19th century, the famous fogs were widely referred 
to as pea soup, or a pea souper, or as black smog and more frequent references to 
its effects on health and premature death were made (Stern, 1982; Urbinato, 1994).
In Britain, it was only after the Great Smog of 1952 that real reform was passed 
by the Parliament. At the time, it was thought that 4000 people had died from Great 
Smog. Later research placed the death toll around 12,000 (Bell & Davis, 2001). 
Parliament took action, passing the 1956 Clean Air Act (Davis, Bell, & Fletcher, 
2002). Today, European air quality is managed by directives issued by the EU, set 
in place since 1980s with directive 80/779/EEC, which set air quality limit values 
(AQLVs) and guide values for SO2 and suspended particulates (SP). Later direc-
tives set limit values for lead, nitrogen dioxide, and ozone (DNERI et al, 2004). In 
the Unites States, it was the investigation into the Donora Smog Disaster that led 
to the first federal clean-air act, passed in 1955. In 1948, the town of Donora, in 
the Monongahela River Valley, Pennsylvania, was covered in toxic smog caused 
by a weather inversion. It trapped a cocktail of sulphur dioxide, carbon monoxide, 
nitrogen oxides, fluoride chlorine and metal dust emitted from local coal burning 
plants and furnaces located in the valley and town. Over four days, 20 people died, 
and 7,000 were reported to be sick (Townsend, 1949). The clean air act forced the 
plants and furnaces to close down. It was in the late 1950s when the first links 
between air pollution and motor vehicle emissions were made, with the State of 
California enacting a legislation requiring its Department of Public Health to estab-
lish air quality standards for vehicle emissions. This led to the federal government’s 
The Motor Vehicle Exhaust Study Act of I960 and subsequent legislation. Just like 
with air pollution in the previous century, some of legislative acts proposed later 
were seen more as a nuisance and never got passed or taken seriously (Stern, 1982).
Fifty years into their accelerative growth, the number of petroleum-fuelled motor 
vehicles on the roads, globally, has become a major source of air pollution (Euro-
pean Environmental Agency, 2015). In early 2016, the World Health Organisation 
issued a warning about deadly levels of pollution in many of the world’s biggest 
cities. Pollutants not only exceed the currently set safe air quality values. They also 
kill millions across the globe (WHO, 2016). As the WHO has shown, air pollution 
has worsened since 2014 in hundreds of urban areas. The WHO warns there is now 
a global “public health emergency” that will have untold health and fiscal implica-
tions (Vidal & Helm, 2016). Only two weeks into 2016, and London had already 
exceeded its annual limit for nitrogen dioxide (Vaughan, 2016). As a study done by 

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
141
researchers at King’s College London show, 9,500 Londoners die each year because 
of air pollution, twice as many as previously thought. “The premature deaths are 
mainly due to two key pollutants, fine particulates known as PM2.5s and the toxic 
gas nitrogen dioxide (NO2)” (Walton et al., 2015).
Many have pondered why it has taken so long to recognise the deadly effects 
of air pollutants to human health and why there has been little action to combat 
this situation. In their very first attempt to encompass the analyses on correlations 
between air pollution and human health data, almost a decade after the Clean Air 
Acts were installed, Kotin and Falk (1964) pointed out the very problem with the 
concept of clean air in the Annual Review of Medicine. As they explained:
A major consideration in the recognition of potential adverse health effects of air 
pollution is the knowledge that pure urban air from a chemical viewpoint is virtu-
ally non-existent. Movement of air and dilution of pollutants in the large volume 
of the atmosphere are the two chief mechanisms of air purification. Interference 
with either, or, as most frequently occurs, with both simultaneously, results in the 
accumulation of progressively increasing levels of pollutants. (Kotin & Falk, 1964)
Bohm (1982), writing about the correlation between increased lung cancer and air 
pollution suggested that this inability to grasp the seriousness of the issue is rather 
a question of human perception: “Mankind accepts the risk of long-term and low-
level exposure to carcinogens. As a rule, immediate benefits are sought and remote 
hazards ignored” (Bohm, 1982). Seaton, MacNee, Donaldson, and Godden (1995), 
reassessing the limited impact of studies correlating the effects of air quality and 
human health pointed out that there might be a problem with the scientific method 
of capturing this complex issue:
These findings have encountered some skepticism, partly because the concentra-
tions of particles at which effects seem to occur are low by comparison with those 
to which many people are exposed in industrial workplaces without apparent harm; 
and partly because no plausible hypothesis has yet been advanced to explain the 
associations. (Seaton, MacNee, Donaldson, & Godden, 1995)
In response, by explaining how harmful particles behave in the environment and 
in the respiratory system, their study proposed the hypothesis that the “acidic ultra-
fine characteristics of air pollution particles provoke alveolar inflammation, which 
causes both acute changes in blood coagulability and the release of mediators able 
to provoke attacks of acute respiratory illness in individuals.”1 They established the 
current leading theory on the mechanisms through which the particles harm human 
health – they cause an inflammatory response that weakens the immune system.

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
142
AIR QUALITY AND HUMAN HEALTH
It is widely accepted today that there are various air pollutants that differ, in their 
chemical composition, reaction properties, emissions, persistence in the environment, 
ability to be transported long distances, and eventual impact on human health. Yet, 
they share some similarities and can be grouped to four categories:
1. 	
Gaseous pollutants (SO2, NOx, CO, ozone, volatile organic compounds);
2. 	
Persistent organic pollutants (dioxins);
3. 	
Heavy metals (lead, mercury); and
4. 	
Particulate matter (Kampa & Castanas, 2008). Similarly, there is agreement 
in how each affect human health.
Indoor and outdoor air quality are linked. It is well established that “much of 
what is outdoors comes indoors. Estimates of the fraction of indoor fine particles 
that originated outdoors range from 46% to 84% depending on whether the house 
was air-conditioned and whether windows were left open” (Wilson, Mage, & Grant, 
2000; Smith et al., 2014). Likewise, the rate at which outdoor air circulates through 
a house depends on the season and the weather. Indoor air pollution is not only af-
fected by outdoor air quality, but also by furniture, cooking gas, chemicals used in 
the house, etc., all contributing pollutants to our environments (Spengler, Samet & 
McCarthy, 2000).
It is widely perceived that air pollution mainly affects the respiratory system and 
lungs. Short term exposure can lead to burning of the eyes and throat and difficulty 
breathing (Waldbott, 1978; Schell & Denham, 2003). It may also result in chronic 
lung disease (Kotin & Falk, 1964; Whittemore, 1981; Utell, Sawyer, & Warren, 
1994), and trigger asthma attacks in adults (Schwartz, Slater, Larson, Pierson, & 
Koenig, 1993) and children (Wjst et al., 1993; Clark et al., 2010). Long-term exposure 
can reduce lung function and increase the risk of developing lung cancer (Nyberg, 
Gustavsson, Ja, Bellander, & Berglind, 2000; Smith et al., 2014).
As many epidemiological studies have shown, the effects of air pollution can 
impact other parts of the body (Utell, Sawyer, & Warren, 1994; Pope, Bates, & 
Raizenne, 1995; Schell, & Denham, 2003), causing heart attacks, irregular heart 
rhythms, and strokes (Seaton, MacNee, Donaldson, & Godden, 1995; Miller et al., 
2007; Brook et al., 2004, 2010). The heavy metals such as lead, mercury and arse-
nic, as well as dioxins, can also affect the nervous system (Lasley & Gilbert, 2000; 
Kampa & Castanas, 2008), urinary system (Damek-Poprawa & Sawicka-Kapusta, 
2003; Kampa & Castanas, 2008) and digestive system (Kimbrough, Carter, Liddle, 
& Cline, 1977; Kampa & Castanas, 2008).

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
143
A body of work has been carried out on the effects of air pollution on different 
social groups. For example, in infants and young children it can decrease nerve 
conduction velocity and impair mental development (Walkowiak et al., 2001), can 
be an indicator of poor health at birth (Chay & Greenstone, 2003; Currie & Neidell, 
2004), and a reason for low birth weight (Almond, Chay, & Lee, 2005). It affects 
growth and development (Fogel, 1986) and leads to premature infant death (Currie 
& Neidell, 2005; Smith et al., 2014). Likewise, the effects of air quality have also 
been studied in the context of other consequences. It is a cause of multiple hospital 
admissions (Dockery & Pope III, 1994; Klot et al., 2002), absence from work and 
school (Park et al., 2002), restricting activity (Pope III, David, & Raizenne, 1995) 
and increasing medication use (Peters, Dockery, Heinrich, & Wichmann, 1997; 
Klot et al., 2002).
As many of these studies on the impact of air quality on human health have 
noted, the subject has often proven to be difficult due to the many complex factors 
involved in assessing the impact of one or other pollutant or due to the variety of 
health factors affecting test subjects. The relevant studies have also confirmed there 
is often some type of limitation involved, either due to the measurement of one or 
other pollutant and its effects over time, or with the variety of observed subjects and 
their individual circumstances. Likewise, studies have revealed their dependency on 
the research methods used, as there is often some element of prediction involved, 
either in the use of algorithms that correlate predictions and the actual levels of 
pollution, or with the quality of measurements conducted by AQ monitor stations. 
Thus any findings are often seen as estimates only (Currie & Neidell, 2004).
Writing at the turn of the century Gochfeld and Goldstein (1999) reassessed the 
lessons from environmental health from the 20th century in their article in the An-
nual Review of Public Health. There they acknowledged the rapid development of 
new technologies and new methods in the field of Public Health and in air quality 
discourse. Advances in analytics, data acquisition, modelling, toxicology and risk 
assessment, have all had immense impact on how studies can be conducted and how 
growing concerns over air quality could be addressed. They suggested three main 
areas lessons could be drawn from:
1. 	
For science and technology to play lead roles in primary and secondary pre-
vention, environmental-health scientists must participate in policy;
2. 	
Environmental health problems and solutions are complex; interdisciplinary 
research is required; and,
3. 	
Environmental health is a global issue. (Gochfeld & Goldstein, 1999),
With accumulated knowledge in this field of study and directives issued by air 
quality monitoring agencies, the impact of air pollution on human life is still per-

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
144
ceived as gravely neglected. In the following analysis into the rise of Citizen Science 
and community-led air quality monitoring networks, this research will argue that 
the perceived failure of established science to deliver change and the quest to affect 
policy-making processes, have led to ordinary citizens adopting the technologies 
and organising themselves. A closer analysis of these desires and of the adopted 
methods and technologies used in research suggest the impact such a bottom up 
approach could have to increase awareness of the subject and subsequently lead to 
action in this field. Before that, the following section will address the technological 
advances that, as our research suggests, has empowered this popular movement.
TECHNOLOGICAL AND SOCIAL CHANGE: 
ARRIVAL OF THE INTERNET OF THINGS
Technological developments of the last decade have led to more advances in the 
application of sensor technologies and the rise of the phenomenon of the Internet 
of Things (IoT). Ubiquity of computing and an increasing number of electronic 
sensors applied to the diverse physical processes of the planet’s environmental 
systems, body monitoring, and the augmentation of everyday objects, allow data 
capture, storage and analytics, now most often in realtime. The Internet of Things 
envisions a connected world of billions of smart things, devices, smartphones, smart 
cars, smart homes, and smart cities (Fleisch, 2010; Haller, 2010; Evans, 2011; Mit-
ton & Simplot-Ryl, 2011; Stankovic, 2014; Behmann & Wu, 2015; Miller, 2015). 
Gartner Inc. forecasts that 6.4 billion connected things will be in use worldwide in 
2016, and will reach 20.8 billion by 2020.2 Cisco has estimated the number being 
even higher, with up to 50 billion devices being connected by 2020 (Evans, 2011).
The IoT has been presented as a way to make intelligent hardware more perva-
sive by reducing hardware size, cost, and power consumption. Another important 
factor was the development of open source software and hardware platforms, in 
particular, the microelectronic platforms with an easy to use Integrated Development 
Environment (IDE). The low cost platforms such as Arduino (2004), Zigbee (2006), 
Nanode (2011), Raspberry Pi (2012), and the like, have democratised access to, and 
use of, these technologies. This has led to a situation where increasing numbers of 
computing projects involving network sensing and other interactive digital urban 
intervention projects are today developed not only by large technology companies 
but also by a wide variety of individuals, groups and communities empowered by 
these technologies (Kuznetsov, 2010).
The other requirement of pervasive distributed sensor networks and the IoT is 
that of network architecture, with its need for devices to configure their own net-
work configuration. Thus not only have devices became smaller, more numerous, 

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
145
and more pervasive, but also the networks in which they are located promise less 
hierarchical system approaches, and are thus also less susceptible to certain types 
of regulation. The latest developments in machine to machine learning (M2M) (Tan 
& Wang, 2010) and the development of autonomous IoT interconnected systems 
(S. Park, Crespi, H. Park, & Kim, 2014), in which machines and devices will be 
able to pass information and/or contexts between each other, will enable further 
machine autonomy in decision-making. It is this very idea of the interoperability of 
devices, networks and intranets - anytime, anyone, anything, any place, any service, 
and any network (Sundmaeker et al., 2010) - that is fostering the development in 
areas of IoT, such as standardisation, semantics, data platforms and management 
of interoperability both in technical and social terms.
CITIZEN SCIENCE AND COLLECTIVE SENSOR NETWORKS
The low cost of and open access technologies have given rise to two recent phe-
nomena: Citizen Science (Riesch & Potter, 2014; Kullenberg & Kasperowski, 2016) 
and the Collaborative Economy (Bauwens, 2012). As Bauwens noted, “The play-
ers of this emerging collaborative economy are diverse: their objectives, attitudes 
towards collaboration and sharing, their methods of work as well as their business 
models are heterogeneous.” Two major types of approaches can be distinguished 
in Citizen Science (CS). While many Citizen Science projects refer to an approach 
of science that mobilises crowds outside science to assists with observations and 
classifications, what we will discuss here is the other account, which refers to CS as 
a way of democratizing science - “aiding concerned communities in creating data to 
influence policy and as a way of promoting political decision processes involving 
environment and health” (Kullenberg & Kasperowski, 2016).
Alan Irwin (1995), in his seminal work Citizen Science, made explicit the link 
between the environmental challenges, global developments and rise of citizen-
science initiatives. Irwin argued that these global challenges and in particular the 
environmental threats “can not be successfully tackled without a full consideration 
of local as well as global initiatives of citizen-oriented programmes”. In 2010, 
Kera and Graham also introduced the term Collective Sensor Networks (CSN) to 
describe activities that involve sensor technologies and involve diverse groups of 
participants working to integrate sensor data from various environmental sources. 
Examples of such projects include citizen-led citizen science initiatives that often 
focus on solving environmental problems affecting people locally. In this respect, 
as acknowledged by the EU research policy study, “the questions that citizens – not 

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
146
just scientists – seek to answer can set the agenda for environmental research and 
policy debate” (Science Communication Unit, 2013).
There are a numerous examples of citizen-led initiatives that have tackled the 
local concerns of air pollution. For example the well documented struggle of African 
American residents of the Diamond subdivision in Norco, Louisiana, who through 
the late 1990s until 2002, “waged a heated campaign against the Shell Chemical 
plant adjacent to their community” (Ottinger, 2010). By use of analogue tools for 
air quality measurement such as buckets3, “activists measured short-term spikes in 
air pollution levels and compared their data to arguably incommensurate regulatory 
standards to demonstrate that the air was unsafe” (Ottinger, 2010). However, retelling 
their story Ottinger argued that, despise the rhetoric of how citizen-science could 
influence the research directions and policies, there is a visible disparity between 
methods and data created by the citizens and scientists. As she pointed out it is 
standardized practices for measuring and evaluating air quality that determine to 
what extent and in what ways the nonscientists’ knowledge production is assessed. 
Ottinger argued that “regulatory standards for air quality, combined with standard-
ized practices for monitoring, provided regulators with a ready-made way to dismiss 
activists’ data as irrelevant to air quality assessment” (Ottinger, 2010).
The advent of IoT has brought about a new opportunity not only for development 
of easy accessible set of new digital tools, but also their networked capabilities with 
its real-time data storage and analytics. It is, then, not surprising that the IoT was, 
early in its development, embraced by the CS movement, and used for intervention 
in the public health sphere and air quality monitoring. The following chapter will 
focus on discussing and analysing a case study based on one such citizen science 
initiative. The core of this initiative was formed by a global network of early adaptors 
of IoT who set out to create widely available tools for air quality measuring. With 
these tools, they established a global, citizen-led, air quality measurement network 
and subsequent sensing intranets.
Besides highlighting a number of social and technological issues that are involved 
in such an enterprise, such as a community approach to measurements and calibra-
tion, this chapter will foreground practical difficulties involved in such enterprise. 
While building tools and contributing to the spread of CS know-how is fundamen-
tal here, the difficulties this community faced is not accidental, but rather deeply 
routed in dichotomy of science versus CS discourse, already highlighted by Ottinger 
(2010). Thus we would argue for CS to be taken seriously and better organised it 
is important to evaluate the strength and weaknesses of past events, so that lessons 
can be learned for future causes.

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
147
CASE STUDY: PACHUBE AND THE AQE COMMUNITY
The community in question consisted (2011-2012) of developers and citizen science 
activists who associated themselves with one of the earliest IoT data platforms. It was 
formerly known as Pachube, Cosm, and, later, as Xively. In its Pachube incarnation, 
it was ‘one of the first available Cloud-based services for managing sensor data, 
that provide[d] a light application programming interface (API) for sending data 
directly from sensors and its web environment allow[ed] the visualization of data 
in graphs’ (Doukas, 2012). The London-based architect and designer Usman Haque 
initiated the Pachube project in 2006 as a monitoring system for his interactive art 
installations. Later it was opened up to other participants and by 2008, it provided 
a public platform and became a meeting ground for DIY sensor data enthusiasts. 
By mid-2011, Pachube accounted for an average of 6,000 users worldwide. At that 
time, it became a start-up company, as the Boston based cloud-service provider 
LogMeIn acquired it (Butcher, 2011).
Diverse interests motivated the users of Pachube. Initially, the largest group was 
enthusiasts engaging with their home energy monitoring systems (Dittus, 2012). In 
2011, after the devastation caused by the tsunami in Japan and by the consequent 
meltdown at the Fukushima nuclear power plant, Pachube became network central 
for a citizen-run network of connected Geiger counters that measured nuclear ra-
diation in real time. These sensors were set up by concerned citizens, in Japan, and 
later globally, as a response to the poor quality of the emission data released by the 
Japanese government. In less than 24 hours the interactive designer Haiyan Zhang 
created the first data map, visualising the Geiger counter data. The map pulled all 
of its real time data from the Pachube platform and showed the movement of radia-
tion spills.4
The same year, Pachube’s rather accidentally assembled user community gained 
a more coherent shape, as series of the earliest IoT meet-ups in New York, London, 
Madrid, and Amsterdam were set up. The broad and spontaneous public participa-
tion in the aftermath of the Fukushima disaster inspired a second citizen science 
interest group focused on air quality. It was during the January 2011 meetup in 
New York that the Pachube community organiser Ed Bordon and technologist Joe 
Savera suggested the development of a community driven air quality network. This 
led to the development of the Air Quality Egg (AQE) project, a sensor hardware 
device (Egg) and an air quality egg network. A year later, as a development of early 
prototypes of this affordable, open and easy to use measurement tool for air quality 
was underway, the group launched a Kickstarter campaign to drive up the interest 
of the wider public, to round up a group of supporters and to spread the great news 
of growing citizen concern about air quality.

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
148
In contrast to other existing projects the AQE project grow out not from a particular 
‘local community’ concerned with a particular problem, but rather from a globally 
dispersed group interested in use of connected monitoring device. As people started 
to join the campaign, it was valuable to see what motivated these early adopters of 
technology and supporters of the AQE project. While the majority of Kickstarter 
supporters were often technologically aware enthusiasts interested in social tech, 
there were also many who were driven by common concern for the planet or for 
their own welfare and who were looking for technology that could support their 
struggles. When we analyse the responses to a question of what motivated them to 
join the campaign, we could distinguish three major themes. The first would be the 
already mentioned technologists involved with development of social technologies, 
as these examples illustrate:
E1: I’m XXXX. I’m a London-based UX designer, who is interested in using pervasive 
technology to help improve people’s lives. This seems like a very interesting 
experiment.
E2: I am a semi-retired instrumentation technician living in the high desert of N.M. 
I have a Pachube feed now just for hobby purposes. Interest in air quality is 
just concern with keeping the planet livable. 
As these comments show, such a community project seems to appeal to a skilled 
people who see the opportunity for their skills to be applied, even in retirement or 
in their free time. Similarly, it was attractive to technologists and activists involved 
in some already existing communities or to education projects, as illustrated by the 
following:
E3: I am an architecture student working for a non-profit community design center 
called building community WORKSHOP. I am leading an energy education 
initiative, and we are working on a plan to implement home energy metering 
and feedback at community scale. I think air-quality goes hand in hand with 
efficient energy use and “healthy neighbourhoods”. We are working on solu-
tions to bring forward the benefits of sensor technology in making educated 
behavioral choices related to building energy performance in low-income 
communities. 
The second group are day-to-day activists who in general are interested in the 
common good, the health of common resources, and in activism as such. While ex-
pressing global concerns, this group is more concerned with local issues. Examples 
can be drawn from comments such as:

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
149
E4: Hi, I live in London England and always wonder just what I’m breathing in, in 
this unnatural world we live in! 
E5: I want to know what kind of air quality we have here in Valparaiso, IN, with 
Chicago being just upstream from us and all. 
E6: Hey - I live in Atlanta, GA - Would like to monitor air quality. I’m about 2 miles 
from downtown and the junction of I20 and I75/I85. 
E7: I am interested in the ‘activist’ angle - data that compliments or supersedes 
that provided by established power structures. 
The third group, and the one we are most interested in the context of this article, 
are people with existing health problems who are looking for the tools to explore 
their own environments and thus to tackle or self-manage concerns driven by their 
or their own or family’s health.
E8: Hi, my interest is in the levels of pollen, mold and humidity as I am asthmatic. 
Cheers from New Zealand. 
E9: I am in Switzerland and they smoke so much here, they also use a lot of chemicals, 
from paint to the oils for heating..... I am sure this has affected my breathing 
these last years.
E10: My children have developed asthma symptoms, and I would like to know how 
the air quality is to see what correlation can be inferred from the data. 
E11: My family lives several miles from the Rhode Island Central Landfill, which was 
never an issue until around September of this year, when foul gas odors began 
emanating from the landfill and spreading far beyond the landfill’s boundaries. 
Sometimes the smell is so pronounced and gag-worthy as to induce headaches 
and nausea. I have a hard time believing that a gas so noxious could possibly 
be benign, and I’d love to contribute in any way to help measure and map air 
quality in our community. 
These examples corroborate the broader trends observable across responses 
received from 927 backers of the Kickstarter campaign. The growing community 
involved in supporting this project had a global character. Likewise, it seemed to 
engage citizens in both urban and rural settings interested in both indoor and outdoor 
air monitoring. Some of them had some other group affiliation, some didn’t. As the 
community set off to develop the AQE device more direct references to overriding 
health concerns linked to air quality could be observed over time. Discussing the 
process of development or negotiating the thinking process, actors kept bringing 
up their motivational concerns. On the AQE group mailing list such cases appeared 
across time. As in following example after the launch of the AQE, one of the de-

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
150
velopers arguing for the validity of the chosen ‘community approach’ decided to 
tell a story to argue his point.
E12: Years ago, I was interviewing a young woman in Chicago whose son had 
serious asthma. She checked the EPA website every morning to see what the 
air quality was that day. She made decisions about which streets to walk her 
son to school along and whether to ask teachers to keep her son indoors. The 
problem with this is that because the sensors were so expensive, the EPA data for 
Chicago came from six sensors, none of which were near her home. She didn’t 
know which streets were better. She didn’t know what the indoor air quality 
was like in her son’s school. She needed the kind of data that can only be col-
lected by many inexpensive sensors. She needed something just like Eggs and 
any of those three levels of data would have worked better than what she had. 
While these are comments from only a few members, they illustrate well the three 
general themes, as well as how often overlapping their interests and motivations 
are. Likewise, they highlighted some other underlying concerns that echo across the 
community discussion we have observed on and offline. Example 3 touches upon 
the idea of behaviour change that such sensing technologies could encourage. The 
idea of behaviour change echoes across many other IoT projects today, suggesting 
technocratic framing for these developments and how well such citizen science net-
work sits within the broader IoT discourse. Examples 7 and 12 similarly highlight 
the issue of concern that can be found across our study, that of power relations. 
Drawing parallels with established data sources, or criticising the shortcomings 
of existing air quality measurement stations or their network density, there seems 
to be a common distrust of government data. As we will see in discussion below, 
these underlying motives were also used to define more practical decision making 
processes and to negotiate the space for the community approach.
Community Approach: An Opportunity to Do It Differently
As community development of the Air Quality Egg device was underway, there were 
numerous discussions of what the distinct characteristics of this community-run 
network would be, of the device itself, and how to determine their unique properties. 
The slogan for the AQE Kickstarter campaign (launched March 2012) stated: “A 
community-led air quality sensing network that gives people a way to participate in 
the conversation about air quality.” However, around that time there were a few other 
air quality measuring projects that sought to empower communities by providing 
tools and in a similar manner set about fostering conversation.

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
151
There have been a number of studies conducted on development of sensor devices, 
for example, measuring the pollution of motor vehicles such as diesel buses. In Cali-
fornia the Dump Dirty Diesel Campaign commissioned ‘The School Bus Monitoring 
Study’ to highlight the health hazards posed to school children by daily exposure to 
diesel pollutants (Solomon et al., 2001). While this study focused specifically on 
bus emissions others use buses for broader citywide air pollution monitoring. The 
Swiss Scientific Initiative’s project OpenSense, has installed sensors on the roofs 
of city buses and trams, to create public air quality monitoring resource (Aberer et 
al., 2010). Similar pollution sensing projects using buses have been trailed in the 
city of Sharjah, UAE (Zualkernan & Aloul, 2010).
Around the same time as AQE development took place there were other more 
citizen-oriented projects. In 2011, in New York, Google funded non-profit environ-
mental health justice organization HabitatMap to develop an Air Casting application 
for mobile platforms. As part of this project Air Casting Air monitor was developed 
and later open-sourced as build-your-own hardware platform (Yap, 2012). In Europe, 
same year EU Seventh Framework Programme, funded consortium of European 
institutions to develop Everyware project. Part of this larger project, researchers 
developed an air quality monitoring kit – SensorBox for community-led air quality 
monitoring (Elen et al., 2012).
While AQE project developers were aware of these other explorations in the 
field, from the projects outset they tried to argue for a different approach. In the fol-
lowing examples, the authors have tried to distil the core difference this community 
chose to highlight. While various actors often repeat these themes in meetings and 
conversations, these particular examples are taken from the key developers of the 
project and thus best elaborate the underlying themes. As we can see in Example 13, 
key to this development was the idea of multiple developers and voices participating 
in decision-making, which was seen as a pedigree for the democratic nature of the 
project and the global characteristic of this community.
E13: The most valuable part of it is the way it is extremely democratic and com-
munity driven project. Even from the concepts, to every part of development 
now: the hardware, the software, the productization of it. All those things are 
happening simultaneously from multiple communities. 
Example 13 talks primarily about the community of developers and the differ-
ence it makes in comparison to other similar projects that were seen as much more 
top down in the way they were executed. For example in case of Everyware project 
the developers of the air monitoring kit applied a scientific approach. As it was the 
established scientists and academics in field of air monitoring who developed this 
kit, there were only limited numbers of units built and used in trials by selected 

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
152
community members. In contrast the AQE community members were self-selected. 
Example 14 turns to the value of users/participants within AQE community and 
what they could bring to the interactivity and way the system operates and its sup-
porting applications. This example is taken from the mailing list conversation at the 
conceptual development stage of the AQE development, and as such, well illustrates 
the aspirations of the project rather than the final outcomes.
E14: We’re not (i think) simply trying to build yet-another-air-quality sensing system 
that passively monitors the environment; or simply trying to replace an official 
network with a distributed/citizen-led initiative. we are (i think) trying to do 
something authentically participative that goes to the heart of why exactly 
people (i.e. citizens/normal people/everybody) would even want to *know 
about* and *do something about* air quality. by way of analogy, there’s a 
difference between a security camera that continually streams footage in the 
hope of catching something significant; and a hand-held still camera that 
encourages - actually *requires* - the bearer of the camera to think about the 
moment of taking a photo and then trying to recognise and capture something 
significant. there is a completely different participation with and interaction 
with the generated ‘data’. 
This “requirement to think about” by providing a human feedback option to the 
otherwise passive observation system did not materialise in the AQE V1 and its 
system. However, the question about tools for user participation resonated across 
many discussions, and often provided a fertile ground for “thinking” further and 
conversing about such system applications, and in particular, the tagging mechanisms 
that could be employed. The third key argument about the uniqueness of such a 
community-driven approach to air quality measuring was that of network density. 
As Example 15 shows, the argument about the density of distribution of air qual-
ity measurement devices that such a network of everyday people could provide is 
what sets this project apart from “government” run networks or any other top-down 
infrastructure.
E15: Even if our data is not validated scientifically or in that technical direction, I 
hope that we get the right information to say – there needs to be more study. 
The air quality sensors like this are really – it can be the go to for application 
real high-end sensors. I mean, the government has picked the places to put 
sensors, but what if we say, well, there are real pockets here that you need to 
be careful about. Or ‘right around the school there is a traffic intersection 
that we have really, really weird readings and we changed our sensor three 
times and we still getting real weird readings’, you know, further investiga-

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
153
tion! And that’s a win right there. You know, weather or not data is great or 
not I don’t really care. 
Like Examples 7 and 12, Example 15 hints of the power relations and how such 
tools in the hands of many could generate knowledge about very local issues that 
often are overlooked by a more centralised viewpoint. Opting for a development of 
a broadly available product rather than specific or experimental community solu-
tion, or release of just How To guide to monitor building was seen as only feasible 
way to reach mass user base. Likewise, Example 15 offers insight into the key, and 
the same time, most contested, value the project has created – that of data created 
by the device, system and community at large. The data will be discussed later on. 
However, it is important to note that it is this belief in data acquisition that is seen 
to empower the actors’ agency.
Community Approach: AQE - A Measurement 
Tool and Its Calibration
One of the key components of the AQE project was the development of the air 
quality measuring device, the Egg, or AQE, that could enable popular access to the 
atmospheric data. It consists of a number of low cost sensors, mainly temperature, 
humidity, NO2 and CO sensors5, and a microelectronic board with an added Ethernet 
board for connectivity and on-board LED lights to indicate status. The components 
of the egg are modular, and all codes are open and published on GitHub. The device 
has an egg shape plastic closure and power adapter. Depending on their level of 
technological understanding, users can ether ‘plug and play’ the AQE or tweak it 
for specific case requirements.
In applying technology to any given natural phenomenon, there are two funda-
mental issues that are of concern. First is the question of measurement, i.e. what it is 
that is measured. The second is the question of the measurement tool’s calibration. 
Within our given subject, both considerations encompass a complex set of issues. 
The most common way to measure air quality is perceived to be by measuring the 
presence of contaminants in the air. As already cited, the AQE V1 (2012) focused on 
two main pollutants, CO and NO2 and on temperature and humidity. However, AQE 
was built as a modular unit thus other sensors could be added. (It should be noted 
here that today [2016] AQE V2 for PM2.5 and PM10, O3 and SO2 are also available).
While there is a standardised way of measuring pollutants, the approach much 
depends on measurement tools and approaches. Each pollutant can be measured in a 
variety of ways and units. The concentration of NO2 is most commonly measured in 
micrograms per cubic metre of air (μg/m3). The AQE device measures CO and NO2 
in ppb (parts per billion), the other possible way for measuring air pollutants. The 

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
154
measurement is defined by national standard, for example in the US EPA standard 
for NO2 is based on ppm, while the European one are based on milligrams, however, 
there is a standard way to convert readings from μg/m3 to ppb.
It was early on in a group’s discussion when the decision to focus on the two 
main pollutants was made. As one of the main objectives was the creation of an easy 
to use and affordable device, the decision was made to apply low cost, off-the-shelf 
available sensors. The discussion regarding what sensors to incorporate into the 
device soon turned to the calibration of these sensors. It seemed clear from the start 
that off-the-shelf sensors might not provide the desired accuracy. On a mailing list, 
the conversation kicked off with suggestions of a number of ways that calibration 
could be developed. Example 16 presents one of the earliest suggestions that also 
illustrate the general stand of the community with regards to data reading.
E16: The egg is hopefully going to tell us that “some of something” is there, but 
as useful as knowing there is ‘some’ there knowing _how much_ of it, and 
accurately, is going to be as important.... In the UK it is a legal requirement 
for cars to be tested annually. The equipment for that testing is available, at 
every MOT test centre. One possibility might be to take along one’s egg to 
the MOT and use the test’s data report as a means to at least know a single 
reference point. 
The DIY approach suggested in Example 16 soon received many responses. One 
of the predominant suggestions was that of scale-free calibration for which some 
high-end calibrated sensor used by a known source could be used to compare the 
data created by an AQE, as suggested in Example 17 by use of term ‘official data’:
E17: I think we could calibrate the eggs using the official data... and perhaps it is 
not necessary to quantify that there are xxxx ppb NO2, but just qualify that 
NO2 level is low, medium, high or very high. 
Other methods suggested included that of ‘Blind Calibration’ and ‘Network 
Calibration’. Blind Calibration, as discussed by Balzano and Nowak (2007), is one 
way of thinking how to make sense out of raw data read from sensors with no cali-
brated source. They applied the term Blind Calibration to “automatic methods for 
jointly calibrating sensor networks in the field, without dependence on controlled 
stimuli or high-fidelity ground-truth data”. They propose an algorithmic solution a 
“novel automatic sensor calibration procedure that requires solving a linear system 
of constraints involving routine sensor measurements” (Balzano & Nowak, 2007). 
The group itself put the ‘network calibration’ approach forward. It is explained in 
the following Example 18:

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
155
E18: “Network calibration” aspect: using the size and distribution of a large sensor 
network to improve on the sensing quality provided by its constituent devices. 
Picking up on a few discussion threads I suggest three phases/strands: 
◦◦
Collect known system limitations (how good/bad are our sensors 
really?).
◦◦
Collect recommendations for metadata to collect (“traceability”).
◦◦
Review potential network calibration models, pick one.
However, soon into the discussion of both these methods the comment was made 
about the lack of supporting sources for these approaches:
E19: There is no useful theory that anyone has put forward or a technical paper 
identified that supports the concept of “Blind Calibration” for a simple sta-
tionery sensor - that is making sense out of raw data read from sensors with 
no calibrated source. There appears to be a lot of wishful thinking. 
The problems with ‘network calibration’ similarly lacked technical papers to 
support this approach. Up until today, there has not been a network-wide calibration, 
and most of the AQE V1 observable on this network, use the sensor factory settings. 
As Examples 20 and 21 show people continued to contemplate and experiment with 
calibration, to draw the meaning from the raw sensor data, thus contributing to the 
community’s shared knowledge pool.
E20: Yes, I think in the long term calibration is very important to this project. While 
I am not an expert at calibration, I am involved with a project that will be test-
ing some Sensaris Sensors against Alberta Environments reference method to 
see how the data compares for NOx. I had suggested that we test the AQegg 
sensors as well. I believe that we need to know what the sensor’s data is saying, 
and how it correlates to a reference method. What is the variance, drift, etc. 
E21: Based on the number of sensors (and data) that will be available and the fact 
that data will be ‘raw’ (uncalibrated, etc.) this looks like a very interesting 
project and challenge for applying pattern recognition techniques in order to 
either identify patterns (based on location of eggs, sensors used, etc.) and/or 
classify air quality (based on user estimation, correlation with other data, etc.). 
While the discussion about calibration is ongoing, the version 1 of the AQE was 
launched without specific method adopted and all sensors were not calibrated. The 
key argument to this approach, also reflected in statement on Kickstarter campaigns 
website, was made by a community organiser who wrote the following statement 
on campaigns discussion board:

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
156
E22: A note on calibration: Impossible. We cannot build a consumer-focused product 
that requires regular maintenance/calibration of the sensors. Moreover, off-
the-shelf sensors like we are using do not come calibrated, and so we would 
incur significant expenses to attempt to calibrate them after integration, only 
to still have the problem of re-calibration later on. Therefore, we can, and will, 
only look at trends in the data. Smart people, I’m sure, will find savvy ways to 
interpret this data for us, match it up with calibrated datasets (government or 
scientific institutions may be able to provide these), and /or learn things we 
never thought we would learn due to the sensor resolution, update frequency, 
and resolution we aim to achieve. 
However, this did not stop the community members from sharing their findings, 
thoughts and processes on this matter, and in the process create a resource of collec-
tive shared knowledge. In fact over 90% of all discussion on calibration took place 
after the Kickstarter statement was released. The discussion continued on mailing 
list and technical forums, and led the developers of AQE V2 to reconsider the im-
portance of this matter. AQE V2 was launched later in that year with two additional 
AQE modalities, for PM, and for Ozone and SO2. AQE V2 now uses fundamentally 
different sensor technology that is factory calibrated.
Furthermore, there have also been numerous community-led local AQE deploy-
ment projects that have published and shared reports on their findings and processes. 
The Citizens For Clean Air, in the Grand Valley in Northwestern Colorado run 
experiments with five eggs installed at different locations across valley. Not only 
they published and shared their findings with AQE community6, but also made it 
to a local news channel7. In London, Breathe Heathrow project distributed AQE 
among residents of Heathrow airport area and as a result succeeded in informing 
broader policy debate and subsequent delaying of airport expansion in South East 
England8. Some members have developed AQE reading and geo tracking maps9, 
and browser extensions10. Others have applied and perfected community-driven 
approaches to air measurements similar to the AQE community while using other 
types of devices.11 These latest actions, recorded years later, show that processes 
started by such citizen science community group might not have immediate effect, 
but could deliver value as time goes on. Likewise, as authors would argue, such 
community-led developments can mobilise and connect citizens interested in air 
quality or other aspects of environmental research and public health.

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
157
CURRENT TECHNOLOGICAL LIMITATIONS
Sensors and Calibration
The complexity of issues involved in the calibration process goes beyond just the 
method of calibration. In any technological setting faults can occur frequently, at 
different levels. While it might appear that the device is still monitoring, the data 
it transmits, might be incorrect. Kingsly and Kaviyarasi (2014), analysing the fault 
detection techniques in Wireless Sensor Networks noted that:
In general, fault occurs in sensor network can be classified into two types. They are 
function faults and data faults. Function faults normally refer to abnormal behaviors 
of the sensor node, and this leads to network failure or breakdown of a node. Whereas 
in data faults, nodes behave as a normal nodes but they sense wrong information 
when compared to other nodes in the network. (Kingsly & Kaviyarasi, 2014)
AQE mailing list members similarly brought up the issues of faults, and numerous 
problems with ‘any type of’ calibration were identified. Those included not only 
technical i.e. those associated with hardware and software applications or processes, 
but also social and socio-economical ones, such as regulation standards in different 
countries. Here is a list of few problems identified:
The sensors will degrade over time.
The devices don’t always perform the method correctly. They get out of whack; 
they’re technology.
In developing software one sets up procedures.
Calibration is only valid for a limited time.
There are different definitions of calibration.
I realized air quality limits differ from US to EU and elsewhere in the world.
The issues of social context and its values were discussed within a broader Pa-
chube community. The ‘faulty node issues’ were highlighted, for example, in a case 
of the radiation network in Japan, as they surfaced during the network data visuali-
sation process12. In Japan, the members of community, alerted by the irregularity 
of readings from one such node, contacted the owner of the node to discover that it 
was affected by falling raindrops. Such power of many, as this example suggested, 
can have a positive impact for ‘community network approach’ argument and its 
practical values.
In a recent [2016] comparative sensor performance study, conducted by South 
Coast Air Quality Management District researchers, three Air Quality Egg V2 

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
158
sensor devices were run side-by-side with Federal Reference Method (FRM; EPA 
approved) instruments measuring the same pollutants. Study found that overall, the 
three Air Quality Egg V2 sensor devices tested, each one measuring CO and NO2, 
“were reliable (i.e. no down time over a period of about two months) with a high 
data recovery ~100%, but showed substantial intra-model variability”. Furthermore, 
there seemed to be “a complete lack of correlation between the CO and NO2 sen-
sor data and the corresponding FRM data,” noting that further “chamber testing 
under known target/interferent gas concentrations and controlled (temperature and 
relative humidity) conditions is necessary to fully evaluate the performance of the 
three Air Quality Egg V2 units.”13 However, the study conducted on PM2.5 sensor 
showed that Air Quality Egg V2 not only correlates well with the FEM PM2.5 data, 
but also outperforms other available sensor devices on market such as Dylos, Air-
Beam, and MetOne.14
Data Quality Reassurance
This study has only focused on one community and its contribution to the devel-
opment of air quality measurement tools, and it has not analyse in-depth the other 
important aspect of this and similar projects. As it has been pointed out, the AQE 
sensor would not exist nor have any impact in isolation from the ‘web or networked 
fabric of Pachube’ (McCue, 2012), its online data repository. It is where the data 
stream graphs are updated every three minutes and data is displayed in human 
readable form. The Pachube data platform, and any other equivalent data hosting 
platform, is another important layer in the overall story. Not only it is at these online 
repositories where raw data get converted and displayed, it also where the data is 
archived and made available. Other important matters, such as data security, stor-
ing and service providing for data interoperability, are also conducted by these data 
hosting platforms, thus adding additional layer of complexity to the overall process, 
however seamless it might appear.
At the time of the early development of the Air Quality Egg (2011-2012), one 
Pachube/Cosm data corpus analysis noted: “Many Cosm feeds have not been anno-
tated with a sufficient degree of detail. Even the scale and units of measurement can 
differ within groups of sensors that observe the same physical property.” Likewise, 
the analysis of the study pointed to the lack of clarity and uniformity of metadata that 
supports the data streams. On the other hand, the study concluded: “This result does 
not put in question that there may be a potential ability of such community sensor 
activities to yield data suitable for building large-scale spatiotemporal models, but 
it clearly indicates that such data aggregation is only possible when the metadata 
supports it, and currently Cosm metadata is too heterogeneous” (Dittus, 2012).

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
159
Data platforms such as Pachube/Cosm and others, enables the access to data, and 
data aggregation from which further meanings could be derived, which, in turn, could 
present the data as an information or political tool. However, this part often presents 
itself as the most problematic. As Examples 23 and 24 reveals, seeing the patterns 
of change in data is not enough, and further discussion is needed about what can be 
done with such data, or what actions one could take in response to such data. What 
are the philosophical and ethical implications of data-empowered global citizens?
E23: My question is how can I interpret these numbers. My family is mostly asthmatic 
and this would indicate to us that we should move right away... not trying to 
be alarmist but since we aren’t totally sure what were looking at some info 
would be helpful. We want to know the meaning of the data over time. Espe-
cially anything we can do to calibrate things so we can see changes seasonal. 
E24: After all with air pollution the origins are not always clear, your agency as an 
individual is very very little and CO2 is not to argue with on a local neighbor-
hood scale. So you install an air pollution sensor and the air is consistently 
very bad (like it is and will be where I live). I know, now I can see it for it for 
myself. So what? What can I do? Move? Where to? Sell the house and not tell 
the new buyers why I move? How ethical is that? Having data in itself does not 
bring knowledge or change. Only agency to act on that data will bring informa-
tion, knowledge or change. Without a ‘how to do’ kit that goes with the tech (is 
it not plain tech push otherwise?) about possible community action, counter 
activities with plants, herbs and planting certain vegetation community garden 
style, boycotts of products of companies that produce traceable pollution in 
an area, making pollution visible by putting up real blockades with wood and 
blocking intersections, cough consistently within and with a whole street for 
a week... I don’t see why it would makes sense to have this data. 
CONCLUSION
Assessing the effect of air quality is, as many studies have confirmed, not an easy 
task. Research in health studies has shown dependency on the method used and, 
bias from predictions due to algorithms that correlate between predictions and 
the actual levels of pollution. Thus any findings are seen as estimates (Currie & 
Neidell, 2004). Likewise, these studies would have been based on data measured by 
air quality monitoring stations run by established government agency. As our study 
has indicated, the data generated by these stations have limited scope (mainly due 
to their low distribution density), and have thus stimulated a whole field of citizen 
community projects that aim to question government data by the use of ‘citizen sen-

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
160
sor devices’ that promise sensor access to very local environments. However, our 
study also points out that data created by citizen-led initiative often lack accepted 
scientific standards.
Technically, air quality itself is a highly variable phenomenon: measurements of 
air quality can vary greatly even at locations close to one another, and over a variety 
of timescales. Finding global, or average, figures can thus seem to be problematic. 
Politically, air quality is a difficult concept to mobilise around: the pollutants are 
invisible, and their effects are usually widely separated, temporally and spatially, from 
the exposure. Nevertheless, as the authors argued, the rise of the IoT has fostered 
community development of air measurement devices that in its turn have created 
space for discussion and practical application. This can lead to a shared knowledge 
distribution base, from which empirical learning and further initiatives can spring.
One aspect this chapter did not address is the socio-economics surrounding 
such citizen science projects. Issues include necessary support systems and organi-
sational structures. AQE development at its outset was supported by the Pachube 
enterprise, financially and technically. Likewise, it was driven by the enthusiasm 
of its key players. How can such structural forms be foster for future sustainability 
so that such citizen-led air monitoring networks could be integrated into overall air 
quality monitoring system or their data made interoperable, with relevant metadata 
and human feedback? Further research and discussion would be an opportunity to 
address some of these issues.
While this chapter contributes to the field of collaborative sensing and of the 
collaborative IoT, it also hopes to contribute to the discussions in the field of pub-
lic health. As more and more devices get employed to support human health and 
wellbeing, it is more important than ever to be aware of processes and complexities 
involved in measuring and calibrating such devices and systems. While community-
led projects might not deliver the intended accuracy with of-the-shelf solutions, they 
can in some way foster discussion, widen knowledge, educate and mobilise for com-
mon goals. Further explorations of how such knowledge and abilities could be put 
to practical use and application are necessary to unveil the nature and potentiality 
of IoT applications in the field of health science and public health.
REFERENCES
Aberer, K., Sathe, S., Chakraborty, D., Martinoli, A., Barrenetxea, G., Faltings, B., 
& Thiele, L. (2010). OpenSense: Open Community Driven Sensing of Environment. 
In Proceedings of ACM SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on GeoStreaming, 
(pp. 39–42). ACM. doi:10.1145/1878500.1878509

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
161
Almond, D., Chay, K., & Lee, D. (2005). The Costs of Low Birth Weight. The 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, 102(3), 1031–1083.
Balzano, L., & Nowak, R. (2007, April). Blind calibration of sensor networks. In 
Proceedings of the 6th international conference on Information processing in sen-
sor networks (pp. 79-88). ACM.
Bauwens, M., Mendoza, N., & Iacomella, F. (2012). Synthetic overview of the 
collaborative economy. Chiang Mai: P2P Foundation. Retrieved August 14, 2014, 
from https://wiki.p2pfoundation.net/Synthetic_Overview_of_the_Collabora-
tive_Economy
Behmann, F., & Wu, K. (2015). Collaborative Internet of Things (C-IoT): For Future 
Smart Connected Life and Business. John Wiley & Sons. doi:10.1002/9781118913734
Bell, M. L., & Davis, D. L. (2001). Reassessment of the lethal London fog of 
1952: Novel indicators of acute and chronic consequences of acute exposure to 
air pollution. Environmental Health Perspectives, 109(s3), 389–394. doi:10.1289/
ehp.01109s3389 PMID:11427388
Boehm, G. M. (1981). Air pollution and lung cancer. Cancer Detection and Preven-
tion, 5(4), 371–374. PMID:7182064
Brook, R. D., Franklin, B., Cascio, W., Hong, Y., Howard, G., Lipsett, M., & Tager, 
I. (2004). Air pollution and cardiovascular disease - A statement for healthcare 
professionals from the expert panel on population and prevention science of the 
American Heart Association. Circulation, 109(21), 2655–2671. doi:10.1161/01.
CIR.0000128587.30041.C8 PMID:15173049
Brook, R. D., Rajagopalan, S., Pope, C. A., Brook, J. R., Bhatnagar, A., Diez-Roux, 
A. V., & Peters, A. et al. (2010). Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovas-
cular disease an update to the scientific statement from the American Heart As-
sociation. Circulation, 121(21), 2331–2378. doi:10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181dbece1 
PMID:20458016
Butcher, M. (2011, July 20). LogMeIn acquires ‘Internet of Things’ Startup Pa-
chube for $15m in Cash. TechCrunch. Retrieved on August 2, 2016, from http://
techcrunch.com
Chay, K. Y., & Greenstone, M. (2003). The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant 
Mortality: Evidence from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced 
by a Recession. The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 118(3), 1121–1167. 
doi:10.1162/00335530360698513

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
162
Clark, N. A., Demers, P. A., Karr, C. J., Koehoorn, M., Lencar, C., Tamburic, L., 
& Brauer, M. (2010). Effect of Early Life Exposure to Air Pollution on Develop-
ment of Childhood Asthma. Environmental Health Perspectives, 118(2), 284–290. 
doi:10.1289/ehp.0900916 PMID:20123607
Currie, J., & Neidell, M. (2004). Air Pollution and infant health: What can we learn 
from California’s recent experience? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 
1003–1030.
Damek-Poprawa, M., & Sawicka-Kapusta, K. (2003). Damage to the liver, kidney, 
and testis with reference to burden of heavy metals in yellow-necked mice from 
areas around steelworks and zinc smelters in Poland. Toxicology, 186(1-2), 1–10. 
doi:10.1016/S0300-483X(02)00595-4 PMID:12604166
Danish National Environmental Research Institute, Center for Clear Air Policy, & 
Milieu Ltd. (2004). Comparison of the EU and US Air Quality Standards & Plan-
ning Requirements. Authors.
Davis, D. L., Bell, M. L., & Fletcher, T. (2002). A Look Back at the London Smog 
of 1952 and the Half Century Since. Environmental Health Perspectives, 110(12), 
734–735. doi:10.1289/ehp.110-a734 PMID:12501843
Dittus, M. S. (2012). The Cosm Sensor Data Set Data Integration of a Sensor Com-
mons (Dissertation). UCL, UK. Retrieved on August 14, 2014, from http://dekstop.
de/temp/dissertation/Martin_Dittus-Cosm_Data-20120908.pdf
Dockery, D. W., & Pope, C. A. III. (1994). Acute respiratory effects of particulate 
air pollution. Annual Review of Public Health, 15(1), 107–132. doi:10.1146/annurev.
pu.15.050194.000543 PMID:8054077
Doukas, C. (2012). Building Internet of Things. Part 1. CreateSpace Independent 
Publishing Platform.
Elen, B., Theunis, J., Ingarra, S., Molino, A., Van den Bossche, J., Reggente, M., 
& Loreto, V. (2012). The EveryAware SensorBox: a tool for community-based air 
quality monitoring. Paper presented at the Sensing a Changing World.
European Environmental Agency. (2015). Air quality in Europe — 2015 report. 
Retrieved on August 1, 2016, from http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/air-
quality-in-europe-2015
Evans, D. (2011). The Internet of Things How the Next Evolution of the Internet 
(White Paper). Cisco.

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
163
Evelyn, J. (1661). Fumifungium: or the Inconvenience of the Aer and Smoake of 
London Dissipated. In S. Staniforth (Eds.), Historical Perspectives on Preventive 
Conservation (pp. 262-269). Getty Conservation Institute.
Fleisch, E. (2010). What is the Internet of Things? An Economic Perspective (White 
Paper). Auto-ID Labs.
Fogel, R. W. (1986). Physical growth as a measure of the economic well-being of 
populations: the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In F. Falkner & J. M. Tan-
ner (Eds.), Human Growth: A Comprehensive Treatise (pp. 263–281). New York: 
Plenum. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-7198-8_13
Gasser, U., & Palfrey, J. (2007). Breaking Down Digital Barriers: When and How 
ICT Interoperability Drives Innovation. Berkman Publication Series.
Gochfeld, M., & Goldstein, B. D. (1999). Lesson in Environmental health in the 
twentieth century. Annual Review of Public Health, 20(1), 35–53. doi:10.1146/an-
nurev.publhealth.20.1.35 PMID:10352848
Haller, S. (2010). The Things in the Internet of Things. Paper presented at Internet 
of Things Conference, Tokyo, Japan.
Helbing, D., Bishop, S., Conte, R., Lukowicz, P., & McCarthy, J. B. (2012). Futu-
rICT: Participatory computing to understand and manage our complex world in a 
more sustainable and resilient way. The European Physical Journal. Special Topics, 
214(1), 11–39. doi:10.1140/epjst/e2012-01686-y
Irwin, A. (1995). Citizen Science: A study of People, Expertise and Sustainable 
Development. London: Routledge.
Kampa, M., & Castanas, E. (2008). Human health effects of air pollution. Science 
Direct, 151, 362–367. PMID:17646040
Kampa, M., Nistikaki, A., Tsaousis, V., Maliaraki, N., Notas, G., & Castanas, E. 
(2002). A new automated method for the determination of the Total Antioxidant 
Capacity (TAC) of human plasma, based on the crocin bleaching assay. BMC Clini-
cal Pathology, 2, 3. PMID:12197944
Kera, D., & Graham, C. (2010, November). Collective sensor networks and future 
communities: designing interaction across multiple scales. In Proceedings of the 22nd 
Conference of the Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia 
on Computer-Human Interaction (pp. 396-399). ACM. doi:10.1145/1952222.1952312

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
164
Kimbrough, R. D., Carter, C. D., Liddle, J. A., Cline, R. E., & Phillips, P. E. (1977). 
Epidemiology and pathology of a tetrachlorodibenzodioxin poisoning episode. 
Archives of Environmental Health, 32(2), 77–86. doi:10.1080/00039896.1977.10
667259 PMID:557961
Kingsly, S. R., & Kaviyarasi, G. (2014). A survey of fault node identification. De-
velopment Research, 4, 898–901.
Kotin, P., & Falk, H. L. (1964). Atmosphere Pollutants. Annual Review of Medicine, 
15(1), 233–254. doi:10.1146/annurev.me.15.020164.001313 PMID:14133847
Kullenberg, C., & Kasperowski, D. (2016). What Is Citizen Science? - A Sciento-
metric Meta-Analysis. PLoS ONE, 11(1), 1–16. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0147152 
PMID:26766577
Kuznetsov, S. (2010). Rise of the expert amateur: DIY projects, communities, 
and cultures. In Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer 
Interaction: Extending Boundaries (pp. 295–304). doi:10.1145/1868914.1868950
Lasley, S. M., & Gilbert, M. E. (2000). Glutamatergic components underlying lead-
induced impairments in hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Neurotoxicology, 21(6), 
1057–1067. PMID:11233752
McCue, T. J. (2012, April 4). 14 billion software as a service industry growth in-
fluences maker companies. Forbes. Retrieved on June 16, 2015, from http://www.
forbes.com
Miller, K. A., Siscovick, D. S., Sheppard, L., Shepherd, K., Sullivan, J. H., Anderson, 
G. L., & Kaufman, J. D. (2007). Long-Term Exposure to Air Pollution and Incidence 
of Cardiovascular Events in Women. The New England Journal of Medicine, 356(5), 
447–458. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa054409 PMID:17267905
Miller, M. (2015). The Internet of things: How smart TVs, smart cars, smart homes, 
and smart cities are changing the world. Pearson Education.
Mitton, N., & Simplot-Ryl, D. (2011). From the Internet of things to the Internet 
of the physical world. Comptes Rendus Physique, 12(7), 669–674. doi:10.1016/j.
crhy.2011.06.006
Nyberg, F., Gustavsson, P., Ja, L., Bellander, T., & Berglind, N. (2000). Urban Air 
Pollution and Lung Cancer in Stockholm. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 11(5), 
487–495. doi:10.1097/00001648-200009000-00002 PMID:10955399

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
165
O’Rourke, D., & Macey, G. P. (2003). Community environmental policing: Assess-
ing new strategies of public participation in environmental regulation. Journal of 
Policy Analysis and Management, 22(3), 383–414. doi:10.1002/pam.10138
Ottinger, G. (2010). Buckets of resistance: Standards and the effectiveness 
of citizen science. Science, Technology & Human Values, 35(2), 244–270. 
doi:10.1177/0162243909337121
Park, H., Lee, B., Ha, E., Lee, J., Kim, H., & Hong, Y. (2002). Association of Air Pol-
lution With School Absenteeism Due to Illness. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent 
Medicine, 156(12), 1235–1239. doi:10.1001/archpedi.156.12.1235 PMID:12444836
Park, S., Crespi, N., Park, H., & Kim, S. H. (2014, March). IoT routing architecture 
with autonomous systems of things. In Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2014 IEEE 
World Forum on (pp. 442-445). IEEE. doi:10.1109/WF-IoT.2014.6803207
Peters, A., Dockery, D. W., Heinrich, J., & Wichmann, H. E. (1997). Medication 
Use Modifies the Health Effects of Particulate Sulfate Air Pollution in Children 
with Asthma. Environmental Health Perspectives, 105(4), 430–435. doi:10.1289/
ehp.97105430 PMID:9189709
Pope, C. A. III, Bates, D., & Raizenne, E. (1995). Health Effects of Particulate Air 
Pollution: Time for Reassessment? Environmental Health Perspectives, 103(5), 
472–480. doi:10.1289/ehp.95103472 PMID:7656877
Riesch, H., & Potter, C. (2014). Citizen science as seen by scientists: Methodologi-
cal, epistemological. PUS, 23(1), 107–120. PMID:23982281
Schell, L. M., & Denham, M. (2003). Environmental Pollution in Urban Environments 
and human Biology. Annual Review of Anthropology, 32(1), 111–134. doi:10.1146/
annurev.anthro.32.061002.093218
Schwartz, J., Slater, D., Larson, T. V., Pierson, W. E., & Koenig, J. Q. (1993). 
Particulate air pollution and hospital emergency room visits for asthma in Seattle. 
The American Review of Respiratory Disease, 147(4), 826–831. doi:10.1164/
ajrccm/147.4.826 PMID:8466116
Science Communication Unit, University of the West of England, Bristol. (2013). 
Science for Environment Policy In-depth Report: Environmental Citizen Science. 
Report produced for the European Commission DG Environment.
Seaton, A., MacNee, W., Donaldson, K., & Godden, D. (1995). Particulate air pol-
lution and acute health effects. Lancet, 345(8943), 176–178. doi:10.1016/S0140-
6736(95)90173-6 PMID:7741860

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
166
Smith, K. R., Bruce, N., Balakrishnan, K., Adair-Rohani, H., Balmes, J., Chafe, Z., & 
Rehfuess, E. (2014). Millions dead: How do we know and what does it mean? Methods 
used in the comparative risk assessment of household air pollution. Annual Review 
of Public Health, 35(1), 185–206. doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-032013-182356 
PMID:24641558
Solomon, G. M., Campbell, T. R., Feuer, G. R., Masters, J., Samkian, A., & Paul, K. 
A. (2001). No Breathing in The Aisles: Diesel Exhaust Inside School Buses. Natural 
Resources Defense Council Coalition for Clean Air.
Spengler, J., Samet, J., & McCarthy, J. F. (2000). Indoor Air Quality Handbook. 
New York: McGraw Hill Book Co.
Staniforth, S. (2013). Historical perspectives on preventive conservation (Vol. 6). 
Getty Publications.
Stankovic, J. A. (2014). Research directions for the Internet of things. IEEE Internet 
of Things Journal, 1(1), 3–9. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2014.2312291
Stern, A. C., & Professor, E. (1982). History of Air Pollution Legislation in the 
United States. Journal of the Air Pollution Control Association, 32(1), 44–61. doi
:10.1080/00022470.1982.10465369 PMID:7033323
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., & Woelfflé, S. (2010). Vision and chal-
lenges for realising the Internet of Things. Cluster of European Research Projects 
on the Internet of Things. European Commission.
Tan, L., & Wang, N. (2010, August). Future internet: The internet of things. In 2010 
3rd International Conference on Advanced Computer Theory and Engineering 
(ICACTE) (Vol. 5, pp. 376-380). IEEE.
Townsend, J. G. (1949). Investigation of the Smog. Incident in Donora, Pa., 
and Vicinity. American Journal of Public Health, 40(2), 183–189. doi:10.2105/
AJPH.40.2.183 PMID:15409515
Urbinato, D. (1994). London’s historic pea-soupers. EPA Journal.
Utell, M. J., Warren, J., & Sawyer, R. F. (1994). Public health risks from motor 
vehicle emissions. Annual Review of Public Health, 15(1), 157–178. doi:10.1146/
annurev.pu.15.050194.001105 PMID:8054079
Vaughan, A. (2016, Jan 8). London takes just one week to breach annual air pollution 
limits. The Guardian. Retrieved on March 10, 2016, from http://www.theguardian.com

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
167
von Klot, S., Wölke, G., Tuch, T., Heinrich, J., Dockery, D. W., Schwartz, J., & Pe-
ters, A. et al. (2002). Increased asthma medication use in association with ambient 
fine and ultrafine particles. European Research Journals, 20(3), 691–702. doi:10.
1183/09031936.02.01402001 PMID:12358349
Yap, R. (2012). How to Build an AirCasting Air Monitor. Retrieved on June 16, 2016 
from habitatmap.org/habitatmap_docs/HowToBuildAnAirCastingAirMonitor.pdf
Zualkernan, I., & Aloul, F. (2010).A Mobile GPRS-Sensors Array for Air Pollution 
Monitoring. IEEE Sensors Journal, 10(10), 1666–1671.
Waldbott, G. L. (1978).Health effects of environmental pollutants (2nd ed.). The 
CV Mosby Company.
Walkowiak, J., Wiener, J. A., Fastabend, A., Heinzow, B., Kramer, U., Schmidt, 
E., & Winneke, G. et al. (2001). Environmental exposure to polychlorinated biphe-
nyls and quality of the home environment: Effects on psychodevelopment in early 
childhood. Lancet, 358(9293), 1602–1607. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(01)06654-5 
PMID:11716887
Walton, B. H., Dajnak, D., Beevers, S., Williams, M., Watkiss, P., & Hunt, A. (2015). 
Understanding the Health Impacts of Air Pollution in London For: Transport for 
London and the Greater London Authority. King’s College London.
Whittemore, A. S. (1981). Air pollution and respiratory disease. Annual Review 
of Public Health, 1(1), 397–429. doi:10.1146/annurev.pu.02.050181.002145 
PMID:7348558
WHO. (2016). Burden of disease from ambient and household air pollution. Re-
trieved on June 16, 2016, from http://www.who.int
Wilson, W., Mage, D., & Grant, L. (2000). Estimating Separately Personal Exposure 
to Ambient and Non-ambient Particulate Matter for Epidemiology and Risk Assess-
ment: Why and How. Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 50(7), 
1167–1183. doi:10.1080/10473289.2000.10464164 PMID:10939210
Wjst, M., Reitmeir, P., Dold, S., Wulff, A., Nicolai, T., von Loeffelholz-Colberg, 
E. F., & von Mutius, E. (1993). Road traffic and adverse effects on respiratory 
health in children. British Medical Journal, 307(6904), 596–600. doi:10.1136/
bmj.307.6904.596 PMID:7691304

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
168
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Air Pollutants: Gasses, particles, organic pollutants and heavy metals in the 
air composition.
Air Quality: A popular term to describe a quality of air and its pollution.
Calibration: Process to determine the relations between two unknown quantities.
Citizen Science: Science research conducted by diverse group of people for 
perceived common good. Could include professional and nonprofessional scientists.
Collective Sensor Networks: Projects, groups and communities that use sensing 
technologies to create data from heterogeneous environmental sources.
Internet of Things: Internet of connected things, objects, vehicles, buildings, 
cities or any other entity in physical world that has been embedded with electronics 
for data collection and exchange.
Measurement: Depending from discipline, the value or number assigned to a 
property of an object or event.
Sensor Technologies: technologies with sensing capabilities to detect the events 
or changes in its immediate environment.
ENDNOTES
1	
Slightly paraphrased for clarity
2	
Gartner, Inc. forecasted that 6.4 billion connected things will be in use world-
wide in 2016, up 30 present from 2015, and will reach 20.8 billion by 2020. In 
2016, 5.5 million new things will get connected every day. Read more about 
this prediction here http://www.gartner.com/newsroom/id/3165317
3	
Since their invention in early 1990s, buckets have become widely used by the 
environmental action groups, sometimes referred to as “Bucket Brigades”. The 
air is collected in bucket that is lined with Tedlar bag. Air collected at regular 
intervals and samples sent to labs for analysis. For more details on Bucket 
Brigade see O’Rourke and Macey (2003).
4	
The original Pachube blog post has been taken offline after Xively redesigned 
their site. The recorded snapshot can be traced via web.archive.org
5	
The summery of AQE community discussion on hardware and sensor issues 
can be found on AQE wiki site. http://airqualityegg.wikispaces.com/Hardware-
Sensors
6	
Referencing here two documents published by Grand Valley community 
members: ‘Frequently asked questions about the Air Quality Egg Project in the 
Grand Valley’ and ‘Monitoring Air Quality In The Grand Valley: Assessing 
The Usefulness Of The Air Quality Egg’ by Nelson (2015).

Citizen Science, Air Quality, and the Internet of Things
169
7	
TV episode is accessible online. Retrieved on August 10, 2016 from www.
westernslopenow.com news website.
8 	
This was a temporary project developed by OpenSensors.org and postgradu-
ate student Natalia Oskina. Read more on its impact on Open Data Institute’s 
blog. Retrieved on August 10, 2016, from https://theodi.org/blog/a-year-in-
open-data-breathe-heathrow-informs-policy-making
9 	
During the winter semester 2012/13 the bachelor students at the Institute for 
Geoinformatics developed modelling and visualisation of AQE network data. 
Their code can be found on GitHub 
10	
The founder of FTP software, John Romkey wrote a Chrome browser exten-
sion that can be downloadable from his personal blog. Retrieved on August 10, 
2016, from https://romkey.com/code/air-quality-egg-helper-browser-extension/
11	
Madrid based The Data Citizen Driven City project used AQE to set up The 
Device Library, citizen device How To database.
12	
At 4th IoT London Meetup, designer Haiyan Zhang presented her work on 
radiation network visualisation. She described a case of such faulty node that 
was sending data ‘off the beat’, and how the data gave a ‘clue’ that there might 
be some problem with the node.
13	
AQMD test preliminary results retrieved on August 1, 2016, from: http://
www.aqmd.gov/docs/default-source/aq-spec/field-evaluations/air-quality-egg-
v2_co-no2---field-evaluation.pdf?sfvrsn=0
14	
Full list of AQMD tested devices and test results can be downloaded here: 
http://www.aqmd.gov/aq-spec/evaluations#&MainContent_C001_Col00=2

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch006
Chapter 6
170 
Preventing Health Risks 
Caused by Unhealthy 
Air Quality Using a 
CEP-Based SOA 2.0
ABSTRACT
Air quality has been a recurrent issue in recent years since it can seriously impact 
citizens’ health and their life quality. Nowadays, the different ways to provide end 
users with air quality information do not provide real-time data and lack accessibil-
ity. Besides, they do not automatically adapt to the particular circumstances of each 
citizen. In this chapter, an event-driven service-oriented architecture is proposed 
for detecting air quality changes in real time as well as making this information 
available to end users in a user-friendly way, notifying them with customized alerts 
upon detecting any potentially hazardous level for their health, thereby helping to 
prevent health risks.
Juan Boubeta-Puig
University of Cádiz, Spain
Guadalupe Ortiz
University of Cádiz, Spain
Inmaculada Medina-Bulo
University of Cádiz, Spain

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
171
INTRODUCTION
Because of pollution, among other factors, air quality plays an essential role in citizens’ 
health. Particularly, air quality may improve or worsen the effects of certain illnesses 
and even cause the death of specific risk groups (WHO, 2013). In this regard, air 
quality monitoring is a fundamental aspect for a significant increasing number of 
citizens, such as elder people, people doing sports outside, children playing outdoor, 
or people who suffer from heart disease or allergies to certain substances that they 
may inhale while breathing. Although these are risk groups, air quality affects all 
citizens in general to a greater or lesser extent in everyday life.
As well as the weather does, air quality changes very frequently. This is why being 
informed about the quality of air in real time is essential to prevent personal risks. 
Three major factors should be addressed when informing citizens about air quality:
1. 	
Information should be available in real time,
2. 	
Information should be accessible in an easy and user-friendly way,
3. 	
Information should be customized depending on the specific circumstances 
affecting the person receiving it, e.g. pollution does not affect the same way 
allergic people than healthy young people without respiratory problems.
Currently, most providers of information about air quality are characterized by 
not supplying this information in real time (minute by minute), not offering infor-
mation easily accessible to citizens or not providing information customized to the 
user context (CITEAIR, 2016; Comunidad de Madrid, 2016; CPCB - India, 2014; 
Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs - UK, 2016a; EPA - US, 2016b; 
Government of Canada, 2016a; Travel China Guide - China, 2016). In order to tackle 
all these challenges, this chapter proposes that the citizens can reach information in 
a comfortable and easy way, also adapting such information to their particular needs.
To achieve this goal, the Event-Driven Service-Oriented Architecture (ED-SOA 
or SOA 2.0) defined by the authors in (Boubeta-Puig, Ortiz, & Medina-Bulo, 2015a) 
is adapted to prevent health risks from air quality by processing data coming from 
multiple information sources all over the world and notifying alerts to end users in 
real time when a health risk is detected. Based on the authors’ experience in other 
application domains (Boubeta-Puig, Medina-Bulo, Ortiz, & Fuentes-Landi, 2012; 
Boubeta-Puig, Ortiz, & Medina-Bulo, 2014a, 2014b; Boubeta-Puig et al., 2015a; 
Gad, Boubeta-Puig, Kappes, & Medina-Bulo, 2012), they firmly believe that the 
use of technologies such as Internet of Things (IoT) and Complex Event Processing 
(CEP) and their integration with SOA 2.0 is key to address such challenges.

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
172
The proposed architecture is implemented for the air quality scope. Such imple-
mentation is then verified and validated to demonstrate its usefulness in this field 
of application.
The rest of the chapter is organized as follows. The next section includes back-
ground on IoT, SOA, EDA, SOA 2.0 and CEP, as well as related work. The fol-
lowing section overviews the proposed CEP-based SOA 2.0 system for preventing 
health risks caused by unhealthy air quality. Furthermore, a section that conducts a 
case study for the detection of unhealthy air quality levels in different geographic 
areas, is presented. Finally, a section highlights the conclusions and the last section 
discusses the future work.
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The subject matters relevant to the scope of this chapter, IoT, SOA, EDA, SOA 2.0 
and CEP, as well as related work are introduced in this section.
Internet of Things
IoT establishes that all physical objects can be uniquely identified and represented in 
the on-line world. IoT can have a high impact on both different aspects of everyday 
life and behavior of potential users (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2010). According to 
these authors, some examples of possible scenarios where IoT can be applied are: 
e-health, home automation, enhanced learning, assisted living, automation and 
industrial manufacturing, logistics, business/process management, and intelligent 
transportation of people and goods.
ThingSpeak (ThingSpeak, 2016) is a real-time open data platform for IoT with the 
capability of managing huge amounts of data per day from thousands of individuals, 
organizations and companies around the world. This platform provides a RESTful 
API for manipulating data in JSON, CSV and XML formats. Thanks to its scalable 
infrastructure, ThingSpeak allows to develop IoT applications, storing, sharing and 
discovering real-time sensing data and devices all over the world.
Service-Oriented Architecture
SOA is a logical way of designing a software system with the aim of providing 
services to end user applications or other services distributed in a network, utilizing 
published and discoverable interfaces (Papazoglou, 2012). According to Chandy and 
Schulte, any application that implements SOA should meet the following principles 
(Chandy & Schulte, 2010):

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
173
1. 	
Modular Application: The application should be modular, so that software 
components can be added, modified or deleted individually.
2. 	
Distributed Components: The components should be able to be run on dif-
ferent computers and communicate with others by sending messages through 
the network at runtime.
3. 	
Discoverable Component Interfaces: These interfaces must be accessible to 
other application developers. In addition, these interfaces should be defined 
and clearly documented as metadata. The latter describes the input and output 
messages of each component, as well as the necessary information to enable 
developers to find and reuse the component as part of a new application.
4. 	
Replaceable Components: A component that provides a service may be re-
placed by another component offering the same service as long as both share 
the same interface. This is possible because the design of the interface – what 
it does – is separated from the service implementation – how it is created.
5. 	
Shareable and Reusable Components: The same code and data are available 
to users of any application that shares the same software component.
Combining the first four principles implies that SOA components are loosely 
coupled, what facilitates the achievement of the fifth principle. Therefore, this archi-
tecture type provides a loosely coupled environment with multiple functionalities, 
improving the maintenance and evolution of enterprise systems.
Event-Driven Architecture
EDA is a style of architecture in which one or more components in a software system 
are executed upon receiving event notifications (Etzion & Niblett, 2011). Accord-
ing to Chandy and Schulte, any application that implements EDA should meet the 
following principles (Chandy & Schulte, 2010):
1. 	
Event Notification: Once a new event is detected in the system, it must be 
notified as soon as possible.
2. 	
Notification Submission: The event producer will decide when event notifica-
tions should be sent to the event consumer.
3. 	
Immediate Response: The event consumer will react, performing some ac-
tions, as soon as an event is detected.
4. 	
One-Way Communication: The event producer will send event notifications 
to the event consumer without waiting for any response from the consumer.
5. 	
Free of Commands: Event notifications will not contain any action to be 
carried out by the event consumer after receiving them.

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
174
The first three principles refer to the event-driven concept – an entity reacts upon 
detecting an event, while the last two ones encompass the meaning of minimally 
coupled – the one-way communication between an event producer and an event 
consumer in which the producer sends events to the consumer. Note that a system 
would be event-driven, even though not using an EDA (Chandy & Schulte, 2010). 
For example, an event producer that sends a notification to an event consumer 
specifying the particular action to be carried out by the consumer.
These five principles of EDA can be implemented using a publish-subscribe 
pattern (Faison, 2006; Mühl, Fiege, & Pietzuch, 2006; Taylor, Yochem, Phillips, & 
Martinez, 2008). By using this type of asynchronous communications, a message 
can be delivered to zero, one or more consumers without requiring the producer to 
send it several times. Moreover, a subscription describes the type of messages to be 
sent to each consumer. It is worthy to mention that the publish-subscribe mechanism 
is much more flexible than other types of messaging mechanisms because the mes-
sage delivery instructions can be dynamically defined, thereby subscriptions can be 
performed at runtime. Another advantage is that new event producers or consumers 
can be added at any time; likewise, they may be eliminated if so required.
Event-Driven Service-Oriented Architecture
Both previously described types of architectures (SOA and EDA) are not exclusive 
but complementary, so they can be combined resulting in ED-SOA or SOA 2.0, an 
evolution of traditional SOA in which communication between users and services 
occurs by means of events (Luckham, 2012). Any application that implements SOA 
2.0 should meet the mentioned SOA principles as well as the EDA ones. To achieve 
this integration, a middleware is necessary; an Enterprise Service Bus (ESB) is the 
suitable candidate for this purpose due to its multiple functionalities (Rademakers 
& Dirksen, 2009): location transparency, transport protocol conversion, message 
transformation, message routing, message enhancement, security, and monitoring 
and management.
Despite all the advantages provided by the combination of EDA and SOA, SOA 
2.0 is not suitable for processing, analyzing and correlating an enormous amount 
of information in form of events with the aim of detecting critical or relevant situa-
tions in real time. This justifies the need to integrate SOA 2.0 with CEP technology.
Complex Event Processing
CEP (Luckham, 2012) is an emerging technology that allows us to analyze and 
correlate huge amounts of data in form of events with the aim of detecting relevant 
or critical situations (complex events) in real time.

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
175
An event can be defined as anything that happens or could happen (Luckham, 
2002), but also anything that could happen but does not happen. A situation is an 
event occurrence or an event sequence that requires an immediate reaction (Etzion 
& Niblett, 2011). Events can be classified into three main categories: a simple 
event is indivisible and happens at a point in time, a complex event contains more 
semantic meaning which summarizes a set of other events, and a derived event is 
generated when applying a process to one or more other events (Event Processing 
Technical Society, 2011). Events can be derived from other events by applying or 
matching event patterns, templates where the conditions describing situations to 
be detected are specified. A CEP engine is the software used to match these pat-
terns over continuous and heterogeneous event streams (timely ordered sequence 
of events of multiple types), and to raise alerts about complex events created when 
detecting such event patterns.
As depicted in Figure 1, CEP is performed in three stages:
•	
Event Capture: It consists of the reception of events to be analyzed by CEP 
technology.
•	
Analysis: From the event patterns previously defined in the CEP engine, it 
will process and correlate the information in the form of events in order to 
detect critical or relevant situations in real time.
•	
Response: After detecting a particular situation, it will be notified to the sys-
tem, software or device in question.
Figure 1. Complex event processing stages

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
176
The main advantage of using CEP to process complex events is that they can be 
identified and reported in real time, unlike traditional software for event analysis, 
therefore reducing the latency in decision making. Other relevant advantages are: 
decision quality improvement, faster and automatic reply, information overload 
prevention and human workload reduction.
Therefore, CEP is a fundamental technology for applications that:
1. 	
Must produce a fast reply to situations that change quickly and asynchronously 
and where interactions do not have to be transactional,
2. 	
Must support management by exception,
3. 	
Must quickly react to unusual situation and
4. 	
Require loose coupling and adaptability (Chandy & Schulte, 2010).
Proposals Integrating CEP with EDA, SOA, or SOA 2.0
In order to detect situations of interest in real time, several works integrating CEP 
technology with EDA, SOA or SOA 2.0 have been proposed over recent years. 
Table 1 summarizes these proposals indicating the event processing software and 
middleware used in each case.
Regarding the multiple existent proposals integrating CEP with EDA we would 
like to highlight that none of them uses an ESB, which would considerably facilitate 
such integration and would provide additional facilities and advantages, as previ-
ously explained.
Concerning the proposals integrating CEP with SOA, all of them describe ar-
chitectures that differ from our proposal. On the one hand, none of them uses Mule 
ESB (MuleSoft, 2016), one of the best current ESBs, as maintained by Forrester 
(Ried, 2014), because of its ability to integrate itself with cloud platforms as well 
as multiple tools and domain scenarios. On the other, Sottara et al. do not use Es-
per (EsperTech, 2016), one of the best-known and most widely used open source 
CEP engines because of its ability to process thousands of events per second and 
to dynamically manage events in map format – providing greater flexibility when 
defining event types with nested properties.
Finally, the proposals which combine CEP and SOA 2.0 have some limitations 
compared to our proposal. On the one hand, none of them has integrated Esper 
engine with Mule ESB, whose combination would provide the aforementioned 
benefits. On the other hand, most of these proposals have no graphical editors to 
help domain experts to define event patterns with their corresponding actions and 
to transform them into code, what means a major handicap when trying to use the 
system in a particular domain.

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
177
Table 1. Proposals integrating CEP with EDA, SOA or SOA 2.0
CEP 
with
Proposal
Topic
Event 
Processing 
Software
Middleware
EDA
(Bruns & Dunkel, 
2013)
Pattern-based architectures for event 
processing systems
Own
Own
(Dunkel, Fernández, 
Ortiz, & Ossowski, 
2011)
Decision support in traffic management 
systems
Esper
Own
(Gad, Kappes, 
Boubeta-Puig, & 
Medina-Bulo, 2013)
Network analysis and surveillance system 
based on CEP
Esper
Own
SOA
(Romero et al., 2011)
Smart home environments
Esper
SCA
(Sottara, Manservisi, 
Mello, Colombini, & 
Luccarini, 2009)
Management of waste water treatment 
plants
Drools
JBoss ESB
(Zmuda, Psiuk, & 
Zielinski, 2010)
Dynamic monitoring of SOA execution 
environments
Esper
ServiceMix 
ESB
SOA 
2.0
(ALERT, 2016)
Coordination among collaborative and 
distributed virtual teams developing 
software
ETALIS
Petals ESB
(Bo, Kun, & Xiaoyi, 
2008)
High performance ESB platform for CEP
Own
Own
(COMPAS, 2011)
Compliance-driven models, languages and 
architectures for services
Esper
ServiceMix 
ESB
(He, Zheng, Xue, & 
Du, 2008)
Exhaust gas detection services
Own
Own
(Juric, 2010)
WSDL and BPEL extensions for EDA
Apache 
ODE
Non-
particular 
ESB
(Levina & Stantchev, 
2009)
Web services-based event-driven SOA
MS 
Workflow 
Foundation
.NET 
framework
(Ravier, 2010)
Intelligent video surveillance systems
Esper
Own
(Vidackovic & 
Weisbecker, 2011)
Methodology for dynamic service 
compositions
Esper
Open ESB
(Wieland, Martin, 
Kopp, & Leymann, 
2009)
Method for specification and 
implementation of applications on a SOA
Esper
BPEL 
workflows
(Zang, Fan, & Liu, 
2008)
Event processing mechanism in enterprise 
information systems based on RFID
Own
Own

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
178
Air Pollution and Air Quality Monitoring Systems
The World Health Organization (WHO) (WHO, 2016) defines air pollution as 
contamination of the indoor or outdoor environment by any chemical, physical or 
biological agent that modifies the natural characteristics of the atmosphere. The 
most relevant pollutants of major public health concern are particulate matter (PM2.5 
and PM10), carbon monoxide (CO), ozone (O3), nitrogen dioxide (NO2) and sulfur 
dioxide (SO2). Monitoring these pollutants in real time is key because air pollution 
causes respiratory and other diseases, which can be fatal for human beings.
Nowadays, there are several indexes for reporting air quality, indicating how pol-
luted or clean the air in a particular zone is and what related effects on their health 
might be a concern for the citizens. However, each index provides details about air 
pollution levels by using different scales, as summarized in Table 2. For this reason, 
as an example, air pollution levels measured in the US cannot be compared to those 
measured in UK. Furthermore, there are different air quality indexes sharing the 
same scale, which use different value ranges and air pollution levels, as for American 
and Indian indexes. So far, there is a lack of an international standard that makes 
air quality measurement universal.
Currently, there are several systems for monitoring air quality levels but only 
focused in particular areas around the world:
•	
One of the most well-known systems is EnviroFlash (EPA - US, 2016b), 
which allows to calculate hourly the Air Quality Index. However, this service 
only monitors air quality data all over the United States.
•	
Following a similar structure to EnviroFlash, Europe has also developed its 
own system, called AirQualityNow (CITEAIR, 2016), to calculate hourly the 
Common Air Quality Index. Nevertheless, this system only monitors air qual-
ity data from cities and regions across Europe. On the other hand, the File 
Transfer Protocol (FTP) is used to transfer data to this system, not providing 
web services that would facilitate its integration with third-parties systems 
or services.
•	
The government of Canada has also developed a web tool to monitor hourly 
its own Air Quality Health Index (Government of Canada, 2016b). In order 
to obtain the air quality level in a particular Canadian location, the end user 
must click on the map in the region followed by the particular city. Obviously, 
this is time-consuming and not user-friendly enough. Another limitation is 
that it does not provide an appropriate interface to be integrated with other 
systems.

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
179
Table 2. Several existing air quality indexes
Index Name
Acronym
Zone
Reference
Scale
Range
Air Pollution Level
Air Quality 
Index
AQI
US
(EPA - US, 
2016a)
0 – 500
0 – 50
Good
51 – 100
Moderate
101 – 150
Unhealthy for 
Sensitive Groups
151 – 200
Unhealthy
201 – 300
Very Unhealthy
301 – 500
Hazardous
Indian Air 
Quality Index
IND-AQI
India
(CPCB - 
India, 2014)
0 – 500
0 – 50
Good
51 – 100
Satisfactory
101 – 200
Moderately-Polluted
201 – 300
Poor
301 – 400
Very Poor
401 – 500
Sever
China Air 
Quality Index
AQICN
China
(Travel China 
Guide - 
China, 2016)
0 – 
300+
0 – 50
Excellent
51 – 100
Good
101 – 150
Lightly Polluted
151 – 200
Moderately Polluted
201 – 300
Heavily Polluted
300+
Severely Polluted
Common Air 
Quality Index
CAQI
EU
(CITEAIR 
- Europe, 
2016)
0 – 
100+
0 – 25
Very Low
25 – 50
Low
50 – 75
Medium
75 – 100
High
100+
Very High
Air Quality 
Health Index
AQHI
Canada
(Government 
of Canada, 
2016a)
0 – 10+
1 – 3
Low Health Risk
4 – 6
Moderate Health 
Risk
7 – 10
High Health Risk
10+
Very High Health 
Risk
Daily Air 
Quality Index
DAQI
UK
(Department 
for 
Environment 
Food & Rural 
Affairs - UK, 
2016a)
1 – 10
1 – 3
Low
4 – 6
Moderate
7 – 9
High
10
Very High

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
180
•	
The Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs in United Kingdom 
has also created a web tool called UK-Air (Department for Environment Food 
& Rural Affairs - UK, 2016b) to monitor air quality in its country. In this 
case, the air quality information is also accessible via a map not intuitive 
enough as this information is not automatically updated, being necessary that 
the user clicks on the specific location.
There are other systems developed by other countries and even by different 
regions in the same country. Nevertheless, to the best knowledge of the authors, 
there is no system satisfying the three requirements that the system proposed in 
this chapter addresses:
1. 	
Information should be available in real time;
2. 	
Information should be accessible in an easy and user-friendly way;
3. 	
The information should be customized depending on the specific circumstances 
affecting the person receiving it.
ARCHITECTURE FOR PREVENTING HEALTH 
RISKS RELATED TO AIR QUALITY
In this section, an architecture system for preventing health risks related to air quality 
is detailed. Particularly, the main goal of this architecture is to continuously monitor 
air pollutants with the aim of detecting unhealthy air pollution levels in real time 
and notifying the interested citizens about them as soon as possible.
In a previous work (Boubeta-Puig et al., 2015a), the authors implemented an 
architecture for integrating IoT, CEP and SOA 2.0 to ease the efficient detection of 
relevant and critical situations in SOA scenarios, in particular for a network security 
domain. Thanks to this architecture, when relevant situations arise from the detec-
tion of certain predefined event patterns, real time alerts are sent to the interested 
parties. In the present chapter, the authors adapt this architecture to support a more 
complex and ambitious scenario for healthcare, as shown in Figure 2.
The implemented architecture is composed of the following elements:
•	
ESB: The middleware that makes easy the integration of the rest of architec-
ture components, in particular, the connection between event producers and 
event consumers and the CEP engine.
•	
Physical Platform: It integrates several sensors for monitoring temperature, 
humidity and air pollutants, such as PM, O3, CO, SO2, NO2 (simulated in the 
case study).

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
181
•	
IoT Platform: It provides several services to obtain real-time data coming 
from sensors located around the world.
•	
CEP Engine: The software with the capability of analyzing and correlating 
huge amounts of sensing data in form of events and of detecting unhealthy air 
pollution levels upon pattern detection.
•	
Notification System: Currently the system sends emails to the interested us-
ers. We are working on an Android application to be integrated into the sys-
tem in the near future.
•	
NoSQL Database: It is used to store complex events as well as air quality 
data coming from physical and IoT platforms. This database type is charac-
terized by not requiring fixed data structures and providing eventual con-
sistency. Moreover, it has the ability to scale horizontally and manage huge 
amounts of data in a distributed way.
•	
SQL Database: It is currently used to store the emails of the registered users. 
In our work in progress we are storing additional information about the users. 
This database type uses fixed structures and provides atomicity, consistency, 
isolation and persistence; however, it is not suitable for large-scale distributed 
systems.
Figure 2. Architecture for preventing health risks related to air quality

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
182
The relation between the different components of the architecture is as follows. 
The ESB is the middleware used for integrating event producers, event consumers 
and the CEP engine. In particular, it will be in charge of receiving the sensing data 
from the physical and IoT platforms. Next, this data will be transformed into events 
following a common format. Then, these events will be sent to the CEP engine, 
where the event patterns to be detected must be previously deployed, and also be 
stored into a NoSQL database in order to keep historical data. When the conditions 
of an event pattern are fulfilled, a complex event summarizing the detected situa-
tion is created, stored in a database and sent to the ESB. Once the complex event 
is received, the ESB will notify it immediately to the registered users by means of 
the mail service.
CASE STUDY
A case study in the scope of air quality is described and implemented in the fol-
lowing subsections.
Case Study Description
Nowadays, there is great concern about the air quality all over the world since un-
healthy air quality levels can affect seriously people’s life.
Considering this, several systems have been created during the last decades to 
provide citizens with the information about what the air quality levels in their living 
areas are. However, these tools have three main drawbacks:
1. 	
They monitor air quality levels hourly or daily, but not immediately (in seconds 
or minutes),
2. 	
They only give this information for a particular geographical area or country, 
but not for everyone, and
3. 	
The notified information is not customized according to the user preferences.
The main aim of this case study is to show that the architecture proposed in this 
chapter is an effective solution for addressing all these drawbacks, by detecting 
health concern levels of air quality in real time (minute to minute) all over the world 
and notifying them to the interested users. The use of this system will allow both 
health officials to mitigate as soon as possible the impact of the real-time pollution 
and citizens to take preventive measures to protect their families.
In this case study, event producers consist of simulated sensors located in dif-
ferent zones: Cádiz (Spain), Hamburg (Germany), Tilburg (The Netherlands) and 

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
183
Montevideo (Uruguay). These sensors, which provide 1-minute measurements of 
air pollutants (PM, O3, CO, SO2, NO2), temperature and humidity for each location, 
send this information to an IoT platform. In that way, the information is available 
all over the world.
On the other hand, event consumers might be:
•	
Hospitals: Health workers would need to know which air quality levels have 
been identified in each area in order to face the situation, so that to be able to 
give the suitable advices to protect patient health.
•	
WHO and Other International Organizations: These organizations may 
subscribe worldwide air quality level notifications to keep themselves in-
formed to be able to establish the corresponding health policies in due time.
•	
Citizens: They will be continuously informed about air quality conditions, 
for instance in their cities. Therefore, they will be able to follow advices and 
recommendations to protect their health.
It is important to mention that on this work we have focused on the implementa-
tion of the server side architecture that paves the way for future implementation of 
diverse interested clients.
Data Source Description
A Java simulator has been implemented to generate 1-minute measurements of air 
pollutants (PM, O3, CO, SO2, NO2) as well as temperature and humidity for four 
locations around the world: Cádiz (Spain), Hamburg (Germany), Tilburg (The 
Netherlands) and Montevideo (Uruguay). That is, the sensors in these locations 
have been simulated.
Moreover, four ThingSpeak channels have been created to send, store and graphi-
cally visualize the simulated data in real time. The data update frequency is minute 
by minute. Particularly, Table 3 summarizes the names and URLs of such channels. 
Each channel has been structured as shown in Table 4.
The information provided by these channels will be transformed into the event 
format inside the ESB. This event format is as follows: AirMeasurement (timestamp, 
location, pm2_5, pm10, o3, no2, so2, co, temp, humidity). Note that AirMeasure-
ment is the event type name and the remaining data refers to the event properties.
Air Quality Levels
As explained before, there are several air quality indexes for reporting air quality; 
however, there is no international standard for air quality measurements. Under this 

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
184
scenario, the authors have chosen as reference the American one, called AQI (EPA 
- US, 2016a), due to its maturity. Nevertheless, this index is currently used only to 
measure air quality in the US. In the present work, this index will be used to unify 
real-time air quality measurements made around the world.
Table 5 shows the six air quality levels – Good, Moderate, Unhealthy for Sensi-
tive Groups, Unhealthy, Very Unhealthy, and Hazardous – that can be detected. For 
each air pollutant, it is indicated what the breakpoints that will enable to detect a 
particular air quality level are. Note that AQI provides two different breakpoints for 
O3 (8-hour O3 and 1-hour O3); however, only the latter has been taken into account 
in the table since the sensing data managed in the proposal is frequently updated.
When one of the breakpoints is fulfilled for one location, its corresponding air 
quality level will be detected. If two or more breakpoints are fulfilled at the same 
Table 3. ThingSpeak channels registering air quality data used in the case study
Nº
Channel Name
URL
C1
Air Quality Simulator - Cádiz (Spain)
https://thingspeak.com/channels/59557 
C2
Air Quality Simulator - Hamburg (Germany)
https://thingspeak.com/channels/59430 
C3
Air Quality Simulator - Tilburg (The 
Netherlands)
https://thingspeak.com/channels/59558 
C4
Air Quality Simulator - Montevideo (Uruguay)
https://thingspeak.com/channels/59560 
Table 4. ThingSpeak channels’ structure used in the case study
Data
Description
id
Channel identification number
Name
Channel name
description
Channel description
created_at
Channel creation date
updated_at
Channel update date
PM2.5
Particle pollution - 2.5 micrometers (µg/m3)
PM10
Particle pollution - 10 micrometers (µg/m3)
O3
Ozone (ppm)
NO2
Nitrogen dioxide (ppm)
SO2
Sulfur dioxide (ppm)
CO
Carbon monoxide (ppm)
Temp
Temperature (ºC)
Humidity
Humidity (%)

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
185
time, the air quality level will be defined as the most dangerous one for that location. 
For instance, having a PM2.5 value of 40.9 µg/m3 and a CO value of 8.4 ppm implies 
the detection of the following air quality levels: Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups and 
Moderate, respectively. Since the Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups level is more 
dangerous than the Moderate one, the global air quality level for this location will 
be Unhealthy for Sensitive Groups.
Event Patterns for Air Quality Levels
In the following paragraphs, the event patterns necessary to detect air quality levels 
are described and implemented in Esper EPL (Event Processing Language) (Es-
perTech, 2016): a declarative language provided by Esper CEP engine.
Eight event patterns have been proposed with the aim of detecting relevant air 
quality levels for citizens: GoodAirQuality, ModerateAirQuality, UnhealthyForS-
ensitiveGroupsAirQuality, UnhealthyAirQuality, VeryUnhealthyAirQuality, Haz-
ardousAirQuality, AirQualityLevelByLocation and AirQualityAlert.
The first six patterns, which are in charge of detecting the air quality levels around 
the world, have been defined according to the breakpoints defined by the AQI, 
which are shown in Table 5. As an example, Listing 1 shows the implementation of 
the ModerateAirQuality event pattern. First of all, the event pattern is specified by 
making use of the from pattern clause. Next, all AirMeasurement events fulfilling 
the conditions are selected by using the every pattern operator. In order to refer these 
events later, it is necessary to assign them an alias (in this case, a1). Finally, the 
properties to be selected from the events matching the pattern conditions are specified. 
These properties are: the air quality level number, the level name, the timestamp, the 
Table 5. Breakpoints defined by the AQI
Air Quality Level
AQI
O3
PM10
PM2.5
CO
SO2
NO2
Good
0 – 50
–
0 – 54
0.0 – 15.4
0.0 – 4.4
0.000 – 
0.034
–
Moderate
51 – 
100
–
55 – 
154
15.5 – 
40.4
4.5 – 9.4
0.035 – 
0.144
–
Unhealthy for 
Sensitive Groups
101 – 
150
0.125 – 
0.164
155 – 
254
40.5 – 
65.4
9.5 – 
12.4
0.145 – 
0.224
–
Unhealthy
151 – 
200
0.165 – 
0.204
255 – 
354
65.5 – 
150.4
12.5 – 
15.4
0.225 – 
0.304
–
Very Unhealthy
201 – 
300
0.205 – 
0.404
355 – 
424
150.5 – 
250.4
15.5 – 
30.4
0.305 – 
0.604
0.65 – 
1.24
Hazardous
301 – 
500
0.405 
–0.604
425 – 
604
250.5 – 
500.4
30.5 – 
50.4
0.605 – 
1.004
1.25 – 
2.04

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
186
location and all air pollutant values. The insert into clause specifies that this pattern 
will create a new complex event with such properties: AirQualityLevel(levelNumber, 
levelName, timestamp, location, pm2_5, pm10, o3, no2, so2, co). Note that the air 
quality levels have been enumerated from the healthiest level as 0 (GoodAirQuality) 
until the most hazardous one as 5 (HazardousAirQuality).
So far, the described event patterns allow the detection of air quality levels ac-
cording to each air pollutant value around the world. As mentioned before, if different 
air quality levels for the same location in a specific point in time are detected, the 
global air quality level will be defined as the most dangerous one in that location. 
In order to deal with this requirement, the AirQualityLevelByLocation event pat-
tern has been implemented as shown in Listing 2. A tumbling time window, which 
batches AirQualityLevel complex events and releases them every 5 minutes, has 
been included in this pattern. These complex events inside the windows are grouped 
by location for which the maximum of their air quality level numbers is calculated. 
Then, this maximum is included in the new complex event called AirQualityLevel-
ByLocation, indicating the global air quality level per location.
Since citizens are interested in being notified when the air quality level is not 
appropriate for their health, another event pattern has been implemented – see 
Listing 3 – to create a new AirQualityAlert complex event upon the detection of 
an AirQualityLevelByLocation complex event, whose air quality level number is 
Listing 1. Esper EPL implementation for the ModerateAirQuality event pattern
@Name(‘ModerateAirQuality’) 
insert into AirQualityLevel 
select 1 as levelNumber, 
‘ModerateAirQuality’ as levelName, 
a1.timestamp as timestamp, 
a1.location as location, 
a1.pm2_5 as pm2_5, 
a1.pm10 as pm10, 
a1.o3 as o3, 
a1.no2 as no2, 
a1.so2 as so2, 
a1.co as co 
from pattern [(every a1 = AirMeasurement(((a1.pm2_5 >= 15.5 and 
a1.pm2_5 <= 40.4) or (a1.pm10 >= 55 and a1.pm10 <= 154) or (a1.
so2 >= 0.035 and a1.so2 <= 0.144) or (a1.co >= 4.5 and a1.co <= 
9.4))))]

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
187
greater than 0. In other words, the level is expected to be moderate, unhealthy for 
sensitive groups, unhealthy, very unhealthy or hazardous.
Event Patterns Verification
The authors have already developed MEdit4CEP (Boubeta-Puig et al., 2015a), a 
model-driven solution for real-time decision making in SOA 2.0. Its main aim is to 
make domain experts’ tasks of defining both event patterns – situations of interest 
to be detected – and alerts for real time notification easier, hiding all implementa-
tion details from them. More specifically, it provides an editor for facilitating user-
friendly design of event patterns for different domains as well as for automatically 
transforming them into code. This editor is independent of both the domain where 
CEP technology is needed to be applied to, and the particular EPL required by a 
particular CEP engine. Notice that the domain-specific modeling languages required 
as the basis for event pattern editor’s creation was published in (Boubeta-Puig, Ortiz, 
& Medina-Bulo, 2015b).
In order to verify the right EPL implementation of the event patterns for air qual-
ity levels, we have asked an expert on air quality to define them using the graphical 
editor MEdit4CEP and doubled checked the correctness of the implementing code, 
compared to the generated one.
Listing 3. Esper EPL implementation for the AirQualityAlert event pattern
@Name(‘AirQualityAlert’)  
insert into AirQualityAlert 
select a1.* 
from pattern [every a1 = AirQualityLevelByLocation(levelNumber 
> 0)]
Listing 2. Esper EPL implementation for the AirQualityLevelByLocation event pattern
@Name(‘AirQualityLevelByLocation’)  
insert into AirQualityLevelByLocation 
select max(a1.levelNumber) as levelNumber, 
a1.location as location, 
current_timestamp() as timestamp 
from AirQualityLevel.win:time_batch(5 min) as a1 
group by a1.location

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
188
As an example, Figure 3 illustrates the result of modeling the ModerateAirQual-
ity event pattern with MEdit4CEP. This graphical pattern can be read as follows: 
every AirMeasurement event, which fulfills the conditions established by AQI for 
the moderate air level – conditions designed on the figure’s left side, will create a 
new complex event called AirQualityLevel containing the air quality level number 
(1), the level name (ModerateAirQuality), the timestamp, the location and all air 
pollutant values.
As a result, we can assure that the event patterns code generated by MEdit4CEP 
is the same as the one given on Listings 1-3.
Architecture Validation
The authors have adapted the implementation of their architecture that combines 
CEP, IoT and SOA 2.0 in order to detect different levels of air quality in real time. 
In particular, the following technologies and frameworks have been used: Mule 
(MuleSoft, 2016) as ESB, Java as programming language for creating the data 
simulator, ThingSpeak (ThingSpeak, 2016) as IoT platform, and Esper (EsperTech, 
2016) as CEP engine.
The system implementation has been tested during two weeks (October 8th – 22nd, 
2015). An example of the data simulated for Cádiz city can be seen in Figure 4. Due 
Figure 3. ModerateAirQuality event pattern graphically modelled using MEdit4CEP

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
189
to the fact that air pollutant values have been randomly generated by the simulator, 
it does not make sense to deeply analyze in this chapter when and how many event 
patterns have been detected by location. Nevertheless, the authors have checked 
that the implemented system is capable of minute by minute detecting the different 
air quality levels for the proposed locations in the case study – Cádiz, Hamburg, 
Tilburg and Montevideo – and it correctly notifies them to the interested users. It is 
noteworthy to mention that the system is easily scalable since new ThingSpeak chan-
nels or even physical sensor platforms can be easily integrated by means of the ESB.
CONCLUSION
An architecture system has been proposed for preventing health risks related to air 
quality by integrating IoT, CEP and SOA 2.0. Thanks to this architecture, when 
relevant situations arise from the detection of certain predefined air quality event 
patterns, real-time alerts will be sent to the interested parties.
Figure 4. ThingSpeak channel that manages simulated air quality data for Cádiz 
(Spain)

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
190
A case study illustrating this approach has also been described and implemented. 
In particular, several simulated sensors have been made available through Thing-
Speak – a real-time data infrastructure platform for the IoT – and have been used 
as event producers. The raw data generated by these producers are published into a 
Mule ESB application, which transforms this data into events and then sends them 
to Esper. This CEP engine will be able to detect complex events that specify a par-
ticular level of air quality or a change in this level in a location at a point in time. 
When an unhealthy air quality level is detected for a particular group of users, then 
a notification will be sent to the interested event consumers.
Therefore, this system can detect current air quality levels in real time (minute 
by minute), ensuring the prevention of health risks; in contrast to current tools that 
report these situations hourly or daily, or even as historical data to be downloaded 
in CSV on demand.
Furthermore, this system can be easily adapted to different domains; although 
the air quality has been chosen as application domain in this chapter; once new 
event patterns are defined, the system could be used for the prevention of a variety 
of diseases as well as for nonmedical fields, should it be necessary. The integra-
tion of ThingSpeak and Esper, making use of Mule ESB, allows the CEP engine to 
process real events shared per day by thousands of individuals, organizations and 
companies all over the world.
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Concerning the future work, the implemented system will be completed with the 
integration of other event producers and event consumers. These producers and 
consumers will be easily integrated into the system thanks to the ESB, which helps 
to increase the flexibility of heterogeneous environments.
A physical sensor platform is necessary as event producer to manage real sensing 
data, instead of simulated. The authors are currently working with the Gases Sen-
sor Board for Waspmote (Libelium, 2016), which is Libelium’s advanced mote for 
wireless sensor networks. This board enables technical users to implement pollution 
and air quality systems with high requirements in terms of high accuracy, reliability 
and measurement range since the sensors come accurate calibrated from factory.
Regarding event consumers, we are working on two main future lines:
•	
Since citizens play an important role in this health scenario, the authors have 
planned the development of a specific mobile application that can be installed 
on their smart phones in an easy and intuitive way. Therefore, they will be 
immediately notified when an air quality level undesirable for their health is 

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
191
detected. When installing the application, or later, they will be able to register 
themselves on the application to receive notifications of air quality levels un-
healthy for them. Users not registered on the system will only receive general 
notifications based on which air quality levels, the WHO and other health 
organizations, such as US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), consider 
dangerous for an adult without relevant diseases, regarding heart and respira-
tory systems. If the users also provided personal information (age, cardio-
respiratory diseases, allergies, etc.) then the notifications will be customized 
for their particular risk group.
Obviously, regardless of notifications, citizens will be able to access to current 
information about air quality levels at any time. Besides, notifications are expected 
to be received in a graphical and user-friendly way, for example, visualizing the 
information on customized Google maps. We also expect to make the air quality 
levels and alerts available through a website.
•	
Additionally, actuators could be integrated into the system as their use will be 
clearly a benefit because some mechanical actions would be taken when de-
tecting specific complex event pattern. For instance, turning on a humidifier 
if the humidity has been considerably reduced in a particular home.
Making this prototype capable of anticipating critical health situations before 
they appear is another research direction. That way, the system will not work in a 
reactive way but a proactive one, taking precautions to protect citizens in advance.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work has been partially funded by the Spanish Ministry of Science and Inno-
vation (projects TIN2014-53986-REDT and TIN2015-65845-C3-3-R) and by the 
University of Cádiz (PR2016-032).
REFERENCES
ALERT. (2016). Active support and reaL-time coordination based on Event pRo-
cessing in FLOSS development. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://www.
alert-project.eu/

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
192
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2010). The Internet of Things: A survey. Com-
puter Networks, 54(15), 2787–2805. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010
Bo, D., Kun, D., & Xiaoyi, Z. (2008). A High Performance Enterprise Service Bus 
Platform for Complex Event Processing. In Seventh International Conference on 
Grid and Cooperative Computing (GCC) (pp. 577–582). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/
GCC.2008.66
Boubeta-Puig, J., Medina-Bulo, I., Ortiz, G., & Fuentes-Landi, G. (2012). Complex 
event processing applied to early maritime threat detection. In Proceedings of the 
2nd International Workshop on Adaptive Services for the Future Internet and 6th 
International Workshop on Web APIs and Service Mashups (pp. 1–4). Bertinoro, 
Italy: ACM. doi:10.1145/2377836.2377838
Boubeta-Puig, J., Ortiz, G., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2014a). A Model-driven Approach 
for Facilitating User-friendly Design of Complex Event Patterns. Expert Systems 
with Applications, 41(2), 445–456. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2013.07.070
Boubeta-Puig, J., Ortiz, G., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2014b). Approaching the Internet 
of Things through Integrating SOA and Complex Event Processing. In Z. Sun & J. 
Yearwood (Eds.), Handbook of Research on Demand-Driven Web Services: Theory, 
Technologies, and Applications (pp. 304–323). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-
4666-5884-4.ch014
Boubeta-Puig, J., Ortiz, G., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2015a). MEdit4CEP: A model-driven 
solution for real-time decision making in SOA 2.0. Knowledge-Based Systems, 89, 
97–112. doi:10.1016/j.knosys.2015.06.021
Boubeta-Puig, J., Ortiz, G., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2015b). ModeL4CEP: Graphical 
domain-specific modeling languages for CEP domains and event patterns. Expert 
Systems with Applications, 42(21), 8095–8110. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2015.06.045
Bruns, R., & Dunkel, J. (2013). Towards Pattern-based Architectures for Event 
Processing Systems. Software, Practice & Experience. doi:10.1002/spe.2204
Chandy, K. M., & Schulte, W. R. (2010). Event Processing: Designing IT Systems 
for Agile Companies. McGraw-Hill.
CITEAIR. (2016). Air Quality Now in Europe. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from 
http://airqualitynow.eu/
CITEAIR - Europe. (2016). Air Quality in Europe. Retrieved January 30, 2016, 
from http://www.airqualitynow.eu/about_indices_definition.php

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
193
COMPAS. (2011). Compliance-driven Models, Languages, and Architectures for 
Services. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/ssai/docs/
finalreport-compas.pdf
Comunidad de Madrid. (2016). Calidad del aire. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from 
http://www.mambiente.munimadrid.es/opencms/opencms/calaire
CPCB - India. (2014). National air quality index (Control of Urban Pollution Se-
ries No. 82). New Delhi, India: Government of India. Retrieved from http://www.
indiaenvironmentportal.org.in/files/file/Air%20Quality%20Index.pdf
Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs - UK. (2016a). Daily Air Qual-
ity Index. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/air-pollution/
daqi?view=more-info&pollutant=pm10#pollutant
Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs - UK. (2016b). UK-AIR, air quality 
information resource. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/
Dunkel, J., Fernández, A., Ortiz, R., & Ossowski, S. (2011). Event-driven Archi-
tecture for Decision Support in Traffic Management Systems. Expert Systems with 
Applications, 38(6), 6530–6539. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2010.11.087
EPA - US. (2016a). Air Quality Index (AQI) Basics. Retrieved January 30, 2016, 
from http://www.airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=aqibasics.aqi
EPA - US. (2016b). EnviroFlash. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://www.
enviroflash.info/
EsperTech. (2016). Esper - Complex Event Processing. Retrieved January 30, 2016, 
from http://www.espertech.com/esper/
Etzion, O., & Niblett, P. (2011). Event Processing in Action. Stamford, CT: Manning.
Event Processing Technical Society. (2011). Event Processing Glossary - Version 
2.0. Retrieved January 15, 2016, from http://www.complexevents.com/wp-content/
uploads/2011/08/EPTS_Event_Processing_Glossary_v2.pdf
Faison, T. (2006). Event-Based Programming: Taking Events to the Limit (1st ed.). 
New York: Apress.
Gad, R., Boubeta-Puig, J., Kappes, M., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2012). Hierarchical Events 
for Efficient Distributed Network Analysis and Surveillance. In Proceedings of the 
2nd International Workshop on Adaptive Services for the Future Internet and 6th 
International Workshop on Web APIs and Service Mashups (pp. 5–11). Bertinoro, 
Italy: ACM. doi:10.1145/2377836.2377839

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
194
Gad, R., Kappes, M., Boubeta-Puig, J., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2013). Employing the 
CEP Paradigm for Network Analysis and Surveillance. In Proceedings of The Ninth 
Advanced International Conference on Telecommunications (pp. 204–210). Rome, 
Italy: IARIA. Retrieved from http://www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&
articleid=aict_2013_9_30_10178
Government of Canada. (2016a). Air Quality Health Index. Retrieved January 15, 
2016, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/cas-aqhi/default.asp?Lang=En&n=065BE995-1
Government of Canada. (2016b). National Map - Air - Environment Cana-
da. Retrieved January 20, 2016, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/cas-aqhi/default.
asp?lang=En&n=450C1129-1
He, M., Zheng, Z., Xue, G., & Du, X. (2008). Event Driven RFID Based Exhaust 
Gas Detection Services Oriented System Research. In 4th International Conference 
on Wireless Communications, Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM) (pp. 
1–4). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/WiCom.2008.698
Juric, M. B. (2010). WSDL and BPEL extensions for Event Driven Architec-
ture. Information and Software Technology, 52(10), 1023–1043. doi:10.1016/j.
infsof.2010.04.005
Levina, O., & Stantchev, V. (2009). Realizing Event-Driven SOA. In Fourth Inter-
national Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services (ICIW) (pp. 
37–42). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/ICIW.2009.14
Libelium. (2016). Gases Board Technical Guide. Retrieved January 18, 2016, from 
http://www.libelium.com/development/waspmote/documentation/gases-board-
technical-guide/
Luckham, D. (2002). The Power of Events: An Introduction to Complex Event Pro-
cessing in Distributed Enterprise Systems. Addison-Wesley.
Luckham, D. (2012). Event Processing for Business: Organizing the Real-Time 
Enterprise. Wiley. doi:10.1002/9781119198697
Mühl, G., Fiege, L., & Pietzuch, P. (2006). Distributed Event-Based Systems. Berlin: 
Springer.
MuleSoft. (2016). Mule ESB. Retrieved January 20, 2016, from http://www.mule-
soft.org/
Papazoglou, M. (2012). Web Services and SOA: Principles and Technology. Essex, 
UK: Pearson Education.

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
195
Rademakers, T., & Dirksen, J. (2009). Open-Source ESBs in Action. Greenwich, 
CT: Manning. Retrieved from http://www.manning.com/rademakers/
Ravier, D. (2010). A Service Oriented Framework Architecture for Intelligent Video 
Surveillance Systems. In Fifth International Conference on Digital Telecommunica-
tions (ICDT) (pp. 123–127). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/ICDT.2010.30
Ried, S. (2014). The Forrester Wave: Hybrid 2 Integration, Q1 2014. Forrester 
Research.
Romero, D., Hermosillo, G., Taherkordi, A., Nzekwa, R., Rouvoy, R., & Eliassen, 
F. (2011). The DigiHome Service-Oriented Platform. Software, Practice & Experi-
ence, 43(10), 1205–1218. doi:10.1002/spe.1125
Sottara, D., Manservisi, A., Mello, P., Colombini, G., & Luccarini, L. (2009). A 
CEP-based SOA for the management of WasteWater Treatment Plants. In IEEE 
Workshop on Environmental, Energy, and Structural Monitoring Systems (EESMS) 
(pp. 58–65). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/EESMS.2009.5341314
Taylor, H., Yochem, Y., Phillips, L., & Martinez, F. (2008). Event-driven architec-
ture: how SOA enables the real-time enterprise. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
ThingSpeak. (2016). The open data platform for the Internet of Things. Retrieved 
January 18, 2016, from https://www.thingspeak.com/
Travel China Guide - China. (2016). Air Pollution in China, Air Quality Index. 
Retrieved January 25, 2016, from http://www.travelchinaguide.com/climate/air-
pollution.htm
Vidackovic, K., & Weisbecker, A. (2011). A Methodology for Dynamic Service 
Compositions Based on an Event-Driven Approach. In 2011 Annual SRII Global 
Conference (pp. 484–494). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/SRII.2011.56
WHO. (2013). Review of evidence on health aspects of air pollution – REVIHAAP Proj-
ect. Retrieved from http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/182432/
e96762-final.pdf
WHO. (2016). World Health Organization. Retrieved January 28, 2016, from http://
www.who.int/en/
Wieland, M., Martin, D., Kopp, O., & Leymann, F. (2009). SOEDA: A Method for 
Specification and Implementation of Applications on a Service-Oriented Event-
Driven Architecture. In W. Abramowicz (Ed.), Business Information Systems (pp. 
193–204). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-01190-0_17

Preventing Health Risks Caused by Unhealthy Air Quality Using a CEP-Based SOA 2.0
196
Zang, C., Fan, Y., & Liu, R. (2008). Architecture, Implementation and Application 
of Complex Event Processing in Enterprise Information Systems Based on RFID. 
Information Systems Frontiers, 10(5), 543–553. doi:10.1007/s10796-008-9109-0
Zmuda, D., Psiuk, M., & Zielinski, K. (2010). Dynamic Monitoring Framework 
for the SOA Execution Environment. Procedia Computer Science, 1(1), 125–133. 
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.015
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Air Quality Index: A tool for reporting air quality, indicating how polluted 
or clean the air in a particular zone is and what related health effects might be a 
concern for the citizen.
Complex Event: An event that contains more semantic meaning, by summariz-
ing a set of other events.
Complex Event Processing: A cutting-edge technology that allows for the 
analysis and correlation of large volumes of data with the aim of detecting complex 
and meaningful events and of inferring valuable knowledge for end users.
Enterprise Service Bus: A software architecture model used to facilitate inter-
action and communication between service-oriented applications.
Event: Anything that happens or could happen.
Event-Driven Architecture: A software architecture type that reacts to multiple 
events under several conditions.
Event Pattern: A template that defines the conditions for detecting situations 
of interest in real time.
Event Processing Language: A language type for defining event patterns.
Service-Oriented Architecture: A software architecture type, based on services.
Web Service: A modular application that can be invoked through the Internet 
following some established standards.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch007
Chapter 7
197 
The Role of Time 
in Health IoT
ABSTRACT
As the biological processes in the body change constantly, comparable measurements 
should be taken simultaneously in time and place. In practice, this is hard to achieve. 
Synchronicity is required to certify medical accuracy for a new device by reference 
to a certified one. In a typical health IoT, synchronicity cannot be enforced proce-
durally and timing needs to be part of the network architecture. Popular examples 
are in blood pressure measurement. Putting the blood flow in a known pinch-off 
situation performs synchronization. But this principle cannot be extended to other 
non-invasive measurements. Hence the chapter proposes to synchronize on basis 
of the heart rate extracted from the blood flow at arbitrary positions on the body. 
This models the blood flow in the body and relates all to the rhythm of the heart. 
It brings existing phenomena into a single, multi-level model that allows wireless 
networked wearables into a single health-monitoring scheme.
INTRODUCTION
The physical effect of sound propagation is rumoured to have decided the Olym-
pic gold medal for 500 metres speed skating in Sochi 2014. The start of the race 
is sounded by a shot as part of a ceremony that brings the racers to attention. The 
competition has become very challenging over the past decades. Nowadays differ-
Lambert Spaanenburg
Comoray AB, Sweden

The Role of Time in Health IoT
198
ences of milliseconds determine to have gold or nothing. Smeets and Mulder made 
such a race, but it was shown afterwards that the real difference, being everything 
else equal, was made by the starting position on the arena. The person closer to 
the centre hears the shot slightly sooner. Such an advantage can easily decide the 
championship when the run itself is short also.
The phenomenon is not rare. In the eighties, the on-going miniaturization has 
cast attention to the different scaling of the clock and the logic signals. Clocks are 
passed over different paths on the distribution network and will therefore delayed 
differently. Then time can be different where after following different paths the 
same clock is logically exerted. The remedy has been to divide the chip area into 
iso-chronic areas, parts where the differences in time definition is still negligibly 
small. Communication between such parts will be by more elaborate, clock-less 
mechanisms. This is called globally asynchronous, locally synchronous or GALS 
communication (Spaanenburg, 1987).
These are only two of the many situations where two observations have problems 
to be synchronized. A new branch of the tree is mHealth. The heart takes the role 
of the atomic clock for the human body. It pumps the blood around to distribute 
the clock event to the organs. The heart rate is not a known and constant value but 
can be reasonably determined invasively; however the determination of the exact 
timing will be harder to achieve.
In this chapter the role of timing in the overall discussion on blood flow analysis 
is looked at. Then we step up the involvement of timing within the extraction of 
blood pressure (BP). From there the attention is broadened to networked collections 
of health devices. In the end we extend the issues to system reliability, the main 
requirement to any product in the health sector.
BLOOD FLOW ANALYSIS
Deep down, the heart drives the blood circulation system. However, its main pipe has 
a flexible wall and hence behaves non-linearly in response to the applied pressure. 
The transients in the heartbeat will gradually be smoothed while passing through 
the artery. Everywhere in the blood circulation system, the heartbeat can be found 
in a related but gradually different way. Ultimo, some non-invasive measurements 
at spread-out locations can be used to model an invasive measurement at the heart.
Circulation Diagnosis
Electrocardiogram (ECG) measurements need proper placement of a number of 
probes. If accurately executed, the signal can be detailed enough allowing more 

The Role of Time in Health IoT
199
than 250 heart diseases to be detected by the trained nurse. The operation is costly 
and limited in use to special situations. For the early detection of heart failure, the 
procedure needs to be cheap and casual.
The heart signal is an intricate set of positive and negative pulses with interme-
diate planes: the PQRST complex (Figure 1a). It shows the ventricular activity and 
can be measured as electrical signals. As every peak and every plane has a func-
tional meaning, any aberration has consequences. Though such deviations may be 
meaningful, they are not appearing often, if ever. Usually a Holter device needs to 
be carried for one or more days to catch a glimpse of the heart failure. With heart 
failure being a major cause of sudden death, a cheap and casual detection without 
special installations is required.
A healthy body is one in which the heart has no problems to bring blood to all 
parts of the body. Classical medicine targets the organs, but the body is much more. 
For instance, an early sign of diabetes is lack of blood flow in the toes. So general 
health needs to capture both the quality of the heart, usually read from ECG analy-
sis, as well as the service ability of the blood circulation system, potentially found 
from a distributed Photoplethysmography (PPG) application.
Flow Quantification
Blood flows through the arteries under the periodically changing pressure as ap-
plied by the heart. The wall of the artery is flexible. It opens up when the pressure 
is building up and narrows again afterwards. Hence the local blood volume varies 
in symphony with the heart pulse. This changing blood volume becomes visible in 
Figure 1. The (a) PQRST vs. (b) PPG relationship
Source: Al-Qazzaz, 2014.

The Role of Time in Health IoT
200
the reflected light that is penetrating the skin. The intensity of the reflected light is 
called the Photoplethysmographic or PPG signal (Figure 1b).
Both PQRST and PPG source from the same heart process. They are likely to 
have many commonalities but there is a lot of variance in the details. The major dif-
ference is that the PPG signal is a derivate (and therefore slightly delayed) but can 
be casually and non-invasively extracted. Therefore the usual heart rate monitoring 
wearables work from the PPG signal.
The vision-based PPG extraction is sampled at a low rate. The sampling error 
is already 5% if the cardiac cycle takes 20 frames. If the cardiac cycle is constant, 
the sampling error is drastically improved by having two or more sensors close to 
one another as has been done in the i-watch. By averaging over many cycles, the 
accuracy will improve further if sampling gives an evenly distributed error. Un-
fortunately longer observation series bring also handling, temperature and motion 
related noise. But the main issue is that the cardiac cycle is not constant. Hence heart 
rate is a momentary value that can only be extracted from small shots (Figure 2).
The most flexible is therefore the Short-Shot Heart Rate Monitor (SSHRM). It 
measures a series of heart rate values from short shots seen from sliding windows. 
This allows to see the dynamics of the body. In the last section, this will also be 
used in creating dynamic synchronization between health devices.
Figure 2. The drift of a ‘stable’ heart rate (AMS watch)

The Role of Time in Health IoT
201
Synchronization in Space
The alternative to measuring the signal propagation between two known positions 
is to measure the signal on a single position at two known times. Then the issue is 
to define the unit of time. The sensor defines the sampling period, which will be 
related to frame rate in case of a vision sensor. However this unit of timing is not 
directly related to the heart rate, the fundamental timing notion inside the body. 
Therefore the timing definition of the heart rate in terms of frame rate is important.
Most of the heart rate monitors (HRM) determine the signal periodicity by 
measuring the peak-to-peak distances in the time domain (Watson, 2015). As the 
slightly fluctuating process (Heart Rate Variance or HRV) is coarsely sampled, 
the trick is to take a larger period and average the period values. Similarly, power 
spectrum analysis in the frequency domain shows the heart rate by the main energy 
peak. Such methods do not provide any indication of the exact location. This seems 
to be another occurrence of the Heisenberg uncertainty principle. Apparently our 
investigation has to be done in the time domain, not the frequency domain.
The interest in heart monitoring is in finding potential heart failure. But fitness 
comes on a good 2nd place. Fitness criteria like the “Cooper test” are based on 
oxygen saturation in combination to heart rate (Cooper, 1969). This is perfectly ok 
for becoming the sporty person, but regularly it shows that this is still no guaran-
tee for a sound body. The long-term goal has remained therefore the non-invasive 
measurement on the heart itself. At the core of this problem is the isolation of the 
‘clock’: the significant effect tightly related to ECG and PPG that times all other 
effects in the body.
In a simplistic 1st order approximation, the ideal PPG signal controlling the blood 
flow can be modelled as a step-wise input to a transmission line system. However 
the signal is dispersed on monitoring and the actual moment of the step-wave on 
the input becomes less transparent. This leaves the question how to reconstruct it. In 
(Klofutar, 1993) it was shown that a non-linear model is required to handle such an 
nth-order differential equation. A very structured way to perform non-linear filtering 
is performed by a classic tapped-delay feed-forward neural network with specific 
training for the wrist or the fingertip (Figure 3).
Both the PQRST complex and the PPG signal have a significant peak that can be 
used to identify the separate cardiac cycles (Kuntamalla, 2014). The R-to-R distance 
is commonly used in the PQRST complex, while the distance between the systolic 
peaks is used in the PPG signal. These peaks are related but do not come at the same 
moment. The relation is important, as parameters such as blood pressure can only be 
computed from the defined start of the cardiac cycle. When the signal dispersion 
makes the individual peaks hard to see, such synchronization peaks require addi-
tional attention as small errors lead to large errors in the blood pressure calculation.

The Role of Time in Health IoT
202
BLOOD PRESSURE
The system is based on the collaboration of an occasional ECG device and a regu-
lar BP monitor. Both devices synchronize on the R-peak of the heart signal. The 
heart signal is cyclic where the overall blood circulation takes typically 6-8 heart 
cycli. A second level of synchronization between ECG device and BP monitor is 
to identify how many cycli are passed between the respective measurements using 
these devices. A third level involves the matching between particular features in the 
current ECG signal and past features in the PPG analysis.
Blood Pressure Measurement
Is the light in the refrigerator really off? While the door is open, you can still see the 
light in there. When you are closing the door, the light is visible to the last. So, how 
can you know? A window would help, but it is usually not part of such a product. 
Let’s take a different example.
The situation seems easier with single lane road reconstruction. Each time the 
traffic can flow in one direction, while the cars at the other side are waiting their 
turn. Changing the direction starts with stopping both directions till the site is 
empty and then the other side can flow. If the reconstruction site is small, visual 
Figure 3. Filtering a diffused PPG signal

The Role of Time in Health IoT
203
monitoring is sufficient to determine whether it has been totally emptied. If it is 
large or when obstacles block the view, information has to be collected from both 
sides to determine:
1. 	
If both sides are currently closed, and
2. 	
If all (or the last one) has reached the other side. 
Practice gives a value for the expected time to wait for clearing the traffic.
Blood pressure measurement goes along the same ways. The principle starts by 
applying a cuff on the upper-arm and pressurize it till the blood flow stops. Whether 
the blood flow stops can be heard on the lower-arm. Then the cuff is slowly deflated 
till the blood can be heard again. The blood pressure can be found from the applied 
cuff pressure. The alternative uses slight pressure differences applied through the 
cuff, and measuring the time delay after these nuances become noticeable at the 
lower-arm. All such methods cannot be used at arbitrary body locations nor in a 
casual manner. They require appreciable skill to be used correctly.
Basic Calculation
The interpretation of a PPG signal starts from the determination of top and bot-
tom. The signal fluctuates but the meaning of top and bottom are dependent of the 
measurement method. The systolic region is the one with the steepest flank. For 
the basic signal, the start is a well-defined extreme and the time elapse to cross the 
distance from top to bottom (or vice versa) relates directly to the systolic blood 
pressure. Clearly, a less-defined beginning will result immediately to an appreciably 
large measurement error (Figure 4).
The diastolic region is the second half of the cardiac cycle and starts from the 
end of the systolic one. As it is longer, the definition of the beginning and the end 
is less important. Somewhat in the middle one finds the “dicrotic notch”. It is found 
that the distance between the dicrotic notch and the onset of the systolic region is 
directly related to the diastolic blood pressure. Unfortunately, the location of the 
notch is one of the first signal details that appear in the dispersion.
The further the signal comes in the transmission line, the more the signal becomes 
susceptible to a number of environmental noise source. Doing the operations on PPG 
data in the time domain allows qualification of the signal shapes. Such shapes are 
characteristic for the differences measured at different locations. This helps to extract 
the position models as well as to disqualify cycle for specific analysis purposes.

The Role of Time in Health IoT
204
Compensation for Dispersion
Blood pressure refers to the force exerted by circulating blood on the walls of blood 
vessels and constitutes one of the principal vital signs. The systolic pressure is the 
peak pressure in the arteries, which occurs near the beginning of the cardiac cycle. 
The diastolic pressure is the lowest pressure, which is at the resting phase of the 
cardiac cycle. The average pressure throughout the cardiac cycle is reported as 
the mean arterial pressure. The pulse pressure reflects the difference between the 
maximum and minimum pressures measured.
The product supports the identification of potential early heart failure in two 
ways. Firstly, the BP monitor has learned which of the PPG characteristics can be 
identified with ECG abnormalities. Vice versa, the ECG device has learned which 
of the PPG characteristics can be identified with incomplete circulation phenomena. 
Both devices can be trained to identify potential issues but will only in combination 
become medically reliable. Thus the commercial casual monitor will already be 
indicative and support a later professional application.
Figure 4. Blood pressure parameters on the basic PPG signal
Source: Yoon, 2009.

The Role of Time in Health IoT
205
HEALTH THINGS
The smart phone being a computer with sensors indicates that in principle a single 
object can handle all health parameter extraction. In practice, it is hard to compro-
mise the requirements for the various extraction methods. A thimble can be used to 
draw a drop of blood for glucose measurement; a set-up lens can support infrared 
vision. This has drawn attention to medical support hardware that can be worn on 
(or inserted into) the body and performs as much as possible of the required func-
tionality. A typical insulin unit measures glucose and delivers insulin (vanDijk, 
2014). Largely for safety reasons, an external phone reads the measured values and 
eventually writes commands for insulin control.
In some way, the wearable/phone interaction is the smallest imaginable network. 
Such two parts are necessary but not necessarily sufficient. Sensors can be heav-
ily specialized; the placement can be at different body locations; the body status 
changes continuously. For all such reasons, there are many network arrangement 
in time and place. A number of significant network arrangements will be discussed 
in the following.
Single Device, Distinct Times
Continuous heart observation is crucial for the prediction of heart failure. However, 
the lack of direct access makes products such as a Holter device the best alterna-
tive. It has been shown that focussed light can reach the arteries and measure the 
geometry (Borgos, 2012). Parameters like blood pressure can then be quantified 
from the continuous changes in artery geometry.
The basic measurement principle is that all external observations can be referenced 
to a single ‘gold pot’, the medically verifiable measurement at a medically monitored 
location. We call this ‘the lab’ and refer to those data as ‘the lab values’. This builds 
a relation between each measurement and its reference, called the ‘position model’.
Where the measurements on various positions have a position model, their 
relation to the single ‘gold pot’ can be drawn in a star model (Figure 5 right). In 
principle an arbitrary number of stars can be modelled. By star/ring conversion, 
the individual position models can be turned into an overall ‘body model’ (Figure 5 
left). This relates the measurements on various positions according to the physical 
blood flow. More modelled positions brings more accuracy. But also the converse is 
true: when sufficient positions are modelled, an occasional missing or faulty value 
can easily be bridged.

The Role of Time in Health IoT
206
Multiple Device, Single Time
It is important for the verification of a new measurement method that it is not only 
compared with a lab value but also that both measurements happen at the same time 
and at the same location. This is hard to accomplish. It is much easier to collect a 
series of data simultaneously, followed by correlation of the series to find a suitable 
mapping in time.
Multiple devices will also appear in fashion or in plaster-based belts in an inte-
grated way (Spaanenburg, 2016). There are plasters with unique sensors and glued 
wires to give the overall functionality, especially in the fitness market. There are 
similar trends in the fashion market, but overall more experimental. Anouk Wip-
precht is the rising star in couture (Cass, 2016). The offering in the catalogue arena 
is steadily increasing (Wearable Technologies, 2015).
The main issue with this arrangement is to guarantee the synchronicity. The 
measurements must be taken at the same time, even though it will not be at the same 
location. Additional steps may be required to bring the results out. This comes close 
to the requirements of the BioPhone (Hernandez, 2015).
Figure 5. Star and ring modeling configurations

The Role of Time in Health IoT
207
Redundant Devices, Some Time
The various measurement techniques have all their individual shortcomings. When 
a doctor applies a device, he should know about the limitations or at least he should 
doubt the result. The famous Nobel laureate Heike Kamerlingh Onnes preached 
“From data to knowledge” (a free translation from the Dutch “Door meten tot weten”). 
The attached warning is of course that incomplete data will easily lead to nonsense.
Heart rate monitoring seems transparent. However, with age more and more 
people have fibrillation (Carroll, 2001). It is a comparatively small signal at har-
monics of the heart frequency.
In August 2015, I went for a check-up in the hospital. In a hurry the nurse applied the 
usual sphygmomanometer and I almost died of pain. The meter shows a ridiculous 
high value. I complained in telling that the reading will be wrong, but she wrote the 
numbers down and rushed off. During the consult, the heart surgeon said that the 
sphygmomanometer is old and occasionally fails. As a comfort, he said, the EKG 
looks ok and that is all that matters!!
Apparently data collection outside the realm of the medical profession is a point 
of concern.
Redundancy helps to establish a correct value, but multiple sources for data do 
not necessarily create for redundancy. In a typical IT infrastructure for health ser-
vices, data are keyed in without taking the data origin into account. Consequently 
there is no guarantee on the data quality in the electronic health dossier when access 
by arbitrary persons with arbitrary devices is permitted. Where such big databases 
are in vogue for performing statistical operations to extract new and unknown rela-
tions, misleading conclusions will be produced. The only reasonable work-around 
is shown in the daily practice of astronomy: every meaningful discovery needs to 
be confirmed independently. One may see this as a kind of procedural redundancy.
TOLERANCE
Health can be endangered when one or more sensors are not functioning correctly. 
Such erroneous behaviour should be detected and consequently either by-passed or 
compensated. Preferably the system continues to provide meaningful information 
and creates the time for a timely repair. Ultimately, the system should clearly indicate 
the problem and refuse to give false information. It would rather die!
Health is a clear application of system reliability (Spaanenburg, 2010). The 
most successful means to reliability is hardware redundancy. The idea is that errors 

The Role of Time in Health IoT
208
come individually and majority voting will easily decide on the truth. Unfortunately, 
practice is hard and fabrication sensitivities break the theoretical effectiveness. The 
cases where hardware multiplicity is applied to achieve majority voting are usually 
where accidents are costly. Health should be 100% fault-tolerant because losing 
health is costly. In the following we look at the different levels where redundancy 
can be applied to raise the reliability level.
Data Reliability
The common practice in data reliability is by averaging. Small variations will easily 
peter out but outliers have a large influence. A number of methods can be used to 
eliminate the influence of outliers, largely based on some degree of clustering. In 
some heart monitor devices, it is assumed that the rate will change only slowly in 
static situations. This can be used to filter large variations away.
The alternative is to cluster the cardiac cycle durations. This keeps heart rate 
variance still in view. Further the signal shapes are categorized, allowing to qualify 
the results in terms of model adherence. The qualification indicates which cycles 
are apt for blood pressure calculation taking the positional model into account. 
Hence the derived results, such as blood pressure and oxygen saturation, can be 
graded for reliability.
The connected benefit of the cycle-based qualification is that it allows taking 
some dynamics of the heart rate into account eventually. Within a typical observa-
tion period, we find a heart rate change from 60 to 90 beats per minute. Averaging 
the values over the entire period is hardly meaningful and will definitely lead to 
errors in the blood pressure calculation. The data are much more reliable when 
clustered over a quasi-static interval. This stresses again for the use of a Short-Shot 
Heart Rate Monitor.
Tic2Go
Pulse Wave Transfer can be implemented on a brace, such that the stimulation and 
the sensing parts are positioned at a known difference. This trick can hardly be ex-
tended without turning the brace into a rigid body harness. The alternative is to have 
multiple devices that measure the wireless signal transport distance automatically, 
such that multiple control pulses can be transmitted to act at the different location at 
the same moment. This brings the collection of position models into a single body 
model, all around the single event called the heartbeat.
In software, a popular pattern called the Event-Driven Architecture (EDA) 
promotes the production, detection, consumption of, and reaction to events. This 
can be defined as “a significant change in state” (Mani, 2006). For example, when 

The Role of Time in Health IoT
209
a person waits at the bus stop, his status changes to passenger when getting on the 
bus. The public transport system may sense this state change as an event whose oc-
currence can be made known to the accounting part within the architecture. From a 
formal perspective, the simple act of swiping the ID-card for access is a (typically 
asynchronous) message called the event notification, and not the event itself, which 
is the state change that triggered the message emission. Events do not travel, they 
just occur.
This software pattern may be applied for the implementation of networks compris-
ing of loosely coupled nodal elements. The overall event-driven system is constructed 
from event producers (sources or agents), event consumers (sinks or acceptor) and 
event channels. Producers will detect, identify and pass specific features, such as the 
start of a cardiac cycle by the onset of the systolic region. Such events are detected 
without any awareness of the presence, existence or nature of a consumer. It does 
not even know whether the event will be processed or continued.
A consumer gets into action when receiving an event to produce a reaction 
either in full or in (partial) preparation (for instance by filtering or transformation) 
for another node to complete the action. Event channels are the mechanisms to 
move events from producers to consumers. The network topology, the distribution 
mechanism and eventual buffering is only known to the event channel. There is a 
wide variety of physical implementations for event channels. A growing amount 
is based on the Internet. In the consumer sector it is usually shaped as Internet of 
Things (IoT), in the industrial sector the need for real-time performance is added 
to achieve Industrial Internet.
The Time-Triggered Architecture (TTA) is a computer system that executes one 
or more sets of tasks according to a pre-determined task schedule (Pont, 2001). The 
TTA can be seen as a special case of the EDA. A typical Time-Triggered system is 
based on a single interrupt, which in our case is the start of the systolic region. In 
the body model, this interrupt drives the task scheduler and so releases the system 
tasks at predetermined points in time. The popularity of the Time-Triggered system is 
that the real-time software can easily be demonstrated to be correct: a major benefit 
for software in the health sector.
The Body Is the Network
The human body is largely a closed system. When substances leak in an unexpected 
manner, this gives reason to assume that something is going wrong. That is espe-
cially true for the blood circulation. Hence the accuracy of the ring model can be 
enhanced by demanding that the ring is in fact an infinite string.

The Role of Time in Health IoT
210
The model is synchronized into cardiac cycles. The full blood circulation needs 
to be an integer times of cardiac cycles, or, again, there will be a health issue (Camp-
bell, 1994). The closure condition needs the posture of the person into account as 
it influences blood pressure. Such effects give a further complication of the body 
model. Current technology is largely restricted to static measurements, a situation 
whereby the person is fully at rest.
CONCLUSION
The design and development of mHealth device can be easily complicated when not 
taking their role as part of a collective health monitoring system. The need to fit in 
the data architecture of the Health Internet of Things poses demands that can best 
be accommodated when considered early on in the algorithm selection. Particularly 
we show this in explanations for the Short-Shot Heart Rate Monitor.
Such considerations come from the recognition that the cardiac cycle performs 
the role of process synchronization, similar to the clock in a microelectronic circuit. 
As the heart synchronizes the body, all other phenomena can be related to this. A 
typical example is the ‘condition monitor’ that evaluates the change of the blood 
pressure in response to change in the heart rate.
In all, we discuss here a physically-inspired behavioral model. It does not aim 
to be medically correct in the physical details, but only to give medically correct 
results within the limitations of the current model. Therefore it reports when the 
analysis finds data that are not in agreement with the model assumptions. As such, 
it is fit for the consumer market while providing medically correct results but does 
not endeavor to replace the physician.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was performed while being a ‘guest’ in the E-building of Lund Univer-
sity in Lund (Sweden). Reported experiments have been performed by AMS on 
their experimental e-watch at their Graz establishment. Further we acknowledge 
the collaboration and discussion with VitalinQ at Groningen (The Netherlands) 
and Foundation of Collaborating Health Centre at Amsterdam (The Netherlands).

The Role of Time in Health IoT
211
REFERENCES
Al-Qazzaz, N. K., & Abdulazez, I. F. (2014). Simulation recording of an ECG, PCG, 
and PPG for features extractions. Al-Khwarizmi Engineering Journal, 10(4), 81–91.
Borgos, J. A., Borgos, T. A., & Pongratz, T. (2012). Optical power modulation vital 
sign detection method and measurement device. Patent US 8111953 B2.
Campbell, R. L., & Langston, W. G. (1995). A comparison of cardiac rate-pressure 
product and pressure rate quotient in health and medically compromised patients. 
Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, and Oral Pathology, 80(2), 145–152. doi:10.1016/
S1079-2104(05)80193-3 PMID:7552876
Carroll, K., & Majeed, A. (2001). Comorbidity associated with atrial fibrillation: A 
general practice-based study. The British Journal of General Practice, 51, 884–891. 
PMID:11761201
Cass, S. (2016). Profile: Anouk Wipprecht’s Dynamic Dresses. IEEE Spectrum, 
53(2), 19–20. doi:10.1109/MSPEC.2016.7419790
Cooper, K. H. (1969). Aerobics. Bantam Books.
Hernandez, J., McDuff, D. J., & Picard, R. W. (2015). BioPhone: Physiology Moni-
toring from Peripheral Smartphone Motions.Proceedings 37th Int. IEEE Engineering 
in Medicine and Biology Society Conference. doi:10.1109/EMBC.2015.7320048
Klofutar, A., Hoefflinger, B., Neusser, S., & Spaanenburg, L. 1993. Robust QRS de-
tection with neuro-processing. In Digest 2nd Eur. Conf. on Eng. and Med. ECEM’93.
Kuntamalla, S., & Ram Gopal Reddy, L. (2014). An efficient and automatic systolic 
peak detection algorithm for photophysmographic signals. Int. Journal of Computer 
Application, 97(19), 18–23. doi:10.5120/17115-7686
Mani Chandy, K. (2006). Event-Driven Applications: Costs, Benefits and Design 
Approaches. California Institute of Technology.
Pont, M. J. (2001). Patterns for Time-Triggered Embedded Systems. Addison-Wesley 
/ ACM Press.
Rees, B. (2014). Connected Health. White Paper. Wragge & Co LLP.
Spaanenburg, L., Duin, P. B., Woudsma, R., & vanderPoel, A. A. (1987). VLSI 
ontwerpsysteem. Patent US 465 6592.

The Role of Time in Health IoT
212
Spaanenburg, L., & Jansen, W. J. (2016). Health Wearables turn to Fashion. In M. 
Khowrow-Pour (Ed.), Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology (4th 
ed.). IGI Press.
Spaanenburg, L., & Spaanenburg, H. A. E. (2010). Cloud Connectivity and Embed-
ded Sensory Systems. Boston, MA: Kluwer Press.
vanDijk, P. R. (2014). Continuous intraperitoneal insulin infusion in the treatment 
of type 1 diabetes mellitus (Ph.D. thesis). Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, Groningen, 
The Netherlands.
Watson, J. P. (2015). Digital Health – health and fitness wearables. Blog Aging 
Sciences, Part 3. WordPress.
Wearable Technologies. (2015). A Look at Smart Clothing for 2015. München, 
Germany: Newsletter.
Yoon, Y., Cho, J. H., & Yoon, G. (2009). Non-constrained blood pressure monitoring 
using ECG and PPG for personal healthcare. Journal of Medical Systems, 33(4), 
261–266. doi:10.1007/s10916-008-9186-0 PMID:19697692
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Body-Area-Network: A wireless network of wearable computing devices.
eHealth: The use of electronic processes and communication for healthcare 
practice.
Event-Driven Architecture: A software pattern where loosely-coupled nodes 
are activated by self-contained events.
mHealth: An abbreviation for mobile health, the use of mobile devices for 
medicine and public health.
Perfusion: The body process delivering capillary blood in its biological tissue.
Photoplethysmography: The use of a pulse oximeter to illuminates the skin 
and measure changes in light absorption.
PPG: Signal is the photoplethysmographical time-series that is extracted by an 
oximeter on basis of light reflection on the skin.
Pulse Oximetry: A non-invasive method for measuring a patient’s O2 saturation.
Quantified Self: A movement to incorporate data acquisition technology for 
health in aspects of a person’s daily life.
Reflective Light: Visual light that is sensed from the reflection on the skin.
Smart Phone: A mobile phone with more advanced capability than basic feature 
phones, such as a vision sensor.

The Role of Time in Health IoT
213
Smart Watch: A wristwatch that at least monitors cardiac effects.
Spectroscopy: Delivers the absorption frequency to indicate the presence and 
amount of matter.
Time-Triggered Architecture: A software pattern to execute one or more sets 
of tasks according to a pre-determined task schedule.
Wearable Technology: Comprises clothing and accessories incorporating com-
puter and advanced electronic technologies. Meant for the consumer market, it has 
a clear aesthetic, say fashionable, aspect.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch008
Chapter 8
214 
Reliability of IoT-
Aware BPMN Healthcare 
Processes
ABSTRACT
BPMN (Business Process Model and Notation) has become the de-facto business 
process modelling language standard. Healthcare processes have been increas-
ingly incorporating participants other than humans, including Internet of Things 
(IoT) physical devices such as biomedical sensors or patient electronic tags. Due 
to its critical requirements, IoT-aware healthcare processes justify the relevance of 
Quality of Services aspects, such as reliability, availability, and cost, among oth-
ers. This chapter focuses on reliability and proposes to use the Stochastic Workflow 
Reduction (SWR) method to calculate the reliability of IoT-aware BPMN health-
care processes. In addition, the chapter proposes a BPMN language extension to 
provide processes with reliability information. This way, at design time, modellers 
can analyse alternatives and, at run time, reliability information can be used to 
select participants, execute services, or monitor process executions. The proposal 
is applied to an Ambient Assisted Living system use case, a rich example of an IoT-
aware healthcare process.
Dulce Domingos
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Ana Respício
Universidade de Lisboa, Portugal
Ricardo Martinho
Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
215
INTRODUCTION
Business Process Management has been applied to the healthcare domain, improving 
several practical aspects regarding the quality of care services provided to patients 
(Reichert, 2011; Russo & Mecella, 2013). These aspects include, from a healthcare 
professional perspective, reduced number of procedures, cost optimizations, increased 
information availability in critical situations and better decision making, among 
others. From a patient perspective, they include reduced length of stay, decrease of 
evasiveness to treatments and a global care process-awareness.
BPMN (Business Process Model and Notation) (OMG, 2011) is becoming the 
leader and de-facto standard in business process modelling (Harmon & Wolf, 2014). 
Considering the healthcare domain, BPMN has been used to model and execute 
various processes, both administrative and medical processes (Svagård & Farshchian, 
2009; Rojo, Calahorra, & Ruiz, 2010; Strasser, Pfeifer, Helm, Schuler, & Altmann, 
2011; Scheuerlein et al., 2012; Cossu et al., 2012; Müller, Prüfer, & Stöhr, 2014; 
Braun, Schlieter, Burwitz, & Esswein, 2015).
In addition, the healthcare domain presents itself as an ideal playground for 
Internet of Things-related scenarios (Pang, 2013). Known applications include real-
time location systems, patient flow management, remote health monitoring, fitness 
programs, chronic diseases, and elderly care. For this, there are several IoT-related 
solutions commonly based on smart devices, including mobile devices, sensors, 
imaging devices and electronic text tags. Together with communication gateways 
or through direct communication protocols, they can bring timely and up-to-date 
information to Information Systems and the Organization. IoT-based healthcare 
services are expected to reduce costs, enrich the user’s experience, increase the 
quality of life, and the number of patients served (Islam, Kwak, Kabir, Hossain, & 
Kwak, 2015).
However, healthcare processes are highly time sensitive and critical due to the 
impact that an error may have regarding, for instance, patient safety or information 
security and confidentiality. In Islam et al. (2015) the authors identify several chal-
lenges, signalling the Quality of Service (QoS) as an important requirement that must 
be assured in the application of IoT in healthcare. In this context, measuring reliability 
of a certain healthcare process that uses smart devices, such as sensors, can prevent 
a number of issues. These can range from a simple medical appointment delay or 
absence, to a serious hazard involving medical prescriptions of wrongly identified 
patients, or inappropriate emergency assistance with potential fatal consequences.
Calculating reliability of sensors has already been proposed (see, for instance, 
Parente et al., 2011; Siewiorek & Swarz, 2014). Nevertheless, these proposals focus 
on a particular device or type of devices, lacking on the evaluation of a global reli-

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
216
ability regarding the remaining process tasks and control-flow elements where they 
participate. Furthermore, decision making based solely on reliability information 
of certain sensor/sensor network is usually very limitative.
In this chapter, the authors propose an innovative approach to the calculation 
of reliability in IoT-aware healthcare processes. For this, the BPMN is used to first 
model the process. Then the Stochastic Workflow Reduction (SWR) algorithm from 
Cardoso (2002) is used to calculate reliability, based on the reliability information 
of each element of a BPMN process (including Tasks, and Events), and in the itera-
tive reduction of these elements to a final process element representing the whole 
process’s reliability. To be able to register reliability information for each BPMN 
process element, the authors propose the relyBPMN extension. A three-step method 
is detailed to accomplish it, using the native BPMN extension mechanisms. The 
authors apply then the approach to an IoT-aware healthcare process use case, in 
order to calculate its reliability, and simulate different scenarios to evaluate which 
conditions are necessary to ensure a given reliability level.
Using this approach of calculating reliability for a BPMN process model will 
allow better decision making. For instance, calculating reliability for a certain part 
of a process model (at design time) can help process designers to assess the need 
of modelling other alternative paths, or to foresee more instances of a certain type 
of sensors in a multi-instance subprocess, in order to assure better patient safety. 
At runtime (i.e., within a running process instance), a certain task resource can be 
selected taking into account the process instance’s reliability so far, or even the 
predicted reliability impact of further tasks, resources, events or decision nodes, 
regarding their actual or historic reliability information.
This chapter is organized as follows: next section provides background concepts 
and discussions supported by a literature review regarding the main topics of BPM in 
healthcare, IoT and reliability. Next, the relyBPMN extension is presented, followed 
by the calculation of business process reliability for BPMN processes. The authors 
proceed with a description of IoT-aware healthcare processes based on Ambient As-
sisted Living (AAL) architectures, and present a use case scenario for a healthcare 
process based on Body Area Network (BAN) sensors. Finally, the chapter ends with 
future research directions and conclusions.
LITERATURE REVIEW
In the last years, we have witnessed the increasing use of Business Process Manage-
ment (BPM) methodologies and tools in the healthcare domain, in order to reduce 
costs and improve quality of care (Russo & Mecella, 2013). They have been used both 

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
217
for administrative/organizational processes and medical processes. Administrative/
organizational processes support administrative tasks, such as patient admission, 
discharge, transfer, appointment planning, and scheduling of resources. Medical 
processes support diagnostic and therapeutic procedures.
As BPMN becomes the de-facto standard in business process modeling, we can 
find in the literature some works describing the use of BPMN to model and execute 
healthcare processes. For instance, Rojo et al. (2010) use BPMN to model and execute 
anatomic pathology sub-processes within the programmed surgical patient process 
in a Spanish hospital; Strasser et al. (2011) use BPMN to define and reconstruct 
clinical processes in order to monitor patients from admission to discharge – their 
main goal is to compare, analyse and evaluate these processes to improve healthcare 
processes and, consequently, to enhance cost control and care quality; Svagård & 
Farshchian (2009) model existing chronic care processes, which are collaborative 
by nature, since chronically ill patients often need to move from one institution to 
another; Scheuerlein et al. (2012) model the processes for the treatment of colon 
and rectum carcinoma; Cossu et al. (2012) define processes for diagnosis and treat-
ment of chest pain; and Duske, Müller, Prüfer, & Stöhr (2014) model a treatment 
process for stroke patients. More recently, Ilahi, Ghannouchi, & Martinho (2014) 
use BPMN to model home healthcare processes and assess their needs in terms of 
flexibility, and Braun et al. (2015) extend BPMN with additional domain specific 
concepts for modelling clinical processes. Martinho, Rijo, & Nunes (2015) perform 
a comparison of process complexity of administrative (BPMN) healthcare processes 
of a hospital, before and after the adoption of a new scheduling system.
Besides the increasing use of BPMN in healthcare, technology advances make 
it also possible to use the Internet of Things (IoT) to improve healthcare processes. 
In particular, considering patient care, IoT can be used in, for instance, AAL ser-
vices or patient monitoring to assist in pediatric and elderly care, chronic disease, 
and private health requirements (Rodrigues, Alves, Silveira, & Laranjeira, 2012; 
Rashidi & Mihailidis, 2013; Memon, Wagner, Pedersen, Beevi, & Hansen, 2014; 
and Islam et al., 2015).
By using web services, IoT information and functionalities can be easily integrated 
in BPMN processes (Zeng, Guo, & Cheng, 2011). In addition, some proposals even 
support the definition of the IoT behaviour with BPMN-based language, with the 
same abstraction level of the remaining process (Caracaş & Bernauer, 2011; Cara-
cas, 2012; Casati et al., 2012; Tranquillini, 2012; Sungur, Spiess, Oertel, & Kopp, 
2013). The IoT behaviour is defined in a separate BPMN pool and the interactions 
amongst pools are specified with BPMN collaboration diagrams. The main chal-
lenge of these proposals is translating this behaviour to a programming language 
and code to be understood and executed by the IoT-associated devices (such as 
sensors and actuators).

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
218
However, as stated for instance by Meyer, Sperner, Magerkurth, & Pasquier 
(2011a), using IoT in business processes (i.e. IoT-aware business processes) presents 
specific requirements, some of them related to Quality of Service (QoS). This way, 
there are some works in literature that extend BPMN with QoS information, such 
as reliability, availability, cost and performance, among others. Meyer et al. (2011a) 
propose a BPMN extension where they use annotations to model the certainty of 
information that sensor devices provide (from 0 to 100%) and the availability/potential 
fault of these devices. Chiu & Wang (2013) also propose a BPMN extension where 
a domain specific task named IoT Task can include information about availability 
and fault tolerance rates. The authors state that IoT tasks can refer to this information 
to decide whether they can finish or they have to handle an exception. Considering 
performance requirements, Caracas & Bernauer (2011) distinguish transmission 
modes, such as broadcast and unicast, as well as communication protocols, such as 
IEEE 802.15.4 and TCP/IP by using the category element of the BPMN message. 
Sungur et al. (2013) use performance annotations to prioritize between reliability 
and energy consumption of sensor devices.
To provide BPMN business processes with IoT quality information, Meyer, Sper-
ner, & Magerkurth (2011b) extends the BPMN Task element with two additional 
elements: the IQMCalculated element, which stores the IoT Information Quality 
Metric (IQM), calculated from the USDL service description, and the IQMManual 
element, which stores the minimum required value. They calculated these metrics 
by using time, space, reliability and traceability quality of information parameters 
available in the USDL service description. This way, process modellers can:
1. 	
Define the minimum required IQM values for real-world process tasks,
2. 	
Choose from different resource service taking into account their IQM values, 
and
3. 	
Deal with low quality resource services by changing the process.
Starting from this BPMN extension that Meyer et al. define and considering 
that quality of information cannot be assessed alone due to its interdependency 
with access cost, Martinho & Domingos (2014) propose to include two additional 
elements to the BPMN task element: the CostMCalculated element that stores the 
cost metric calculated from the USDL service description and; the CostMManual 
element that stores the maximum required value.
The main focus of the previous works is to overcome BPMN expressiveness 
limitations to include information about QoS. In the following, the authors present 
the literature review about computing reliability for composite tasks or even for the 
overall process.

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
219
Koren and Krishna (2007) define reliability of a system at time t, denoted by 
R t( ) , as the probability of the system to be up continuously in time interval 0,t

. 
This metric is adequate for systems operating continuously, where a single momen-
tary failure can have a high or even critical impact.
In the context of workflow modelling, Cardoso (2002) defines task reliability 
as the probability that the components operate on users demand, following a discrete-
time model. The failure rate of a task is the ratio number of unsuccessful executions 
to scheduled executions. This way, the task reliability, denoted by R A
( ), is
R A
failureRate A
( ) =
−
( )
1
,	
the opposite of the failure rate.
Traditionally, reliability has been a major concern for networking, critical and 
real-time applications, as well as middleware (Parente et al., 2011; Siewiorek & 
Swarz, 2014). The increasing use of workflow systems, specifically, in more criti-
cal systems, justifies the works on workflow reliability. Cardoso (2002) proposes 
a predictive QoS model for workflows and web services that, based on atomic task 
QoS attributes, is able to estimate the QoS for workflows, considering the following 
dimensions: time, cost, reliability, and fidelity. This author developed the Stochas-
tic Workflow Reduction (SWR) algorithm, which applies a set of reduction rules 
to the process, iteratively, until only one activity remains. The QoS metrics of the 
remaining activity corresponds to the QoS metrics of the process. Cardoso defines 
reduction rules for the following construction blocks: sequential, parallel, conditional, 
loop, fault tolerant, and network systems. He applies his proposal to the METEOR 
workflow management system (Krishnakumar & Sheth, 1995).
Coppolino, Romano, Mazzocca, and Salvi (2007) generalize the Cardoso proposal, 
covering all the generic workflow patterns of van der Aalst, Ter Hofstede, Kiepusze-
wski, & Barros (2003), to estimate the reliability of web services compositions.
Mukherjee, Jalote, & Nanda (2008) compute the reliability of WS-BPEL pro-
cesses taking into account most of the workflow patterns that WS-BPEL can express, 
while Distefano, Ghezzi, Guinea, & Mirandola (2014) method also incorporates 
advanced composition features such as fault, compensation, termination and event 
handling. Rodrigues et al. (2012) use Unified Modeling Language (UML) models, 
which specify system component interactions, annotating them with component 
failure probabilities. They convert them into a formal executable specification, 
based on a probabilistic process algebra description language, which are executed 
on PRISM. This way, they can, for instance, identify the components that have the 
highest impact on the reliability of the system.

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
220
Respício and Domingos (2015) calculate the reliability of BPMN business pro-
cesses by using the Stochastic Workflow Reduction method of Cardoso in (Cardoso, 
2002; Cardoso, Sheth, Miller, Arnold, & Kochut, 2004). To meet this goal, they 
extend BPMN with reliability information and they identify the BPMN process 
blocks for which they can apply a reduction rule.
The work presented in this chapter applies and extends the proposal of Respício 
& Domingos (2015). It includes a process scenario from the healthcare domain, 
more specifically, an IoT-aware and AAL-enabled healthcare process, and details 
the study of Martinho, Domingos, and Respício (2016).
relyBPMN: THE BPMN EXTENSION FOR RELIABILITY
Despite BPMN 2.0 meta-model already defines an extensibility mechanism, it 
leaves out the methodological guides to develop BPMN extensions. Based on the 
work proposed by Stroppi, Chiotti, & Villarreal (2011), in this section, the authors 
define the relyBPMN extension, by following these three steps:
1. 	
Definition of the Conceptual Domain Model of the Extension, using the Unified 
Modelling Language (UML);
2. 	
Definition of the BPMN Extension Model, defining the extension in terms of 
the standard BPMN extension mechanism; and
3. 	
Definition of the XML Schema Extension.
Respício and Domingos (2015) present the first approach to step 3 using a XML 
Schema. The following sections present the models for steps 1 and 2 as well as a 
more detailed XML Schema Extension.
Conceptual Domain Model for Process Reliability
The first step consists in defining the concepts of the domain and their relationships. 
Processes and flow nodes (Activities, Events, and Gateways) include reliability in-
formation, as illustrated in Figure 1. The requiredReliability defines the minimum 
accepted value for the process or flow node. For atomic activities and events, cal-
culatedReliability corresponds to a known value determined, for instance, during a 
training period, while for decomposable activities (sub-processes) and processes, 
it corresponds to reliability calculated by using the Stochastic Workflow Reduction 
method of Cardoso (2002).
In addition, SequenceFlow elements include the probability value, which is used 
in conditional SequenceFlow elements within conditional process blocks or loop 

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
221
process blocks. The probability value of a conditional SequenceFlow defines the 
probability of the process execution path of taking it.
BPMN Model for relyBPMN Extension
The extensibility mechanism of the BPMN 2.0 meta-model standard (OMG, 2011) 
already considers the possibility of extending standard BPMN elements by add-
ing non-standard attributes and other elements. According to this native extension 
mechanism, a BPMN extension consists of the following elements:
1. 	
Extension;
2. 	
ExtensionDefinition;
3. 	
ExtensionAttributeDefinition; and
4. 	
ExtensionAttributeValue.
The ExtensionDefinition element defines and groups additional attributes. It can 
be defined independently of the BMPN model with which it is to be associated. To 
use an ExtensionDefinition within a BPMN model definition, it must be associ-
ated with an Extension element that binds it to a specific BPMN model definition 
together with its ExtensionAttributeDefinition. This later element defines the list 
of new attributes. Each of these attributes is defined by its name and type.
The Extension element is contained within the BPMN Definitions element and, 
therefore, is defined at the BPMN model definitions level. This way, through the 
ExtensionDefinition element the Extension element is available to be associated 
with any BPMN element that subclasses the BPMN BaseElement. Figure 2 presents 
the class diagram for a BPMN extension.
Figure 1. UML conceptual model for process reliability

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
222
The class diagram of the relyBPMN extension model is defined in Figure 3. The 
value of the ExtensionDefinition attribute name corresponds to the extension name: 
relyBPMN. The mustUnderstand attribute of the Extension class has the false value, 
i.e., a compliant BPMN tool may ignore the extension. The relyBPMN extension 
has two new attribute, the ReliabilityInformation and the Probability, defined as 
ExtensionAttributeDefinitions. This way, every BPMN element that subclasses the 
BaseElement element can use these new attributes.
XML Schema for the relyBPMN Extension
The BPMN standard has two representations of its elements. The previous section 
describes the language concepts using the Meta Object Facility meta-model. This 
section presents the XML Schema.
These two representations are not equivalent, as explained in the following:
Figure 2. BPMN extension class diagram
Source: OMG, 2011.
Figure 3. relyBPMN extension class diagram

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
223
1. 	
The ExtensionDefinition class defines and groups additional attributes. Since 
XSD Complex Types already satisfy this requirement, this type is not applicable 
when the XML schema interchange is used (OMG, 2011), and
2. 	
The ExtensionAttributeDefinition defines new attributes and the 
ExtensionAttributeValue contains the attribute value. Since the XSD mecha-
nisms for supporting “AnyAttribute” and “Any” type already satisfy this re-
quirement, these types are not applicable when the XML schema interchange 
is used.
This way, considering the four elements that the BPMN extensibility mechanism 
provides, the XML Schema only includes the Extension element, as illustrated 
in Figure 4. BPMN extensions are defined using XML components in a separate 
XML Schema documents, with their own namespaces, and imported through the 
TImport element.
Listing 1 presents the relyBPMN extension XML Schema. The relyBPMN Ex-
tensionDefinition element is represented with a <xsd:group> element, while the 
ExtensionAttributeDefinition elements are represented with the <xsd:element> 
element inside the <xsd:group> element. The <xsd:complexType> XML Schema 
element is used to define the structure of extension attributes types (it is not pos-
sible to define them using the BPMN meta-model).
The XML Schema presented in Respício & Domingos (2015) includes one <xsd: 
group> element reliabilityInfo handling only one attribute for the calculated reli-
ability value (in that case named ReliabilityValue).
BUSINESS PROCESS RELIABILITY CALCULATION
The business process reliability value is calculated by using the Stochastic Workflow 
Reduction (SWR) method that Cardoso (2002) proposes. This method applies a set 
of reduction rules to the process, iteratively, until only one activity remains. The 
reliability of the remaining activity corresponds to the reliability of the process. 
Figure 4. BPMN extensibility XML schema

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
224
Respício & Domingos (2015) apply the six reduction rules of Cardoso to BPMN, 
identifying the BPMN process blocks for which the reduction rules can be used. 
The next subsection overviews these process blocks, their corresponding reduction 
rules, and reliability values.
Reduction Rules for BPMN Process Blocks
Cardoso (2002) presents reduction rules for six process blocks:
Listing 1. relyBPMN XML schema
<?xml version=”1.0” encoding=”UTF-8”?> 
<xsd:schema xmlns:xsd=”http://www.w3.org/2001/XMLSchema” 
xmlns=”http://www.fc.ul.pt/relybpmn ” xmlns:bpmn=”http://www.
omg.org/spec/BPMN/20100524/MODEL ” targetNamespace=”http://www.
fc.ul.pt/relybpmn ”> 
    <xsd:import namespace=”http://www.omg.org/spec/
BPMN/20100524/MODEL ” schemaLocation=”BPMN20.xsd”/> 
    <xsd:group name=”relyBPMN”> 
        <xsd:sequence> 
            <xsd:element name=”ReliabilityInformation” 
type=”tReliabilityInformation” 
                         minOccurs=”0” maxOccurs=”unbounded”/> 
<xsd:element name=”Probability” type=”tProbability” minOc-
curs=”0” 
                         maxOccurs=”unbounded”/> 
        </xsd:sequence> 
    </xsd:group> 
    <xsd:complexType name=”tReliabilityInformation” 
abstract=”false”> 
        <xsd:attribute name=”requiredReliability” 
type=”xsd:decimal”/> 
        <xsd:attribute name=”calculatedReliability” 
type=”xsd:decimal”/> 
    </xsd:complexType> 
    <xsd:complexType name=”tProbability” abstract=”false”> 
        <xsd:attribute name=”value” type=”xsd:decimal”/> 
    </xsd:complexType> 
</xsd:schema>

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
225
1. 	
Sequential,
2. 	
Parallel,
3. 	
Conditional,
4. 	
Loop,
5. 	
Fault-tolerant, and
6. 	
Network.
BPMN provides more than one option to represent almost all these types of 
process blocks. The following systematization is mainly based on the works of 
White (2004) and Wohed, van der Aalst, Dumas, Ter Hofstede, and Russell (2006).
Sequential Process Block
In BPMN, a sequential process block is represented with a BPMN Uncontrolled 
Flow. A BPMN Uncontrolled Flow is a BPMN Sequence Flow that connects two 
activities without a conditional indicator (mini-diamond) or an intervening gateway. 
Figure 5 illustrates a BPMN sequential process block.
The reliability value of the reduced sequential block, designated as R AB
(
), is 
the product of the reliabilities values of Activities A and B :
R AB
R A
R B
(
) =
( )
( )
*
	
(1)
Parallel Process Block
BPMN provides two options to represent concurrency, i.e., two or more activities 
that are executed in parallel. The preferred method for most situations uses mul-
tiple outgoing sequence flows. The other option uses a parallel gateway. Figure 6 
illustrates both options.
The reduced parallel process block, designated as B n
1 , replaces the group of 
parallel activities (activities B1,..., Bn ). Its reliability value, R B n
( 1 ), is the prod-
uct of the reliability values of each activity Bi :
Figure 5. BPMN pattern for sequential process block

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
226
R B n
R Bi
i n
1
1
(
) =
(
)
≤≤∏
	
(2)
Conditional Process Block
In BPMN, conditional process blocks are represented with exclusive gateways, 
branching points where alternatives are based on conditional expressions (cond1, 
cond2,..., default) contained within the outgoing sequence flows. Only one of the 
alternatives will be chosen. Exclusive gateways can be shown with or without the 
“X” marker. In case of a merge gateway, if all the incoming flows are alternatives, 
then the gateway is not needed, as shown in the left part of Figure 7.
As the parallel process block, the reduced conditional process block, designated 
as B n
1 , replaces the group of alternative activities (activities B1,..., Bn ).
To calculate the reliability value of the reduced conditional block we need to 
know the probability value of each conditional sequence flow pi , i.e. the probabil-
ity pi   that activity Bi  is chosen to execute, where 
1
1
in
ip
∑
=  and n is the number 
of alternative flows.
The reliability of the reduced conditional block, R B n
1
(
), is:
R B n
p R Bi
i n
i
1
1
(
) =
(
)
≤≤∑
	
(3)
Figure 6. BPMN patterns for parallel process blocks
Figure 7. BPMN patterns for conditional process blocks

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
227
Loop Process Block
BPMN has two mechanisms to represent loops:
1. 	
Standard Loop: The activity is executed as long as its Boolean condition 
evaluates to true;
2. 	
Parallel Multiple Instances Loop: Multiple instances of Activity are executed 
in parallel;
3. 	
Sequence Multiple Instances Loop: Multiple instances of Activity are ex-
ecuted sequentially; and
4. 	
Sequence Flow Looping: Loops are created by connecting a Sequence Flow 
to an “upstream” object.
Figure 8 illustrates each of these loop representations from left to right, respectively.
The reliability value of the reduced loop blocks that execute exactly k times, 
designed as R A′
( ) is:
R A
R A
k
′
( ) =
( ) 	
(4)
For the reduced block of the Sequence flow looping, its reliability value is:
R A
p R A
pR A
'
(
) =
−
(
) ( )
−
( )
1
1
	
(5)
where p  is the probability of executing the loop. An activity A that includes a loop 
may execute as follows: the loop is not performed, with reliability 1−
(
) ( )
p R A , 
or the loop is performed once, with reliability
pR A
p R A
( )
−
(
) ( )
1
,	
Figure 8. BPMN patterns for Loop process blocks

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
228
or the loop performs k times, with reliability
pR A
p R A
k
( )
(
)
−
(
) ( )
1
.	
Thus,
R A
pR A
p R A
k
k
′
∗
( ) =
( )
(
)
−
(
) ( )
≥∑
0
1
. 	
(6)
Summing the terms of the infinite geometric progression, we obtain
R A
pR A
p R A
p R A
pR A
′
( ) =
−
( )
∗
−
(
) ( ) =
−
(
) ( )
−
( )
1
1
1
1
1
  
  
. 	
(7)
Fault Tolerant Process Block
While in Conditional process blocks only one of the alternatives will be chosen, 
in Fault Tolerant process blocks one to all of the alternative paths can be chosen.
In BPMN, Fault Tolerant process blocks can be represented with Inclusive Gate-
ways or Complex Gateways. With Inclusive Gateways, alternatives are based on 
conditional expressions contained within the outgoing sequence flows, illustrated in 
the left side of Figure 9. Unlike conditional process blocks, each path is independent 
and, consequently, all combinations of paths may be taken. Alternatively, instead of 
using an inclusive gateway, it is possible to use conditional Sequence Flows, marked 
with mini-diamonds, as illustrated in the right side of Figure 9.
BPMN also represents Fault Tolerant process blocks with Complex Gateways. 
In this case, the modeller defines how many alternative paths are necessary to be 
executed (k out of n). Alternative paths can also be represented by conditional flows 
as illustrated in the right side of Figure 10.
Figure 9. BPMN patterns for fault tolerant process blocks: inclusive gateway

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
229
The reduced fault tolerant process block, designated as B n
1 , replaces the group 
of alternative activities (activities B1,..., Bn ). Its reliability value, R B n
1
(
), is:
R B n
I
k
I
I
I
I
i
n
i
i
n
i
i
1
1
2
1
2
0 1
0 1
1
1
(
) =
…
−






−
+
=
=
=
=
∑
∑
∑
∏
,
,
φ
−
(
) (
)






1 R Bi
	
(8)
The reliability of a k-out-of-n system is given by the sum of the reliabilities of 
all the scenarios where at least k activities execute. Variable Ii   is used to express 
whether activity Bi  executes or fails, by setting Ii = 1 or Ii = 0, respectively. We 
consider the function φ x
if x
( ) =
≥
1
0 0
,
;  otherwise, to determine which combina-
tions of k  activities out of n  correspond to scenarios where at least k  activities 
execute, and thus should be considered. For activity Bi  the reliability value to 
consider is 1
2
1
−
+
−
(
) (
)
I
I
R Bi
i
i
 which is R Bi
(
), if Bi  executes, and
 1−
(
)
R Bi , otherwise.
Network Process Block
BPMN represents Network process blocks as sub-processes. A Sub-process is an 
Activity that encapsulates a Process, whose internal details have been modelled 
using BPMN elements. Figure 11 illustrates a BPMN sub-process.
Reliability value of the reduced block is set to the reliability value of the sub-
process.
Reduction Rules for Additional BPMN Elements: 
Events and Collaboration Diagrams
The reduction rules presented in the previous section can be applied to process blocks 
that include events as they are applied to process block with activities.
Figure 10. BPMN patterns for fault tolerant process blocks: complex gateway

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
230
Considering collaboration diagrams, reduction rules can be applied to the overall 
diagram by omitting pools and lanes. However, there are limitations on the block 
structured approach. For instance, it imposes one starting point and one ending point. 
To overcome this, it is necessary to transform the diagram by adding an Exclusive 
Event-Based Gateway (the new unique starting point) without any incoming sequence 
flows and with one outgoing sequence flow to each start event of the collaboration 
diagram. It is also necessary to convey an inclusive OR merge gateway with an 
incoming sequence flow, from each end event and without any outgoing sequence 
flows (Ouyang, Dumas, Ter Hofstede, & van der Aalst, 2007).
IoT-AWARE AMBIENT ASSISTED LIVING 
HEALTHCARE PROCESS
Ambient Assisted Living systems aim at improving the quality of life for people 
in all age phases by extending the time elderly people can live at home. They also 
help in promoting a better and healthier environment for patients at risk, improv-
ing the delivery of care where and when needed, and supporting carers, families 
and care organizations, for instance. They continuously monitor vital parameters 
of patients and can alert care people in case they detect emergency situations. They 
can also have a more active role by, for instance, auto injecting insulin, when the 
insulin level declines.
While it seems that the main motivation of AAL systems is to support assist-
ing elderly people (see for instance H2020 calls of European Commission), they 
also present many advantages for patients suffering from chronic diseases such as 
diabetes, asthma and heart attacks.
Before presenting the IoT-aware healthcare AAL process model use case, this 
section includes an overview of AAL system architecture and of the reliability of 
its components.
Figure 11. BPMN pattern for network process blocks

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
231
Architecture of Ambient Assisted Living Systems
Ambient Assisted Living systems include four main components (see, for instance, 
Rodrigues et al., 2012; Rashidi & Mihailidis, 2013; Islam et al., 2015; and Memon 
et al., 2014):
1. 	
Body Area Network (BAN) Sensor Devices: BAN sensor devices are used for 
monitoring different types of vital signs, such as body temperature (Istepanian, 
Hu, Philip, & Sungoor, 2011), blood pressure (Dohr, Modre-Opsrian, Drobics, 
Hayn, & Schreier, 2010), blood sugar (Istepanian et al., 2011), electrical activ-
ity of the brain (EEG), cardiac activity (Drew et al., 2004; Yang et al., 2014), 
and blood oxygen (Jara, Zamora-Izquierdo, & Skarmeta, 2013). While, for 
instance, cardiac activity, blood glucose and pressure can be measured through 
wearable sensors using techniques such as infrared sensing, optical sensing, 
and oscillometric; some other vital signs, such as Electroencephalography 
(EEG) can be invasive in case of specific applications. Indeed, BAN devices 
can be implanted inside the body, surface mounted on the body or external 
devices that humans can carry for instance, by hand, in bags or in clothes. 
When used with BAN actuators, BAN devices can auto inject insulin through 
a pump while monitoring the insulin level on a diabetic patient (Jara, Zamora, 
& Skarmeta, 2011);
2. 	
Body Area Network (BAN) Gateway: The BAN gateway is responsible for the 
communication inside the BAN and to the home gateway. It can also execute a 
BAN application to validate sensor read values, aggregate data, analyse data, 
and identifying the situations to activate actuators. Body sensors and actua-
tors communicate with each other and with the BAN gateway. Most of them 
use wireless technologies, such as IEEE802.15.4 /ZigBee (IEEE, 2011). The 
latest international standard for wireless BAN (WBAN) is the IEEE802.15.6 
(IEEE, 2012);
3. 	
Home Gateway: Home gateways, such as smart phones or wireless routers, 
provide the connectivity to the internet, and, this way, to the health monitoring 
system. Home gateways communicate with a BAN gateway and BAN devices 
through wireless technologies (Bluetooth or WiFi, for instance);
4. 	
Health Monitoring System (HMS): With health monitoring systems, care-
givers and physicians can monitor patients remotely.
Figure 12 illustrates a typical architecture of an AAL system, taking into ac-
count this previous numbering regarding the four main components. It includes four 
BAN sensors (1), which measure/observe physical signs and communicate directly 
with a BAN gateway (2). In turn, this gateway can communicate with one or more 

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
232
home gateways (3), which are represented as a smartphone and a wireless router in 
Figure 12. From here, sensor measured data and/or other kind of messaging can be 
sent to/received from a Health Monitoring System (4), which is being operated by 
a skilled health professional.
Reliability of AAL System Components
The reliability of AAL systems is a critical requirement as it can lead to misdiagnosis, 
treatment errors, and fatal consequences. This section discusses how and why the 
reliability value of each component of an AAL system can take different values.
Firstly, BAN devices (sensors and actuators) reliability depends on their quality 
and manufacturer. The mean-time between failures (MTBF) metrics can be used to 
assess it (McNaull, Augusto, Mulvenna, & McCullagh, 2012). Moreover, sensors 
data quality (accuracy) also interferes with reliability as anomalous values can be 
discarded, for instance, in the BAN gateway. Quality of data depends on sensor 
calibration as well as on the correct sensor use and application. For instance, other 
heat sources can affect temperature sensors.
Parente et al. (2011) present a use case where they monitor the health of patients 
considering heart activity and body activity. To monitor the heart activity, the system 
uses three devices: a heart rate monitor, a pulse oxymeter, and a sphygmomanom-
eter. The system monitors the body activity of patients by using an accelerometer 
on their knees and a motion detector in the room. Taking into account the reliability 
of each device and the required reliability of the system, the authors determine the 
minimal combinations of sensors the system need.
Figure 12. Typical AAL system architecture with the four main types of components

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
233
BAN gateways may evaluate sensor data and detect anomalous and inconsistent 
values, considering the expected ones, which may have been established during 
the testing period of the AAL system (McNaull et al., 2012). In case of anomaly, 
erroneous sensor values are discarded and BAN gateways can read new sensor 
values. If the problem persists, the BAN gateway can alert the health monitoring 
system. These additional functionalities can increase the reliability of the system. 
Another way to increase system reliability is by defining a fault tolerant behaviour 
for the BAN gateway.
Considering the architecture of the overall system, the use of BAN gateways 
contributes to the decentralization of AAL systems, and consequently, decreases 
the number of messages exchanged with the monitoring system and its processing 
activities.
Reliability of wireless networks, such as ZigBee, WiFi, and Bluetooth, depends 
on interferences of other devices, obstruction of the signal due to lifts or wall, and 
attenuation, i.e., the strength of the signal reduces during transmission. In their study 
Baig, GholamHosseini, Connolly, & Kashfi (2014) compare wireless transmitted 
data with manual recorded data and hospital collected data. They use a total of ap-
proximately 2500 transmissions of 30 hospitalized patients and they conclude that, 
in wireless transmitted data, losses vary from 20% (blood glucose) to 80% (blood 
pressure and heart rate). They also conclude that data losses were mainly due to 
distance and data transmission delays were due to poor signals, signal drops, con-
nection loss and/or poor location.
The IoT-Aware Healthcare AAL Process Model
This section describes the simplified IoT-aware healthcare AAL BPMN process 
model considered as use case in this chapter (Martinho et al., 2016). It is based on 
the processes presented by Bui & Zorzi (2011) and Dar, Taherkordi, Baraki, Elias-
sen, & Geihs (2014). It also considers the process proposed by Meyer et al. (2011a), 
which uses sensors but for a different application domain.
The BPMN process model is defined as a collaboration diagram and includes 
three pools, one for each component: BAN devices (sensors), the BAN gateway, 
and the health monitoring system (see Figure 13).
Sensors read values from the patient and send them to the BAN gateway. The 
process model illustrates that sensors perform these tasks from time to time by us-
ing a timer. Another way to model the interaction between sensors and the BAN 
gateway is by using the request-reply paradigm, where the BAN gateway starts the 
interaction asking for the values. In addition, depending on sensor computational 
capabilities, they can also filter the data they send by restringing it to the values that 
are considered relevant. However, for the reliability study that this chapter pro-

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
234
poses, these differences are not significant. Based on one of the scenarios that 
Parente et al. (2011) presents, sensors monitor the health of the patient considering 
heart and body activity. The set of sensors includes a heart rate monitor (HRM), a 
pulse oxymeter to measure the blood oxygen saturation, and a sphygmomanometer 
to measure the blood pressure and an accelerometer to monitor the body activity.
The BAN gateway receives data from each sensor. This behaviour is modelled 
with an Event-Based Parallel Gateway. The information about heart rate should be 
provided by at least two out of three devices (behaviour modelled with a Complex 
Gateway). After evaluating sensor values, the BAN gateway sends an alarm to the 
health monitoring system (HMS) to assist the patient, in case any emergent situa-
tion is detected.
Reliability Study
Initially, designers define values for required reliabilities (requiredReliability at-
tributes), the minimum accepted reliability values. These values are added to the 
BPMN process model by using the relyBPMN extension. By also using the attributes 
the relyBPMN extension provides, they enrich the BPMN process model with values 
for the calculatedReliability and the probability value attributes. The calculatedRe-
liability attribute is initialized with pre-estimated values for atomic activities and 
events. If the process includes any conditional sequence flows, the probability value 
attributes are also initialized with pre-estimated values. Next, by using the SWR 
Figure 13. IoT-aware AAL BPMN process model

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
235
algorithm, the calculatedReliability attribute is calculated for sub-processes and, 
finally for the overall process (the collaboration diagram).
In the following, the application of the proposed method to assess the reliability 
of the collaboration diagram illustrated in Figure 13 is described.
The calculatedReliability attribute is initialised as follows:
1. 	
For the “read value” activities of sensors, the values proposed by Parente et al. 
(2011) are used, considering, respectively, 0.8 for the HRM, 0.7 for the Pulse 
Oxymeter, 0.6 for the Shygmomanometer, and 0.9 for the Accelerometer;
2. 	
For all “receive value” activities (the transmission from sensors to the BAN 
gateway), the value 0.992 is chosen according to the measures of Baig et al. 
(2014);
3. 	
For the “receive alarm” activity (the transmission from the BAN gateway to 
the Health monitoring system), the value 0.99 is used, as this connection uses 
the WiFi network; and
4. 	
For the remaining activities and events, such as the process start, the evaluation 
of the received values in the BAN gateway, and the “assist patient” activity, 
the value 1 is set.
In addition, the requiredReliability value for all process activities and events is 
set to 0.6.
Figure 14 presents the process diagram used to apply reduction rules. As explained 
in section “Reduction rules for additional BPMN elements: events and collaboration 
diagrams”, polls and lanes are omitted and two gateways (the initial and the final) 
are added. The upper dark grey rectangle represents the reduction of the sequence 
<”event timer”, “read value”, “send value”, “receive value”>. The reliability value 
of the corresponding reduced block is computed by applying iteratively three times 
the reduction rule for sequential process blocks, thus obtaining the value 0.7936 
(0.7936=(((1*0.8)*1)*0.992)).
The reduction rule for the fault tolerant process block has four feasible combina-
tions of receiving two out of three signal devices:
1. 	
HRM, Pulse Oxymeter, Shygmomanometer with reliability 
0.3280=0.7936*0.6944*0.5952;
2. 	
HRM, Pulse Oxymeter with reliability 0.2231=0.7936*0.6944*(1-0.5952);
3. 	
HRM, Shygmomanometer with reliability 0.1444=0.7936*(1-0.6944)*0.5952; 
and
4. 	
Pulse Oxymeter, Shygmomanometer with reliability 
0.0853=(1-0.7936)*0.6944*0.5952.

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
236
After applying this reduction rule, the reliability value of the reduced block is 
0.7807, as illustrated in the light grey rectangle of Figure 14.
Then, the parallel process block reduction is applied and the reduced block has 
the reliability value of 0.6971=0.7807*0.8928.
Finally, by applying reduction rules for the remaining sequential process blocks, the 
reliability of the process is achieved and has the value 0.6901 (0.6901=0.6971*0.99), 
a value above the required reliability, thus corresponding to a feasible reliability.
The second part of this study consists of assessing the impact on the reliability 
of the global process created by varying separately the reliability of elements. The 
study explores the following elements: the accelerometer sensor, the HRM sensor, 
the transmission from sensors to the BAN gateway and the transmission from the 
BAN gateway to the HMS. For each element under analysis, the reliability of that 
element is varied in the interval [0.6; 1], using steps of 0.01. The reliability values 
for the remaining elements are fixed considering three scenarios:
1. 	
The base case scenario fixes all the other reliability values to the ones of the 
original setting described above;
2. 	
The worst case scenario fixes the reliability values of all sensors to their mini-
mum value (0.6), to evaluate a pessimistic setting; and
3. 	
The best case scenario fixes the reliability values of all sensors to their maxi-
mum value (0.99), to assess an optimistic scenario.
Figure 14. Applying reduction rules to the AAL BPMN process model

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
237
Figures 15-18 display the results of this study. Chart (a) illustrates the impact on 
the process reliability resulting from varying the accelerometer reliability for the 
three scenarios considered. Chart (b) shows the effects of varying the HRM reli-
ability. This chart would be similar for reliability variations of the Pulse Oxymeter 
and Shygmomanometer sensors. This is due to the fact that all these sensors are part 
of the same fault tolerant pattern, and, consequently, variations on their reliability 
values have the same impact. The impact of varying the reliability of transmission 
from the sensors to the BAN gateway is displayed in chart (c), while chart (d) dis-
closes the effect of considering different reliability values for the transmission from 
the BAN gateway to the HMS.
Firstly, the reliability of the transmission from sensors to the BAN gateway (chart 
(c)) is the element with the greatest impact on the reliability of the overall process. 
Secondly, the reliability of the process depends on the accelerometer reliability 
(chart (a)) and the transmission from the BAN gateway to the HSM (chart (d)), and, 
finally, on the reliability of a single sensor (HRM) (chart (b)).
For the best case scenario, variations of the value under analysis have a high impact 
on the process reliability for charts (a), (c) and (d), while the impact is minimum in 
chart (b), which corresponds to variations of the HRM, as well as Pulse Oxymeter 
and Shygmomanometer sensors. Considering the three scenarios, the worst case 
is the one that presents a smaller impact due to variations (charts (a), (c) and (d)), 
except for the HRM (chart (b)).
Figure 15. Impact on the process overall reliability by varying separate reliabilities: 
variation of accelerometer reliability (chart a)

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
238
This study also allows determining in which conditions the minimum required 
reliability is attained. For instance, from chart (a) it is possible to infer that 0.8 
(approximately) is the minimum value of the accelerometer reliability that allows 
reaching a feasible reliability of the process (0.6), in the base case, while for the 
Figure 16. Impact on the process overall reliability by varying separate reliabilities: 
variation of HRM reliability (chart b)
Figure 17. Impact on the process overall reliability by varying separate realities: 
variation of sensors to BAN gateway transmission reliability (chart c)

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
239
same scenario, for the HRM sensor instead this value would drop to 0.6. For the 
worst case scenarios, the only situation where the feasible reliability can be met is 
with an accelerometer reliability value of at least 0.96. In addition, no conditions 
allow reaching an overall reliability greater than 0.8 in the base case scenarios. 
For the best case scenarios it is possible to attain a value of 0.9 in few situations: 
whenever the reliability of the accelerometer is greater than 0.92, for any reliability 
value of the HRM, when the reliability of the transmission from sensors to gateway 
is greater than 0.94, or for values of reliability greater than 0.92 for the transmission 
from the BAN Gateway to the HMS.
This study exemplifies how to proceed to assess different conditions of a BPMN 
healthcare process that involves IoT elements. This assessment can be made at 
design time to analyse the feasibility of the process, for instance, if a minimum 
level of reliability is assured. It allows to identify the elements which have the high-
est impact on process reliability and, therefore, to design the system architecture 
and set the requirements for system elements. Additionally, reliability can be com-
puted at run time to monitor process executions hence providing an approach to 
identify low reliability services. In that case, the sensors timers can be adjusted as 
well as the transmission rate can be increased at run time.
Figure 18. Impact on the process overall reliability by varying separate realities: 
variation of BAN gateway to HMS transmission reliability (chart d)

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
240
FUTURE RESEARCH DIRECTIONS
Besides stated advantages of using BPM and the innovative approach to calculating 
partial or global reliability from a process model, other future research directions 
include additional and important aspects associated with IoT-aware healthcare pro-
cesses that are reliability-dependent and can take advantage of a globally calculated 
reliability. These include, among others:
•	
Risk analyses from the security point of view, including vulnerabilities and 
attacks. Healthcare information is often subjected to strict security regula-
tions, which impose extra security measures such as data anonymization, 
privacy, confidentiality and access control, in order to prevent information 
leaks. Dealing with IoT-aware healthcare processes brings additional secu-
rity challenges such as computational, memory and energy limitations, or 
even tamper-related attacks. These challenges often cannot be ensured by 
traditional security techniques (Islam et al., 2015). Reliability can help on the 
choice of these techniques to prevent security risks;
•	
Reliability versus cost decisions, including the management of trade-offs be-
tween, for instance, sensors’ battery life and more or less quality/timely infor-
mation (Martinho & Domingos, 2014). Reliability information on a process 
can automatically help on the fine-tuning of these trade-offs, assuring the 
most suitable solution for a process instance where sensor’s battery life and 
the quality of the information they provide are key factors;
•	
(Human or material) resource allocation optimization for a certain healthcare 
process, taking into account the process reliability actual and history data. 
This line of research can be pursued through diverse paths such as to maxi-
mize the reliability of processes that satisfy participant or material resource 
constraints, such as health professionals or certain medical exams scheduling. 
Another application includes minimizing differences of reliability observed in 
several process instances, to reach certain conditions of system equilibrium.
In addition, the authors are capitalizing previous experience with the jBPM 
Business Process Management System (BPMS) to incorporate the implementation 
of the relyBPMN extension proposed and detailed in this chapter.

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
241
CONCLUSION
As the use of BPM techniques and technologies is increasing in the healthcare 
domain, it is very important to take into account reliability information, not only 
for a particular activity in a process, but also for a group of activities, events and 
gateways, or even sub-processes and whole processes. This is even more critical 
when healthcare processes rely on IoT sensors or other devices to deliver a certain 
healthcare service to patients.
This chapter presents a comprehensive solution to calculate reliability in BPMN 
and IoT-aware healthcare processes. The approach includes an extension to the 
BPMN language to add reliability information for any particular process element 
(activities, events and gateways) or group of elements (sub-processes, loops and 
multiple-instance activities). Based on this information and on the calculus of the 
reliability of single and combined BPMN process elements, the authors apply the 
SWR algorithm to iteratively calculate reliability of process fragments or entire 
processes, through the reduction of all process elements to a single activity.
The use case scenario presented concerns an IoT-aware healthcare process, more 
specifically an AAL common application of BAN and health monitoring system, 
which architecture is also detailed. The healthcare process includes three process 
distinct participants and several sensors that must communicate with a BAN gateway 
to report biomedical measures for a certain home healthcare patient.
Base, worst and best case scenarios were considered for both individual and 
combined reliability values regarding the four BAN sensors and gateway included 
in the IoT-aware AAL BPMN process. The process reliability value was also cal-
culated for these scenarios, taking into account reported reliability in the literature 
for these kinds of sensors. The impact of the variation of the individual reliability 
of the IoT process elements regarding the overall process could also be observed.
These reliability values can be used both at process design time and run time. 
This means that a process designer can take decisions, at design time, on the mod-
elling of a certain IoT-aware healthcare process, based on reliability information 
of a particular sensor type to be used, or a calculated reliability for a certain path/
branch of the process. At run time, resource allocation can be performed based on 
the reliability of a certain (human or material) resource, taking into account their 
actual availability. For instance, a number of health professionals can be scheduled 
to assist on an emergency care episode, based on their previous experience and 
outcomes. Similarly, an increased number of sensors can be initialized or actuated 
for a certain body biomedical measure, based on the need of a higher reliability on 
the correct reading and communication of certain values to a BAN gateway.

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
242
Besides the aforementioned direct advantages of having reliability information 
on an IoT-aware healthcare process, other applications of this information can be 
derived. These include using reliability to assess risks in critical safety healthcare 
scenarios, prevent security flaws or even manage and optimize resource usage.
REFERENCES
Baig, M. M., GholamHosseini, H., Connolly, M. J., & Kashfi, G. (2014, June). A wire-
less patient monitoring system for hospitalized older adults: Acceptability, reliability 
and accuracy evaluation. In Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI),2014IEEE-
EMBS International Conference on (pp. 330-333). IEEE.
Braun, R., Schlieter, H., Burwitz, M., & Esswein, W. (2015). Extending a Busi-
ness Process Modeling Language for Domain-Specific Adaptation in Healthcare. 
Wirtschaftsinformatik Proceedings.
Bui, N., & Zorzi, M. (2011, October). Health care applications: a solution based 
on the internet of things. In Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on 
Applied Sciences in Biomedical and Communication Technologies (p. 131). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2093698.2093829
Caracas, A. (2012, March). From business process models to pervasive applications: 
Synchronization and optimization. In Pervasive Computing and Communications 
Workshops (PERCOM Workshops), 2012 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 
320-325). IEEE.
Caracaş, A., & Bernauer, A. (2011, June). Compiling business process models 
for sensor networks. In Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems and Work-
shops (DCOSS), 2011 International Conference on (pp. 1-8). IEEE. doi:10.1109/
DCOSS.2011.5982159
Cardoso, A. J. S. (2002) Quality of service and semantic composition of workflows 
(Doctoral dissertation). University of Georgia.
Cardoso, J., Sheth, A., Miller, J., Arnold, J., & Kochut, K. (2004). Quality of service 
for workflows and web service processes. Web Semantics: Science, Services, and 
Agents on the World Wide Web, 1(3), 281–308. doi:10.1016/j.websem.2004.03.001
Casati, F., Daniel, F., Dantchev, G., Eriksson, J., Finne, N., Karnouskos, S.,... Voigt, 
T. (2012, June). Towards business processes orchestrating the physical enterprise 
with wireless sensor networks. In Software Engineering (ICSE), 2012 34th Inter-
national Conference on (pp. 1357-1360). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICSE.2012.6227080

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
243
Chiu, H., & Wang, M. (2013). A Study of IoT-Aware Business Process Modeling. 
International Journal of Modeling and Optimization, 3(3), 238–244. doi:10.7763/
IJMO.2013.V3.274
Coppolino, L., Romano, L., Mazzocca, N., & Salvi, S. (2007).Web Services work-
flow reliability estimation through reliability patterns. In International Conference 
on Security and Privacy in Communications Networks and the Workshops. IEEE. 
doi:10.1109/SECCOM.2007.4550316
Cossu, F., Marrella, A., Mecella, M., Russo, A., Bertazzoni, G., Suppa, M., & Grasso, 
F. (2012, June). Improving operational support in hospital wards through vocal in-
terfaces and process-awareness. In Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), 2012 
25th International Symposium on (pp. 1-6). IEEE. doi:10.1109/CBMS.2012.6266329
Dar, K., Taherkordi, A., Baraki, H., Eliassen, F., & Geihs, K. (2014). A resource 
oriented integration architecture for the Internet of Things: A business process perspec-
tive. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 20, 145–159. doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2014.11.005
Distefano, S., Ghezzi, C., Guinea, S., & Mirandola, R. (2014). Dependability as-
sessment of web service orchestrations. Reliability. IEEE Transactions on, 63(3), 
689–705.
Dohr, A., Modre-Opsrian, R., Drobics, M., Hayn, D., & Schreier, G. (2010, April). 
The internet of things for ambient assisted living. In Information Technology: New 
Generations (ITNG), 2010 Seventh International Conference on (pp. 804-809). 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/ITNG.2010.104
Drew, B. J., Califf, R. M., Funk, M., Kaufman, E. S., Krucoff, M. W., Laks, M. M., 
& Van Hare, G. F. et al. (2004). Practice Standards for Electrocardiographic Monitor-
ing in Hospital Settings An American Heart Association Scientific Statement From 
the Councils on Cardiovascular Nursing, Clinical Cardiology, and Cardiovascular 
Disease in the Young: Endorsed by the International Society of Computerized Elec-
trocardiology and the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. Circulation, 
110(17), 2721–2746. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000145144.56673.59 PMID:15505110
Duske, K., Müller, R., Prüfer, R., & Stöhr, D. (2014). A BPMN Model of the Charity 
Stroke Treatment Process. Inst. für Informatik.
Harmon, P., & Wolf, C. (2014). The State of Business Process Management 2014. 
Retrieved July 2, 2015, from http://www.bptrends.com/bpt/wp-content/uploads/
BPTrends-State-of-BPM-Survey-Report.pdf
IEEE. (2011). IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks--Part 15.4: 
Low-Rate Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs). IEEE.

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
244
IEEE. (2012). IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks - Part 15.6: 
Wireless Body Area Networks. IEEE.
Ilahi, L., Ghannouchi, S. A., & Martinho, R. (2014). Healthcare information sys-
tems promotion: from an improved management of telemedicine processes to home 
healthcare processes. In Proceedings of the Second International Conference on 
Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing Multiculturality (pp. 333-338). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/2669711.2669920
Islam, S. M. R., Kwak, D., Kabir, M. H., Hossain, M., & Kwak, K. (2015). The 
Internet of Things for Health Care: A Comprehensive Survey. Access, IEEE, (3), 
678-708.
Istepanian, R. S. H., Hu, S., Philip, N. Y., & Sungoor, A. (2011, August). The potential 
of Internet of m-health Things “m-IoT” for non-invasive glucose level sensing. In 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC, 2011 Annual International 
Conference of the IEEE (pp. 5264-5266). IEEE.
Jara, A. J., Zamora, M. A., & Skarmeta, A. F. (2011). An internet of things---based 
personal device for diabetes therapy management in ambient assisted living (AAL). 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 15(4), 431–440. doi:10.1007/s00779-010-
0353-1
Jara, A. J., Zamora-Izquierdo, M. A., & Skarmeta, A. F. (2013). Interconnection 
framework for mHealth and remote monitoring based on the Internet of Things.
Selected Areas in Communications. IEEE Journal on, 31(9), 47–65.
Koren, I., & Krishna, C. M. (2007). Fault tolerant systems. Morgan Kaufmann.
Krishnakumar, N., & Sheth, A. (1995). Managing heterogeneous multi-system tasks 
to support enterprise-wide operations. Distributed and Parallel Databases, 3(2), 
155–186. doi:10.1007/BF01277644
Martinho, R., & Domingos, D. (2014). Quality of Information and Access Cost of IoT 
Resources in BPMN Processes. Procedia Technology, 16, 737–744. doi:10.1016/j.
protcy.2014.10.023
Martinho, R., Domingos, D., & Respício, A. (2016). Evaluating the Reliability of 
Ambient-Assisted Living Business Processes. In Proceedings of the 18th Interna-
tional Conference on Enterprise Information Systems (pp. 528 – 536). Scitepress. 
doi:10.5220/0005917005280536

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
245
Martinho, R., Rijo, R., & Nunes, A. (2015). Complexity Analysis of a Business 
Process Automation: Case study on a Healthcare Organization. Procedia Computer 
Science, 64, 1226–1231. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.510
McNaull, J., Augusto, J. C., Mulvenna, M., & McCullagh, P. (2012). Data and 
information quality issues in ambient assisted living systems. Journal of Data and 
Information Quality, 4(1), 4. doi:10.1145/2378016.2378020
Memon, M., Wagner, S. R., Pedersen, C. F., Beevi, F. H. A., & Hansen, F. O. 
(2014). Ambient assisted living healthcare frameworks, platforms, standards, and 
quality attributes. Sensors (Basel, Switzerland), 14(3), 4312–4341. doi:10.3390/
s140304312 PMID:24599192
Meyer, S., Sperner, K., & Magerkurth, C. (2011b, October). Towards Real World 
Aware Enterprise Systems-Reflecting the Quality Information of Physical Resources 
in Services and Processes. In Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), 2011 IEEE 
8th International Conference on (pp. 843-848). IEEE. doi:10.1109/MASS.2011.98
Meyer, S., Sperner, K., Magerkurth, C., & Pasquier, J. (2011a, June). Towards model-
ing real-world aware business processes. In Proceedings of the Second International 
Workshop on Web of Things (p. 8). ACM.
Mukherjee, D., Jalote, P., & Nanda, M. G. (2008). Determining QoS of WS-BPEL 
compositions. In Service-Oriented Computing–ICSOC 2008 (pp. 378–393). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-89652-4_29
Müller, R., Prüfer, R., & Stöhr, D. (2014). A BPMN Model of the Charity Stroke 
Treatment Process. Inst. für Informatik.
Object Management Group (2011). Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) 
Version 2.0. Author.
Ouyang, C., Dumas, M., Ter Hofstede, A. H., & van der Aalst, W. M. (2007). Pattern-
based translation of BPMN process models to BPEL web services. International 
Journal of Web Services Research, 5(1), 42–62. doi:10.4018/jwsr.2008010103
Pang, Z. (2013). Technologies and Architectures of the Internet-of-Things (IoT) 
for Health and Well-being (PhD Thesis). KTH - Royal Institute of Technology, 
Stockholm, Sweden.
Parente, G., Nugent, C. D., Hong, X., Donnelly, M. P., Chen, L., & Vicario, E. (2011). 
Formal modeling techniques for ambient assisted living. Ageing International, 36(2), 
192–216. doi:10.1007/s12126-010-9086-8

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
246
Rashidi, P., & Mihailidis, A. (2013). A survey on ambient-assisted living tools for 
older adults. Biomedical and Health Informatics. IEEE Journal of, 17(3), 579–590.
Reichert, M. (2011). What BPM technology can do for healthcare process sup-
port. In Artificial Intelligence in Medicine (pp. 2–13). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22218-4_2
Respício, A., & Domingos, D. (2015). Reliability of BPMN Business Processes. 
Procedia Computer Science, 64, 643–650. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.578
Rodrigues, G. N., Alves, V., Silveira, R., & Laranjeira, L. A. (2012). Dependability 
analysis in the ambient assisted living domain: An exploratory case study. Journal 
of Systems and Software, 85(1), 112–131. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2011.07.037
Rojo, M. G., Calahorra, L., & Ruiz, F. (2010). BPMN in practice. Experiences of 
business modeling in the Department of Pathology. Diagnostic Pathology, 5(Suppl 
1), S4. doi:10.1186/1746-1596-5-S1-S4
Russo, A., & Mecella, M. (2013). On the evolution of process-oriented approaches 
for healthcare workflows. International Journal of Business Process Integration 
and Management, 6(3), 224–246. doi:10.1504/IJBPIM.2013.056962
Scheuerlein, H., Rauchfuss, F., Dittmar, Y., Molle, R., Lehmann, T., Pienkos, N., 
& Settmacher, U. (2012). New methods for clinical pathways—Business Process 
Modeling Notation (BPMN) and Tangible Business Process Modeling (t. BPM). 
Langenbeck’s Archives of Surgery, 397(5), 755–761. doi:10.1007/s00423-012-0914-z 
PMID:22362053
Siewiorek, D., & Swarz, R. (2014). Reliable Computer Systems: Design and Evalu-
ation. Digital Press.
Strasser, M., Pfeifer, F., Helm, E., Schuler, A., & Altmann, J. (2010). Defining and 
reconstructing clinical processes based on IHE and BPMN 2.0. Studies in Health 
Technology and Informatics, 169, 482–486. PMID:21893796
Stroppi, L. J. R., Chiotti, O., & Villarreal, P. D. (2011). Extending BPMN 2.0: 
method and tool support. In Business Process Model and Notation (pp. 59-73). 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Sungur, C. T., Spiess, P., Oertel, N., & Kopp, O. (2013, July). Extending bpmn for 
wireless sensor networks. In Business Informatics (CBI), 2013 IEEE 15th Confer-
ence on (pp. 109-116). IEEE. doi:10.1109/CBI.2013.24

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
247
Svagård, I., & Farshchian, B. A. (2009). Using business process modelling to model 
integrated care processes: Experiences from a european project. In Distributed 
Computing, Artificial Intelligence, Bioinformatics, Soft Computing, and Ambient 
Assisted Living (pp. 922-925). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Tranquillini, S., Spieß, P., Daniel, F., Karnouskos, S., Casati, F., Oertel, N., & Voigt, 
T. (2012). Process-based design and integration of wireless sensor network applica-
tions. In Business Process Management (pp. 134–149). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-32885-5_10
van der Aalst, W. M., Ter Hofstede, A. H., Kiepuszewski, B., & Barros, A. P. 
(2003). Workflow patterns. Distributed and Parallel Databases, 14(1), 5–51. 
doi:10.1023/A:1022883727209
White, S. A. (2004). Process modeling notations and workflow patterns. Workflow 
handbook, 2004, 265-294.
Wohed, P., van der Aalst, W. M., Dumas, M., ter Hofstede, A. H., & Russell, N. 
(2006). On the suitability of BPMN for business process modelling (pp. 161–176). 
Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/11841760_12
Yang, G., Xie, L., Mantysalo, M., Zhou, X., Pang, Z., Da Xu, L., & Zheng, L. R. 
et al. (2014). A Health-IoT Platform Based on the Integration of Intelligent Packag-
ing, Unobtrusive Bio-Sensor, and Intelligent Medicine Box. Industrial Informatics. 
IEEE Transactions on, 10(4), 2180–2191.
Zeng, D., Guo, S., & Cheng, Z. (2011). The web of things: A survey. Journal of 
Communication, 6(6), 424–438.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Ambient Assisted Living (AAL): A broader definition that includes methods, 
concepts, electronic systems, products and services which support the everyday lives 
of elder, disabled or chronically ill patients. The AAL techniques and technologies 
are user-centred, i.e., integrated directly into patients living environments and fitted 
to the needs of any particular patient.
Business Process: A set of activities, control-flow elements (e.g. sequences, 
decision, fork and join nodes), resources (e.g. human roles, materials) and data ob-
jects (documents, values) that are orchestrated together to deliver a certain product 
or service.

Reliability of IoT-Aware BPMN Healthcare Processes
248
Business Process Management (BPM): Considers that organizations are 
composed by a set of business processes and focuses on the management of those 
processes. BPM can usually be described by a cycle of activities including the 
modelling, deployment, execution, monitoring, analysis and optimization of busi-
ness processes. It also can refer to the techniques and technologies used in each of 
these activities.
Business Process Management System (BPMS): A kind of Information System 
that can execute business processes described or designed in a certain modelling 
language. BPMSs usually also comprise the management of running instances of 
business processes, and more advanced BPMS suites also include modelling studios 
and allow for a full configuration of an organisation, its roles and users interacting 
with business processes.
Business Process Modelling and Notation (BPMN): A modelling language 
based on a set of graphical notations that allow a visual design of a business process. 
Since 2004, the Object Management Group has been releasing major and minor 
versions of this language, which has become a standard de-facto for the modelling 
and also the execution of business processes.
Internet of Things: A network of physical objects or smart items (or simply, 
“things”) that are able, through the use of sensors and transmitters, to capture and 
send information of a certain environment to other objects or a centralised Information 
System. It also foresees that these objects can be sensed, monitored and controlled 
using an existing network infrastructure such as the Internet.
Reliability: Regarding Information Systems and systems engineering, reliability 
can be briefly described as the ability of a system or component to function under 
certain conditions over a period of time. Allied to business processes, it can be 
spanned to indicate the probability of a certain process element or group of process 
elements (such as activities, events, gateways or even resource allocations) to be 
executed with success.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch009
Chapter 9
249 
Thing Theory:
Connecting Humans to 
Smart Healthcare
ABSTRACT
As healthcare professionals and others embrace the Internet of Things (IoT) and 
smart environment paradigms, developers will bear the brunt of constructing the IT 
relationships within these, making sense of the big data produced as a result, and 
managing the relationships between people and technologies. This chapter explores 
how PolySocial Reality (PoSR), a framework for representing how people, devices 
and communication technologies interact, can be applied to developing use cases 
combining IoT and smart environment paradigms, giving special consideration to the 
nature of location-aware messaging from sensors and the resultant data collection 
in a healthcare environment. Based on this discussion, the authors suggest ways to 
enable more robust intra-sensor messaging through leveraging social awareness 
by software agents applied in carefully considered healthcare contexts.
Sally A. Applin
University of Kent – Canterbury, UK
Michael D. Fischer
University of Kent – Canterbury, UK

Thing Theory
250
INTRODUCTION
Healthcare providers will enter location-aware smart environments with the expec-
tation that their devices will integrate, their location will be incorporated, and the 
environment that they are within will specifically respond to their needs, as well as 
to the needs of their patients. Cooperation and coordination in complex environments 
requires people to have access to appropriate contextually sensitive information, some 
of which must be shared between them. To plan and design effective location-aware 
smart environments for healthcare, tools are required for integrating and responding 
to human needs and anticipating human intents and desires.
Humans depend upon successful cooperation with each other for their survival. 
As humans have evolved their environments, their communications structure and the 
messages that it produces have become more complex. Sharing or overlap of mes-
sages becomes critical in these highly heterogeneous environments, now comprised 
of people with many points-of-view using a range of channels for communication 
in multiple languages.
A location-aware healthcare smart environment is another layer within this 
already highly heterogeneous system of communication. Each component in a 
location-aware smart environment network can generate data and send messages 
that must be processed, understood and responded to in some manner. In a health-
care environment, well placed software agents can help manage critical messages 
shared between sensors, low level software agents and the people who act on this 
information, improving care for patients and outcomes for providers.
The authors’ propose a framework based on the agency of both humans and 
environmental components: Thing Theory, a logic-based agent framework that 
evolves discussion on how to connect humans to a healthcare environment designed 
to function for their benefit.
BACKGROUND: THE HEALTHCARE ENVIRONMENT
Discrete pieces of the healthcare environment can be automated with Internet of 
Things (IoT) technologies, lessening the risk of mistakes from the outcome of multiple, 
multiplexed messaging and increasing the cooperation and abilities of technology to 
partner with people. In ideation, smart environments in healthcare are a great idea. 
In practice, much must be overcome for their successful deployment (Perry et. al 
2013). Healthcare is a legacy system, largely regulated by government. In healthcare, 
many mistakes can have serious long term consequences, or can be fatal. Thus, any 
automated element within the healthcare domain must be well thought-out, robust 
and offer redundancy to enable successful application (Fairbanks et. al. 2014).

Thing Theory
251
With the IoT and healthcare there are many possible hypothetical scenarios that 
could be developed, from the critical, such as smart operating rooms, pharmacy ser-
vices, and smart rooms for patient or psychiatric care units (Wears & Leveson 2008), 
to more mundane aspects of healthcare such as sections of preventative clinics or 
cafeteria and parking services. In healthcare, using the IoT for patient care and using 
the IoT to reduce costs can co-exist as mutual goals to improve healthcare quality, as 
joint benefits emerge from streamlining for efficiency and improvement of service 
quality (Chaudhry et. al. 2006). IoT strategies for healthcare should enhance and 
leverage legacy systems rather than reduce services as a by-product of automation.
The easiest early applications of the IoT could augment current automated ele-
ments of medical processes. An IoT within healthcare should be based on two broad 
concepts, distribution of functions to addressable devices where each device is re-
sponsible for a limited set of operations or capabilities, and a framework for flexibly 
integrating these devices so that developers, or even end users, can assemble the set 
of capabilities needed for some situational macro-task. Thus, IoT devices are tools 
that can be used for a vast range of purposes, rather than integrated systems per se. 
Integration emerges from instantiation of a given tool assemblage into a process 
through knowledge-based systems external to each device (Bradshaw et. al. 2013). 
This orientation largely mirrors the current situation, where space and individual 
tools are available for highly trained teams of individuals to integrate as needed to 
serve different medical procedures.
Minimally, connecting a device to the IoT framework requires transforming the 
external information a device produces and consumes into a form that can be trans-
mitted over a network (Gubbi et. al. 2013). Examples of relatively straightforward 
healthcare IoT applications enable scales, blood pressure monitors, temperature and 
other visit quantification devices to share data directly by transmitting on demand 
usable measurements to a requesting (or watching) network agent. One or more 
network agents could manage the patient’s record from each device. For example, 
as a patient enters a room, the room could be either activated by sensor, or could 
activate when a healthcare worker logs into the room’s network and verifies the 
patient identity in the room. As the healthcare worker takes the measurements on 
various devices, the smart machines can send their readings to an open file, with 
buttons on the devices as options to skip logging the reading, or a way to do that in 
software in case there is a patient request to not update certain readings. Automating 
this data entry would save the time of the healthcare worker, who currently must 
scribe and re-enter the data into the computer after completing the data collection 
with the patient.
Most current devices used in medical contexts are designed with the intent to be 
administered by highly trained people. Current devices need to be actuated to take 
a useful measurement and to have the appropriate context for that measurement to 

Thing Theory
252
be useful. Some of these tasks are easier to address than others. An example of this 
might be to use IoT sensors to maintain room supply inventories. A simple sensor 
could determine if a supply level was low for cotton or alcohol pads, or other supplies, 
and this could trigger inventory resupply. In small clinics, this may not be useful, 
but in larger hospital settings, it may be helpful to have supply levels monitored 
and automated for refills. IoT sensors can monitor if someone is out of their bed, 
if the door has been opened, if the floor has extra weight on it, if the lavatory has 
been used or not, etc.
What can be measured, recorded and sent back as data in the healthcare envi-
ronment is only limited by human imagination. What will be key to IoT healthcare 
scenarios are trusted methods to manage this low-level sensor data as messages 
between agents (Babar et. al. 2010). In addition, the data from these messages would 
serve the patient and clinics best if it could be managed and integrated in more 
meaningful ways that contribute to the well being of the patient and the efficiency 
of the healthcare enterprise. In healthcare especially, context of data collection is 
critical (Ahsan et. al. 2009).
If there is a patient who is mobile, and staying overnight in a room for observations 
or tests, whether or not they get up to use the lavatory (assuming it is not related to 
their tests) is less important in a smart environment, than if a patient records using 
the lavatory every 15 minutes and does not have a condition precluding that behav-
ior. Simultaneously, patient data must be protected against uses that do not serve 
patient treatment, and in cases where it does, care must be taken so that the patient 
does not feel that they are a part of a larger surveillance state, only benefitting the 
healthcare clinic or provider, rather than patient well-being.
To achieve this in an IoT multi-agent healthcare environment, a trusted broker 
between individual agents and components and the healthcare workers and patients, 
is required to achieve secure and appropriate results. Thus, to move healthcare into 
the IoT realm, a universal ‘thing’ that can function as a source of trust and compe-
tence to organize other agents (Atzori et. al. 2011) while securing and protecting 
patient data, is required.
THING
An Agent Based Multiplexed Message Manager
The 1960’s Addams Family television series was based on a cartoon by Charles Ad-
dams (The Paley Center for Media, n.d.). The Addams Family lived in an enormous 
old mansion, full of taxidermy and other curiosities, located adjacent to a cemetery 
near caves, quicksand, and a swamp. The character of Thing is a disembodied hand 

Thing Theory
253
(and forearm) that has been with the family for many years and is described as both a 
‘family retainer’ and ‘friend.’ It inhabits a series of tabletop boxes in different rooms 
of the house that could be compared to a type of roughly cobbled physical network.
Thing also inhabits plant pots, clocks, the breadbox, glove compartments, tree 
roots, and other devices to use as a base for interaction. Thing communicates with 
the family by gestures, sign language, writing out notes, or tapping out messages in 
Morse code. Thing serves the family by accessing a portal in contextual proximity 
to what is needed. Thing will answer the phone, by taking the receiver off the hook 
(and later replacing it), pour the tea, retrieve and deliver the mail, play castanet 
accompaniment to the Butler’s harpsichord recitals, light cigars, return hats, offer 
advice, put its finger on a bow for tying up a present, or whatever else might be 
needed or desired at the precise moment required, in the precise room or context 
needed. Thing is not only a ubiquitous agent, but an anticipatory one that migrates 
within the environment. Although the family displays a “Beware of the Thing” sign 
on their front gate, Thing is shown to be courteous, friendly and helpful.
The authors consider the Addams Family’s Thing, minus the Uncanny Valley 
issues (Masahiro, 1970), as a good potential starting point for how agent behavior 
and interaction could support people in location-aware smart environments, including 
those within healthcare. The sensing, response and location-awareness of Thing is a 
useful aspirational model, even if the goal is not for disembodied hands to pop out 
of boxes to assist a patient. As an agent of sorts, Thing learned about and possessed 
data knowledge of every member of the household, their preferences, needs and 
desires, and was sensing and aware as to what type of contribution it could make 
to the successful outcome of their actions. Thing worked with their location and 
required nothing from them to be able to assist them, outside of their accepting its 
non-verbal limitation.
Thing had sensors, data, and was location-aware. It also managed in part, the 
relationships between members of the household. This is what the authors would 
expect of an agent in a healthcare smart environment, and what the authors hope, 
within the range of sensitivity to privacy, might be achieved. Developers will have to 
think like Thing in order to take into account how to manage the multiplexed com-
munications, needs and messages that come from multiple sensors and actuators at 
different locations within the healthcare environment. People, sensors or actuators 
might be moving within the environment requiring location awareness on the part 
of the overall environment to use the capabilities of the space. Physical spaces are 
gradually shifting, with the aid of pervasive technology, from being mainly loca-
tions or destinations (with space in-between), towards the notion of being places 
that ‘host transitions’ (Applin and Fischer, 2011a).
In healthcare, this becomes critical as people may move through many spaces 
as a result of what is required for their care. A patient might begin in one environ-

Thing Theory
254
ment (doctor’s office) and transition through the course of diagnosis or treatment 
through several more offices, labs, or specialty clinics, each for an unknown amount 
of time. No two patients may have the exact time or place experience as part of the 
process of their care. This makes provider-to-patient ratios difficult to estimate and 
creates an unpredictable system that when unified for a ‘standard’ patient, risks 
individualized care through poor design of over homogenization. However, smart 
environments that can keep track of individual needs, requirements, times, prefer-
ences and schedules, can be welcome additions to any healthcare system, if they are 
implemented in a way that promotes human agency and protects patient privacy. In 
other words, it becomes even more critical for developers to create agency-based 
aware systems and to design the algorithmic underpinnings of the healthcare smart 
environment to be useful, yet unobtrusive. Most critically, these new designs must 
integrate to work within existing legacy systems.
PERVASIVENESS AND POLYSOCIAL REALITY
When the authors examined the current state of the distribution of pervasive tech-
nology, they discovered that it permeates some areas, and barely covers others. As 
services by sensors and actuators becomes pervasive, human expectation, and some 
level of fusion with the systems that support sensors, will become more and more 
intertwined.
To smooth the transition for healthcare into a sensor/actuator services system, 
conflicts within its culture with regard to adopting and adapting new technolo-
gies must be resolved by those developing and deploying pervasive technologies. 
Technological practice that is ‘marked’ (e.g. unabsorbed) cannot be pervasive. 
Technologies becoming ‘unmarked’ (e.g. absorbed) into the ‘unawareness’ of daily 
life in a healthcare system, indicate successful technology acceptance (Applin and 
Fischer, 2011a).
Humans are constantly trying to communicate whether static or in motion or in 
proximity or distanced. When humans communicate with others they might talk 
through closed doors. They also often disrupt, interrupt and try their best to be heard 
and to listen. Digital mobile technology enables people to be in the same place at 
the same time, or not, and to be mobile or not. Due to time, space, and conceptual 
differences, people may not be in the same ‘plane of reception’ at the same time even 
if they share time and space coordinates. To the extent that people share common 
sources of information while interacting with each other, the greater their capacity 
to collaborate becomes. If humans share too few channels relevant to a common 
goal, there may be too little mutual information about a transaction to interact and 
communicate well collaboratively. Poor collaborative interaction can lead to further 

Thing Theory
255
relational fragmentation with the potential to promote isolated individuation on a 
broad scale (Applin & Fischer, 2011b). By changing the means that humans use 
to manage space and time during their daily routines, developers can shift human 
experience from individuated, user experiences to enhanced sociability within a 
multi-user, multiple application, multiplexed messaging environment. In healthcare 
smart environments, there are multiple channels creating multiple communications, 
which may or may not be coordinated or multiplexed, and receiving multiple com-
munications in kind that may or may not be synchronous, all while people may be 
moving through the environment. It can add up quickly to being overwhelming 
(Applin and Fischer, 2012a).
PolySocial Reality (PoSR) as a conceptual model of the global interaction 
context that emerges when use of the social mobile web and other forms of com-
munication contribute significantly to instantiating intentions (Applin & Fischer, 
2011b, 2012a). PoSR describes the aggregate of all the experienced ‘locations’ and 
‘communications’ of all individual people in multiple networks and/or locales at the 
same or different times. PoSR is based upon the core concept that dynamic relational 
structures emerge from the aggregate of multiplexed asynchronous or synchronous 
data creations of all individuals within the domain of networked, non-networked, 
and/or local experiences (Applin & Fischer, 2012b).
Network and mobile communications tend towards message multiplexing that 
results in a PoSR messaging environment that goes well beyond the limitations of 
human physiological systems to directly engage (Applin & Fischer, 2012b). Thus, the 
interaction environment described by PoSR implies that there are great challenges in 
using upcoming technologies to improve the social integration of people and their 
environments, and the entropy associated with location-awareness combined with 
PoSR outcomes creates a complexity problem that might benefit from a particular 
kind of Artificial Intelligence (AI) agency to solve on an as needed basis. When 
environments have the potential to be ‘social’ (even between themselves as machine-
to-machine) there exists a high potential for fragmentation (e.g. partial or complete 
isolation from ensuing social transactions) due to PoSR related multiplexing.
This type of messaging situation in healthcare can be critical and lead to fatali-
ties if messages communicating urgent, specific care instructions are not received 
and acted upon in a timely manner. The capacity to parse multiple messages in 
location-aware healthcare environments is certainly possible, through sensors and 
processors, and collating that material and sifting through what is critical is where 
an integrative agent can contribute. This is where Thing excels as an agent, mostly 
based on knowledge of the situation, the requirements and specifications, and what 
is going on in context in real time; the capabilities of the healthcare environment in 
the present. There will need to be well considered somewhat transparent software 

Thing Theory
256
and hardware in order to design agents with the utility of ‘Thing’ to manage mul-
tiplexed communications, needs and relationships in the healthcare environment.
THING THEORY
Thing operates through observing, reasoning and then taking action. Thing’s ob-
servations and reasoning are based on knowledge of the humans in its proximity 
that it has gained over time through understanding and learning what type of tasks 
they require assistance with on a regular basis. Thing expands the agency of group 
members and greatly enhances their experience within their rather complex envi-
ronment by acting as an agent on behalf of a wide range of different services and 
facilities the environment has to offer, connecting these to intentions of the group. 
In a healthcare environment, Thing would require trusted access (on an appropriate 
sliding scale depending upon patient healthcare needs) to learn about a patient in 
order to successfully assist it in the healthcare environment. Thing can transform 
a complex jumble of services into a successful technological context. The authors 
argue that successful technological contexts are those that people use to expand 
their agency outside that technological context proper; the technology expands their 
general capacity to choose. (Applin and Fischer 2013).
A Thing-agent might improve a healthcare smart environment by specifying 
some principles that Thing must satisfy. Foremost, the authors would argue that a 
Thing-agent can and will facilitate people exercising agency.
Agency is the capacity to make and execute nondeterministic choices intended 
to advance to a goal as events unfold. For example, humans exercise agency when 
deciding whether to turn on a light or to walk across a street to avoid a possible 
obstacle. Agency implies that agents’ future choices are not intrinsically fixed or 
stochastically predictable except on the basis of secondary principles of reasoning, 
such as rationality, cooperation or enmity.
In any given circumstance, people have a set of options upon which they could 
base choices. In many cases they will not be aware of some options, a situation that 
discovery might advance. In other cases, people will lack the means to usefully 
enact an option because of a lack of skill or knowledge, even though they are aware 
of it as an available possibility. In still other cases, options might not be available 
because the contexts within which these would be available, cannot be deployed. 
Agency is a direct function of how well people can exercise available options into 
choices. Agency can be expanded by making new options available by discovery 
or invention, or through supplying the knowledge and skill required to exercise an 
option. Agency can be reduced by removing options or the capacity to exercise 

Thing Theory
257
options. We can measure the effective agency within a context relative to a given 
agent as a simple ratio, choices/options.
Often these options and corresponding choices are somewhat predictable due to 
the assumption of cultural and social frames for reasoning that will vary between 
people depending on social roles, relative power and specialist knowledge. High 
levels of predictability will be based on mutual understanding of the different points-
of-view by each participant. Resolving most complex situations is not as simple as 
making a single choice or a simple sequence of choices.
Adaptive agency is the capacity to transform options into choices, sometimes 
through learning or skill, but most often through exchange with other agents, where 
each possesses knowledge and skills that can activate options on behalf of the other. 
Exchange can be direct or deferred and results in the establishment of social rela-
tionships between agents. The foundation of a social relationship requires a mutual 
presumption of agency on the part of the other; social relations require that each 
party assumes the other has some level of agency (Applin and Fischer, 2012b). 
One of the outcomes of this relationship is a process of negotiation between social 
agents to arrive at a mutually beneficial consensus that influences future choices.
If someone wanted to turn on a lamp, they would most likely try a wall switch, the 
switch on the lamp, check the plug, or in rare cases, depending upon TV exposure, 
clap their hands (Srinivas et al., 2004). An average person might not expect or an-
ticipate that the person seeking illumination would put their head in the refrigerator 
to make use of its automatic light. However, humans can, and have made this choice 
at times. This is the difficulty in developing adaptive software for an Agent (Thing). 
Fixed decision tree choices are good, but do not have enough information within 
them to fully satisfy human agency. An environment, to be truly smart, must learn 
from the cumulative data within its realm to understand and guess what likely choices 
might be for a given agent and then facilitate or enact these on behalf of that agent.
The first principle of Thing Theory shown in Table 1 is that the Thing-agent 
operates as a meta-agent over the entire technology context, not as a sub-component. 
Our Thing-agent assembles capabilities (e.g. whether or not the refrigerator light is 
suitable as a lamp) that are extensible based on what subcomponents of the system 
happen to be available. What Thing can do is ultimately limited by the basic capa-
bilities of various system subcomponents in combination with Thing’s knowledge 
about these and how to combine capabilities to make new more context sensitive 
capabilities. To increase the Thing-agent’s capabilities, more information from 
subcomponents must be shared. The third principle of Thing Theory is that the 
Thing-agent must be context aware and able to identify that different combinations 
of capabilities are available in different contexts, and have a corresponding capacity 

Thing Theory
258
to manipulate contexts (e.g. enact, repress, and aggregate) to ‘reveal’ new capabili-
ties, many of which may be ‘innovations’ based on context discovery (invention). 
The fourth principle of Thing Theory is that a Thing-agent extends the capabilities 
of other meta-agents. In order for the fourth principle to work, the meta-agents (a 
social network of at least one Thing-agent and another meta-gent) must have some 
type of transparency or at least shared permissions for the exchange of capabili-
ties and contexts. To describe or analyze such multi-agent systems in healthcare, 
developers must take account of the social as well as the individual behaviors of 
the agents as well (Dix & Fischer, 2011).
In implementing Thing theory in location-aware Smart Environments the authors 
argue that a Thing-agent must relate to other agents and interface between multiple 
smart technological contexts. At a minimum, the Thing-agent will inform agents of 
the capabilities of a Smart Environment in pragmatic terms that make sense to the 
agents, and ideally provides a high level interface for the agents into these environ-
ments (Applin & Fischer 2013).
The Thing-agent will discover the capabilities of the various systems it ranges 
over, and possess a representation of the pragmatic contexts for these. There is an 
inherent notion of extensibility; new features will be added and people (or other 
agents) will use these for many purposes not anticipated by designers. A Thing-agent 
could move forward on this problem by using an extensible multi-agent simulation 
incorporating a specification of the capabilities of each sensor and actuator, user 
expertise and other information, to create a model of the outcomes of how services 
and agents might interact with each other. Thing-agent could then offer reasonable 
choices to user agents in terms of what is likely to occur should the agent make a 
given choice (Applin & Fischer 2013: Conclusion).
Table 1. Principles and functions of the thing-agent
Principle
Function
1
Thing-agent is meta agent.
Operates over entire context.
2
Thing-agent’s capabilities are 
based on system subcomponents.
Thing-agent’s capabilities of extension are limited by system 
subcomponents capabilities.
3
Thing-agent must be context 
aware.
Thing-agent must be able to identify different capabilities in 
different contexts and to select the most appropriate one to take 
action.
4
Thing-agent works with other 
meta agents.
Thing-agent works with other meta-agents to expand their 
capabilities when required. Shared permissions/context/
capabilities are required as is some transparency between other 
meta-agents.

Thing Theory
259
IMPLEMENTING THING THEORY
There are two approaches to implementing Thing theory in healthcare smart en-
vironments: as an interface to user-agents; and as an interface between multiple 
smart technological contexts that may be using and supporting the same location. 
A Thing-agent must do both to be effective, where the Thing-agent serves at a mini-
mum as a means to inform user-agents of the capabilities of the smart environment 
in pragmatic terms that make sense to the user-agents, and ideally provides a high 
level interface to these. The Thing-agent must be able to discover the capabilities 
of the various sub-systems it ranges over, and to possess a representation of the 
pragmatic contexts in which the capabilities are expressed. This must be done in 
a way to where Thing-agent facilitates choices by user-agents, rather than forcing 
user-agents into specific choices.
For most technology, the user-agent interface is designed by implementing a 
metaphorical interface. This works reasonably well for simple technological con-
texts, though it often takes a very long time for designers to find just the ‘right’ 
metaphor for implementation.
In a healthcare smart environment, there is usually the intent to ‘embed’ a tech-
nological context within existing contexts that people use. Thus, there is an inher-
ent notion of extensibility in that new features can be added, sometimes arbitrarily 
with the assumption that people will use the environment for many purposes, not 
all of which can be anticipated by designers. A possible approach for resolving this 
is for Thing-agent to employ one or more extensible multi-agent simulations that 
incorporate a specification of each sub-system that specifies sensor information, 
associated services and the role of other agents, including health care professionals 
and patients, to project multiple hypothetical models of how the services and agents 
might interact with each other, and the resulting contexts that emerge from different 
combinations of interaction. This would provide a basis for Thing-agent to offer 
informed choices to both sub-system agents and user-agents, providing feedback 
in advance to them regarding the choices and the likely outcomes should an agent 
make a choice, thus permitting agents to ‘fine-tune’ how they proceed.
To achieve this, developers might need to move beyond classical imperative log-
ics most commonly in use for inference-based systems. Deontic logic was originally 
developed to explore the logic of morality in theology. In addition to the classical 
predicate calculus, deontic logic adds two basic modal operators, permitted and 
obliged (and their negations). Rather than describing specific outcomes, deontic 
operators focus on potentialities such as what is permitted and not permitted at a 
given time, with the capacity to identify derivations that make the possible impos-
sible, and the impossible possible. From an agency perspective, identifying available 

Thing Theory
260
options and choices, and in particular a means of analyzing what is needed to turn 
a theoretical option into a practical choice (Fischer, 2006).
Deontic logic has been demonstrated to be a useful basis for constructing simula-
tions of sensitive real-time, time and location aware interactions between agents of 
different types (Ryan et. al. 1991; Dong and Li 2013). Casto and Maibaum (2007) 
present a deontic logic suitable for representing the interrelations between agents of 
different types, including agents exhibiting agency, and Horty (2001) is an extended 
logical treatment of representing and reasoning with agency in deontic logic. An 
advantage of modeling with deontic logic is that it is relatively easy to introduce new 
agents, new conditions and new outcomes into a working simulation and produce 
results that are instructive to user-agents.
Furthermore, a Thing-agent mediated multi-agent simulation can be useful for 
designing new pan-context technologies to be incorporated into the location-aware 
smart environment, since these too can take advantage of ‘simulation services’ 
provided by Thing-agent as a part of their decision making, both discovering new 
capabilities, contexts and a basis for comparing different options. Effectively this 
facilitates the incorporation of true agency into even sub-systems, and thus the capac-
ity for the design of social cooperation between processes, rather than master-slave 
relationships, exploiting Thing-agent to ensure that the information that needs to 
be shared to support agency in the network of agents is available to maximize the 
capacity for cooperation, and avoid the problems that can arise from PoSR networks 
of cooperating agents.
A presumption might be made that a Thing-agent must have a human intelligence 
of sorts. The authors agree to the extent that social intelligence is human. However, 
research such as Brian Hare’s ongoing research on dogs, highlights their non-human 
anticipatory intelligence as a alternate type of sensory intelligence (Hare and To-
masello, 2005). A Thing-agent needs to resolve design principles and may need to 
do this in non-human ways, while remaining socially aware.
Patient Process Management Using Thing Theory
Extending the Kaiser and IBM example from the IBM Interconnect Smarter Processes 
Keynote in 2015 (IBM Software, 2015), one of many possible cases where Thing 
Theory could be used is as a solution to nurse-to-patient room ratio concerns. In the 
Interconnect example, nurse to patient ratios are shown to need to be maintained at 
1:4 for optimum care in a hospital environment. The IBM/Kaiser solution proposed 
tracking nurses to trigger messaging systems, to direct available staff to rooms on 
wards with lower ratios. This tracking may cause privacy concerns for nursing staff 
and inhibit implementation. If the healthcare provider’s concern is insuring that 
patient needs are attended to, Thing-agents could monitor in-room processes at a 

Thing Theory
261
sensor/process level and communicate those to negotiate with other Thing-agent 
representatives to summon staff.
One critical element of patient care is that the processes required to maintain 
that specific conditions of care, possibly unique to a single patient, are fulfilled. In 
the case of hospitalization, each patient may have different needs. Some may need 
oxygen, heart rate, fluid monitoring at close intervals, others may need different 
systems monitored or the same ones at different intervals. As people and their condi-
tions are individualized, so must be their care. This is challenging to manage in an 
environment that must operate within constrained budgets and resources.
A new way to relate to patients using the IoT could be to understand patient 
care needs as time intervals and time functions that are different from each other. 
Computing gives developers tools to enable more sophisticated time management. 
A Thing-agent can manage the time schedules for each patient’s needs and com-
municate those with other Thing-agents that manage nurse schedules. In this way, 
hospitals would not be tracking whether or not nurses were on the floor, but rather 
whether or not the maintenance tasks for individual care were addressed at the times 
they needed to be addressed. The sensors themselves on devices would respond 
to checks in place by physically present nurses, who would be available to check 
these patients due to the needs of the monitoring, rather than only due to needs of 
a nurse to patient ratio.
CONCLUSION
The healthcare environment intersects with people in deep and meaningful ways. 
To automate it without this consideration can be dangerous. The first steps of auto-
mation as applied to healthcare environments have been based on ‘lean’ and ‘agile’ 
principles with a first focus on cost-savings. This is a short-sighted implementation 
plan that does not account for the long-term effects on patients of losing agency 
and critical relationships. Lean and agile mechanisms for ‘processing’ patients have 
neglected to respect patients’ privacy and have risked patient safety as healthcare 
workers scramble to make their quota of rooming patients in a lean healthcare 
environment. Future plans of healthcare providers to incorporate remote ‘video 
medicine’ as further cost savings, have the possibility to impact patient care as 
doctors may miss a critical diagnosis due to the loss of resolution in a small video 
window. Furthermore, the condition of ‘denial’ can impact the accuracy of patients 
self-reporting their states.
When IoT is applied to healthcare the outcome will be multiple partially-automated 
IoT device-based systems, from different vendors that vary from installation to in-

Thing Theory
262
stallation. These systems will depend on other systems (and people) for oversight, 
information and activities required for proper operation in any specific context. 
These systems will have to work together without being designed specifically to do 
so. In terms corresponding to the four principles of Thing Theory (Table 1), we will 
need a supervisor agent that operates over the entire context. This agent will moni-
tor dynamically the capabilities and requirements of each IoT device system in the 
context. It will identify appropriate applications of these capabilities as specific and 
unique circumstance transpire, coordinating all the systems in that context through 
relevant information and judgements in the context of use.
Thing is, however, just a critical element, not the only element needed for suc-
cessful IoT applications in healthcare. In short, automation without context, agency 
and consideration for patients will lead to unforeseen complications that will cost 
much more in the long run to resolve. Technology that inhibits a physician from 
developing the trusted relationships critical and foundational to good care, can also 
create similar problems. The people designing and implementing healthcare systems 
must see the people within the systems (workers, physicians, and patients) as a 
series of long-term relationships that are to be managed, not necessarily resources, 
services and supplies to be coordinated in the moment. Much of what makes a good 
doctor-patient relationship function well is the understanding and shared history that 
happens between the doctor and patient over time. IoT technologies can augment 
relationships by being smarter about how information may be gathered and processed, 
but it is best to do this within the context surrounding existing and well-established 
relationships within the healthcare system. Humans do not necessarily benefit from 
solely interacting with machines in this context. However, machines can provide 
processing and knowledge management that assists and bolsters relationships. Our 
recommendation is that clinics understand how to augment their offerings to let 
machines do what they do best in the context of enabling the people within the 
system to do what they do best: create, build and sustain human relationships in the 
context of maintaining overall health and well-being.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This chapter is derived from an Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI 2013) workshop 
paper on Location Awareness for Mixed and Dual Reality (LAMDa ‘13), which the 
authors have extended for the healthcare smart environment context. The authors 
thank the Economic and Social Research council for funding for underlying research 
under grant ES/J012300/1 and the Natural Environment Research Council for fund-
ing underlying research under grant NE/I004149/1.

Thing Theory
263
REFERENCES
Ahsan, K., Kingston, P., & Shah, H. (2009). Context Based Knowledge Management 
in Healthcare: An EA Approached. In AMCIS 2009 Proceedings (pp. 297-302). 
AIS Electronic Library.
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2011a). A Cultural Perspective on Mixed, Dual and 
Blended Reality. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Intelligent 
User Interfaces (IUI’11) IUI Workshop on Location Awareness for Mixed and Dual 
Reality (LAMDa’11) (pp. 1-4). Palo Alto, CA: DFKI.
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2011b). Pervasive Computing in Time and Space: 
The Culture and Context of ‘Place’ Integration. In Proceedings of the 2011 7th 
International Conference on Intelligent Environments (IE’11) (pp. 285-293). Not-
tingham, UK: IEEE. doi:10.1109/IE.2011.65
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2012a). PolySocial Reality: Prospects for Extend-
ing User Capabilities Beyond Mixed, Dual and Blended Reality. In Proceedings of 
the 17th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’12) Workshop 
on Location Awareness for Mixed and Dual Reality (LAMDa’12) (pp.1–4). Lisbon, 
Portugal: DFKI.
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2012b). Applied Agency: Resolving Multiplexed 
Communication in Automobiles. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 4th Annual Confer-
ence on Automotive User Interaction (AutomotiveUI ‘12) (pp. 159–163), Portsmouth, 
NH: ACM SIGCHI.
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2013). Thing Theory: Connecting People to Location-
Aware Smart Environments. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference 
on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’13) Workshop on Location Awareness for Mixed 
and Dual Reality (LAMDA’13) (pp.115-118). Santa Monica, CA: ACM.
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2011). Siot: Giving a social structure to the 
internet of things. Communications Letters, IEEE, 15(11), 1193–1195. doi:10.1109/
LCOMM.2011.090911.111340
Babar, S., Mahalle, P., Stango, A., Prasad, N., & Prasad, R. (2010). Proposed secu-
rity model and threat taxonomy for the internet of things (IoT). In Recent Trends in 
Network Security and Applications (pp. 420–429). Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-
3-642-14478-3_42
Bradshaw, J. M., Hoffman, R. R., Woods, D. D., & Johnson, M. (2013). The Seven 
Deadly Myths of “Autonomous Systems”. In IEEE Intelligent Systems (pp. 54-61). 
IEEE.

Thing Theory
264
Castro, P., & Maibaum, T. (2007). A complete and compact propositional deontic 
logic. In Theoretical Aspects of Computing–ICTAC 2007 (109-123). Berlin, Ger-
many: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-75292-9_8
Chaudhry, B., Wang, J., Wu, S., Maglione, M., Mojica, W., Roth, E., & Shekelle, 
P. G. et al. (2006). Systematic review: Impact of health information technology on 
quality, efficiency, and costs of medical care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 144(10), 
742–752. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-144-10-200605160-00125 PMID:16702590
Dix, J., & Fisher, M. (2011). Where logic and agents meet. Annals of Mathematics 
and Artificial Intelligence, 61(1), 15–28. doi:10.1007/s10472-010-9223-9
Dong, H., & Li, X. (2013). A deontic action logic for complex actions. In Logic, 
Rationality, and Interaction (pp. 311–315). Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-
642-40948-6_24
Fairbanks, R. J., Wears, R. L., Woods, D. D., Hollnagel, E., Plsek, P., & Cook, R. 
I. (2014). Resilience and resilience engineering in health care. Joint Commission 
Journal on Quality and Patient Safety, 40, 376–383. PMID:25208443
Fischer, M. D. (2006). Cultural agents: a community of minds. In Engineering Societies 
in the Agents World VI (pp. 259–274). Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/11759683_16
Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., & Palaniswami, M. (2013). Internet of Things 
(IoT): A vision, architectural elements, and future directions. Future Generation 
Computer Systems, 29(7), 1645–1660. doi:10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010
Hare, B., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Human-like social skills in dogs? Trends in 
Cognitive Sciences, 9(9), 439–444. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2005.07.003 PMID:16061417
Horty, J. (2001). Agency and Deontic Logic. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
doi:10.1093/0195134613.001.0001
IBM Software. (2015). Smarter Process: Reinventing Business Operations. Retrieved 
from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=nZjIApCIUKw
Mori, M. (1970). The Uncanny Valley. Trans. Karl F. McDorman and Norri Kageki. 
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, 19.
Perry, S. J., Mosher, H. J., Persoon, T. J., Bass, E. J., Fairbanks, R. T. J., & Pennathur, 
P. R. (2013). Healthcare Systems Design At a Crossroads: Challenges, Opportuni-
ties and Strategies. In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society 
Annual Meeting. SAGE Publications. doi:10.1177/1541931213571155

Thing Theory
265
Ryan, M., Fiadeiro, J., & Maibaum, T. (1991). Sharing actions and attributes in 
modal action logic. In Theoretical Aspects of Computer Software (pp. 569–593). 
Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/3-540-54415-1_65
Wears, R. L., & Leveson, N. G. (2008). Safeware: Safety-critical computing and 
healthcare information technology. Advances in Patient Safety: New Directions and 
Alternative Approaches, 4, 1-10.
KEY TERMS AND DEFINITIONS
Asynchronous: Not occurring in the current time. Voice mail is an example of 
an asynchronous message.
Heterogeneity/Heterogeneous: Composed of many different pieces, parts or 
attributes.
Location-Aware: A condition by which technology can track its location in an 
automated fashion using a combination of hardware, sensors, and software.
Meta-Agent: A software algorithm that can monitor various inputs from various 
lower level hardware sensors and their data outputs.
Multiplexed: A telecommunications term referring to a circumstance where 
multiple signals, message streams or data, are combined into one signal that is 
transmitted over a shared medium.
PolySocial Reality: A conceptual model of all synchronous and asynchronous 
communications by humans/humans, humans/machines, machines/machines, ani-
mals/animals, animals/humans, animals/machines.
Smart Environment: An environment that contains responsive electronic monitor 
equipment such as sensors, actuators or other devices that can measure information 
in the environment and act upon it to either generate, share or transmit data to enable 
reactions from the environment or devices related to the environment.
Synchronous: Occurring in real time in the present. People meeting face-to-face 
are doing so in synchronous time.
Thing-Agent: A trusted meta-agent that manages low level processes in a smart 
environment and brokers preferences to other trusted meta-agents.

Copyright ©2017, IGI Global. Copying or distributing in print or electronic forms without written permission of IGI Global is prohibited.
DOI: 10.4018/978-1-5225-1820-4.ch010
Chapter 10
266 
Social Internet of 
Things in Healthcare:
From Things to Social Things 
in Internet of Things
ABSTRACT
This chapter presents a future vision for healthcare, which will involve smart devices, 
Internet of Things, and social networks, that make this vision a reality. The authors 
present the necessary background by introducing the Social Internet of Things para-
digm. Agent technology seems to be a promising approach in the adoption of the 
Social Internet of Things in collaborative environments with increased autonomy 
and agility, like healthcare is. Also, it is examined challenges to the adoption of the 
Social Internet of Things in healthcare in order to facilitate new applications and 
services in more effective and efficient ways.
INTRODUCTION
The healthcare industry is constantly bound to adapt to the many occurring changes, 
from advances in diagnostic and therapeutic procedures to the most advanced in-
formation technology, in order to increase the overall quality of patient care, and 
also to reduce healthcare costs (Riazul Islam, Kwak, Humaun Kabir, Hossain, & 
Kwak, 2015).
Cristina Elena Turcu
University of Suceava, Romania
Corneliu Octavian Turcu
University of Suceava, Romania

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
267
Various worldwide surveys conducted in relation to this field reveal that one of 
the biggest current technological initiatives in the healthcare industry is the Internet 
of Things (IoT) (IoT to Revolutionize Healthcare, 2015; State of the Market, 2015). 
In recent times, there has been a growing interest in building Social Internet of 
Things (SIoT) (Atzori 2011a, 2012, 2013).
This chapter examines challenges to the adoption of the Social Internet of Things 
in healthcare in order to facilitate new applications and services in more effective 
and efficient ways. Several papers and studies have focused their attention on this 
new paradigm. We present the necessary background by introducing the SIoT para-
digm. Subsequently, we provide a survey of the applications of SIoT in different 
domains. Some solutions for SIoT are also presented, each with its own strengths 
and weaknesses. We consider various enabling technologies that could be exploited 
in order to extend the current applications in the healthcare area. The movement of 
healthcare out of the hands of healthcare providers (hospital, laboratory, etc.) and 
into people’s homes will be greatly facilitated with the latest remote sensing devices 
of all kinds connected to physicians and care givers. The examples are numerous and 
the potential for cost savings and improved care is overwhelming. We also address 
social networks that can be used for storing and sharing information of interest for 
the SIoT interactions. Agent technology seems to be a promising approach in the 
adoption of the Social Internet of Things in collaborative environments with increased 
autonomy and agility, like healthcare is. If a physical entity is linked via a unique 
identifier to an agent, then the identifiable entity could be easily integrated in SIoT 
as a social thing. For things in SIoT to understand each other, sharing a common 
understanding of the structure of information among them is required. Ontologies 
offer a solution to represent information, including the relationships between things 
in SIoT and to share knowledge as well. Moreover, ontologies allow the dynamic 
integration of knowledge in different domains into SIoT. Finally, we highlight the 
lessons to be learnt from the past, open challenges and some possible directions 
for future research.
This chapter is organized as follows: background of research fields of Internet 
of Things and Social Internet of Things is investigated in the second section. The 
next section presents the enabling technologies that could be exploited in order to 
extend the current applications in the healthcare area. Next, some consideration 
related to evolution of medicine models and potential implications of SIoT adoption 
in healthcare are presented. Next section presents some practical benefits enabled 
by SIoT for people suffering from asthma. Finally, future research direction and 
conclusions are pointed out.

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
268
BACKGROUND
According to various studies, e.g. (Davis, 2004; Fisher, 2003), healthcare systems 
around the world, face rising costs and uneven quality, thus generating significant 
variations, both within the United States and internationally. It is a common fact that 
U.S. adults often do not receive the proper level of care recommended for a certain 
condition. One study indicates that on average, individuals received only about 55 
percent of the recommended medical care for common illnesses (McGlynn et al., 
2003), whereas preventive care is often overlooked.
But various studies reveal that a large number of people tracks health indicators 
or symptoms for themselves or for someone else. For example, according to (Health 
Fact Sheet, 2015), 60% of U.S. adults track their weight, diet, or exercise routine; 
33% of U.S. adults track health indicators or symptoms, like blood pressure, blood 
sugar, headaches, or sleep patterns; 12% of U.S. adults track a health indicator on 
behalf of someone they care for. The technology offers the potential to help people 
to track all these data. For example, according to (Susannah, & Duggan, 2012), 
31% of cell phone owners, and 52% of smartphone owners, have used their phone 
to look up health or medical information. Thus, the advancements in technology, 
like Internet, Web-based, smartphone, etc. have encouraged the development of 
technology-based applications aimed at supporting people in both easily tracking 
health indicators or symptoms, and diagnosing and managing various diseases.
A report by PwC’s Health Research Institute (HRI) reveals patients’ attraction to 
social media sites such as Facebook and Twitter in order to find and share medical 
information (Social media, 2012). According to this survey of 1,060 U.S. adults, 
about one-third of consumers are using the social space as a place for healthcare 
discussions. And 42% of consumers have used social media to access health-related 
consumer reviews.72% of Internet users say they looked online for health informa-
tion within the past year, according to (Susannah, & Duggan, 2013) and 27% of 
US internet users had tracked health data online, (Health Fact Sheet, 2015). Con-
sequently, in trying to reduce the costs of providing care and to increase efficiency, 
many healthcare organizations adopt a social media oriented strategy in order to 
interact with patients and provide them services and information that could impact 
their healthcare decisions.
Current development of the traditional medical model toward P6 medicine model 
can be amplified by the Internet of Things (IoT) paradigm.
The Internet of Things (IoT) infrastructure allows connections between different 
entities (i.e., human beings, wireless sensors, mobile robots, etc.), using different 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
269
but interoperable communication protocols and makes a dynamic multimodal/ 
heterogeneous network. In this infrastructure, these different entities (viewed as 
“things”) have the ability to discover and explore one another, gather, provide, or 
transmit information to IoT. Thus, according to (ITU Internet Reports, 2005, p. 8), 
“from anytime, anyplace connectivity for anyone, we will now have connectivity for 
anything”, not only for anyone. According to (Botterman, 2009, p. 5), the Internet 
of Thing integrates “things having identities and virtual personalities operating 
in smart spaces, using intelligent interfaces to connect and communicate within 
social, environmental, and user contexts”. And, “from objects that communicate 
to objects that socialize in the Internet” (Iera, 2011), there is only one step. Thus, 
a novel paradigm of the Social Internet of Things (SIoT) was introduced: a “social 
network of intelligent objects” that is “based on the notion of social relationships 
among objects”, according to (Atzori,Iera, & Morabito, 2011b).
The authors of (Zorzi, Gluhak, Lange, & Bassi, 2010; Uckelmann, Harrison, & 
Michahelles, 2011; Ortiz, Hussein, Park, Han, & Crespi, 2014) present a phased 
approach of the evolution of Internet of Thing from Intranet of Things or of Extranet 
of Things to Social Internet of Things. They also discuss how the situation of many 
“Intranets” of Things should evolve into a much more integrated and heterogeneous 
system, namely the Internet of Things. According to (Ortiz, Hussein, Park, Han, 
& Crespi, 2014), “IoT enables the creation and composition of new services and 
applications, offering to individual users a new ecosystem where different intranets 
of things can collaborate”. Also, “things should be socialized for allowing humans 
to establish relationships with them in an easy way”. In the same paper, the authors 
present visually the evolution of IoT from Intranet of Things to SIoT (Figure 1), 
considering that “the cluster between Internet of Things (IoT) and social networks 
(SNs) enables the connection of people to the ubiquitous computing universe”.
The Internet of Things is viewed as an evolutionary process, rather than a com-
pletely new one. And the Social Internet of Things, dealing with some IoT related 
issues, is part of evolution. According to (Atzori, Carboni, & Iera, 2013, p. 13), “the 
driving motivation is that a social-oriented approach is expected to put forward the 
discovery, selection and composition of services and information provided by dis-
tributed objects and networks that have access to the physical world”.
According to (IoT to Revolutionize Healthcare, 2015) the range of “things” that 
can be part of an IoT or a SIoT solution is practically unlimited. From the small and 
simple to the large and complex, the possibilities are enormous. Next we present 
some medical monitoring devices that can be connected to IoT or SIoT in order to 
improve the overall quality of patient care.

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
270
State of the Art of SIoT Enabling Technologies
Medical Monitoring Devices
Common to everyday living, wearable and wireless implantable medical devices, as 
well as home monitoring devices, are endowed with transmitting capabilities (Nata-
rajan, Prasath, & Kokila, 2016) that make information about a patient available for 
hospital staff analysis. For example, these devices may be wireless interconnected 
with sensors that measure the glucose level, the heart rate, the blood pressure, the 
weigh, and other medical parameters. These characteristics will turn these devices 
into a real part of IoT. In this sense, various applications are currently deployed, 
especially regarding the measurement and monitoring of a patient’s vital signs, in-
cluding glucose level sensing, electrocardiography, and blood pressure monitoring.
Glucose Level Testing/Glucose Monitoring
It is a common fact that carbohydrates are the main sources of glucose, essential for 
providing energy for both the brain and the body. Nevertheless, a high level of blood 
glucose over a prolonged period of time might cause diabetes. The World Health 
Figure 1. Evolutionary history
Source: Ortiz, Hussein, Park, Han, & Crespi, 2014.

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
271
Organization estimates that more than 380 million people are suffering from this 
disorder, and these figures will double by 2030 (What is Diabetes? (n.d.)).
During the last decade, several non-invasive methods for glucose monitoring were 
used. For example, in 2003 Caduff et al. (Caduff, Hirt, Feldman, Ali, & Heinemann, 
2003) described an experiment using a new, non-invasive, non-optical continuous 
glucose monitoring system, based on impedance spectroscopy. Later on, they used 
a multisensor system, combining sensors for dielectric and optical characterization 
of skin (Caduf et al. 2009). In 2006, the concept of Continuous Glucose Monitoring 
(CGM) was introduced (Hovorka, 2006). Actually, blood sugar levels are recorded 
using a CGM sensor implanted under the skin of a diabetic patient, and that sends 
information to a wireless device. In 2011, Istepanian et al. (Istepanian, Hu, Philip, 
& Sungoor, 2011) proved the potential of Internet of m-health Things “m-IoT” for 
non-invasive glucose level sensing. Looking towards the future 4G health applica-
tions, this concept embedded both m-health and IoT functionalities.
Many companies have developed CGMs using Bluetooth technology to transmit 
glucose levels to a compatible smart device (i.e. Medtonic, Dexcom, Glucowise). In 
2014, Google and the Swiss health care group Novartis announced that they were 
testing a smart contact lens able to measure the glucose level from tears. Therefore, 
a new way to deal with diabetes would be to endow such lenses with transmitting 
capabilities. Also, BodyTel from Germany sells a Bluetooth 4.0 device with a 
blood glucose meter (GDH-FAD, n.d.) that communicates with Android and iOS 
smartphones, and transmits data to a medical data cloud.
Electrocardiogram Monitoring
Electrocardiography (ECG or EKG) is a diagnostic tool which records the electrical 
activity of the heart over a period of time. The electrocardiogram is not used only to 
measure the rate and rhythm of the heartbeat, but also to diagnose different diseases 
like arrhythmia, ischemia etc. ECG is very important, especially for the evaluation 
of patients with possible heart problems.
The Belgian company Imec developed a Smart ECG necklace used to monitor 
every-day cardiac activity (Wearable health monitoring, n.d.). The device is based 
on a commercial low-power microcontroller and a low-power radio, and has wire-
less communication capabilities within 10 m range. Also, the company designed 
a prototype which stores heart rate and 3D accelerometer data. These data can be 
transmitted in real time to a receiver located up to 16 km away from the acquiring 
point.
The Spanish start-up Nuubo, dealing with wearable medical devices for cardiac 
prevention, diagnostics, and rehabilitation solutions developed a wireless and remote 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
272
cardiac monitoring platform based on a biomedical e-textile technology - BlendFix 
Sensor Electrode Technology (NECG Platform, n.d.).
Also, some researches are related to ECG and IoT (Li, 2014; Lu, 2015).
Blood Pressure Monitoring
Researchers and companies showed interest in developing blood pressure devices 
for IoT integration. In (Xin, Min, & Ji, 2013) the authors proposed an IoT - based 
blood pressure monitoring system (patent in China), their intelligent terminal being 
based on the Internet of Things and including the following: a health monitoring 
device, a data communication device, a locating device, a microprocessor, a storage 
device, an input-output device, and an electrical power unit.
Many authors implemented various applications for blood pressure monitoring, 
based on different transmission technologies, usually Bluetooth or Zigbee (Anto-
novici, 2014; Anurag, 2014). For example, the authors in (Hassanalieragh et al., 2015) 
use a concentrator to access each individual sensor from an IoT-based architecture.
Different companies released blood pressure monitors that not only check the 
readings, but also automatically store data in the cloud. For example, QardioArm 
implements a “tap to pair” system with iPhones and Android, working on Bluetooth 
4.0 technology. Data are automatically stored in the Qardio cloud and then shared 
by actors from the health system or the family.
Aiming to improve the patients’ blood pressure, Withings Company and the 
American Medical Group Foundation finished in 2016 a pilot project (Macala, 
2016) that used the Withings Wireless Blood Pressure Monitor. This monitor is 
connected with the patient’s personal iOS or Android device and collected data are 
transmitted in real time to his personal healthcare team, through a dedicated web 
portal. Using this device, patients are able to monitor and control their own blood 
pressure and the medical staff is provided with valuable information regarding the 
health status of a large group of patients.
Body Temperature Measurement
Body temperature is one of the four main vital signs that must be monitored to 
ensure safe and effective care (McCallum, & Higgins, 2012). Body temperature 
sensors are used as a part of various items: wearable bracelet, smart pillow, finger-
style device, skin stamp, etc.
Authors in (Mansor, Shukor, Meskam, Rusli, & Zamery, 2013) proposed a re-
mote health monitoring system in which such a sensor sends the body temperature 
values to a microcontroller through an Xbee wireless communication. Real-time 
data are stored in a health monitoring database, using a wireless local area network. 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
273
Another temperature monitoring system was found in (Malhi, Mukhopadhyay, Sch-
nepper, Haefke, & Ewald, 2012). Here, the authors designed and developed a smart 
noninvasive wearable physiological parameters monitoring device based on Zigbee 
technology. The deficiency of Zigbee protocol stack is that it might prove too large 
to handle. Therefore, other authors (Chin, Atmodihardjo, Woo, & Mesbahi, 2015) 
decided to use the MiWi protocol stack instead. The advantages derived from using 
this protocol consist in reduced code size, small footprint, and a very low overhead, 
in comparison to the ZigBee protocol. Authors in (Jian, Zhanli, & Zhuang, 2012) 
use a OSGi (Open Service Gateway Initiative) to send packages with the body 
temperature values into an M2M (Machine to Machine) format.
Wireless Body Temperature Monitor from Win-Health is a technologically ad-
vanced medical device which allows body temperature recording up to 100 hours. It 
consists of 2 independent parts: a transmitter, and a receiver; the transmitter monitors 
the body temperature and transmits the values automatically to the remote receiver.
The US start-up MC 10 released a high-tech tattoo (actually an elastomeric 
plaster which includes an electronic part) endowed with measuring capabilities 
(Bachfischer, 2014). It can be used not only to monitor the body temperature in a 
real-time manner, but also to measure some biometric data (brainwaves, heartbeat, 
and muscle activity).
All these above presented devices are a few examples from a large range of suit-
able candidates to “things” that could be connected in IoT/SIoT.
Social Internet of Things
The goal of the Internet of Things is to enable things to be connected anytime, 
anyplace, with anything and anyone ideally using any path/network and any service 
(Vermesan, & Friess, 2014).
According to the authors of (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2011b, p. 1193) “the 
IoT vision can be fully achieved only if objects are able to cooperate in an open 
way”. Thus, in order to exploit the potential of the IoT, the authors believe that trust 
objects and provided services should be easily discoverable and usable by humans 
and by other objects. But, the existing solutions for service discovery in IoT do not 
scale with the number of things that are expected to be connected in IoT. Moreover, 
although researchers reveal other problems for adopting IoT in reality, various solu-
tions were proposed. In this chapter, we will focus only on the potential offered by 
social networking to enable IoT.
In (Kleinberg, 2008) the author noticed that the exponential growth of social 
networking websites usage, along some of the features provided, have attracted the 
attention of a large number of researchers from various areas. For example, several 
authors focus on the great potential of using online social networks for enhancing 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
274
the Internet search (Mislove, Gummadi, & Druschel, 2006; Erola, Castellà-Roca, 
Viejo, & Mateo-Sanz, 2011), for enabling new forms of information exchange in the 
Internet (Mislove, Gummadi, & Druschel, 2006), or for optimizing the peer-to-peer 
networks (Fast, Jensen, & Levine, 2005).
In the last years, social relationships between human beings were extended to 
social relationships between objects, as solutions to various problems. The authors 
of (Holmquistet al., 2001) were among the first to tackle with the socialization 
between objects, and they presented a solution for establishing qualitative relations 
and selective connections between smart wireless devices. In their paper, the authors 
analyzed temporary relationships between objects and how the owners of those 
objects should control such a process in the context of ubiquitous computing. In 
2001, when the paper was published, both concepts of the IoT and the online social 
networks were in their beginning stages.
More recent literature focus on several research projects and experimental ap-
plications based on a new generation of objects. For example, Bleeckerin (Bleecker, 
2006), introduces the neologism “Blogject”- ‘objects that blog’ in order to distinguish 
the “things” connected to the Internet from the “things” participating within the 
Internet of social networks. The researcher presents in his paper the characteristics 
of Blogjects: they can “track and trace where they are and where they’ve been”; 
“have self-contained (embedded) histories of their encounters and experiences; 
“have some form of agency — they can foment action and participate; they have 
an assertive voice within the social web”.
In fact, the Blogject is viewed as a kind of early ancestor to the Spimes, defined 
by Sterling in (Sterling, 2005) as material instantiations of an immaterial system, 
digitally manufactured things from virtual plans, trackable in space and time.
Later on, P. Mendes (Mendes, 2011) presents objects able to participate in 
conversations that were previously reserved to humans only. “Such objects may be 
intermittently connected most of the time, and may be capable of collecting and 
processing data without a constant human intervention. The result is a self-organised 
ecosystem able to make useful data available to people when and where they really 
need it, augmenting their social and environmental awareness”.
With the rapid development of social networking, researchers focused on the 
benefits social networking could bring to IoT.
D. Guinard et al. (Guinard, Fischer, & Trifa, 2010) proposed the use of the 
existing online social structures as a solution for enabling the sharing of things in 
the context of the IoT. Thus, exploiting various features offered by social networks 
(e.g. Facebook, LinkedIn, Twitter, etc.) and their (open) APIs, the authors build a 
system for sharing and controlling access to resources supplied by a given Web-
enabled device (smart thing).

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
275
In order to analyze the behaviors of objects and people as data, L. Ding et 
al.(Ding, Shi, & Liu, 2010, p. 417) propose a platform to cluster together the Inter-
net, the Internet of Things, and social network. Thus, “since the development of the 
Internet of Things, objects are involved into the network together with people” they 
consider that the “social networks can be built based on the Internet of Things” and 
“are meaningful to investigate the relations and evolution of the objects in the IoT”.
In 2010, M. Kranz et al. (Kranz, Roalter, & Michahelles, 2010) present in their 
paper an investigation regarding both the potential of combining social and tech-
nical networks and the implication of so-called “socio-technical networks” in the 
context of the IoT. Also, the authors describe how to empower physical objects to 
share pictures, comments, and sensor data via social networks. However, they do 
not propose any solution for the required architecture and protocols or for how the 
objects involved can establish social relationships.
Authors of L. Atzori et al. (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2011) define various types 
of relationships in which things can be engaged: Parental Object Relationship (POR) 
(built in same period, by the same manufacturer); Co-Location Object Relationship 
(CLOR) (exist in a common location - cohabitation); Co-Work Object Relationship 
(CWOR) (work in a common location); Ownership Object Relationship (OOR) (be-
long to the same owner); Social Object Relationship (SOR) (objects that come into 
contact due to owners relationships). Based on this last relationship among objects, 
the paper introduces the concept of Social Internet of Things (SIoT). Moreover, 
considering a comparison with Social Networks Services (SNS) for human beings, 
the authors introduce an architectural model of SIoT and imagine some possible 
application scenarios where objects share best practices. Thus, for example, they 
propose to establish social relationships between PCs in the same local area network 
in order to “find solutions to common setting problems, such as those related to the 
configuration of a tricky network printer”. Similarly, social relationships established 
between devices that visit the same geographical area allow the exchanging of useful 
information on the physical world. In this scenario, the authors consider the case 
of handsets that provide data on the radio coverage to new visitors so as improve 
their connectivity service.
According to L. Atzori et al. (Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2011), trustworthiness of 
the billions of members of the IoT should be a key element in object selection and 
provided services usage. The problem of the trustworthiness in the Social IoT (how 
to know which services and objects to trust) is addressed by the authors of (Nitti, 
Girau, Atzori, Iera, & Morabito, 2012; Nitti, Girau, & Atzori, 2014). In order to 
build a reliable system on the basis of the behavior of objects, the authors focus on 
understanding how the information provided by members of the social IoT has to 
be processed so as to avoid attacks and malfunctions. Therefore, they defined and 
analyzed two models for trustworthiness management in the social IoT: the subjective 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
276
and the objective models. The authors plan to use the trustworthiness management, 
in order to enable the promoting social relations in the social IoT.
The authors of (Nitti, Atzori, & Cvijikj, 2014; Nitti, Atzori, & Cvijikj, 2015) 
address the problem of network navigability in the Social Internet of Things. In 
order to find the right object that can provide a desired service, an object can use 
its own relationships, the friends of its friend, and so on. Considering the selection 
of the friendships as a key for finding the desired service and, consequently, for a 
successful deployment of the SIoT, the authors focused on the selection of a narrow 
set of links, in order to support an efficient management of friendships. Also, they 
analyze possible strategies for the benefit of overall network navigability.
In (Girau, Nitti, & Atzori, 2013), the authors analyze the major IoT imple-
mentations, highlighting their common characteristics that could be re-used for 
implementing a new platform for the Social Internet of Things. Also, the authors 
present the major extensions introduced on the existing platforms, in order to offer 
the features of the SIoT. They describe some possible simple application scenarios 
that use this platform, “where objects create their own relationships and groups, 
in order to provide several functionalities to the final users” (p. 5), with minimal 
human intervention.
Social Internet of Things Platforms
Even though in recent years different models and prototypes of SIoT occurred, 
practical applications are not very present in literature. Ascribing social attributes to 
connected devices will open new ways to develop a new generation of applications 
where human-to-device social relationships will be intensively exploited.
Some examples of SIoT platforms are briefly described below.
Cosmos
Cosmos is an IoT platform, developed in a FP7 project. The declared aim of COS-
MOS is to “enhance the sustainability of smart city applications by allowing IoT 
based systems to reach their full potential” (“Cultivate resilient,” 2015). The authors 
proposed this platform in order to endow things with the capacity of acting in an 
autonomous way, while they become smarter and more reliable. Three representative 
scenarios were considered in COSMOS: Smart heat and electricity management 
(London), Smart mobility for public transport (Madrid), IoT Business Eco-System 
(Taipei). Virtual entities (VE) were used to represent things and groups of things 
from the real word. VEs act with specific goals and internal mechanisms to achieve 
them. Multiple interactions between VEs can be established for sharing a common 
goal, for achieving specific objectives, for advertising properties/attributes actua-
tion service offers etc. (Voutyras, Bourelos, Kyriazis, & Varvarigou, 2014). Further 
on, the authors considered the social relations and interactions between VEs and 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
277
introduced two new COSMOS components: Social Monitoring and Social Analysis 
(Voutyras, Gogouvitis, Marinakis, & Varvarigou, 2014). The first one collects, ag-
gregates, and distributes monitoring data towards collaborating groups, while the 
second one extracts the VE complex social characteristics, constructs models and 
patterns for VEs’ behaviors, and establishes relations between them. This way, COS-
MOS became a SIoT platform since, based on social media technologies, it exploits 
social relations and interactions between the VEs. The result is an interesting social 
concept: friendship between VEs. Social criteria are used for friends’ choice and 
a valuable advantage of this platform is that each VE is in a relationship of mutual 
aid with other VEs. Other advantages lie in the possibility of applying this concept 
to many areas, such as eHealth, environment monitoring, security & emergencies, 
traffic management, logistics, industrial control, home automation, etc.
ThingsChat
This platform was a subject of a doctoral thesis (Han, 2015). The author considered 
that connected devices are able to have social relationship with both people and 
other devices. In this approach, a Web API was used to assure the interaction be-
tween online social network (OSN) and devices. Later on, new functionalities were 
added to the OSN core, and the result, an universal OSN of everything, was named 
ThingsChat. To include social characteristics into the service framework, a Device 
Socialization module was added to the architecture presented in (Han, 2015). This 
module facilitates communication between both devices and SIoT, and devices and 
human users. A home gateway named ThingsGate is the element that discovers, 
stores, and transmits device services to ThingsChat. This module is responsible 
with user grant authorization to ThingsChat and device initialization with social 
functionalities. In this way the connected device become social entities. ThingsGate 
plays a vital role in the realization of the socializing device, very important for this 
platform. In order to fit the device in the SIoT platform, ThingsGate acts like a 
mediator in the process of device authorizing and customization. It is the module 
that registers the device in SIoT and adds it to the socialized list, which can be ac-
cessed later by user. Message exchanges between users and devices are facilitated 
by existence of a NLP (Natural Language Processing) interface which converts user 
messages into machine readable commands, and vice versa. The typical interaction 
between users and devices identified by the author is that the user asks the device 
to complete various operations and the device does the job and afterwards replies 
back to the user. This seems to be similar to the client/server negotiation process in 
multi-agent technology. Otherwise, we consider that some of the functionalities on/
in this platform could be realized by using agents (for example, NLP).
Socialite
For bringing to reality the vision of the SIoT, the authors of (Kim, 2015; Kim, 2016) 
propose a cloud based distributed collaboration framework, named Socialite. As the 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
278
authors presented, the Socialite architecture is designed to support the following: the 
interoperability of different connected devices from various manufacturers perform-
ing in different ecosystems; the scalability to handle a large number of data streams 
from various interactions between devices and/or people; the extensibility, by taking 
into consideration future devices to be connected and, also, provided services, for 
achieving the proposed goals based on different types of social relationships. In order 
to allow participants in Social Internet of Things to collaborate with each other in 
this framework, the authors define new social relationships between humans and 
devices, in addition to existing friendships among users in social networks (Kim, 
2015; Kim, 2016):
•	
Collocation: Users and/or devices in “the same” location.
•	
Friendship: Relationship between users, as in Social Networks.
•	
Kinship: Devices with a same model and manufacturer.
•	
Ownership: A device registered by its owner.
•	
Shared Ownership: Devices owned by a same user.
•	
Thriendship: Friendship among things/devices of friends.
These newly defined social people-to-device and device-to-device relationships 
could be used in order to determine how the data generated by users and devices is 
being exchanged, distributed and received.
The uniform access to different connected devices and people in the system 
is enabled by the semantic models defined in this framework for users, locations, 
relationships, services and devices.
Multi-Agent Technology in Healthcare, IoT, and SIoT
In order to solve various problems related to information exchange between dif-
ferent things connected to IoT, agent technology proves to be a viable solution. 
Before presenting the specific aspects of the problems solved with the help of this 
type of technology, we briefly introduce the agent technology and several systems 
developed for healthcare.
There is no universally accepted definition of the term agent. However, the defi-
nition given by Wooldridge is one of the most comprehensive and frequently used 
worldwide. According to it, an agent is “a hardware or (more usually) a software-
based computer system that enjoys the following properties: autonomy - agents 
operate without the direct intervention of humans or others, and have some kind of 
control over their actions and internal state; social ability - agents interact with other 
agents (and possibly humans) via some kind of agent-communication language; 
reactivity- agents perceive their environment and respond in a timely fashion to 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
279
changes that occur in it; pro-activeness - agents do not simply act in response to 
their environment, they are able to exhibit goal-directed behaviour by taking initia-
tive” (Wooldridge, & Jennings, 1995). The multi-agent system (MAS) paradigm 
views agents mainly as cooperating entities acting in a group with other agents in 
order to solve various problems. To enable agents to interoperate ontologies are 
part of solution. Ontologies represent a formalism which allows the representation 
of the knowledge related to a certain field, as a model. “Ontologies can be used to 
represent the structure of a domain by means of defining concepts and properties 
that relate them” (IGI-GLOBAL Dictionary, 2016).
In fact, researchers agree that agent-based system technology provides a real 
paradigm for designing and implementing software or integrated systems that offer 
solutions to various complex and dynamic problems from different domains.
Over time, several multi-agent systems were developed in order to address some 
of the issues related to various domains, including healthcare.
Remote health monitoring solutions offer great potential help for the disabled, 
elderly and/or chronically ill patients. This way they have access to good healthcare 
without regularly visiting their doctors. Over time, various multi-agent systems that 
offer solutions to remote health monitoring have been developed worldwide.
A multi-agent system for remote healthcare monitoring through computerized 
clinical guidelines was developed in the SAPHIRE project (Laleci et. al., 2008). 
This system provides a Clinical Decision Support system for remote monitoring of 
patients at their homes, and at the hospital to decrease the load of medical practi-
tioners and also of healthcare costs. Also, the system aims to reduce human error 
in hospital events/complications and finally to provide a feedback system for the 
medical staff in training.
K4CARE, (K4CARE, 2008), was a research project whose main objective was 
to create, implement, and validate a knowledge-based healthcare model for the 
professional assistance of senior patients at home. The main step of the project 
was to develop a healthcare model to guide the creation of an integrated system of 
healthcare services for the care of the elderly, the disabled persons, and the patients 
with chronic diseases, (Bergenti, & Poggi, 2009). The model created during this 
project defined the actors in the care model (representing the profiles of the subjects 
involved in the K4CARE model: healthcare professionals, patients and relatives, 
citizens, and social organisms), their roles and interactions. The concepts behind the 
model were formalized using ontologies and the chosen language for the ontologies 
was the OWL (Web Ontology Language).
Also, in the healthcare sectors, various medical systems that cooperate with each 
other were suggested. Thus, in (Iantovics, 2010), the author proposes a cooperative 
medical diagnosis multi-agent system called CMDS (Contract Net Based Medi-

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
280
cal Diagnosis System). This system can flexibly solve a large variety of medical 
diagnosis problems.
Moreover, the use of agents for gathering the patients’ medical electronic records 
from the information systems of different medical units was addressed in many 
research papers.
In (Chen, González, Zhang, & Leung, 2010), the authors conducted a study 
about a secured scheme based on mobile agents, for the systems which manage 
electronic medical records. The medical staff can instantaneously search for complete 
information about a patient, by accessing his/her electronic records via the Internet. 
The mobile agents are used to search for the patients’ electronic records in different 
medical units that provide medical services. Taking into account that a mobile agent 
communicates with other applications and agents from the network for a faster access 
to the medical information, the probability of security issues arising is very high. 
In order to solve the security problems, the authors use a management scheme for 
access keys based on the interpolation formulas of Lagrange and on hierarchical 
management structures to increase the security of mobile agents.
In order to gather the information distributed among healthcare centers, authors 
of (Martin-Campillo, et al., 2009), also take into account the use of mobile agents. 
The agents developed in the MedIGS system collect all the medical data about a 
patient by performing a local search at each hospital, part of a predefined group, 
avoiding the need for a central repository.
Given the different standards used to store the patient’s medical records in vari-
ous health care settings, the use of the ontology is mandatory in order to gather 
health-related information from many health information systems. The authors of 
(Chang, Yang, & Luo, 2011), go a step further and “propose an ontology-based 
agent generation framework for information retrieval in a flexible, transparent, and 
easy way on cloud environment”.
To sum up, we can say that multi-agent technology proves to be a viable solution 
to various problems encountered in global health care.
Also, the semantic interactions and the interoperability between various things 
connected to the IoT could be achieved by using a multi-agent system. The adoption 
of a multi-agent system for an IoT oriented solution is enabled by a natural map-
ping between a real world entity and an agent. Hence, if a physical entity is linked 
via its unique identifier (e.g., Radio Frequency IDentification: RFID tag) to an 
agent, then the identifiable entity could be easily controlled in a complex network 
of autonomous objects. The distributed software agents will represent the desired 
IoT things and interact accordingly with the standard defined by the Foundation for 
Intelligent Physical Agents (FIPA).
Agent technology seems to be a promising approach in the implementation of 
the Internet of Things in collaborative environments with increased autonomy and 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
281
agility. Regarding the architecture of an IoT oriented solution, the benefits of an 
approach based on multi-agent systems (instead of using centralized approaches) 
are listed below:
•	
The multi-agent system can work even if one agent (as a component of the 
system) fails or is compromised;
•	
It is easy to recover a failed agent or replace it with another one;
•	
Autonomous agents are less vulnerable to attacks than in a centralized 
architecture.
But, considering the multiple advantages provided by the agent technology, 
researchers try to adopt it in implementing the Social Internet of Things. Currently, 
worldwide there are few applications of the Social Internet of Things using agent 
technology. Subsequently, we will take a look at some recently published research 
papers dealing with the adoption of multi-agent technologies in the Social Internet 
of Things.
Thus, Ciortea et al. (Ciortea, Boissier, Zimmermann, & Florea, 2013) propose 
to model the autonomous entities in the SIoT as autonomous and proactive agents. 
The authors’ aim is “to enable things as proactive participants in existing social 
networking services” (p. 1536), extending and transforming social networks by 
integrating autonomous and proactive things.
The authors of (Hussein, Soochang, & Crespi, 2015) propose a framework for 
adaptive and personalized smart services provisioning within the Social Internet of 
Things. Built on the socio-technical networks, it was considered as goal-driven, i.e. 
cognitive, context-awareness being the core for intelligence generation. The pre-
sented results show reduced overhead of contextual data acquisition and processing.
S. Park et al. (Park, Hussein, & Crespi, 2015) presented a “socialization agent 
to support the evolution toward the SIoT that could be embedded into some of IoT 
devices by the policy and capacity of themselves” (p. 2). The authors propose an 
on-site available service discovery architecture which takes into consideration the 
practical IoT domains’ formations and federations, by evolving from smart devices 
to social devices.
The authors of the (Lin, Ho, & Lin, 2014), define an NFC-based intelligent 
agent for the Social Internet of Things (presented in Figure 2) and propose a frame-
work for developing this kind of agent, which combines the NFC technique with 
context-acquisition, ontology-knowledgebase, and semantic-adaptation modules, a 
credit-based incentive scheme to encourage social cooperation and to recommend 
relevant services. In order to enable the accommodation to the uncertain real-world 
environments, “this study also defines intelligent and social functionalities for the 
proposed NIA to achieve three indispensable abilities: reactive actions, proactive 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
282
achievements, and social cooperation. In order to support context-aware computing, 
this study develops several mechanisms to support the abilities of location, time, 
activity, and social awareness” (p. 15). The resulting social-advertising system shows 
that this framework can support context awareness in the SIoT environments and a 
wide range of different functionalities.
The Social Internet of Things represents the extension of Internet of Things, 
which has great potential for various applications. Although, it lacks intelligence 
and cannot comply with the increasing application performance requirements from 
different domains, agent technology seems to be a promising approach in the imple-
mentation of the Social Internet of Things.
The next section briefly summarizes a historical evolution of medicine models 
and potential implications of SIoT adoption in healthcare.
MEDICINE MODELS AND SIoT
Over the years various Pn medicine models (where n takes values from 0 to 6) have 
been considered. Their evolution, taking into consideration their main features, is 
briefly summarized in Table 1.
The P0 medicine model, strongly centered on the physician, is seen as the dawn 
of medicine, according to (Bragazzi, 2013). Gradually, we evolved from P0 medicine 
to P3 medicine, a model defined as personalized, predictive, and preventive. But 
paradigm changes with an additional feature of the new medicine model: participa-
Figure 2. Architecture of the NFC-based intelligent agent
Source: Lin, Ho, & Lin, 2014.

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
283
tory. The editors of Journal of Participatory Medicine, Jessie Gruman and Charles 
W. Smith, define participatory medicine as “a cooperative model of health care that 
encourages, supports and expects active involvement by all parties (clinicians, pa-
tients, caregivers, administrators, payers and communities) in the prevention, man-
agement and treatment of disease and disability and the promotion of health” 
(Gruman, & Smith, 2009, p. 1). In fact, several terms have been used for this new 
model, such as: personalized medicine, precision medicine and P4 medicine. We 
consider that the first two terms do not express the four features of this paradigm, 
and, therefore we opt for the term P4 medicine. In comparison to traditional medi-
cine, the P4 approach was regarded visionary. However, according to (Gorini, & 
Pravettoni, 2011, p. 1), this approach “lacks a consideration of the psychological 
needs and values that make each individual unique”. Consequently, the authors 
suggest adding the ‘fifth P’ standing for the psycho-cognitive aspects. And n was 
incremented, transforming P4 medicine into ‘P5 medicine’. P6 medicine (i.e., per-
sonalized, predictive, preventive, participatory, psycho-cognitive, public) entails 
the addition of the public feature as a conceptual evolution of P5 medicine. In fact, 
P6 medicine was defined by G. Cumming and others as “P4 + Cn Hippocratic 
revolution”, where, according to Cumming G. et al. (Cumming, Fowlie, & McK-
endrick, 2013), Cn stands for “community, collaboration, self-caring, co-creation, 
co-production, and co-development using technologies delivered via the Internet”. 
In accordance with (Bragazzi, 2013), “patients do not limit themselves to browse 
health-related information on the Web, but they actively exploit all of the Web’s 
potential”, including the social networks. In fact, according to (Topol, 2012), “our 
go-to source for health and medical information is moving away from our doctor—
it is increasingly by crowdsourcing and friend sourcing our entrusted social network.”
We propose to extend these models. In fact, adopting Social Internet of Thing in 
healthcare could favor the development of a new form of medicine that ensures the 
fulfillment of healthcare delivery criteria as presented in (Srini, 2011):
Table 1. The evolution of medicine models
Feature
P0 Medicine
P3 Medicine
P4 Medicine
P5 Medicine
P6 Medicine
Personalized
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Predictive
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Preventive
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Yes
Participatory
No
No
Yes
Yes
Yes
Psycho-cognitive
No
No
No
Yes
Yes
Public
No
No
No
No
Yes

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
284
•	
Content;
•	
Context;
•	
Communication;
•	
Convenience;
•	
Customization.
These are briefly described as P6 + C5.
In this context, the meaning of the word “community” considered in the defini-
tion of P6 medicine (P4 + Cn) must be understood not only in human terms, but as 
a community of things (living and non-living entities).
The use of this new medicine model, encouraged by the adoption of SIoT in 
healthcare is in compliance with the right principles of healthcare delivery, pre-
sented in (Srini, 2011):
•	
Right Care (right to access and right to waive);
•	
Right Time;
•	
Right Place;
•	
Right Delivery Model/Channel;
•	
Right Price;
•	
Right Personnel;
•	
Right Partnerships.
These are described as P6 + C5 => 7R.
Next section evaluates the potential and implications of Social Internet of Things 
approach for people suffering from asthma.
SIoT-Based Benefits for People with Asthma
Further on, we focus on presenting a Social Internet of Things (SIoT) approach to 
solve some problems encountered by the many people suffering from asthma. In 
fact, those who suffer from this chronic disease (children and adults alike) are not 
the only ones affected. Family members and friends may also be dealing with the 
issues, because they have to adjust their lives according to the special requirements 
of the patient. The use of information technology holds promise for improving the 
patients’ overall safety and for enhancing the quality of medical services.
In order to meet the needs of asthma patients and to prevent asthma attacks, 
we propose a smart living, cost-effective and real-time solution based on a Social 
Internet of Things approach. Acute, severe asthma exacerbations or attacks can be 
life-threatening and therefore must be prevented by the use of medications and by 
reducing exposure to the environmental factors known as triggers. But because these 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
285
triggers differ from case to case, a good asthma management implies identifying those 
specific to a certain patient in order to limit exposure or to avoid them completely. 
In this context, the Social Internet of Things can prove really useful for enabling 
the efficiency of various information related to medical problems. In fact, the SIoT 
approach can be perceived as a natural extension of the current implementations 
which must take into consideration important additional IoT based resources and 
capabilities.
Asthma attacks are the result of some cumulative factors, such as exposure to 
cold air, pollution, dust, pet dander, exhaustion or even secondhand smoke. More 
important than recognizing the early warning signs of an asthma attack, is the attempt 
to prevent it. Some important living or non-living things, located indoors or outdoors, 
are included in this architecture. Things linked to people are a special category to 
be considered. Different types of sensors, moving at the same time with the patient, 
could be used to monitor his health parameters. For example, breath rate sensors 
developed by PASCO (PASPORT Respiration. (n.d.)) measure the breathing rate 
based on the air pressure in a mask worn by the patient. Usually, this sensor is used 
indoors, but if it communicates with another thing, like a mobile phone or a tablet, 
it would be included in the considered SIoT architecture. The values of breath rate 
and breath rate average parameter can be sent to the living things of the architecture, 
e.g. personal general practitioners, specialists, emergency team members, care giver, 
or family members. Moreover, the patient can wear different types of biosensors 
or an intelligent T-shirt (Monitoring patients using intelligent t-shirts, 2011), that 
can measure his temperature or can generate an electrocardiogram. There are many 
choices available on the market for global positioning system (GPS) receivers that 
could provide the patient’s position (latitude, longitude, and altitude). When the val-
ues of the measured parameter exceed the patient’s personal presets limits, the data 
are communicated to other things (especially to the emergency staff, if necessary).
Home things could also bring benefits when the patient’s status is monitored. For 
example, indoor sensors or companion robots can be sources of environment status 
parameters sent to other things connected in a social relationship to the SIoT. Also, 
home appliances can tell something about the patient’s activities (for example, the 
moment when the patient uses the vacuum-cleaner implies dust).
The patient could receive alerts from other things connected to the SIoT, such 
as, air quality monitoring stations, wireless pollution sensors, weather stations or 
even traffic monitoring systems. Based on these alerts signals, the patient (if pe-
destrian) can avoid polluted areas in the city, and thus preventing the occurrence 
of an asthma attack.
If we consider outdoor asthma triggers, the IoT local weather report can enable 
patients with asthma to monitor the weather conditions and the air quality. Based 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
286
on their social relationships in SIoT, people with asthma could receive information 
regarding location-based real-time index levels for pollen, asthma sensitivity, as 
well as the local weather forecast. Extreme hot, cold, or even humid weather, or 
rapidly changing climate conditions (e.g., changes in temperature and humidity, 
barometric pressure or strong winds, etc.) may also be asthma triggers. Also, patients 
with asthma living in areas where forest fires are common during the summer must 
pay attention to the poor quality of air. Regular exercise is healthy for patients with 
asthma, but the air quality must be taken into consideration. Thus, based on the local 
weather report, patients can schedule their outdoor activities when the air quality 
is suitable for their health status, thus avoiding exposure to high levels of pollen or 
pollution. Moreover, this kind of report helps patients to decide whether to use the 
air conditioner in order to filter the air coming into their home.
Using their social relationships in SIoT, people suffering from asthma have 
access to exact and real-time information regarding potential symptom triggers in 
their close environment.
CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
The latest in advanced treatments and information technology came with the promise 
of improved efficiency in healthcare.
In this chapter we have focused on the social-oriented approach that we believe 
to be the gap between current medicine models and practice. Starting from the idea 
that the evolution of the Internet of Things to Social Internet of Things supports this 
approach, the present chapter aims to examine the adoption of the Social Internet 
of Things in healthcare. We address a broad range of techniques, methods, models, 
functionalities, middleware solutions, systems and applications related to SIoT. 
Next, some consideration related to evolution of P’s medicine models and potential 
implications of SIoT adoption in healthcare are presented.
Additionally, this chapter provides an overview of the impact of the SIoT in 
healthcare, and tackles with the inherent challenges of making the use of SIoT a 
reality in the field. The Social Internet of Things has great potential for healthcare 
organizations and society. The benefits can be enormous, both for people and for 
healthcare organizations, if the development of SIoT is properly managed.
As healthcare professionals cannot afford to take risks, significant research is 
needed to make SioT at healthcare a reality. Thus, according to J. A. Stankovic 
(Stankovici, 2014, p. 6), “new research problems arise due to the large scale of 
devices, the connection of the physical and cyber worlds, the openness of the sys-
tems of systems, and continuing problems of privacy and security”. Besides the IoT 

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
287
challenges, SIoT brings its own challenges in order to facilitate new applications 
and services in more effective and efficient ways. Some of these challenges are the 
following:
•	
Ownership;
•	
Defining/enabling relationship between things;
•	
The heterogeneous nature of the connected devices (resolving this problem 
will increase inter-things communications in the SIoT);
•	
Concurrent access to connected devices; aiming to limit costs, medical units 
must determine the optimal number of devices that provide the same service. 
On the other hand, in SIoT, multiple users can simultaneously try to access 
the same equipment, which can lead to blockages in the system. Establishing 
a system of priorities in accessing connected devices or temporally limiting 
the access to them, may be part of the solution to this problem;
•	
Conflicts between devices;
•	
Function redundancy;
•	
The establishing of a level of trustworthiness between connected devices that 
are “friends” (Chen, Bao, & Guo, 2014; Nitti, 2014; Nitti, 2015);
•	
Non-standardization.
Despite the many problems faced by the adoption of SIoT in healthcare, this 
paradigm promises to deliver to human users and connected devices the possibility 
to discover, select, and use proper services found through scanning their friends 
network.
REFERENCES
Antonovici, D. A., Chiuchisan, I., Geman, O., & Tomegea, A. (2014). Acquisition 
and management of biomedical data using Internet of Things concepts. Fundamen-
tals of Electrical Engineering (ISFEE),2014 International Symposium. doi:10.1109/
ISFEE.2014.7050625
Anurag, M., Rahmani, A.M., Westerlund, T., Yang, G., Liljeberg, P., & Tenhunen, 
H. (2014). Pervasive Health Monitoring Based on Internet of Things: Two Case 
Studies. Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communica-
tion and Healthcare (MobiHealth’14). doi:10.4108/icst.mobihealth.2014.257395
Atzori, L., Carboni, D., & Iera, A. (2013). Smart Things in the Social Loop: Para-
digms, Technologies, and Potentials. Ad Hoc Networks.

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
288
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2011a). Making things socialize in the Internet 
-- Does it help our lives? ITU Kaleidoscope.
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2011b). SIoT: Giving a Social Structure to the 
Internet of Things. IEEE Communications Letters, 15(11), 1193–1195. Retrieved 
from http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6042288&isnu
mber=6083590
Atzori, L., Iera, A., Morabito, G., & Nitti, M. (2012). The Social Internet of Things 
(SIoT) – When social networks meet the Internet of Things: Concept, architecture and 
network characterization. Computer Networks, 56(16), 3594–3608. doi:10.1016/j.
comnet.2012.07.010
Bachfischer, N. (2014). The Internet-of-Medical-Things: Five innovative examples, 
2014. Retrieved from http://www.i-q-i.net/
Bergenti, F., & Poggi, A. (2009). Multi-Agent Systems for E-health: Recent Projects 
and Initiatives. Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop on Objects and Agents.
Bleecker, J. (2006). Why Things Matter: A Manifesto for Networked Objects — 
Cohabiting with Pigeons, Arphids and Aibos. Internet of Things. Retrieved from 
www.nearfuturelaboratory.com/files/WhyThingsMatter.pdf
Botterman, M. (2009). Internet of Things: an early reality of the Future Internet. 
European Commission. Retrieved June, 2015 from ftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/
fp7/ict/docs/enet/iot-prague-workshop-report-vfinal-20090706_en.pdf
Bragazzi. N. L. (2013). From P0 to P6 Medicine, a model of highly participatory, 
narrative, interactive and “augmented” medicine: Some considerations on Salvatore 
Iaconesi’s clinical history. Patient Preference and Adherence, 7, 353–359.
Caduff, A., Hirt, E., Feldman, Y., Ali, Z., & Heinemann, L. (2003). First human 
experiments with a novel non-invasive, non-optical continuous glucose monitor-
ing system. Biosensors & Bioelectronics, 19(3), 209–217. doi:10.1016/S0956-
5663(03)00196-9 PMID:14611756
Caduff, A., Talary, M. S., Mueller, M., Dewarrat, F., Klisic, J., Donath, M., & Sta-
hel, W. A. et al. (2009). Non-invasive glucose monitoring in patients with Type 1 
diabetes: A Multisensor system combining sensors for dielectric and optical char-
acterisation of skin. Biosensors & Bioelectronics, 24(9), 2778–2784. doi:10.1016/j.
bios.2009.02.001 PMID:19286364

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
289
Chang, Y. S., Yang, C. T., & Luo, Y. C. (2011). An Ontology based Agent Generation 
for Information Retrieval on Cloud Environment. Journal of Universal Computer 
Science, 17(8), 1135–1160.
Chen, I.R., Bao, F., & Guo, J. (2014). Trust-based Service Management for Social 
Internet of Things Systems. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Comput-
ing. doi: 10.1109/TDSC.2015.2420552
Chen, M., Gonzalez, S., Zhang, Q., & Leung, V. (2010). Code-centric RFID sys-
tem based on software agent intelligence. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 25(2), 12–19. 
doi:10.1109/MIS.2010.44
Chin, C. S., Atmodihardjo, W., Woo, L. W., & Mesbahi, E. (2015). Remote tempera-
ture monitoring device using a multiple patients-coordinator set design approach. 
ROBOMECH Journal, 2(1), 4. doi:10.1186/s40648-015-0027-x
Ciortea, A., Boissier, O., Zimmermann, A., & Florea, A. M. (2013). Reconsidering 
the social web of things: position paper. Proceedings of the 2013 ACM conference on 
Pervasive and ubiquitous computing adjunct publication, (UbiComp ‘13 Adjunct). 
ACM. doi:10.1145/2494091.2497587
Cultivate resilient smart Objects for Sustainable city applications. (2015). Retrieved 
from http://www.sido-event.com/public/exposants_files/COSMOSNewsletterIs-
sue1.pdf
Cumming, G., Fowlie, A., & McKendrick, D. (2013). H = P4 + C and Health Web 
Science: “A Hippocratic Revolution in Medicine”. Proceedings of the ACM Web-
Sci ’11 3rd International Conference on Web Science. Retrieved April, 2014 from 
http://www.websci11.org/fileadmin/websci/Papers/Health_WS_Workshop-A_Hip-
pocratic_Revolution.pdf
Davis, K. (2004). Mirror, Mirror on the Wall: Looking at the Quality of American 
Health Care Through the Patient’s Lens. Commonwealth Fund.
Ding, L., Shi, P., & Liu, B. (2010). The clustering of internet, internet of things and 
social network. Proc. of the 3rd International Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition 
and Modeling. doi:10.1109/KAM.2010.5646274
Erola, A., Castellà-Roca, J., Viejo, A., & Mateo-Sanz, J. M. (2011). Exploiting 
social networks to provide privacy in personalized web search. Journal of Systems 
and Software, 84(10), 1734-1745. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0164121211001117

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
290
Fast, A., Jensen, V., & Levine, B. N. (2005). Creating social networks to improve 
peer-to-peer networking. In Proc. of ACM KDD’05. doi:10.1145/1081870.1081938
Fisher, E. (2003). The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending: 
Part I. The Context, Quality, and Accessibility of Care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 
138(4), 273. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-138-4-200302180-00006 PMID:12585825
GDH-FAD blood glucose meter / Bluetooth. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.
medicalexpo.com/prod/taidoc-technology/product-70247-729754.html
Girau, R., Nitti, M., & Atzori, L. (2013). Implementation of an Experimental Plat-
form for the Social Internet of Things, Seventh International Conference on Innova-
tive Mobile and Internet Services in Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS), (pp. 500-505). 
doi:10.1109/IMIS.2013.90
Gorini, A., & Pravettoni, G. (2011). P5 medicine: A plus for a personalized approach 
to oncology, Nat. Rev. Clinical Oncology, 8(7), 444. doi:10.1038/nrclinonc.2010.227-
c1 PMID:21629214
Gruman, J., & Smith, C. W. (2009). Why the Journal of Participatory Medicine? 
Journal of Participatory Medicine, 1. Retrieved from http://www.jopm.org/opinion/
editorials/2009/10/21/why-the-journal-of-participatory-medicine/
Guinard, D., Fischer, M., & Trifa, V. (2010). Sharing using social networks in a 
composable Web of Things. Proceedings of IEEE PERCOM. doi:10.1109/PER-
COMW.2010.5470524
Han, N. S. (2015). Semantic service provisioning for 6LoWPAN: powering internet of 
things applications on Web (Doctoral dissertation). Available from Institut National 
des Telecommunications. (tel-01217185)
Hassanalieragh, M., Page, A., Soyata, T., Sharma, G., Aktas, M., Mateos, G.,... An-
dreescu, S. (2015, June). Health monitoring and management using internet-of-things 
(IoT) sensing with cloud-based processing: Opportunities and challenges. In Services 
Computing (SCC), 2015 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 285-292). IEEE.
Health Fact Sheet. (2015). Health Fact Sheet. Pew Internet Project’s research related 
to health and health care. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/
health-fact-sheet/
Holmquist, L. E., Mattern, F., Schiele, B., Alahuhta, P., Beigl, M., & Gellersen, H. 
W. (2001). Smart-its friends: A technique for users to easily establish connections 
between smart artefacts, Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Ubiq-
uitous Computing, UbiComp ’01. Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/3-540-45427-6_10

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
291
Hovorka, R. (2006). Continuous glucose monitoring and closed-loop systems. Diabetic 
Medicine, 23(1), 1–12. doi:10.1111/j.1464-5491.2005.01672.x PMID:16409558
Hussein, D., Soochang, P., & Crespi, N. (2015). A Cognitive Context-aware Ap-
proach for Adaptive Services Provisioning in Social Internet of Things. IEEE ICCE 
Conference Proceeding. doi:10.1109/ICCE.2015.7066376
Iantovics, B. (2010). Cognitive Medical Multiagent Systems, BRAIN. Broad Re-
search in Artificial Intelligence and Neuroscience, 1(1).
Iera, A. (2011). The Social Internet of Things: from objects that communicate to 
objects that socialize in the Internet. 50th FITCE International Congress Palermo. 
Retrieved from https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=sQZDlLPgTWY
IGI Global Dictionary. (2016). Retrieved from http://www.igi-global.com/diction-
ary/ontology/21117
IoT to Revolutionize Healthcare. (2015). IoT to Revolutionize Healthcare Industry: 
Survey. M2M Magazine. Retrieved from http://www.machinetomachinemagazine.
com/2015/04/14/iot-to-revolutionize-healthcare-industry-zebra-survey/
Istepanian, R. S., Hu, S., Philip, N. Y., & Sungoor, A. (2011). The potential of 
Internet of m-health Things “m-IoT” for non-invasive glucose level sensing. Pro-
ceedings of the 33rd Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society.
ITU Internet Reports. (2005). The Internet of Things. Executive Summary. Inter-
national Telecommunication Union. Retrieved from http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/
publications/internetofthings/InternetofThings_summary.pdf
Jian, Z., Zhanli, W., & Zhuang, M. A. (2012). Temperature measurement system 
and method based on home gateway. Patent CN 102811185.
K4CARE. (2008). K4CARE project Web site. Retrieved from http://www.k4care.ne
Kim, J. E. (2016). Architecting Social Internet of Things (Doctoral dissertation). 
University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kim, J. E., Maron, A., & Mosse, D. (2015, June). Socialite: A Flexible Framework 
for Social Internet of Things. In Mobile Data Management (MDM), 2015 16th IEEE 
International Conference on (Vol. 1, pp. 94-103). IEEE. doi:10.1109/MDM.2015.50
Kleinberg, J. (2008). The convergence of social and technological networks. Com-
munications of the ACM, 51(11), 66–72. doi:10.1145/1400214.1400232

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
292
Kranz, M., Roalter, L., & Michahelles, F. (2010). Things that Twitter: social net-
works and the Internet of things, What can the Internet of Things do for the Citizen 
(CIoT). Workshop at Pervasive.
Laleci, G.B., Dogac, A., Olduz, M., Tasyurt, I., Yuksel, M., & Okcan, A. (2008). 
SAPHIRE: A Multi-Agent System for Remote Healthcare Monitoring through Com-
puterized Clinical Guidelines. Agent Technology and e-Health. Whitestein Series in 
Software Agent Technologies and Autonomic Computing, 25-44.
Li, H., Miao, C., Zhang, L., Tian, W., & Wang, J. (2014). Research on key technolo-
gies of ECG monitoring system based on Internet of things. Application Research 
of Computers, 38(12).
Lin, C.H., Ho, P.H., & Lin, H.C. (2014). Framework for NFC-Based Intelligent 
Agents: A Context-Awareness Enabler for Social Internet of Things. International 
Journal of Distributed Sensor Networks. doi:10.1155/2014/978951
Lu, L., & Chen, M. (2015). Implementation of ECG Monitoring System Based on 
Internet of Things. Chinese Journal of Medical Instrumentation, 39(6), 418–420. 
PMID:27066681
Macala, W. (2016). A pilot project increased blood pressure monitoring effective-
ness to 70 percent. Retrieved from http://www.psfk.com/2016/02/withings-fitness-
tracker-home-blood-pressure-monitoring.html
Malhi, K., Mukhopadhyay, S. C., Schnepper, J., Haefke, M., & Ewald, H. (2012). 
A Zigbee-Based Wearable Physiological Parameters Monitoring System. IEEE 
Sensors Journal, Volume, 12(Issue:3), 423–430. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2010.2091719
Mansor, H., Shukor, M. H. A., Meskam, S. S., Rusli, N. Q. A. M., & Zamery, N. S. 
(2013, November). Body temperature measurement for remote health monitoring sys-
tem. In Smart Instrumentation, Measurement and Applications (ICSIMA), 2013 IEEE 
International Conference on (pp. 1-5). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICSIMA.2013.6717956
Martin-Campillo, A., Martinez-Garcia, C., Cucurull, J., Marti, R., Robles, S., & 
Borrell, J. (2009). Mobile Agents in Healthcare. Distributed Intelligence Approach.
McCallum, L., & Higgins, D. (2012). Measuring body temperature. Nursing Times, 
108(45), 20–22. PMID:23240273
McGlynn, E. A., Asch, S. M., Adams, J., Keesey, J., Hicks, J., DeCristofaro, A., & 
Kerr, E. A. (2003). The Quality of Health Care Delivered to Adults in the United 
States. The New England Journal of Medicine, 348(26), 2635–2645. doi:10.1056/
NEJMsa022615 PMID:12826639

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
293
Mendes, P. (2011). Social-driven internet of connected objects. Proc. of the Inter-
connecting Smart Objects with the Internet Workshop.
Mislove, A., Gummadi, K. P., & Druschel, P. (2006). Exploiting Social Networks 
for Internet Search. Proc. of ACM HotNets.
Monitoring patients using intelligent t-shirts. (2011). Retrieved from http://portal.
uc3m.es/portal/page/portal/actualidad_cientifica/noticias/intelligent_tshirts
Natarajan, K., Prasath, B., & Kokila, P. (2016). Smart Health Care System Using 
Internet of Things. Journal of Network Communications and Emerging Technolo-
gies, 6(3). Retrieved from www. jncet. org
NECG Platform. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.nuubo.com/index.php?q=en/
node/165
Nitti, M., & Atzori, L. (2015). What the SIoT needs: a new caching system or new 
friendship selection mechanism? Conference: IEEE 2nd World Forum on Internet 
of Things (WF-IoT). doi:10.1109/WF-IoT.2015.7389092
Nitti, M., Atzori, L., & Cvijikj, I. P. (2014). Network navigability in the social Internet 
of Things. Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2014 IEEE World Forum on. doi:10.1109/
WF-IoT.2014.6803200
Nitti, M., Atzori, L., & Cvijikj, I. P. (2015). Friendship Selection in the Social 
Internet of Things: Challenges and Possible Strategies. IEEE Internet of Things 
Journal, 2(3), 240–247. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2014.2384734
Nitti, M., Girau, R., & Atzori, L. (2014). Trustworthiness Management in the Social 
Internet of Things. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering.
Nitti, M., Girau, R., Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2012). A subjective 
model for trustworthiness evaluation in the social Internet of Things. IEEE 23rd 
International Symposium on Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications 
(PIMRC), (pp. 18-23).
Ortiz, A. M., Hussein, D., Park, S., Han, S. N., & Crespi, N. (2014). The Cluster 
Between Internet of Things and Social Networks: Review and Research Challenges. 
IEEE Internet of Things Journal., 1(3), 206–215. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2014.2318835
Park, S., Hussein, D., & Crespi, N. (2015). On-site service discovery along user 
roaming over Internet of Things. Consumer Electronics (ICCE), 2015 IEEE Inter-
national Conference on, (pp. 194-195). Retrieved from http://servicearchitecture.
wp.tem-tsp.eu/files/2015/01/On-site-Service-Discovery-along-User-Roaming-over-
Internet-of-Things.pdf

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
294
Pasport Respiration Rate Sensor. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.pasco.com/
prodCatalog/PS/PS-2133_pasport-respiration-rate-sensor/
Riazul Islam, S. M., Kwak, D., Humaun Kabir, M., Hossain, M., & Kwak, K. S. 
(2015). The internet of things for health care: A comprehensive survey. Access, 
IEEE, 3, 678–708. doi:10.1109/ACCESS.2015.2437951
Social Media. (2012). Social media “likes” healthcare. From marketing to social 
business. Health Research Institute. Retrieved from http://www.pwc.com/us/en/
health-industries/publications/health-care-social-media.html
Srini, J. (2011). The Future of mHealth [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from http://
www.slideshare.net/HowardRosen129/the-future-of-mhealth-jay-srini-march-201.1
Stankovic, J. A. (2014). Research Directions for the Internet of Things. IEEE Internet 
of Things Journal, 1(1), 3–9. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2014.2312291
Sterling, B. (2005). Shaping Things. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Susannah, F., & Duggan, M. (2012). Mobile health 2012. Retrieved from http://
www.pewinternet.org/2012/11/08/mobile-health-2012/
Susannah, F., & Duggan, M. (2013). Health Online 2013. Available at: http://www.
pewinternet.org/2013/01/15/health-online-2013/
Topol, E. J. (2012). The Creative Destruction of Medicine: How the Digital Revolu-
tion Will Create Better Health Care. Academic Press.
Uckelmann, D., Harrison, M., & Michahelles, F. (2011). An architectural approach 
towards the future Internet of Things. Architecting the Internet of Things, 1–24. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-19157-2_1
Vermesan, O., & Friess, P. (2014). Internet of Things Applications - From Research 
and Innovation to Market Deployment, Bringing IP to Low-power Smart Objects: 
The Smart Parking Case in the CALIPSO Project. The River Publishers.
Voutyras, O., Bourelos, P., Kyriazis, D., & Varvarigou, T. (2014). An Architecture 
supporting Knowledge flow in Social Internet of Things systems. Wireless and 
Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications (WiMob), 2014 IEEE 10th 
International Conference on.
Voutyras, O., Gogouvitis, S., Marinakis, A., & Varvarigou, T. (2014). Achiev-
ing Autonomicity in IoT systems via Situational-Aware, Cognitive and So-
cial Things. Proceedings of the 18th Panhellenic Conference on Informatics. 
doi:10.1145/2645791.2645854

Social Internet of Things in Healthcare
295
Wearable Health Monitoring. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www2.imec.be/be_en/
research/wearable-health-monitoring.html
What is Diabetes ? (n.d.). Retrieved January 24, 2016, from http://www.diabetes-
research.org/what-is-diabetes
Wooldridge, M., & Jennings, N. (1995). Agent theories, architectures, and languages: 
a survey. In Intelligent agents. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Xin, T. J., Min, B., & Ji, J. (2013). Carry-on blood pressure/pulse rate/blood oxygen 
monitoring location intelligent terminal based on internet of things. Patent no. CN 
202875315 U.
Zorzi, M., Gluhak, A., Lange, S., & Bassi, A. (2010). From today’s INTRAnet of 
things to a future INTERnet of things: A wireless- and mobility-related view. IEEE 
Wireless Commun., 17(6), 44–51. doi:10.1109/MWC.2010.5675777

296
Compilation of References
Aberer, K., Sathe, S., Chakraborty, D., Martinoli, A., Barrenetxea, G., Faltings, B., & Thiele, L. 
(2010). OpenSense: Open Community Driven Sensing of Environment. In Proceedings of ACM 
SIGSPATIAL International Workshop on GeoStreaming, (pp. 39–42). ACM. 
doi:10.1145/1878500.1878509
Abowd, G. D., Dey, A. K., Brown, P. J., Davies, N., Smith, M., & Steggles, P. (1999). Towards 
a better understanding of context and context-awareness. In HUC ‘99 Proceedings of the 1st 
international symposium on Handheld and Ubiquitous Computing, (pp. 304-307).
Abowd, G. D., Dey, A. K., Brown, P. J., Davies, N., Smith, M., & Steggles, P. (1999). Towards 
a better understanding of context and context-awareness. Paper presented at the Handheld and 
ubiquitous computing.
Abtahi, Björlin, Yang, Seoane, & Lindecrantz. (2014). Bodykom mobile cardiac monitoring 
system: Current status and developments. 10th Medicinteknikdagarna (MTD 2014).
Acampora, G., Cook, D., Rashidi, P., & Vasilakos, A. (2013). A survey on ambient intelligence in 
healthcare.Proc IEEE Inst Electr Electron, (pp. 2470–2494). doi:10.1109/JPROC.2013.2262913
Aced López, S., Corno, F., & De Russis, L. (2015). Supporting Caregivers in Assisted Living 
Facilities for Persons with Disabilities: A User Study. Universal Access in the Information Society, 
14(1), 133–144. doi:10.1007/s10209-014-0400-1
Ackerman, M. S., Cranor, L. F., & Reagle, J. (1999). Privacy in e-commerce: examining user 
scenarios and privacy preferences. In Proceedings of the 1st ACM conference on Electronic 
commerce (pp. 1-8). New York: ACM. doi:10.1145/336992.336995
Adamer, K., Bannach, D., Klug, T., Lukowicz, P., Sbodio, M., Tresman, M., & Ziegert, T. et al. 
(2008). Developing a Wearable Assistant for Hospital Ward Rounds: An Experience Report. The 
Internet of Things, 4952, 289–307. doi:10.1007/978-3-540-78731-0_19
Agilent Technologies. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www.agilent.com/
Agoston, T. C., Ueda, T., & Nishimura, Y. (2000). Pervasive computing in a networked world. 
Paper presented at the Proceedings of INET.

Compilation of References
297
Ahsan, K., Kingston, P., & Shah, H. (2009). Context Based Knowledge Management in Health-
care: An EA Approached. In AMCIS 2009 Proceedings (pp. 297-302). AIS Electronic Library.
Alam, M. M., & Hamida, E. B. (2014, May). Surveying Wearable human assistive technology 
for life and safety critical applications: Standards, challenges and opportunities. Sensors (Basel, 
Switzerland), 14(5), 9153–9209. doi:10.3390/s140509153 PMID:24859024
ALERT. (2016). Active support and reaL-time coordination based on Event pRocessing in FLOSS 
development. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://www.alert-project.eu/
Almond, D., Chay, K., & Lee, D. (2005). The Costs of Low Birth Weight. The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, 102(3), 1031–1083.
Alper, S., & Raharinirina, S. (2006). Assistive technology for individuals with disabilities: A 
review and synthesis of the literature. Journal of Special Education Technology, 21(2), 47–64.
Al-Qazzaz, N. K., & Abdulazez, I. F. (2014). Simulation recording of an ECG, PCG, and PPG 
for features extractions. Al-Khwarizmi Engineering Journal, 10(4), 81–91.
Altakouri, B., Kortuem, G., Grunerbl, A., Kunze, K., & Lukowicz, P. (2010). The benefit of 
activity recognition for mobile phone based nursing documentation: A Wizard-of-Oz study. Wear-
able Computers (ISWC), 2010 International Symposium on (pp. 1-4). Seoul: IEEE. doi:10.1109/
ISWC.2010.5665866
Ameen, M. A., Liu, J., & Kwak, K. (2012). Security and Privacy Issues in Wireless Sensor 
Networks for Healthcare Applications. Journal of Medical Systems, 36(1), 93–101. doi:10.1007/
s10916-010-9449-4 PMID:20703745
American Academy of Audiology. (n.d.). Cochlear Implants in Children. American Academy of 
Audiology. Retrieved from: http://www.audiology.org/publications-resources/document-library/
cochlear-implants-children
American Association of People with Disabilities. (2015). Retrieved January 23, 2016, http://
www.aapd.com/resources/power-grid-blog/iot-innovations.html
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990, Pub. L. No. 101-336, § 1, 104 Stat. 328 (1990).
Anliker, U., Ward, J., Lukowicz, P., Troster, G., Dolveck, F., Baer, M., & Coluccini, L. et al. 
(2004). AMON: A wearable multiparameter medical monitoring and alert system. Information 
Technology in Biomedicine. IEEE Transactions on, 8(4), 415–427.
Annear, S. (2014). What the Tech? Lechal ‘Smart Shoes’ Help the Blind Get Around. Retrieved 
August 10, 2015, http://www.bostonmagazine.com/news/blog/2014/03/05/lechal-insoles-mit-
visually-impaired/
Antonovici, D. A., Chiuchisan, I., Geman, O., & Tomegea, A. (2014). Acquisition and management 
of biomedical data using Internet of Things concepts. Fundamentals of Electrical Engineering 
(ISFEE),2014 International Symposium. doi:10.1109/ISFEE.2014.7050625

Compilation of References
298
Anurag, A., Moosavi, S. R., Rahmani, A.-M., Westerlund, T., Yang, G., Liljeberg, P., & Ten-
hunen, H. (2014). Pervasive Health Monitoring Based on Internet of Things: Two Case Studies. 
4th International Conference on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare. doi:10.4108/
icst.mobihealth.2014.257395
Apple. (n.d.). Accessibility. Retrieved from: http://www.apple.com/accessibility/
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2012b). Applied Agency: Resolving Multiplexed Communica-
tion in Automobiles. In Adjunct Proceedings of the 4th Annual Conference on Automotive User 
Interaction (AutomotiveUI ‘12) (pp. 159–163), Portsmouth, NH: ACM SIGCHI.
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2011a). A Cultural Perspective on Mixed, Dual and Blended 
Reality. In Proceedings of the 16th International Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces 
(IUI’11) IUI Workshop on Location Awareness for Mixed and Dual Reality (LAMDa’11) (pp. 
1-4). Palo Alto, CA: DFKI.
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2011b). Pervasive Computing in Time and Space: The Culture 
and Context of ‘Place’ Integration. In Proceedings of the 2011 7th International Conference on 
Intelligent Environments (IE’11) (pp. 285-293). Nottingham, UK: IEEE. doi:10.1109/IE.2011.65
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2012a). PolySocial Reality: Prospects for Extending User Ca-
pabilities Beyond Mixed, Dual and Blended Reality. In Proceedings of the 17th International 
Conference on Intelligent User Interfaces (IUI’12) Workshop on Location Awareness for Mixed 
and Dual Reality (LAMDa’12) (pp.1–4). Lisbon, Portugal: DFKI.
Applin, S. A., & Fischer, M. D. (2013). Thing Theory: Connecting People to Location-Aware 
Smart Environments. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Intelligent User 
Interfaces (IUI’13) Workshop on Location Awareness for Mixed and Dual Reality (LAMDA’13) 
(pp.115-118). Santa Monica, CA: ACM.
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2011b). SIoT: Giving a Social Structure to the Internet of 
Things. IEEE Communications Letters, 15(11), 1193–1195. Retrieved from http://ieeexplore.
ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?tp=&arnumber=6042288&isnumber=6083590
Atzori, L., Carboni, D., & Iera, A. (2013). Smart Things in the Social Loop: Paradigms, Tech-
nologies, and Potentials. Ad Hoc Networks.
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2010). The Internet of Things: A survey. Computer Networks, 
54(15), 2787–2805. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2010.05.010
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2011). Siot: Giving a social structure to the internet of things. 
Communications Letters, IEEE, 15(11), 1193–1195. doi:10.1109/LCOMM.2011.090911.111340
Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2011a). Making things socialize in the Internet -- Does it 
help our lives? ITU Kaleidoscope.
Atzori, L., Iera, A., Morabito, G., & Nitti, M. (2012). The Social Internet of Things (SIoT) – When 
social networks meet the Internet of Things: Concept, architecture and network characterization. 
Computer Networks, 56(16), 3594–3608. doi:10.1016/j.comnet.2012.07.010

Compilation of References
299
AVALON. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: www.avalon-eu.org
Aziz, O., Lo, B., Pansiot, J., Atallah, L., Yang, G.-Z., & Ara Darzim, A. (2008). From comput-
ers to ubiquitous computing by 2010: health care. Philosophical Transactions A: Mathematical, 
Physical & Engineering Sciences, 366(1881), 3805-3811.
Babar, S., Mahalle, P., Stango, A., Prasad, N., & Prasad, R. (2010). Proposed security model 
and threat taxonomy for the internet of things (IoT). In Recent Trends in Network Security and 
Applications (pp. 420–429). Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-14478-3_42
Bachfischer, N. (2014). The Internet-of-Medical-Things: Five innovative examples, 2014. Re-
trieved from http://www.i-q-i.net/
Baig, M. M., GholamHosseini, H., Connolly, M. J., & Kashfi, G. (2014, June). A wireless patient 
monitoring system for hospitalized older adults: Acceptability, reliability and accuracy evalua-
tion. In Biomedical and Health Informatics (BHI),2014IEEE-EMBS International Conference 
on (pp. 330-333). IEEE.
Baldauf, M., Dustdar, S., & Rosenberg, F. (2007). A survey on context-aware systems. International 
Journal of Ad Hoc and Ubiquitous Computing, 2(4), 263–277. doi:10.1504/IJAHUC.2007.014070
Balzano, L., & Nowak, R. (2007, April). Blind calibration of sensor networks. In Proceedings of 
the 6th international conference on Information processing in sensor networks (pp. 79-88). ACM.
Bandyopadhyay, D., & Sen, J. (2011). Internet of Things: Applications and challenges in tech-
nology and standardization. Wireless Personal Communications, 58(1), 49–69. doi:10.1007/
s11277-011-0288-5
Barrenetxea, G., Ingelrest, F., Schaefer, G., Vetterli, M., Couach, O., & Parlange, M. (2008). 
SensorScope: Out-of-the-Box Environmental Monitoring. Information Processing in Sensor 
Networks, 2008. IPSN ‘08. International Conference on, (pp. 332–343).
Bauwens, M., Mendoza, N., & Iacomella, F. (2012). Synthetic overview of the collaborative 
economy. Chiang Mai: P2P Foundation. Retrieved August 14, 2014, from https://wiki.p2pfoun-
dation.net/Synthetic_Overview_of_the_Collaborative_Economy
Beeber, A., Cohen, L., Zimmerman, S., Gwyther, L., Washington, T., Cagle, J., & Reed, D. 
(2014). Differences in assisted living staff perceptions, experiences, and attitudes. Journal of 
Gerontological Nursing, 40(1), 41–49. doi:10.3928/00989134-20130731-03 PMID:23937102
Behmann, F., & Wu, K. (2015). Collaborative Internet of Things (C-IoT): For Future Smart 
Connected Life and Business. John Wiley & Sons. doi:10.1002/9781118913734
Bell, M. L., & Davis, D. L. (2001). Reassessment of the lethal London fog of 1952: Novel indica-
tors of acute and chronic consequences of acute exposure to air pollution. Environmental Health 
Perspectives, 109(s3), 389–394. doi:10.1289/ehp.01109s3389 PMID:11427388
Berbers, Y., & Preuveneers, D. (2009). Support for context-driven applications in Ambient Intel-
ligence environments. Academic Press.

Compilation of References
300
Bergenti, F., & Poggi, A. (2009). Multi-Agent Systems for E-health: Recent Projects and Initia-
tives. Proceedings of the 10th International Workshop on Objects and Agents.
Bettini, C., Brdiczka, O., Henricksen, K., Indulska, J., Nicklas, D., Ranganathan, A., & Riboni, 
D. (2010). A survey of context modelling and reasoning techniques. Pervasive and Mobile 
Computing, 6(2), 161–180. doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2009.06.002
Bhadoria, S., & Gupta, H. (2013). A Wearable Personal Healthcare and Emergency Information 
Based On Mobile Application. International Journal of Scientific Research in Computer Science 
and Engineering, 1(4), 24–30.
Bikakis, A., Patkos, T., Antoniou, G., & Plexousakis, D. (2007). A survey of semantics-based 
approaches for context reasoning in ambient intelligence. In Constructing ambient intelligence 
(pp. 14–23). Springer.
Bisio, I., Lavagetto, F., Marchese, M., & Sciarrone, A. (2015). Smartphone-centric ambient as-
sisted living platform for patients suffering from co-morbidities monitoring. IEEE Communica-
tions Magazine, 23(1), 34–41. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2015.7010513
Bleecker, J. (2006). Why Things Matter: A Manifesto for Networked Objects — Cohabiting with 
Pigeons, Arphids and Aibos. Internet of Things. Retrieved from www.nearfuturelaboratory.com/
files/WhyThingsMatter.pdf
Bo, D., Kun, D., & Xiaoyi, Z. (2008). A High Performance Enterprise Service Bus Platform 
for Complex Event Processing. In Seventh International Conference on Grid and Cooperative 
Computing (GCC) (pp. 577–582). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/GCC.2008.66
Boehm, G. M. (1981). Air pollution and lung cancer. Cancer Detection and Prevention, 5(4), 
371–374. PMID:7182064
Bonato, P. (2003). Wearable sensors/systems and their impact on biomedical engineering. IEEE 
Engineering in Medicine and Biology Magazine, 22(3), 18–20. doi:10.1109/MEMB.2003.1213622 
PMID:12845812
Bonato, P. (2005). Advances in wearable technology and applications in physical medicine and 
rehabilitation. Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, 2(1), 2. doi:10.1186/1743-0003-
2-2 PMID:15733322
Borazio, M., & Van Laerhoven, K. (2012). Combining Wearable and Environmental Sensing into an 
Unobtrusive Tool for Long-term Sleep Studies.Proceedings of the 2nd ACM SIGHIT International 
Health Informatics Symposium (pp. 71-80). Miami, FL: ACM. doi:10.1145/2110363.2110375
Borgos, J. A., Borgos, T. A., & Pongratz, T. (2012). Optical power modulation vital sign detec-
tion method and measurement device. Patent US 8111953 B2.
Botterman, M. (2009). Internet of Things: an early reality of the Future Internet. European Com-
mission. Retrieved June, 2015 from ftp://ftp.cordis.europa.eu/pub/fp7/ict/docs/enet/iot-prague-
workshop-report-vfinal-20090706_en.pdf

Compilation of References
301
Boubeta-Puig, J., Ortiz, G., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2014b). Approaching the Internet of Things 
through Integrating SOA and Complex Event Processing. In Z. Sun & J. Yearwood (Eds.), 
Handbook of Research on Demand-Driven Web Services: Theory, Technologies, and Applica-
tions (pp. 304–323). IGI Global. doi:10.4018/978-1-4666-5884-4.ch014
Boubeta-Puig, J., Medina-Bulo, I., Ortiz, G., & Fuentes-Landi, G. (2012). Complex event process-
ing applied to early maritime threat detection. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Workshop 
on Adaptive Services for the Future Internet and 6th International Workshop on Web APIs and 
Service Mashups (pp. 1–4). Bertinoro, Italy: ACM. doi:10.1145/2377836.2377838
Boubeta-Puig, J., Ortiz, G., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2014a). A Model-driven Approach for Facilitat-
ing User-friendly Design of Complex Event Patterns. Expert Systems with Applications, 41(2), 
445–456. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2013.07.070
Boubeta-Puig, J., Ortiz, G., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2015a). MEdit4CEP: A model-driven solution 
for real-time decision making in SOA 2.0. Knowledge-Based Systems, 89, 97–112. doi:10.1016/j.
knosys.2015.06.021
Boubeta-Puig, J., Ortiz, G., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2015b). ModeL4CEP: Graphical domain-specific 
modeling languages for CEP domains and event patterns. Expert Systems with Applications, 
42(21), 8095–8110. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2015.06.045
Bouwstra, S., Feijs, L., Wei, C., & Oetomo, S. B. (2009). Smart Jacket Design for Neonatal 
Monitoring with Wearable Sensors. Sixth International Workshop on in Wearable and Implant-
able Body Sensor Networks. doi:10.1109/BSN.2009.40
Bradley, N., & Dunlop, M. (2008). Navigation AT: Context-aware computing. In M. A. Hersh & 
M. A. Johnson (Eds.), Assistive Technology for Visually Impaired and Blind People (pp. 231–260). 
Springer London. doi:10.1007/978-1-84628-867-8_7
Bradshaw, J. M., Hoffman, R. R., Woods, D. D., & Johnson, M. (2013). The Seven Deadly Myths 
of “Autonomous Systems”. In IEEE Intelligent Systems (pp. 54-61). IEEE.
Bragazzi. N. L. (2013). From P0 to P6 Medicine, a model of highly participatory, narrative, 
interactive and “augmented” medicine: Some considerations on Salvatore Iaconesi’s clinical 
history. Patient Preference and Adherence, 7, 353–359.
Braun, R., Schlieter, H., Burwitz, M., & Esswein, W. (2015). Extending a Business Process Model-
ing Language for Domain-Specific Adaptation in Healthcare. Wirtschaftsinformatik Proceedings.
Brook, R. D., Franklin, B., Cascio, W., Hong, Y., Howard, G., Lipsett, M., & Tager, I. (2004). Air 
pollution and cardiovascular disease - A statement for healthcare professionals from the expert 
panel on population and prevention science of the American Heart Association. Circulation, 
109(21), 2655–2671. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000128587.30041.C8 PMID:15173049

Compilation of References
302
Brook, R. D., Rajagopalan, S., Pope, C. A., Brook, J. R., Bhatnagar, A., Diez-Roux, A. V., & 
Peters, A. et al. (2010). Particulate matter air pollution and cardiovascular disease an update to 
the scientific statement from the American Heart Association. Circulation, 121(21), 2331–2378. 
doi:10.1161/CIR.0b013e3181dbece1 PMID:20458016
Bruns, R., & Dunkel, J. (2013). Towards Pattern-based Architectures for Event Processing Sys-
tems. Software, Practice & Experience. doi:10.1002/spe.2204
Bui, N., Castellani, A. P., Casari, P. M., & Zorzi, M. (2012). The internet of energy: A web-
enabled smart grid system. IEEE Network, 26(4), 39–45. doi:10.1109/MNET.2012.6246751
Bui, N., & Zorzi, M. (2011, October). Health care applications: a solution based on the internet 
of things. In Proceedings of the 4th International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical 
and Communication Technologies (p. 131). ACM. doi:10.1145/2093698.2093829
Burke, M. J., & Gleeson, D. T. (2000). A micropower dry-electrode ECG preamplifier. IEEE 
Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, 47(2), 155–162.
Busch, M., Hochleitner, C., Lorenz, M., Schulz, T., Tscheligi, M., Wittstock, E. (2103). All in: 
Targeting trustworthiness for special needs user groups in the Internet of Things. Lecture Notes 
in Computer Science, 7904, 223-231. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-38908-5_17
Butcher, M. (2011, July 20). LogMeIn acquires ‘Internet of Things’ Startup Pachube for $15m 
in Cash. TechCrunch. Retrieved on August 2, 2016, from http://techcrunch.com
Buyya, R., Yeo, C., Venugopal, S., Broberg, J., & Brandic, I. (2009). Cloud computing and emerg-
ing IT platforms: Vision, hype, and reality for delivering computing as the 5th utility. Future 
Generation Computer Systems, 25(6), 599–616. doi:10.1016/j.future.2008.12.001
Caduff, A., Hirt, E., Feldman, Y., Ali, Z., & Heinemann, L. (2003). First human experiments 
with a novel non-invasive, non-optical continuous glucose monitoring system. Biosensors & 
Bioelectronics, 19(3), 209–217. doi:10.1016/S0956-5663(03)00196-9 PMID:14611756
Caduff, A., Talary, M. S., Mueller, M., Dewarrat, F., Klisic, J., Donath, M., & Stahel, W. A. et al. 
(2009). Non-invasive glucose monitoring in patients with Type 1 diabetes: A Multisensor system 
combining sensors for dielectric and optical characterisation of skin. Biosensors & Bioelectron-
ics, 24(9), 2778–2784. doi:10.1016/j.bios.2009.02.001 PMID:19286364
Calvaresi, D., Cesarini, D., Sernani, P., Marinoni, M., Dragoni, A. F., & Sturm, A. (2016). Ex-
ploring the ambient assisted living domain: a systematic review. Journal of Ambient Intelligence 
and Humanized Computing, 1-19.
Calvaresi, D., Cesarini, D., Sernani, P., Marinoni, P., Dragoni, A. F., & Sturm, A. (2016). Explor-
ing the ambient assisted living domain: a systematic review. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and 
Humanized Computing, 1-19. doi:10.1007/s12652-016-0374-3
Campbell, R. L., & Langston, W. G. (1995). A comparison of cardiac rate-pressure product and 
pressure rate quotient in health and medically compromised patients. Oral Surgery, Oral Medi-
cine, and Oral Pathology, 80(2), 145–152. doi:10.1016/S1079-2104(05)80193-3 PMID:7552876

Compilation of References
303
Caracas, A. (2012, March). From business process models to pervasive applications: Synchro-
nization and optimization. In Pervasive Computing and Communications Workshops (PERCOM 
Workshops), 2012 IEEE International Conference on (pp. 320-325). IEEE.
Caracaş, A., & Bernauer, A. (2011, June). Compiling business process models for sensor net-
works. In Distributed Computing in Sensor Systems and Workshops (DCOSS), 2011 International 
Conference on (pp. 1-8). IEEE. doi:10.1109/DCOSS.2011.5982159
Cardoso, A. J. S. (2002) Quality of service and semantic composition of workflows (Doctoral 
dissertation). University of Georgia.
Cardoso, J., Sheth, A., Miller, J., Arnold, J., & Kochut, K. (2004). Quality of service for work-
flows and web service processes. Web Semantics: Science, Services, and Agents on the World 
Wide Web, 1(3), 281–308. doi:10.1016/j.websem.2004.03.001
Carroll, K., & Majeed, A. (2001). Comorbidity associated with atrial fibrillation: A general 
practice-based study. The British Journal of General Practice, 51, 884–891. PMID:11761201
Casati, F., Daniel, F., Dantchev, G., Eriksson, J., Finne, N., Karnouskos, S., . . . Voigt, T. (2012, 
June). Towards business processes orchestrating the physical enterprise with wireless sensor 
networks. In Software Engineering (ICSE), 2012 34th International Conference on (pp. 1357-
1360). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICSE.2012.6227080
Cass, S. (2016). Profile: Anouk Wipprecht’s Dynamic Dresses. IEEE Spectrum, 53(2), 19–20. 
doi:10.1109/MSPEC.2016.7419790
Castro, P., & Maibaum, T. (2007). A complete and compact propositional deontic logic. In 
Theoretical Aspects of Computing–ICTAC 2007 (109-123). Berlin, Germany: Springer. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-75292-9_8
Catarinucci, L., Colella, R., Esposito, A., Tarricone, L., & Zappatore, M. (2012). RFID sensor-tags 
feeding a context-aware rule-based healthcare monitoring system. Journal of Medical Systems, 
36(6), 3435–3449. doi:10.1007/s10916-011-9794-y PMID:22083369
Catlett, C., & Turan, Y. (2013). Technology applications to support your work, Part 1& Part 2. 
Young Exceptional Children, 16(1), 46–50. doi:10.1177/1096250612473130
Chaari, T. (2007). Adaptation d’applications pervasives dans des environnements multi-contextes. 
INSA de Lyon.
Chae, M., Liu, W., Yang, Z., Chen, T., & Kim, J. (2008). A 128-Channel 6mW Wireless Neural 
Recording IC with On-the-Fly Spike Sorting and UWB Tansmitter. In IEEE International Solid-
State Circuits Conference, 2008.
Chandy, K. M., & Schulte, W. R. (2010). Event Processing: Designing IT Systems for Agile 
Companies. McGraw-Hill.
Chang, Y. S., Yang, C. T., & Luo, Y. C. (2011). An Ontology based Agent Generation for Informa-
tion Retrieval on Cloud Environment. Journal of Universal Computer Science, 17(8), 1135–1160.

Compilation of References
304
Chaudhry, B., Wang, J., Wu, S., Maglione, M., Mojica, W., Roth, E., & Shekelle, P. G. et al. 
(2006). Systematic review: Impact of health information technology on quality, efficiency, and 
costs of medical care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 144(10), 742–752. doi:10.7326/0003-4819-
144-10-200605160-00125 PMID:16702590
Chay, K. Y., & Greenstone, M. (2003). The Impact of Air Pollution on Infant Mortality: Evidence 
from Geographic Variation in Pollution Shocks Induced by a Recession. The Quarterly Journal 
of Economics, 118(3), 1121–1167. doi:10.1162/00335530360698513
Chen, I.R., Bao, F., & Guo, J. (2014). Trust-based Service Management for Social Internet 
of Things Systems. IEEE Transactions on Dependable and Secure Computing. doi: 10.1109/
TDSC.2015.2420552
Chen, W., Augusto, J., Martinez, F., Lehocki, F., Wolf, K-H., Arends, J., … Wichert, R. (2015). 
Recent Advances on AAL - bridging Assistive Technologies, e-Health and Personalized Health 
Care. IOS Press.
Chen, H., Finin, T., & Joshi, A. (2003). An ontology for context-aware pervasive computing environ-
ments. The Knowledge Engineering Review, 18(03), 197–207. doi:10.1017/S0269888904000025
Chen, M., Gonzalez, S., Zhang, Q., & Leung, V. (2010). Code-centric RFID system based on 
software agent intelligence. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 25(2), 12–19. doi:10.1109/MIS.2010.44
Chen, W. (2015, May). Mimo Pillow - a Comfortable Cushion Designed with Maternal Heart 
Beat Vibrations for Comforting Newborn Infants. IEEE Journal of Biomedical Health Informat-
ics, 19(3), 979–985. PMID:25148673
Chi, Y. M. Deiss, S. R., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2009). Non-contact Low Power EEG/ECG Elec-
trode for High Density Wearable Biopotential Sensor Networks. In Wearable and Implantable 
Body Sensor Networks, 2009. BSN 2009. Sixth International Workshop on.
Chi, Y. M., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2009). Micropower non-contact EEG electrode with active 
common-mode noise suppression and input capacitance cancellation. In Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Society, 2009. EMBC 2009. Annual International Conference of the IEEE.
Chin, C. S., Atmodihardjo, W., Woo, L. W., & Mesbahi, E. (2015). Remote temperature moni-
toring device using a multiple patients-coordinator set design approach. ROBOMECH Journal, 
2(1), 4. doi:10.1186/s40648-015-0027-x
Chiu, H., & Wang, M. (2013). A Study of IoT-Aware Business Process Modeling. International 
Journal of Modeling and Optimization, 3(3), 238–244. doi:10.7763/IJMO.2013.V3.274
Cho, G., Jeong, K., Paik, M. J., Kwun, Y., & Sung, M. (2011, December). Performance Evalua-
tion of Textile-Based Electrodes and Motion Sensors for Smart Clothing. IEEE Sensors Journal, 
11(12), 3183–3193. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2011.2167508
Ciortea, A., Boissier, O., Zimmermann, A., & Florea, A. M. (2013). Reconsidering the social web 
of things: position paper. Proceedings of the 2013 ACM conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous 
computing adjunct publication, (UbiComp ‘13 Adjunct). ACM. doi:10.1145/2494091.2497587

Compilation of References
305
CISCO. (2016, Jan 1). At-a-glance: Internet of things. Retrieved from http://www.cisco.com/c/
dam/en/us/products/collateral/se/internet-of-things/at-a-glance-c45-731471.pdf
CITEAIR - Europe. (2016). Air Quality in Europe. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://www.
airqualitynow.eu/about_indices_definition.php
CITEAIR. (2016). Air Quality Now in Europe. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://airquali-
tynow.eu/
Clark, N. A., Demers, P. A., Karr, C. J., Koehoorn, M., Lencar, C., Tamburic, L., & Brauer, M. 
(2010). Effect of Early Life Exposure to Air Pollution on Development of Childhood Asthma. 
Environmental Health Perspectives, 118(2), 284–290. doi:10.1289/ehp.0900916 PMID:20123607
Coetzee, L., & Olivrin, G. (2012). Inclusion through the internet of things. Inclusion Through 
the Internet of Things. In Assistive Technologies. InTech. Available from: http://www.intechopen.
com/books/assistive-technologies/inclusion-through-the-internet-of-things
COMPAS. (2011). Compliance-driven Models, Languages, and Architectures for Services. Re-
trieved January 30, 2016, from http://cordis.europa.eu/fp7/ict/ssai/docs/finalreport-compas.pdf
Comunidad de Madrid. (2016). Calidad del aire. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://www.
mambiente.munimadrid.es/opencms/opencms/calaire
Cooper, K. H. (1969). Aerobics. Bantam Books.
Coppolino, L., Romano, L., Mazzocca, N., & Salvi, S. (2007).Web Services workflow reliability 
estimation through reliability patterns. In International Conference on Security and Privacy in 
Communications Networks and the Workshops. IEEE. doi:10.1109/SECCOM.2007.4550316
Cossu, F., Marrella, A., Mecella, M., Russo, A., Bertazzoni, G., Suppa, M., & Grasso, F. (2012, 
June). Improving operational support in hospital wards through vocal interfaces and process-
awareness. In Computer-Based Medical Systems (CBMS), 2012 25th International Symposium 
on (pp. 1-6). IEEE. doi:10.1109/CBMS.2012.6266329
CPCB - India. (2014). National air quality index (Control of Urban Pollution Series No. 82). 
New Delhi, India: Government of India. Retrieved from http://www.indiaenvironmentportal.org.
in/files/file/Air%20Quality%20Index.pdf
Cultivate resilient smart Objects for Sustainable city applications. (2015). Retrieved from http://
www.sido-event.com/public/exposants_files/COSMOSNewsletterIssue1.pdf
Cumming, G., Fowlie, A., & McKendrick, D. (2013). H = P4 + C and Health Web Science: “A 
Hippocratic Revolution in Medicine”. Proceedings of the ACM WebSci ’11 3rd International 
Conference on Web Science. Retrieved April, 2014 from http://www.websci11.org/fileadmin/
websci/Papers/Health_WS_Workshop-A_Hippocratic_Revolution.pdf
Currie, J., & Neidell, M. (2004). Air Pollution and infant health: What can we learn from Cali-
fornia’s recent experience? The Quarterly Journal of Economics, 120(3), 1003–1030.

Compilation of References
306
Curtin University. (2013). New navigation gadget for people who are blind. Curtin University. 
Retrieved from: http://news.curtin.edu.au/media-releases/new-navigation-gadget-for-people-
who-are-blind/
Damek-Poprawa, M., & Sawicka-Kapusta, K. (2003). Damage to the liver, kidney, and testis 
with reference to burden of heavy metals in yellow-necked mice from areas around steelworks 
and zinc smelters in Poland. Toxicology, 186(1-2), 1–10. doi:10.1016/S0300-483X(02)00595-4 
PMID:12604166
Danish National Environmental Research Institute, Center for Clear Air Policy, & Milieu Ltd. 
(2004). Comparison of the EU and US Air Quality Standards & Planning Requirements. Authors.
Dar, K., Taherkordi, A., Baraki, H., Eliassen, F., & Geihs, K. (2014). A resource oriented inte-
gration architecture for the Internet of Things: A business process perspective. Pervasive and 
Mobile Computing, 20, 145–159. doi:10.1016/j.pmcj.2014.11.005
Davis, K. (2004). Mirror, Mirror on the Wall: Looking at the Quality of American Health Care 
Through the Patient’s Lens. Commonwealth Fund.
Davis, D. L., Bell, M. L., & Fletcher, T. (2002). A Look Back at the London Smog of 1952 and 
the Half Century Since. Environmental Health Perspectives, 110(12), 734–735. doi:10.1289/
ehp.110-a734 PMID:12501843
Dawadi, P., Cook, D., Schmitter-Edgecombe, M., & Parsey, C. (2013). Automated assessment of 
cognitive health using smart home technologies. Technology and Health Care, 21(4), 323–343. 
doi:10.3233/THC-130734 PMID:23949177
de Vries, B. (2014). Introducing data science: Hearing aids on the brink of a paradigm shift. 
Audiology Worldnews. Retrieved on 11/13/15 from http://www.audiology-worldnews.com/focus-
on/1215-introducing-data-science-hearing-aids-on-the-brink-of-a-paradigm-shift
del Castillo, M. (2014). Stephen Hawking endorses Intel’s souped up smart wheelchair. Retrieved 
July 28, 2015, http://upstart.bizjournals.com/multimedia/interactives/2014/09/stephen-hawking-
endorses-intel-s-souped-up-smart.html
Demigha, O., Hidouci, W., & Ahmed, T. (2012). On Energy Efficiency in Collaborative Target 
Tracking in Wireless Sensor Network: A Review. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 
15(3), 1210–1222. doi:10.1109/SURV.2012.042512.00030
Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs - UK. (2016a). Daily Air Quality Index. 
Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/air-pollution/daqi?view=more-
info&pollutant=pm10#pollutant
Department for Environment Food & Rural Affairs - UK. (2016b). UK-AIR, air quality informa-
tion resource. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://uk-air.defra.gov.uk/
Dey, A. K. (2000). Providing architectural support for building context-aware applications. 
Georgia Institute of Technology.

Compilation of References
307
Dey, A. K., Abowd, G. D., & Wood, A. (1998). CyberDesk: A framework for providing self-
integrating context-aware services. Knowledge-Based Systems, 11(1), 3–13. doi:10.1016/S0950-
7051(98)00053-7
Dey, A. K., & Estrin, D. (2011). Perspectives on Pervasive Health from Some of the Field’s 
Leading Researchers. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 10(2), 4–7. doi:10.1109/MPRV.2011.29
Dey, A. K., & Estrin, D. (2011). Pervasive healthcare 2010: Two perspectives. IEEE Perva-
sive Computing / IEEE Computer Society [and] IEEE Communications Society, 10(3), 8–11. 
doi:10.1109/MPRV.2011.56
Dhor, A., Modre-Opsrian, R., Drobics, M., Hayn, D., & Schreier, G. (2010). The Internet of 
Things for Ambient Assisted Living. In Information Technology: New Generations (ITNG), 2010 
Seventh International Conference on (pp. 804-809). doi:10.1109/ITNG.2010.104
Digitex . (2016, Aug. 1). Available: www.digitex-eu.com
Dillon, T. (2006). Pervasive and ubiquitous computing. Retrieved from http://www2.futurelab.
org.uk/resources/publications-reports-articles/web-articles/Web-Article497
Ding, L., Shi, P., & Liu, B. (2010). The clustering of internet, internet of things and social 
network. Proc. of the 3rd International Symposium on Knowledge Acquisition and Modeling. 
doi:10.1109/KAM.2010.5646274
Distefano, S., Ghezzi, C., Guinea, S., & Mirandola, R. (2014). Dependability assessment of web 
service orchestrations. Reliability. IEEE Transactions on, 63(3), 689–705.
Dittus, M. S. (2012). The Cosm Sensor Data Set Data Integration of a Sensor Commons (Dis-
sertation). UCL, UK. Retrieved on August 14, 2014, from http://dekstop.de/temp/dissertation/
Martin_Dittus-Cosm_Data-20120908.pdf
Dix, J., & Fisher, M. (2011). Where logic and agents meet. Annals of Mathematics and Artificial 
Intelligence, 61(1), 15–28. doi:10.1007/s10472-010-9223-9
Dockery, D. W., & Pope, C. A. III. (1994). Acute respiratory effects of particulate air pollution. 
Annual Review of Public Health, 15(1), 107–132. doi:10.1146/annurev.pu.15.050194.000543 
PMID:8054077
Domingo, M. C. (2012). An overview of the Internet of Things for people with disabilities. 
Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 35(2), 584–596. doi:10.1016/j.jnca.2011.10.015
Dong, H., & Li, X. (2013). A deontic action logic for complex actions. In Logic, Rationality, and 
Interaction (pp. 311–315). Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-40948-6_24
Dores, C., Reis, L. P., & Lopes, N. V. (2014). Internet of Things and Cloud Computing.Iberian 
Conference on Information Systems & Technologie (CISTI).
Doukas, C. (2012). Building Internet of Things. Part 1. CreateSpace Independent Publishing 
Platform.

Compilation of References
308
Drew, B. J., Califf, R. M., Funk, M., Kaufman, E. S., Krucoff, M. W., Laks, M. M., & Van Hare, 
G. F. et al. (2004). Practice Standards for Electrocardiographic Monitoring in Hospital Settings An 
American Heart Association Scientific Statement From the Councils on Cardiovascular Nursing, 
Clinical Cardiology, and Cardiovascular Disease in the Young: Endorsed by the International 
Society of Computerized Electrocardiology and the American Association of Critical-Care Nurses. 
Circulation, 110(17), 2721–2746. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.0000145144.56673.59 PMID:15505110
Dunkel, J., Fernández, A., Ortiz, R., & Ossowski, S. (2011). Event-driven Architecture for 
Decision Support in Traffic Management Systems. Expert Systems with Applications, 38(6), 
6530–6539. doi:10.1016/j.eswa.2010.11.087
Duske, K., Müller, R., Prüfer, R., & Stöhr, D. (2014). A BPMN Model of the Charity Stroke 
Treatment Process. Inst. für Informatik.
El-Basioni, B. M., El-Kader, S. M., & Eissa, S. E. (2014). Independent living for persons with 
disabilities and elderly people using smart home technology. International Journal of Application 
or Innovation in Engineering and Management, 3(4), 11–28.
Elen, B., Theunis, J., Ingarra, S., Molino, A., Van den Bossche, J., Reggente, M., & Loreto, V. 
(2012). The EveryAware SensorBox: a tool for community-based air quality monitoring. Paper 
presented at the Sensing a Changing World.
EPA - US. (2016a). Air Quality Index (AQI) Basics. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://
www.airnow.gov/index.cfm?action=aqibasics.aqi
EPA - US. (2016b). EnviroFlash. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://www.enviroflash.info/
Erola, A., Castellà-Roca, J., Viejo, A., & Mateo-Sanz, J. M. (2011). Exploiting social networks 
to provide privacy in personalized web search. Journal of Systems and Software, 84(10), 1734-
1745. Retrieved from http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0164121211001117
EsperTech. (2016). Esper - Complex Event Processing. Retrieved January 30, 2016, from http://
www.espertech.com/esper/
Etzion, O., & Niblett, P. (2011). Event Processing in Action. Stamford, CT: Manning.
European Commission Eurostat: Causes of Death Statistics . (2011). Available from: http://epp.
eurostat.ec.europa.eu/statistics_explained/index.php/Causes_of_death_statistics
European Environmental Agency. (2015). Air quality in Europe — 2015 report. Retrieved on 
August 1, 2016, from http://www.eea.europa.eu/publications/air-quality-in-europe-2015
Evans, D. (2011). The Internet of Things How the Next Evolution of the Internet (White Paper). 
Cisco.
Evelyn, J. (1661). Fumifungium: or the Inconvenience of the Aer and Smoake of London Dis-
sipated. In S. Staniforth (Eds.), Historical Perspectives on Preventive Conservation (pp. 262-269). 
Getty Conservation Institute.

Compilation of References
309
Event Processing Technical Society. (2011). Event Processing Glossary - Version 2.0. Re-
trieved January 15, 2016, from http://www.complexevents.com/wp-content/uploads/2011/08/
EPTS_Event_Processing_Glossary_v2.pdf
Fairbanks, R. J., Wears, R. L., Woods, D. D., Hollnagel, E., Plsek, P., & Cook, R. I. (2014). 
Resilience and resilience engineering in health care. Joint Commission Journal on Quality and 
Patient Safety, 40, 376–383. PMID:25208443
Faison, T. (2006). Event-Based Programming: Taking Events to the Limit (1st ed.). New York: 
Apress.
Farnsworth, B. D., Talyor, D. M., Triolo, R. J., & Young, D. J. (2009). Wireless in vivo EMG 
sensor for intelligent prosthetic control. In International Solid-State Sensors, Actuators and 
Microsystems Conference, 2009. doi:10.1109/SENSOR.2009.5285488
Fast, A., Jensen, V., & Levine, B. N. (2005). Creating social networks to improve peer-to-peer 
networking. In Proc. of ACM KDD’05. doi:10.1145/1081870.1081938
Fischer, M. D. (2006). Cultural agents: a community of minds. In Engineering Societies in the 
Agents World VI (pp. 259–274). Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/11759683_16
Fisher, E. (2003). The Implications of Regional Variations in Medicare Spending: Part I. 
The Context, Quality, and Accessibility of Care. Annals of Internal Medicine, 138(4), 273. 
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-138-4-200302180-00006 PMID:12585825
Flavián, C., & Guinalíu, M. (2006). Consumer trust, perceived security and privacy policy: 
Three basic elements of loyalty to a web site. Industrial Management & Data Systems, 106(5), 
601–620. doi:10.1108/02635570610666403
Fleisch, E. (2010). What is the Internet of Things? An Economic Perspective (White Paper). 
Auto-ID Labs.
Fogel, R. W. (1986). Physical growth as a measure of the economic well-being of populations: 
the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries. In F. Falkner & J. M. Tanner (Eds.), Human Growth: A 
Comprehensive Treatise (pp. 263–281). New York: Plenum. doi:10.1007/978-1-4615-7198-8_13
Frederiks, K., Croes, M., Chen, W., Bambang Oetomo, S., & Sterkenburg, P. (2015). Sense - a 
biofeedback system to support the interaction between parents and their child with the Prader-
Willi syndrome. Journal of Ambient Intelligence and Smart Environments, 7(4), 449–459. 
doi:10.3233/AIS-150327
Fung, S. W., Liu, B., Yuan, J., & Guo, Q. (2009). A low-noise monolithic CMOS bio-potential 
detector. IEEE International Symposium on in Circuits and Systems, 2009. doi:10.1109/IS-
CAS.2009.5117833
Gad, R., Kappes, M., Boubeta-Puig, J., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2013). Employing the CEP Paradigm 
for Network Analysis and Surveillance. In Proceedings of The Ninth Advanced International 
Conference on Telecommunications (pp. 204–210). Rome, Italy: IARIA. Retrieved from http://
www.thinkmind.org/index.php?view=article&articleid=aict_2013_9_30_10178

Compilation of References
310
Gad, R., Boubeta-Puig, J., Kappes, M., & Medina-Bulo, I. (2012). Hierarchical Events for Ef-
ficient Distributed Network Analysis and Surveillance. In Proceedings of the 2nd International 
Workshop on Adaptive Services for the Future Internet and 6th International Workshop on Web 
APIs and Service Mashups (pp. 5–11). Bertinoro, Italy: ACM. doi:10.1145/2377836.2377839
Garmin, H. R. M. (2016, Aug. 1). Retrieved from http://www.garmin.com/
Gartner. (2013). Market Trends: New Technologies Benefit Employees and People With Dis-
abilities. Retrieved August 1, 2015 from https://www.gartner.com/doc/2593617/market-trends-
new-technologies-benefit
Gasser, U., & Palfrey, J. (2007). Breaking Down Digital Barriers: When and How ICT Interoper-
ability Drives Innovation. Berkman Publication Series.
Gatzoulis, L., & Iakovidis, I. (2007). Wearable and portable ehealth systems. IEEE Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Magazine, 26(5), 51–56. doi:10.1109/EMB.2007.901787 PMID:17941323
Gazis, V., Goertz, M., Huber, M., Leonardi, A., Mathioudakis, K., Wiesmaier, A., & Zeiger, F. 
(2015). Short Paper: IoT: Challenges, projects, architectures. 2015 18th International Conference 
on Intelligence in Next Generation Networks (ICIN), (pp. 145-147).
GDH-FAD blood glucose meter / Bluetooth. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.medicalexpo.com/
prod/taidoc-technology/product-70247-729754.html
Gheibi, A., Latifi, M., Merati, A. A., & Bagherzadeh, R. (2014). Piezoelectric electrospun nano-
fibrous materials for self-powering wearable electronic textiles applications. Journal of Polymer 
Research, 21(7), 469. doi:10.1007/s10965-014-0469-5
Girau, R., Nitti, M., & Atzori, L. (2013). Implementation of an Experimental Platform for the 
Social Internet of Things, Seventh International Conference on Innovative Mobile and Internet 
Services in Ubiquitous Computing (IMIS), (pp. 500-505). doi:10.1109/IMIS.2013.90
Gluhak, A., Krco, S., Nati, M., Pfisterer, D., Mitton, N., & Razafindralambo, T. (2011). A sur-
vey on facilities for experimental internet of things research. IEEE Communications Magazine, 
49(11), 58–67. doi:10.1109/MCOM.2011.6069710
Gochfeld, M., & Goldstein, B. D. (1999). Lesson in Environmental health in the twentieth cen-
tury. Annual Review of Public Health, 20(1), 35–53. doi:10.1146/annurev.publhealth.20.1.35 
PMID:10352848
Goodwin, C. (1991). Privacy: Recognition of a consumer right. Journal of Public Policy & 
Marketing, 10(1), 149–166.
Gorini, A., & Pravettoni, G. (2011). P5 medicine: A plus for a personalized approach to oncology, 
Nat. Rev. Clinical Oncology, 8(7), 444. doi:10.1038/nrclinonc.2010.227-c1 PMID:21629214
Gosselin, B., Sawan, M., & Kerherve, E. (2010). Linear-Phase Delay Filters for Ultra-Low-Power 
Signal Processing in Neural Recording Implants. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and 
Systems., 4(3), 171–180. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2010.2045756 PMID:23853341

Compilation of References
311
Government of Canada. (2016a). Air Quality Health Index. Retrieved January 15, 2016, from 
http://www.ec.gc.ca/cas-aqhi/default.asp?Lang=En&n=065BE995-1
Government of Canada. (2016b). National Map - Air - Environment Canada. Retrieved January 
20, 2016, from http://www.ec.gc.ca/cas-aqhi/default.asp?lang=En&n=450C1129-1
Griffith, M., Portnoy, W., Stotts, L., & Day, J. (1979). Improved capacitive electrocardiogram 
electrodes for burn applications. Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 17(5), 641–646. 
doi:10.1007/BF02440910 PMID:316080
Gruman, J., & Smith, C. W. (2009). Why the Journal of Participatory Medicine? Journal of 
Participatory Medicine, 1. Retrieved from http://www.jopm.org/opinion/editorials/2009/10/21/
why-the-journal-of-participatory-medicine/
Gubbi, J., Buyya, R., Marusic, S., & Palaniswami, M. (2013). Internet of Things (IoT): A vi-
sion, architectural elements, and future directions. Future Generation Computer Systems, 29(7), 
1645–1660. doi:10.1016/j.future.2013.01.010
Guinard, D., Fischer, M., & Trifa, V. (2010). Sharing using social networks in a composable Web 
of Things. Proceedings of IEEE PERCOM. doi:10.1109/PERCOMW.2010.5470524
Gu, T., Pung, H. K., & Zhang, D. Q. (2005). A service‐oriented middleware for building con-
text‐aware services. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 28(1), 1–18. doi:10.1016/j.
jnca.2004.06.002
Gyu, Y. (2006). ECG measurement on a chair without conductive contact. Biomedical Engineer-
ing. IEEE Transactions on, 53(5), 956–959.
Gyu, Y. (2007). ECG Recording on a Bed During Sleep Without Direct Skin-Contact. Biomedical 
Engineering. IEEE Transactions on, 54(4), 718–725.
H.-C. Kung, Hoyert, Xu, & Murphy, S.L. (2008). Deaths: final data for 2005. National Vital 
Statistics Reports, 56(10), 5-9.
Haller, S. (2010). The Things in the Internet of Things. Paper presented at Internet of Things 
Conference, Tokyo, Japan.
Hamed, Z., Tenhunen, H., & Yang, G. (2015). A Programmable Low Power Current Source for 
Bioimpedance Measurement: Towards a Wearable Personalized Health. In IEEE 37th Annu.
Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society(EMBC2015). doi:10.1109/
EMBC.2015.7318787
Han, N. S. (2015). Semantic service provisioning for 6LoWPAN: powering internet of things 
applications on Web (Doctoral dissertation). Available from Institut National des Telecommu-
nications. (tel-01217185)
Hare, B., & Tomasello, M. (2005). Human-like social skills in dogs? Trends in Cognitive Sci-
ences, 9(9), 439–444. doi:10.1016/j.tics.2005.07.003 PMID:16061417

Compilation of References
312
Harmon, P., & Wolf, C. (2014). The State of Business Process Management 2014. Retrieved 
July 2, 2015, from http://www.bptrends.com/bpt/wp-content/uploads/BPTrends-State-of-BPM-
Survey-Report.pdf
Harrison, C., Lim, B., Shick, A., & Hudson, S. (2009). Where to locate wearable displays?: 
reaction time performance of visual alerts from tip to toe.Proceedings of the 27th international 
conference on Human factors (pp. 941-944). Boston: ACM. doi:10.1145/1518701.1518845
Harrison, R. R., & Charles, C. (2003). A low-power low-noise CMOS amplifier for neural 
recording applications. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 38(6), 958–965. doi:10.1109/
JSSC.2003.811979
Hassanalieragh, M., Page, A., Soyata, T., Sharma, G., Aktas, M., Mateos, G., . . . Andreescu, S. 
(2015, June). Health monitoring and management using internet-of-things (IoT) sensing with 
cloud-based processing: Opportunities and challenges. In Services Computing (SCC), 2015 IEEE 
International Conference on (pp. 285-292). IEEE.
He, M., Zheng, Z., Xue, G., & Du, X. (2008). Event Driven RFID Based Exhaust Gas Detection 
Services Oriented System Research. In 4th International Conference on Wireless Communi-
cations, Networking and Mobile Computing (WiCOM) (pp. 1–4). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/
WiCom.2008.698
Health Fact Sheet. (2015). Health Fact Sheet. Pew Internet Project’s research related to health 
and health care. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.org/fact-sheets/health-fact-sheet/
Healthcare, P. (2016, Aug. 1). [Online]. Available: http://www.usa.philips.com/healthcare/
Helbing, D., Bishop, S., Conte, R., Lukowicz, P., & McCarthy, J. B. (2012). FuturICT: Participatory 
computing to understand and manage our complex world in a more sustainable and resilient way. 
The European Physical Journal. Special Topics, 214(1), 11–39. doi:10.1140/epjst/e2012-01686-y
Hernandez, J., McDuff, D. J., & Picard, R. W. (2015). BioPhone: Physiology Monitoring from 
Peripheral Smartphone Motions.Proceedings 37th Int. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biol-
ogy Society Conference. doi:10.1109/EMBC.2015.7320048
Hiremath, S., Yang, G., & Mankodiya, K. (2014). Wearable Internet of Things: Concept, Archi-
tectural Components and Promises for Person-Centered Healthcare. 4th International Conference 
on Wireless Mobile Communication and Healthcare. doi:10.4108/icst.mobihealth.2014.257440
Holmquist, L. E., Mattern, F., Schiele, B., Alahuhta, P., Beigl, M., & Gellersen, H. W. (2001). 
Smart-its friends: A technique for users to easily establish connections between smart artefacts, 
Proceedings of the 3rd international conference on Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp ’01. 
Springer-Verlag. doi:10.1007/3-540-45427-6_10
Horiuchi, T., Swindell, T., Sander, D., & Abshier, P. (2004). A low-power CMOS neural ampli-
fier with amplitude measurements for spike sorting. In International Symposium on Circuits and 
Systems, ISCAS2004. doi:10.1109/ISCAS.2004.1328932

Compilation of References
313
Horty, J. (2001). Agency and Deontic Logic. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press. 
doi:10.1093/0195134613.001.0001
Hovorka, R. (2006). Continuous glucose monitoring and closed-loop systems. Diabetic Medicine, 
23(1), 1–12. doi:10.1111/j.1464-5491.2005.01672.x PMID:16409558
Hristova, A. (2008). Conceptualization and Design of a Context-aware Platform for User-centric 
Applications. Academic Press.
Huang, J. (2013). Research on application of internet of things in nursing home. Applied Mechan-
ics and Materials, 303-306, 2153-2156. DOI: 10.4028/www.scientific.net/AMM.303-306.2153
Huigen, E., Peper, A., & Grimbergen, C. A. (2002). Investigation into the origin of the noise of 
surface electrodes. Medical & Biological Engineering & Computing, 40(3), 332–338. doi:10.1007/
BF02344216 PMID:12195981
Hu, R., Qin, Y., Tian, Y., Hong, Z., Yang, G., Zheng, L.-R., & Wang, Y. et al. (2014). Biofeed-
back Neuromuscular Electrical Stimulation Front-end for Dysphagia Treatment. 10th Biomedical 
Circuits and Systems Conference (BIOCAS2014). doi:10.1109/BioCAS.2014.6981800
Hussein, D., Soochang, P., & Crespi, N. (2015). A Cognitive Context-aware Approach for Adap-
tive Services Provisioning in Social Internet of Things. IEEE ICCE Conference Proceeding. 
doi:10.1109/ICCE.2015.7066376
Iantovics, B. (2010). Cognitive Medical Multiagent Systems, BRAIN. Broad Research in Artificial 
Intelligence and Neuroscience, 1(1).
IBM Software. (2015). Smarter Process: Reinventing Business Operations. Retrieved from https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=nZjIApCIUKw
IBM. (n.d.). A New vision for ‘social security’: Home healthcare smart sensors help keep Italian 
seniors living in place. IBM. Retrieved from: http://www-03.ibm.com/able/news/homehealthcare.
html
IEEE. (2011). IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks--Part 15.4: Low-Rate 
Wireless Personal Area Networks (LR-WPANs). IEEE.
IEEE. (2012). IEEE Standard for Local and metropolitan area networks - Part 15.6: Wireless 
Body Area Networks. IEEE.
Iera, A. (2011). The Social Internet of Things: from objects that communicate to objects that 
socialize in the Internet. 50th FITCE International Congress Palermo. Retrieved from https://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=sQZDlLPgTWY
IGI Global Dictionary. (2016). Retrieved from http://www.igi-global.com/dictionary/ontol-
ogy/21117

Compilation of References
314
Ilahi, L., Ghannouchi, S. A., & Martinho, R. (2014). Healthcare information systems promo-
tion: from an improved management of telemedicine processes to home healthcare processes. In 
Proceedings of the Second International Conference on Technological Ecosystems for Enhancing 
Multiculturality (pp. 333-338). ACM. doi:10.1145/2669711.2669920
Inteltex. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: www.inteltex.eu
IoT to Revolutionize Healthcare. (2015). IoT to Revolutionize Healthcare Industry: Survey. 
M2M Magazine. Retrieved from http://www.machinetomachinemagazine.com/2015/04/14/iot-
to-revolutionize-healthcare-industry-zebra-survey/
Irwin, A. (1995). Citizen Science: A study of People, Expertise and Sustainable Development. 
London: Routledge.
Islam, S. M. R., Kwak, D., Kabir, M. H., Hossain, M., & Kwak, K. (2015). The Internet of Things 
for Health Care: A Comprehensive Survey. Access, IEEE, (3), 678-708.
Istepanian, R. S. H., Hu, S., Philip, N. Y., & Sungoor, A. (2011, August). The potential of 
Internet of m-health Things “m-IoT” for non-invasive glucose level sensing. In Engineering in 
Medicine and Biology Society, EMBC, 2011 Annual International Conference of the IEEE (pp. 
5264-5266). IEEE.
Istepanian, R. S., Hu, S., Philip, N. Y., & Sungoor, A. (2011). The potential of Internet of m-
health Things “m-IoT” for non-invasive glucose level sensing. Proceedings of the 33rd Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.
ITU Internet Reports. (2005). The Internet of Things. Executive Summary. International Tele-
communication Union. Retrieved from http://www.itu.int/osg/spu/publications/internetofthings/
InternetofThings_summary.pdf
iTunes. (2016). easyTek. Apple. Retrieved from: https://itunes.apple.com/us/app/siemens-easytek/
id893105249?mt=8
Jablonski, C. (2012). Sensing systems for robots could help blind navigate. Retrieved August 
9, 2015, http://www.zdnet.com/article/sensing-systems-for-robots-could-help-blind-navigate/
Jara, A. J., Zamora-Izquierdo, M. A., & Skarmeta, A. F. (2013). Interconnection framework for 
mHealth and remote monitoring based on the Internet of Things.Selected Areas in Communica-
tions. IEEE Journal on, 31(9), 47–65.
Jara, A. J., Zamora, M. A., & Skarmeta, A. F. (2011). An internet of things---based personal 
device for diabetes therapy management in ambient assisted living (AAL). Personal and Ubiq-
uitous Computing, 15(4), 431–440. doi:10.1007/s00779-010-0353-1
Ji, G., Ouyang, W., Yang, K., & Yang, G. (2015). Skin-attached sensor and artifact removal using 
cloud computing. In 7th International Conference on e-Health (e-Health2015).

Compilation of References
315
Ji, G., Yang, G., Yang, K., & Zheng, L. R. (2015). A User-friendly Wearable Device Based on 
Plastic Substrate for Heart Disease Monitoring. In 4th International Conference on Computational 
& Mathematical Biomedical Engineering (CMBE2015).
Jian, Z., Zhanli, W., & Zhuang, M. A. (2012). Temperature measurement system and method 
based on home gateway. Patent CN 102811185.
Joseph, S. L., Xiao, J., Zhang, X., Chawda, B., Narang, K., Rajput, N., & Subramaniam, L. V. 
et al. (2015). Being aware of the world: Toward using social media to support the blind with 
navigation. IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, 45(3), 399–405. doi:10.1109/
THMS.2014.2382582
Juhasz, B., Juhasz, N., Steiner, H., & Kertesz, Z. (2013). Coginfocom in collaborative virtual 
working environments. In 4th IEEE International Conference on Cognitive Infocommunications, 
CogInfoCom 2013 - Proceedings, (pp. 475-480). doi:10.1109/CogInfoCom.2013.6719294
Juric, M. B. (2010). WSDL and BPEL extensions for Event Driven Architecture. Information 
and Software Technology, 52(10), 1023–1043. doi:10.1016/j.infsof.2010.04.005
Justice. (n.d.). Article 29: Working Party. Justice: Building a European Area of Justice. Retrieved 
from: http://ec.europa.eu/justice/data-protection/article-29/index_en.htm
K4CARE. (2008). K4CARE project Web site. Retrieved from http://www.k4care.ne
Kalakota, R., & Whinston, A. B. (1996). Frontiers of electronic commerce. Addison-Wesley.
Kampa, M., & Castanas, E. (2008). Human health effects of air pollution. Science Direct, 151, 
362–367. PMID:17646040
Kampa, M., Nistikaki, A., Tsaousis, V., Maliaraki, N., Notas, G., & Castanas, E. (2002). A new 
automated method for the determination of the Total Antioxidant Capacity (TAC) of human 
plasma, based on the crocin bleaching assay. BMC Clinical Pathology, 2, 3. PMID:12197944
Kang, Y.-B., & Pisan, Y. (2006). A survey of major challenges and future directions for next 
generation pervasive computing. In Computer and Information Sciences–ISCIS 2006 (pp. 
755–764). Springer.
Kanth, R. K., Liljeberg, P., Westerlund, T., Kumar, H., Tenhunen, H., Wan, Q., . . . Zheng, L.-
R. (2015). Information and communication system technology’s impacts on personalized and 
pervasive healthcare: A technological survey. 2014/6/24, IEEE Conference on Norbert Wiener 
in the 21st Century (21CW). doi:10.1109/NORBERT.2014.6893917
Kato, T., Ueno, A., Kataoka, S., Hoshino, H., & Ishiyama, Y. (2006). An Application of Capacitive 
Electrode for Detecting Electrocardiogram of Neonates and Infants. 28th Annual International 
Conference of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2006.260362

Compilation of References
316
Kera, D., & Graham, C. (2010, November). Collective sensor networks and future communi-
ties: designing interaction across multiple scales. In Proceedings of the 22nd Conference of the 
Computer-Human Interaction Special Interest Group of Australia on Computer-Human Interac-
tion (pp. 396-399). ACM. doi:10.1145/1952222.1952312
Kharif, O. (2013). Trillions of Smart Sensors Will Change Life. Retrieved July 26, 2015, http://
www.bloomberg.com/news/articles/2013-08-05/trillions-of-smart-sensors-will-change-life-as-
apps-have
Kim, J. E. (2016). Architecting Social Internet of Things (Doctoral dissertation). University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA.
Kim, J. E., Maron, A., & Mosse, D. (2015, June). Socialite: A Flexible Framework for Social 
Internet of Things. In Mobile Data Management (MDM), 2015 16th IEEE International Confer-
ence on (Vol. 1, pp. 94-103). IEEE. doi:10.1109/MDM.2015.50
Kimbrough, R. D., Carter, C. D., Liddle, J. A., Cline, R. E., & Phillips, P. E. (1977). Epidemiol-
ogy and pathology of a tetrachlorodibenzodioxin poisoning episode. Archives of Environmental 
Health, 32(2), 77–86. doi:10.1080/00039896.1977.10667259 PMID:557961
Kim, J., & Chung, K.-Y. (2014). Ontology-based healthcare context information model to imple-
ment ubiquitous environment. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 71(2), 873–888. doi:10.1007/
s11042-011-0919-6
Kim, J.-H., Chung, K.-Y., Rim, K.-W., Lee, J.-H., Kang, U.-G., & Lee, Y.-H. (2009). Design of 
U-healthcare service system based on personalized model in smart home. In U-and E-Service, 
Science and Technology (pp. 104–111). Springer.
Kingsly, S. R., & Kaviyarasi, G. (2014). A survey of fault node identification. Development 
Research, 4, 898–901.
Kleinberg, J. (2008). The convergence of social and technological networks. Communications 
of the ACM, 51(11), 66–72. doi:10.1145/1400214.1400232
Kling, A., Campbell, P. H., & Wilcox, J. (2010). Young children with phyical disabilities: 
Caregiver perspectives about assistive technology. Infants and Young Children, 23(3), 169–183. 
doi:10.1097/IYC.0b013e3181e1a873
Klofutar, A., Hoefflinger, B., Neusser, S., & Spaanenburg, L. 1993. Robust QRS detection with 
neuro-processing. In Digest 2nd Eur. Conf. on Eng. and Med. ECEM’93.
Ko, E. J., Lee, H. J., & Lee, J. W. (2007). Ontology-based context modeling and reasoning for 
U-HealthCare. IEICE Transactions on Information and Systems, 90(8), 1262–1270. doi:10.1093/
ietisy/e90-d.8.1262
Koren, I., & Krishna, C. M. (2007). Fault tolerant systems. Morgan Kaufmann.
Kotin, P., & Falk, H. L. (1964). Atmosphere Pollutants. Annual Review of Medicine, 15(1), 
233–254. doi:10.1146/annurev.me.15.020164.001313 PMID:14133847

Compilation of References
317
Kovacs, E. (2014). 70 Percent of IoT Devices Vulnerable to Cyberattacks: HP. Retrieved on July 
28, 2015, http://www.securityweek.com/70-iot-devices-vulnerable-cyberattacks-hp
Kranz, M., Roalter, L., & Michahelles, F. (2010). Things that Twitter: social networks and the 
Internet of things, What can the Internet of Things do for the Citizen (CIoT). Workshop at Pervasive.
Krishnakumar, N., & Sheth, A. (1995). Managing heterogeneous multi-system tasks to support 
enterprise-wide operations. Distributed and Parallel Databases, 3(2), 155–186. doi:10.1007/
BF01277644
Kullenberg, C., & Kasperowski, D. (2016). What Is Citizen Science? - A Scientometric Meta-
Analysis. PLoS ONE, 11(1), 1–16. doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0147152 PMID:26766577
Kuntamalla, S., & Ram Gopal Reddy, L. (2014). An efficient and automatic systolic peak detec-
tion algorithm for photophysmographic signals. Int. Journal of Computer Application, 97(19), 
18–23. doi:10.5120/17115-7686
Kuznetsov, S. (2010). Rise of the expert amateur: DIY projects, communities, and cultures. In 
Proceedings of the 6th Nordic Conference on Human-Computer Interaction: Extending Boundar-
ies (pp. 295–304). doi:10.1145/1868914.1868950
Laleci, G.B., Dogac, A., Olduz, M., Tasyurt, I., Yuksel, M., & Okcan, A. (2008). SAPHIRE: A 
Multi-Agent System for Remote Healthcare Monitoring through Computerized Clinical Guide-
lines. Agent Technology and e-Health. Whitestein Series in Software Agent Technologies and 
Autonomic Computing, 25-44.
Lambrinos, L., & Dosis, A. (2013). UbiComp 2013 Adjunct - Adjunct Publication of the 2013 
ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing. Doi:10.1145/2494091.2494162
Lasley, S. M., & Gilbert, M. E. (2000). Glutamatergic components underlying lead-induced impair-
ments in hippocampal synaptic plasticity. Neurotoxicology, 21(6), 1057–1067. PMID:11233752
Lau, S. L., König, I., David, K., Parandian, B., Carius-Düssel, C., & Schultz, M. (2010). Support-
ing patient monitoring using activity recognition with a smartphone. Wireless Communication 
Systems (ISWCS), 2010 7th International Symposium on (pp. 810-814). York: IEEE. doi:10.1109/
ISWCS.2010.5624490
Lazarescu, M. T. (2013). Design of a WSN Platform for Long-Term Environmental Monitoring 
for IoT Applications. IEEE Journal of Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 
3(1), 45–54. doi:10.1109/JETCAS.2013.2243032
Leary, J. F. (2010). Nanotechnology: What is it and why is small so big? Canadian Journal of 
Ophthalmology, 45(5), 449–456. doi:10.3129/i10-089 PMID:20856270
Lechal. (n.d.). Lechal. Retrieved from: http://lechal.com/
Lee. (2011). A Programmable Implantable Microstimulator SoC With Wireless Telemetry: Ap-
plication in Closed-Loop Endocardial Stimulation for Cardiac Pacemaker. Biomedical Circuits 
and Systems. IEEE Transactions on., 5(6), 511–522.

Compilation of References
318
Leeb, R., Tonin, L., Rohm, M., Desideri, L., Carlson, T., & Millán, J. D. R. (2015). Towards 
independence: A BCI telepresence robot for people with severe motor disabilities. Proceedings 
of the IEEE, 103(6), 969–982. doi:10.1109/JPROC.2015.2419736
Lee, H. (2009). Using assistive technology to ensure access to E-Learning for individuals with 
disabilities. In I. Lee (Ed.), Encyclopedia of E-Business development and management in the 
digital economy. Hershey, PA: IGI Publishing.
Lee, H., & Kwon, J. (2013). Ontology Model-based Situation and Socially-Aware Health Care 
Service in a Smart Home Environment. International Journal of Smart Home, 7(5), 239–250. 
doi:10.14257/ijsh.2013.7.5.24
Lee, H., & Templeton, R. (2008). Ensuring equal access to technology: An overview of providing 
assistive technology services to students with disabilities. Theory into Practice, 47(3), 212–219. 
doi:10.1080/00405840802153874
Lee, I., & Lee, K. (2015). The Internet of things (IoT): Applications, investments and challenges 
for enterprises. Business Horizons, 58(4), 431–440. doi:10.1016/j.bushor.2015.03.008
Lee, S. B., & Lee, H.-M. (2010). An inductively powered scalable 32-channel wireless neural 
recording system-on-a-chip for neuroscience applications. In IEEE International Solid-State 
Circuits Conference Digest of Technical Papers (ISSCC).
Levina, O., & Stantchev, V. (2009). Realizing Event-Driven SOA. In Fourth International 
Conference on Internet and Web Applications and Services (ICIW) (pp. 37–42). http://doi.org/ 
doi:10.1109/ICIW.2009.14
Li, H., Miao, C., Zhang, L., Tian, W., & Wang, J. (2014). Research on key technologies of ECG 
monitoring system based on Internet of things. Application Research of Computers, 38(12).
Li, N., & Becerik-Gerber, B. (2012). Assessment of a Smart Phone-Based Indoor Localization 
Solution for Improving Context Awareness in the Construction Industry. Computing in Civil 
Engineering, 561-568.
Libelium. (2016). Gases Board Technical Guide. Retrieved January 18, 2016, from http://www.
libelium.com/development/waspmote/documentation/gases-board-technical-guide/
LIFX. (n.d.). LIFX. Retrieved from: http://www.lifx.com
Lin, C.H., Ho, P.H., & Lin, H.C. (2014). Framework for NFC-Based Intelligent Agents: A 
Context-Awareness Enabler for Social Internet of Things. International Journal of Distributed 
Sensor Networks. doi:10.1155/2014/978951
Liu, C., Yang, C., Zhang, X., & Chen, J. (2015). External integrity verification for outsourced 
big data in cloud and IoT: A big picture. Future Generation Computer Systems, 49, 58–67. 
doi:10.1016/j.future.2014.08.007

Compilation of References
319
Liu, S.-C., & Tang, K.-T. (2011). A low-voltage low-power sigma-delta modulator for bio-potential 
signals. In IEEE/NIH Life Science Systems and Applications Workshop (LiSSA). doi:10.1109/
LISSA.2011.5754146
Liu, Y., Dong, B., Guo, B., Yang, J., & Peng, W. (2015). Combination of cloud computing and 
Internet of Things (IOT) in medical monitoring systems. International Journal of Hybrid Infor-
mation Technology, 8(12), 367–376. doi:10.14257/ijhit.2015.8.12.28
Lopes, N. V., Pinto, F., Furtado, P., & Silva, J. (2014). IoT architecture proposal for disabled 
people. 2014 IEEE 10th International Conference on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Network-
ing and Communications, (pp. 152-158).
Luckham, D. (2002). The Power of Events: An Introduction to Complex Event Processing in 
Distributed Enterprise Systems. Addison-Wesley.
Luckham, D. (2012). Event Processing for Business: Organizing the Real-Time Enterprise. Wiley. 
doi:10.1002/9781119198697
Lukowicz, P., Junker, H., Stäger, M., von Büren, T., & Tröster, G. (2002). WearNET: A Distributed 
Multi-sensor System for Context Aware Wearables. UbiComp 2002: Ubiquitous Computing, 4th In-
ternational Conference (pp. 361-370). Göteborg: Springer Verlag. doi:10.1007/3-540-45809-3_28
Lu, L., & Chen, M. (2015). Implementation of ECG Monitoring System Based on Internet of 
Things. Chinese Journal of Medical Instrumentation, 39(6), 418–420. PMID:27066681
Lymperis, A., & Dittmar, A. (2007). Advanced wearable health systems and applications, research 
and development efforts in the european union. IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology 
Magazine, 26(3), 29–33. doi:10.1109/MEMB.2007.364926 PMID:17549917
Maalel, N., Natalizio, E., Bouabdallah, A., Roux, P., & Kellil, M. (2013). Reliability for Emer-
gency Applications in Internet of Things.2013 IEEE International Conference on Distributed 
Computing in Sensor Systems (DCOSS), (pp. 361-366). doi:10.1109/DCOSS.2013.40
Macala, W. (2016). A pilot project increased blood pressure monitoring effectiveness to 70 
percent. Retrieved from http://www.psfk.com/2016/02/withings-fitness-tracker-home-blood-
pressure-monitoring.html
Malhi, K., Mukhopadhyay, S. C., Schnepper, J., Haefke, M., & Ewald, H. (2012). A Zigbee-
Based Wearable Physiological Parameters Monitoring System. IEEE Sensors Journal, Volume, 
12(Issue:3), 423–430. doi:10.1109/JSEN.2010.2091719
Malik, N., Mahmud, U., & Javed, Y. (2007). Future challenges in context-aware computing. 
Paper presented at the IADIS International Conference WWW/Internet.
Mani Chandy, K. (2006). Event-Driven Applications: Costs, Benefits and Design Approaches. 
California Institute of Technology.

Compilation of References
320
Mansor, H., Shukor, M. H. A., Meskam, S. S., Rusli, N. Q. A. M., & Zamery, N. S. (2013, 
November). Body temperature measurement for remote health monitoring system. In Smart In-
strumentation, Measurement and Applications (ICSIMA), 2013 IEEE International Conference 
on (pp. 1-5). IEEE. doi:10.1109/ICSIMA.2013.6717956
Martin-Campillo, A., Martinez-Garcia, C., Cucurull, J., Marti, R., Robles, S., & Borrell, J. (2009). 
Mobile Agents in Healthcare. Distributed Intelligence Approach.
Martinho, R., Domingos, D., & Respício, A. (2016). Evaluating the Reliability of Ambient-
Assisted Living Business Processes. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on 
Enterprise Information Systems (pp. 528 – 536). Scitepress. doi:10.5220/0005917005280536
Martinho, R., & Domingos, D. (2014). Quality of Information and Access Cost of IoT Resources 
in BPMN Processes. Procedia Technology, 16, 737–744. doi:10.1016/j.protcy.2014.10.023
Martinho, R., Rijo, R., & Nunes, A. (2015). Complexity Analysis of a Business Process Auto-
mation: Case study on a Healthcare Organization. Procedia Computer Science, 64, 1226–1231. 
doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.510
Marzano, S. (2003). The new everyday: Views on ambient intelligence. 010 Publishers.
Massagram, W., Hafner, N., Chen, M., Macchiarulo, L., Lubecke, V. M., & Boric-Lubecke, O. 
(2010). Digital Heart-Rate Variability Parameter Monitoring and Assessment ASIC. IEEE Trans-
actions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 4(1), 19–26. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2009.2035555 
PMID:23853306
Maurer, U., Rowe, A., Smailagic, A., & Siewiorek, D. (2006). Location and Activity Recognition 
Using eWatch: A Wearable Sensor Platform. Ambient Intelligence in Everyday Life, 3864, 86–102.
Ma, Y., Rao, J., Hu, W., Meng, X., Han, X., Zhang, Y., & Liu, C. et al. (2012). An efficient 
index for massive IoT data in cloud environment. In Proceedings of the 21st ACM International 
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. doi:10.1145/2396761.2398587
Mayora, O., Arnrich, B., Bardram, J., Drager, C., Finke, A., Frost, M., . . . Wurzer, G. (2013). 
{Personal health systems for bipolar disorder Anecdotes, challenges and lessons learnt from 
MONARCA project. Pervasive Computing Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth), 2013 
7th International Conference on (pp. 424-429). Venice: EAI.
McCallum, L., & Higgins, D. (2012). Measuring body temperature. Nursing Times, 108(45), 
20–22. PMID:23240273
McCarthy, J. (1993). Notes on formalizing contexts. Paper presented at the Thirteenth International 
Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
McCrory, A. (2000, March). Ubiquitous? Pervasive? Sorry, they don’t compute. Computer World.
McCue, T. J. (2012, April 4). 14 billion software as a service industry growth influences maker 
companies. Forbes. Retrieved on June 16, 2015, from http://www.forbes.com

Compilation of References
321
McGlynn, E. A., Asch, S. M., Adams, J., Keesey, J., Hicks, J., DeCristofaro, A., & Kerr, E. A. 
(2003). The Quality of Health Care Delivered to Adults in the United States. The New England 
Journal of Medicine, 348(26), 2635–2645. doi:10.1056/NEJMsa022615 PMID:12826639
McNaull, J., Augusto, J. C., Mulvenna, M., & McCullagh, P. (2012). Data and information qual-
ity issues in ambient assisted living systems. Journal of Data and Information Quality, 4(1), 4. 
doi:10.1145/2378016.2378020
Mell, P., & Grance, T. (2011). The NIST Definition of Cloud Computing. NIST Special Publica-
tion 800-145, National Institute of Standards and Technology. Retrieved on January 26, 2016 
from http://csrc.nist.gov/publications/nistpubs/800-145/SP800-145.pdf
Memon, M., Wagner, S. R., Pedersen, C. F., Beevi, F. H. A., & Hansen, F. O. (2014). Ambient 
assisted living healthcare frameworks, platforms, standards, and quality attributes. Sensors (Basel, 
Switzerland), 14(3), 4312–4341. doi:10.3390/s140304312 PMID:24599192
Mendes, P. (2011). Social-driven internet of connected objects. Proc. of the Interconnecting 
Smart Objects with the Internet Workshop.
Merritt, C. R., Nagle, H. T., & Grant, E. (2009). Fabric-Based Active Electrode Design and 
Fabrication for Health Monitoring Clothing. IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in 
Biomedicine, 13(2), 274–280. doi:10.1109/TITB.2009.2012408 PMID:19174357
Meyer, S., Sperner, K., & Magerkurth, C. (2011b, October). Towards Real World Aware Enterprise 
Systems-Reflecting the Quality Information of Physical Resources in Services and Processes. 
In Mobile Adhoc and Sensor Systems (MASS), 2011 IEEE 8th International Conference on (pp. 
843-848). IEEE. doi:10.1109/MASS.2011.98
Meyer, S., Sperner, K., Magerkurth, C., & Pasquier, J. (2011a, June). Towards modeling real-
world aware business processes. In Proceedings of the Second International Workshop on Web 
of Things (p. 8). ACM.
Microflex. (2016, Aug.1). Available: http://microflex.ecs.soton.ac.uk
Microsoft. (n.d.). Microsoft Accessibility. Microsoft. Retrieved from: https://www.microsoft.
com/enable/
Miller, K. A., Siscovick, D. S., Sheppard, L., Shepherd, K., Sullivan, J. H., Anderson, G. L., & 
Kaufman, J. D. (2007). Long-Term Exposure to Air Pollution and Incidence of Cardiovascular 
Events in Women. The New England Journal of Medicine, 356(5), 447–458. doi:10.1056/NEJ-
Moa054409 PMID:17267905
Miller, M. (2015). The internet of things: How smart TVs, smart cars, smart homes, and smart 
cities are changing the world. Pearson Education.
Miller, M. (2015). The Internet of things: How smart TVs, smart cars, smart homes, and smart 
cities are changing the world. Pearson Education.

Compilation of References
322
Milosevic, M., Milenkovic, A., & Jovanov, E. (2013). mHealth @ UAH: computing infrastructure 
for mobile health and wellness monitoring. XRDS: Crossroads. The ACM Magazine for Students, 
20(2), 43–49. doi:10.1145/2539269
Miranda, H., Gilja, V., Chestek, C. A., Shenoy, K. V., & Meng, T. H. (2010). HermesD: A 
High-Rate Long-Range Wireless Transmission System for Simultaneous Multichannel Neural 
Recording Applications. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 4(3), 181–191. 
doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2010.2044573 PMID:23853342
Miraoui, M., & Tadj, C. (2007). A service oriented definition of context for pervasive comput-
ing. Paper presented at the 16th International Conference on Computing, Mexico City, Mexico.
Mislove, A., Gummadi, K. P., & Druschel, P. (2006). Exploiting Social Networks for Internet 
Search. Proc. of ACM HotNets.
Mitton, N., & Simplot-Ryl, D. (2011). From the Internet of things to the Internet of the physical 
world. Comptes Rendus Physique, 12(7), 669–674. doi:10.1016/j.crhy.2011.06.006
Mohsen, M., Kartikeya, M., Gert, C., & Nitish, T. (2008). From spikes to EEG: Integrated mul-
tichannel and selective acquisition of neuropotentials. In 30th Annual International Conference 
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society.
Mollazadeh, M., Murari, K., Cauwenberghs, G., & Thakor, N. (2009). Micropower CMOS Inte-
grated Low-Noise Amplification, Filtering, and Digitization of Multimodal Neuropotentials. IEEE 
Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 3(1), 1–10. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2008.2005297 
PMID:20046962
Monitoring patients using intelligent t-shirts. (2011). Retrieved from http://portal.uc3m.es/portal/
page/portal/actualidad_cientifica/noticias/intelligent_tshirts
More, C. M., & Travers, J. C. (2013). What’s App with that? Selecting educational apps for young chil-
dren with disabilities. Young Exceptional Children, 16(2), 15–32. doi:10.1177/1096250612464763
Mori, M. (1970). The Uncanny Valley. Trans. Karl F. McDorman and Norri Kageki. IEEE Ro-
botics & Automation Magazine, 19.
Morris, J., Mueller, J., & Jones, M. (2010). Tomorrow’s elders with disabilities: What 
the wireless industry needs to know. Journal of Engineering Design, 21(2/3), 131–146. 
doi:10.1080/09544820903303431
Morrison, E., George, V., & Mosqueda, L. (2008). Primary care for adults with physical disabili-
ties: perceptions from consumer and provider focus groups. Family Medicine Journal, 645-651.
Mühl, G., Fiege, L., & Pietzuch, P. (2006). Distributed Event-Based Systems. Berlin: Springer.
Mukherjee, D., Jalote, P., & Nanda, M. G. (2008). Determining QoS of WS-BPEL composi-
tions. In Service-Oriented Computing–ICSOC 2008 (pp. 378–393). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-540-89652-4_29

Compilation of References
323
Mulder, I., Schikhof, Y., Vastenburg, M., Card, A., Dunn, T., Komninos, A., & Eslami, Z. et al. 
(2009). Designing with Care: The Future of Pervasive Healthcare. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 
8(4), 85–88. doi:10.1109/MPRV.2009.71
MuleSoft. (2016). Mule ESB. Retrieved January 20, 2016, from http://www.mulesoft.org/
Mulfari, D., Celesti, A., Fazio, M., Villari, M., & Puliafito, A. (2014). Using embedded systems to 
spread assistive technology on multiple devices in smart environments. In Proceedings - 2014 IEEE 
International Conference on Bioinformatics and Biomedicine. doi:10.1109/BIBM.2014.6999234
Mulfari, D., Celesti, A., Fazio, M., Villari, M., & Puliafito, A. (2015). Achieving assistive tech-
nology systems based on IoT devices in cloud computing. EAI Endorsed Transactions on Cloud 
Systems, 1(1), e4. doi:10.4108/cs.1.1.e4
Musumba, G. W., & Nyongesa, H. O. (2013). Context awareness in mobile computing: A review. 
International Journal of Machine Learning and Applications, 2(1).
Myo Armband. (2016, Aug. 1). Retrieved from https://www.myo.com/
MyZone. (2016, Aug. 1). Retrieved from http://www.myzone.org/
Nalepa, G. J., & Bobek, S. (2014). Rule-based solution for context-aware reasoning on mobile de-
vices. Computer Science and Information Systems, 11(1), 171–193. doi:10.2298/CSIS130209002N
Natarajan, K., Prasath, B., & Kokila, P. (2016). Smart Health Care System Using Internet of 
Things. Journal of Network Communications and Emerging Technologies, 6(3). Retrieved from 
www. jncet. org
Natex. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: www.natex.eu
National Intelligence Council. (2008). Six technologies with potential impacts on US interests 
out to 2025. National Intelligence Council.
NECG Platform. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www.nuubo.com/index.php?q=en/node/165
Nellcor. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www.nellcor.com/
Neßelrath, R., Haupert, J., Frey, J., & Brandherm, B. (2011). Supporting persons with special 
needs in their daily life in a smart home. In Proceedings - 2011 7th International Conference on 
Intelligent Environments. doi:10.1109/IE.2011.75
Nitti, M., & Atzori, L. (2015). What the SIoT needs: a new caching system or new friendship 
selection mechanism? Conference: IEEE 2nd World Forum on Internet of Things (WF-IoT). 
doi:10.1109/WF-IoT.2015.7389092
Nitti, M., Atzori, L., & Cvijikj, I. P. (2014). Network navigability in the social Internet of Things. 
Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2014 IEEE World Forum on. doi:10.1109/WF-IoT.2014.6803200
Nitti, M., Girau, R., & Atzori, L. (2014). Trustworthiness Management in the Social Internet of 
Things. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering.

Compilation of References
324
Nitti, M., Girau, R., Atzori, L., Iera, A., & Morabito, G. (2012). A subjective model for trust-
worthiness evaluation in the social Internet of Things. IEEE 23rd International Symposium on 
Personal Indoor and Mobile Radio Communications (PIMRC), (pp. 18-23).
Nitti, M., Atzori, L., & Cvijikj, I. P. (2015). Friendship Selection in the Social Internet of Things: 
Challenges and Possible Strategies. IEEE Internet of Things Journal, 2(3), 240–247. doi:10.1109/
JIOT.2014.2384734
NoTeReFiGa. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://extra.ivf.se/noterefiga
Nyberg, F., Gustavsson, P., Ja, L., Bellander, T., & Berglind, N. (2000). Urban Air Pollution and Lung 
Cancer in Stockholm. Epidemiology (Cambridge, Mass.), 11(5), 487–495. doi:10.1097/00001648-
200009000-00002 PMID:10955399
O’Rourke, D., & Macey, G. P. (2003). Community environmental policing: Assessing new 
strategies of public participation in environmental regulation. Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management, 22(3), 383–414. doi:10.1002/pam.10138
Object Management Group (2011). Business Process Model and Notation (BPMN) Version 2.0. 
Author.
Okolo, C. M., & Diedrich, J. (2014). Twenty-Five Years Later: How is technology used in the 
Education of students with disabilities? Results of a statewide study. Journal of Special Educa-
tion Technology, 29(1), 1–20. doi:10.1177/016264341402900101
Oniga, S., & Süto, J. (2014). Human activity recognition using neural networks. In Proceed-
ings of the 2014 15th International Carpathian Control Conference, ICCC 2014. doi:10.1109/
CarpathianCC.2014.6843636
Ortiz, A. M., Hussein, D., Park, S., Han, S. N., & Crespi, N. (2014). The Cluster Between Inter-
net of Things and Social Networks: Review and Research Challenges. IEEE Internet of Things 
Journal., 1(3), 206–215. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2014.2318835
Ottinger, G. (2010). Buckets of resistance: Standards and the effectiveness of citizen science. 
Science, Technology & Human Values, 35(2), 244–270. doi:10.1177/0162243909337121
Ouyang, C., Dumas, M., Ter Hofstede, A. H., & van der Aalst, W. M. (2007). Pattern-based trans-
lation of BPMN process models to BPEL web services. International Journal of Web Services 
Research, 5(1), 42–62. doi:10.4018/jwsr.2008010103
Pang, Z. (2013). Technologies and Architectures of the Internet-of-Things (IoT) for Health and 
Well-being (PhD Thesis). KTH - Royal Institute of Technology, Stockholm, Sweden.
Pantelopoulos, A., & Bourbakis, N. G. (2010, January). A Survey on Wearable Sensor-Based 
Systems for Health Monitoring and Prognosis. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man and Cy-
bernetics. Part C, Applications and Reviews, 40(1), 1–12. doi:10.1109/TSMCC.2009.2032660
Papazoglou, M. (2012). Web Services and SOA: Principles and Technology. Essex, UK: Pearson 
Education.

Compilation of References
325
Papetti, A., Iualé, M., Ceccacci, S., Bevilacqua, R., Germani, M., & Mengoni, M. (2014). Smart 
objects: An evaluation of the present state based on user needs. doi:10.1007/978-3-319-07788-8_34
Param. (2014). IoT iBeacons for the Visually Impaired at SFO. LyfeArts Blog. Retrieved from: 
http://www.lyfearts.com/iot-assistive-tech-and-living/
Parente, G., Nugent, C. D., Hong, X., Donnelly, M. P., Chen, L., & Vicario, E. (2011). For-
mal modeling techniques for ambient assisted living. Ageing International, 36(2), 192–216. 
doi:10.1007/s12126-010-9086-8
Park, S., Crespi, N., Park, H., & Kim, S. H. (2014, March). IoT routing architecture with au-
tonomous systems of things. In Internet of Things (WF-IoT), 2014 IEEE World Forum on (pp. 
442-445). IEEE. doi:10.1109/WF-IoT.2014.6803207
Park, S., Hussein, D., & Crespi, N. (2015). On-site service discovery along user roaming over 
Internet of Things. Consumer Electronics (ICCE), 2015 IEEE International Conference on, (pp. 
194-195). Retrieved from http://servicearchitecture.wp.tem-tsp.eu/files/2015/01/On-site-Service-
Discovery-along-User-Roaming-over-Internet-of-Things.pdf
Park, H., Lee, B., Ha, E., Lee, J., Kim, H., & Hong, Y. (2002). Association of Air Pollution With 
School Absenteeism Due to Illness. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent Medicine, 156(12), 
1235–1239. doi:10.1001/archpedi.156.12.1235 PMID:12444836
Pasport Respiration Rate Sensor. (n.d.). Retrieved from https://www.pasco.com/prodCatalog/
PS/PS-2133_pasport-respiration-rate-sensor/
PASTA. (2016, Aug.1). Available: https://projects.imec.be/pasta/node/1
Perera, C., Zaslavsky, A., Christen, P., & Georgakopoulos, D. (2014). Context Aware Comput-
ing for the Internet of Things: A Survey. IEEE Communications Surveys and Tutorials, 16(1), 
414–454. doi:10.1109/SURV.2013.042313.00197
Perry, S. J., Mosher, H. J., Persoon, T. J., Bass, E. J., Fairbanks, R. T. J., & Pennathur, P. R. 
(2013). Healthcare Systems Design At a Crossroads: Challenges, Opportunities and Strategies. 
In Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. SAGE Publica-
tions. doi:10.1177/1541931213571155
Perusquía-Hernández, M., Chen, W., & Feijs, L. M. G. (2015). Textile-integrated electronics for 
ambulatory pregnancy monitoring. In Advanced in smart medical textiles. Woodhead Publishing.
Peters, A., Dockery, D. W., Heinrich, J., & Wichmann, H. E. (1997). Medication Use Modifies 
the Health Effects of Particulate Sulfate Air Pollution in Children with Asthma. Environmental 
Health Perspectives, 105(4), 430–435. doi:10.1289/ehp.97105430 PMID:9189709
Pont, M. J. (2001). Patterns for Time-Triggered Embedded Systems. Addison-Wesley / ACM Press.
Pope, C. A. III, Bates, D., & Raizenne, E. (1995). Health Effects of Particulate Air Pollution: 
Time for Reassessment? Environmental Health Perspectives, 103(5), 472–480. doi:10.1289/
ehp.95103472 PMID:7656877

Compilation of References
326
Rademakers, T., & Dirksen, J. (2009). Open-Source ESBs in Action. Greenwich, CT: Manning. 
Retrieved from http://www.manning.com/rademakers/
Raghunath, M., & Narayanaswami, C. (2002). User Interfaces for Applications on a Wrist Watch. 
Personal and Ubiquitous Computing, 6(1), 17–30. doi:10.1007/s007790200002
Rai, M., & Ingle, A. (2012). Role of nanotechnology in agriculture with special reference to man-
agement of insect pests. Applied Microbiology and Biotechnology, 94(2), 287–293. doi:10.1007/
s00253-012-3969-4 PMID:22388570
Rashidi, P., & Cook, D. (2013). COM: A Method for Mining and Monitoring Human Activity 
Patterns in Home-based Health Monitoring Systems. ACM Transactions on Intelligent Systems 
and Technology, 4(4), 1–20. doi:10.1145/2508037.2508045
Rashidi, P., & Mihailidis, A. (2012). A Survey on Ambient-Assisted Living Tools for Older 
Adults. Biomedical and Health Informatics. IEEE Journal of, 17(3), 579–590. doi:10.1109/
JBHI.2012.2234129
Rashidi, P., & Mihailidis, A. (2013). A survey on ambient-assisted living tools for older adults. 
Biomedical and Health Informatics. IEEE Journal of, 17(3), 579–590.
Raskovic, D., Martin, T., & Jovanov, E. (2004). Medical monitoring applications for wearable 
computing. The Computer Journal, 47(4), 495–504. doi:10.1093/comjnl/47.4.495
Ravier, D. (2010). A Service Oriented Framework Architecture for Intelligent Video Surveil-
lance Systems. In Fifth International Conference on Digital Telecommunications (ICDT) (pp. 
123–127). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/ICDT.2010.30
Redding Medical. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www. reddingmedical.com/
Rees, B. (2014). Connected Health. White Paper. Wragge & Co LLP.
Reichert, M. (2011). What BPM technology can do for healthcare process support. In Artificial 
Intelligence in Medicine (pp. 2–13). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-22218-4_2
Respício, A., & Domingos, D. (2015). Reliability of BPMN Business Processes. Procedia Com-
puter Science, 64, 643–650. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2015.08.578
Riazul Islam, S. M., Kwak, D., Humaun Kabir, M., Hossain, M., & Kwak, K. S. (2015). The in-
ternet of things for health care: A comprehensive survey. Access, IEEE, 3, 678–708. doi:10.1109/
ACCESS.2015.2437951
Ridden, P. (2012). Camera-toting EyeRing could help blind people to “see” objects. Retrieved 
August 9, 2015, http://www.gizmag.com/eyering-object-recognition-aural-feedback-mit/23677/
Ried, S. (2014). The Forrester Wave: Hybrid 2 Integration, Q1 2014. Forrester Research.
Riesch, H., & Potter, C. (2014). Citizen science as seen by scientists: Methodological, epistemo-
logical. PUS, 23(1), 107–120. PMID:23982281

Compilation of References
327
Rocha, A., Martins, A., Freire Junior, J., Kamel Boulos, M., Vicente, M., Feld, R., & Rodriguez-
Molinero, A. et al. (2013). Innovations in health care services: The CAALYX system. Interna-
tional Journal of Medical Informatics, 82(11), 307–320. doi:10.1016/j.ijmedinf.2011.03.003 
PMID:21481633
Rodrigues, G. N., Alves, V., Silveira, R., & Laranjeira, L. A. (2012). Dependability analysis in 
the ambient assisted living domain: An exploratory case study. Journal of Systems and Software, 
85(1), 112–131. doi:10.1016/j.jss.2011.07.037
Rojo, M. G., Calahorra, L., & Ruiz, F. (2010). BPMN in practice. Experiences of business mod-
eling in the Department of Pathology. Diagnostic Pathology, 5(Suppl 1), S4. doi:10.1186/1746-
1596-5-S1-S4
Romero, D., Hermosillo, G., Taherkordi, A., Nzekwa, R., Rouvoy, R., & Eliassen, F. (2011). The 
DigiHome Service-Oriented Platform. Software, Practice & Experience, 43(10), 1205–1218. 
doi:10.1002/spe.1125
Russo, A., & Mecella, M. (2013). On the evolution of process-oriented approaches for health-
care workflows. International Journal of Business Process Integration and Management, 6(3), 
224–246. doi:10.1504/IJBPIM.2013.056962
Ryan, M., Fiadeiro, J., & Maibaum, T. (1991). Sharing actions and attributes in modal action logic. 
In Theoretical Aspects of Computer Software (pp. 569–593). Berlin: Springer. doi:10.1007/3-
540-54415-1_65
Salam, M. T., Sawan, M., & Khoa, N. (2011). A Novel Low-Power-Implantable Epileptic 
Seizure-Onset Detector. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 5(6), 568–578. 
doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2011.2157153 PMID:23852554
Sanchez, D., Tentori, M., & Favela, J. (2008, March). Activity Recognition for the Smart Hospital. 
IEEE Intelligent Systems, 23(2), 50–57. doi:10.1109/MIS.2008.18
Saranummi, N. (2008). IT Applications for Pervasive, Personal, and Personalized Health. 
IEEE Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 12(1), 1–4. doi:10.1109/
TITB.2007.913880 PMID:18270031
Sarji, D. K. (2008). HandTalk: Assistive technology for the deaf. Computer, 41(7), 84–86. 
doi:10.1109/MC.2008.226
Schell, L. M., & Denham, M. (2003). Environmental Pollution in Urban Environments and 
human Biology. Annual Review of Anthropology, 32(1), 111–134. doi:10.1146/annurev.an-
thro.32.061002.093218
Scherer, M. J., & Cushman, L. A. (2001). Measuring subjective quality of life following spinal 
cord injury: A validation study of the assistive technology device predisposition assessment. Dis-
ability and Rehabilitation, 23(9), 387–393. doi:10.1080/09638280010006665 PMID:11394589

Compilation of References
328
Scheuerlein, H., Rauchfuss, F., Dittmar, Y., Molle, R., Lehmann, T., Pienkos, N., & Settmacher, 
U. (2012). New methods for clinical pathways—Business Process Modeling Notation (BPMN) 
and Tangible Business Process Modeling (t. BPM). Langenbeck’s Archives of Surgery, 397(5), 
755–761. doi:10.1007/s00423-012-0914-z PMID:22362053
Schilit, B., Adams, N., & Want, R. (1994). Context-aware computing applications. Paper pre-
sented at the Mobile Computing Systems and Applications.
Schilit, B. N., & Theimer, M. M. (1994). Disseminating active map information to mobile hosts. 
IEEE Network, 8(5), 22–32. doi:10.1109/65.313011
Schmidt, A., Beigl, M., & Gellersen, H.-W. (1999). There is more to context than location. 
Computers & Graphics, 23(6), 893–901. doi:10.1016/S0097-8493(99)00120-X
Schmidt, A., & Van Laerhoven, K. (2001). How to build smart appliances? Personal Communi-
cations, IEEE, 8(4), 66–71. doi:10.1109/98.944006
Schmidtke, H. R. (2012). Contextual Reasoning in Context-Aware Systems. Paper presented at 
the Intelligent Environments (Workshops).
Schulz, T., Fuglerud, K. S., Arfwedson, H., & Busch, M. (2014). A case study for universal design 
in the internet of things. Assistive Technology Research Series, 35, 45–54. doi:10.3233/978-1-
61499-403-9-45
Schwartz, J., Slater, D., Larson, T. V., Pierson, W. E., & Koenig, J. Q. (1993). Particulate air 
pollution and hospital emergency room visits for asthma in Seattle. The American Review of 
Respiratory Disease, 147(4), 826–831. doi:10.1164/ajrccm/147.4.826 PMID:8466116
Science Communication Unit, University of the West of England, Bristol. (2013). Science for 
Environment Policy In-depth Report: Environmental Citizen Science. Report produced for the 
European Commission DG Environment.
Searle, A., & Kirkup, L. (2000, May). A direct comparison of wet, dry and insulating bioelec-
tric recording electrodes. Physiological Measurement, 21(2), 271–283. doi:10.1088/0967-
3334/21/2/307 PMID:10847194
Seaton, A., MacNee, W., Donaldson, K., & Godden, D. (1995). Particulate air pollution and acute 
health effects. Lancet, 345(8943), 176–178. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(95)90173-6 PMID:7741860
Sehgal, A., Perelman, V., Kuryla, S., & Schonwalder, J. (2012). Management of resource con-
strained devices in the internet of things. IEEE Communications Magazine, 50(12), 144–149. 
doi:10.1109/MCOM.2012.6384464
Shahrokhi, F., Abdelhalim, K., Serletis, D., Carlen, P. L., & Genov, R. (2010). The 128-Channel 
Fully Differential Digital Integrated Neural Recording and Stimulation Interface. IEEE Transac-
tions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems., 4(3), 149–161. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2010.2041350 
PMID:23853339

Compilation of References
329
Sheng, Q. Z., & Benatallah, B. (2005). ContextUML: a UML-based modeling language for 
model-driven development of context-aware web services. Paper presented at the Mobile Busi-
ness. doi:10.1109/ICMB.2005.33
Shen, J., Mao, J., Yang, G., Xie, L., Feng, Y., Nejad, M. B., & Zheng, L.-R. et al. (2015). A 180 
nm-CMOS Asymmetric UWB-RFID Tag with Real-Time Remote-Monitored ECG-Sensing. 
8th International Conference on Biomedical Electronics and Devices (BIODEVICE2014). 
doi:10.5220/0005286302100215
Siewiorek, D., & Swarz, R. (2014). Reliable Computer Systems: Design and Evaluation. Digital 
Press.
Smith, K. R., Bruce, N., Balakrishnan, K., Adair-Rohani, H., Balmes, J., Chafe, Z., & Rehfuess, 
E. (2014). Millions dead: How do we know and what does it mean? Methods used in the compara-
tive risk assessment of household air pollution. Annual Review of Public Health, 35(1), 185–206. 
doi:10.1146/annurev-publhealth-032013-182356 PMID:24641558
Social Media. (2012). Social media “likes” healthcare. From marketing to social business. Health 
Research Institute. Retrieved from http://www.pwc.com/us/en/health-industries/publications/
health-care-social-media.html
Solomon, G. M., Campbell, T. R., Feuer, G. R., Masters, J., Samkian, A., & Paul, K. A. (2001). 
No Breathing in The Aisles: Diesel Exhaust Inside School Buses. Natural Resources Defense 
Council Coalition for Clean Air.
Sottara, D., Manservisi, A., Mello, P., Colombini, G., & Luccarini, L. (2009). A CEP-based SOA 
for the management of WasteWater Treatment Plants. In IEEE Workshop on Environmental, 
Energy, and Structural Monitoring Systems (EESMS) (pp. 58–65). http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/
EESMS.2009.5341314
Spaanenburg, L., Duin, P. B., Woudsma, R., & vanderPoel, A. A. (1987). VLSI ontwerpsysteem. 
Patent US 465 6592.
Spaanenburg, L., & Jansen, W. J. (2016). Health Wearables turn to Fashion. In M. Khowrow-Pour 
(Ed.), Encyclopedia of Information Science and Technology (4th ed.). IGI Press.
Spaanenburg, L., & Spaanenburg, H. A. E. (2010). Cloud Connectivity and Embedded Sensory 
Systems. Boston, MA: Kluwer Press.
Spach, M., Barr, R., Havstad, J., & Long, E. (1966). Skin-electrode impedance and its effect 
on recording cardiac potentials. Circulation, 34(4), 649–656. doi:10.1161/01.CIR.34.4.649 
PMID:5921760
Spencer, B. F. Jr, Ruiz-Sandoval, M. E., & Kurata, N. (2004). Smart sensing technology: Oppor-
tunities and challenges. Journal of Structural Control and Health Monitoring, 11(4), 349–368. 
doi:10.1002/stc.48
Spengler, J., Samet, J., & McCarthy, J. F. (2000). Indoor Air Quality Handbook. New York: 
McGraw Hill Book Co.

Compilation of References
330
Srini, J. (2011). The Future of mHealth [PowerPoint slides]. Retrieved from http://www.slideshare.
net/HowardRosen129/the-future-of-mhealth-jay-srini-march-201.1
Staniforth, S. (2013). Historical perspectives on preventive conservation (Vol. 6). Getty Publi-
cations.
Stankovic, J. A. (2014). Research directions for the Internet of things. IEEE Internet of Things 
Journal, 1(1), 3–9. doi:10.1109/JIOT.2014.2312291
Sterling, B. (2005). Shaping Things. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.
Stern, A. C., & Professor, E. (1982). History of Air Pollution Legislation in the United States. 
Journal of the Air Pollution Control Association, 32(1), 44–61. doi:10.1080/00022470.1982.1
0465369 PMID:7033323
Strang, T., & Linnhoff-Popien, C. (2004). A context modeling survey. Paper presented at the 
Workshop Proceedings.
Strasser, M., Pfeifer, F., Helm, E., Schuler, A., & Altmann, J. (2010). Defining and reconstructing 
clinical processes based on IHE and BPMN 2.0. Studies in Health Technology and Informatics, 
169, 482–486. PMID:21893796
Stroppi, L. J. R., Chiotti, O., & Villarreal, P. D. (2011). Extending BPMN 2.0: method and tool 
support. In Business Process Model and Notation (pp. 59-73). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Sula, A., Spaho, E., Barolli, L., & Miho, R. (2014). A proposed framework for combining smart 
environment and heuristic diagnostic teaching principles in order to assess students’ abilities 
in math and supporting them during learning. Mediterranean Journal of Social Sciences, 5(2), 
187–196. doi:10.5901/mjss.2014.v5n2p187
Sullivan, J., Deiss, S. R., Jung, T.-P., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2008). A brain-machine interface 
using dry-contact, low-noise EEG sensors. In IEEE International Symposium on. Circuits and 
Systems, 2008.
Sullivan, T. J., & Deiss, S. R. Tzyy-Ping, J., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2008). A brain-machine in-
terface using dry-contact, low-noise EEG sensors. In Circuits and Systems, 2008. ISCAS 2008. 
IEEE International Symposium on.
Sullivan, T. J., Deiss, S. R., & Cauwenberghs, G. (2007). A Low-Noise, Non-Contact EEG/ECG 
Sensor. In Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference, 2007. BIOCAS 2007. IEEE. doi:10.1109/
BIOCAS.2007.4463332
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., & Woelfflé, S. (2010). Vision and challenges for realis-
ing the Internet of Things, CERP-IoT – Cluster of European Research Projects on the Internet of 
Things. Retrieved August 16, 2014 from http://www.researchgate.net/publication/228664767_Vi-
sion_and_challenges_for_realising_the_Internet_of_Things

Compilation of References
331
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., & Woelfflé, S. (2010). Vision and challenges for re-
alising the Internet of Things. Cluster of European Research Projects on the Internet of Things. 
European Commission.
Sundmaeker, H., Guillemin, P., Friess, P., & Woelfflé, S. (2010). Vision and challenges for real-
izing the internet of things. Brussels: CERP-IoT – Cluster of European Research Projects on the 
Internet of Things.
Sungur, C. T., Spiess, P., Oertel, N., & Kopp, O. (2013, July). Extending bpmn for wireless 
sensor networks. In Business Informatics (CBI), 2013 IEEE 15th Conference on (pp. 109-116). 
IEEE. doi:10.1109/CBI.2013.24
Suryadevara, N., & Mukhopadhyay, S. (2014). Determining Wellness through an Ambient As-
sisted Living Environment. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 29(3), 30–37. doi:10.1109/MIS.2014.16
Susannah, F., & Duggan, M. (2012). Mobile health 2012. Retrieved from http://www.pewinternet.
org/2012/11/08/mobile-health-2012/
Susannah, F., & Duggan, M. (2013). Health Online 2013. Available at: http://www.pewinternet.
org/2013/01/15/health-online-2013/
Suzuki, T., Tanaka, H., Minami, S., Yamada, H., & Miyata, T. (2013). Wearable wireless vital 
monitoring technology for smart health care. Medical Information and Communication Technol-
ogy (ISMICT), 2013 7th International Symposium on, (pp. 1-4).
Svagård, I., & Farshchian, B. A. (2009). Using business process modelling to model integrated 
care processes: Experiences from a european project. In Distributed Computing, Artificial Intel-
ligence, Bioinformatics, Soft Computing, and Ambient Assisted Living (pp. 922-925). Springer 
Berlin Heidelberg.
Swan, M. (2012). Sensor Mania! The Internet of Things, Wearable Computing, Objective 
Metrics, and the Quantified Self 2.0. Journal of Sensor and Actuator Networks, 1(3), 217–253. 
doi:10.3390/jsan1030217
Tahir, R. (2013). Context aware mobile computing as a challenge for developers and software 
engineers: a review. European Scientific Journal.
Tan, L., & Wang, N. (2010, August). Future internet: The internet of things. In 2010 3rd Inter-
national Conference on Advanced Computer Theory and Engineering (ICACTE) (Vol. 5, pp. 
376-380). IEEE.
Taylor, H., Yochem, Y., Phillips, L., & Martinez, F. (2008). Event-driven architecture: how SOA 
enables the real-time enterprise. Boston: Addison-Wesley.
Technology-Related Assistance for Individuals with Disabilities Act (Tech Act), P.L., 100-407 
(1988, 1998, 2004).

Compilation of References
332
Telecom, S. K. (2015). SK Telecom Rargets Global IoT Market with Lifeware. PRNewswire. 
Retrieved from: http://www.prnewswire.com/news-releases/sk-telecom-targets-global-iot-market-
with-lifeware-300043278.html
Textiles, E. U. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www.textile-platform.eu/links/
ThingSpeak. (2016). The open data platform for the Internet of Things. Retrieved January 18, 
2016, from https://www.thingspeak.com/
Tickr, X. (2016, Aug. 1). Retrieved from http://eu.wahoofitness.com/
Topcu, F. (2011). Context Modeling and Reasoning Techniques. Paper presented at the SNET 
Seminar in the ST.
Topol, E. J. (2012). The Creative Destruction of Medicine: How the Digital Revolution Will 
Create Better Health Care. Academic Press.
Toumaz. (2016, Aug. 1). Available http://www.toumaz.com/
Townsend, J. G. (1949). Investigation of the Smog. Incident in Donora, Pa., and Vicinity. Ameri-
can Journal of Public Health, 40(2), 183–189. doi:10.2105/AJPH.40.2.183 PMID:15409515
Tranquillini, S., Spieß, P., Daniel, F., Karnouskos, S., Casati, F., Oertel, N., & Voigt, T. (2012). 
Process-based design and integration of wireless sensor network applications. In Business Process 
Management (pp. 134–149). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-32885-5_10
Travel China Guide - China. (2016). Air Pollution in China, Air Quality Index. Retrieved January 
25, 2016, from http://www.travelchinaguide.com/climate/air-pollution.htm
Turcu, C., Turcu, C., & Gaitan, V. (2012). Integrating robots into the internet of things. Interna-
tional Journal of Circuits, Systems and Signal Processing, 6(6), 430-437. Retrieved from www.
scopus.com
Uckelmann, D., Harrison, M., & Michahelles, F. (2011). An architectural approach towards the 
future Internet of Things. Architecting the Internet of Things, 1–24. doi:10.1007/978-3-642-
19157-2_1
Urbinato, D. (1994). London’s historic pea-soupers. EPA Journal.
Utell, M. J., Warren, J., & Sawyer, R. F. (1994). Public health risks from motor vehicle emissions. 
Annual Review of Public Health, 15(1), 157–178. doi:10.1146/annurev.pu.15.050194.001105 
PMID:8054079
van der Aalst, W. M., Ter Hofstede, A. H., Kiepuszewski, B., & Barros, A. P. (2003). Workflow 
patterns. Distributed and Parallel Databases, 14(1), 5–51. doi:10.1023/A:1022883727209
vanDijk, P. R. (2014). Continuous intraperitoneal insulin infusion in the treatment of type 1 
diabetes mellitus (Ph.D. thesis). Rijksuniversiteit Groningen, Groningen, The Netherlands.

Compilation of References
333
Varshney, U. (2009). Pervasive healthcare computing: EMR/EHR, wireless and health monitor-
ing. Springer Science & Business Media. doi:10.1007/978-1-4419-0215-3
Vaughan, A. (2016, Jan 8). London takes just one week to breach annual air pollution limits. The 
Guardian. Retrieved on March 10, 2016, from http://www.theguardian.com
Verma, N., Shoeb, A., Bohorquez, J., Dawson, J., Guttag, J., & Chandrakasan, A. P. (2010). A 
Micro-Power EEG Acquisition SoC With Integrated Feature Extraction Processor for a Chronic 
Seizure Detection System. IEEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits, 45(4), 804–816. doi:10.1109/
JSSC.2010.2042245
Vermesan, O., & Friess, P. (2014). Internet of Things Applications - From Research and Innova-
tion to Market Deployment, Bringing IP to Low-power Smart Objects: The Smart Parking Case 
in the CALIPSO Project. The River Publishers.
Vidackovic, K., & Weisbecker, A. (2011). A Methodology for Dynamic Service Compositions 
Based on an Event-Driven Approach. In 2011 Annual SRII Global Conference (pp. 484–494). 
http://doi.org/ doi:10.1109/SRII.2011.56
Vidojkovic. (2011). A 2.4 GHz ULP OOK Single-Chip Transceiver for Healthcare Applications. 
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems, 5(6), 523–534. PMID:23852550
Vilarinho, T., Farshchian, B. A., Floch, J., & Mathisen, B. M. (2013). A communication framework 
for the internet of people and things based on the concept of activity feeds in social computing. In 
Proceedings - 9th International Conference on Intelligent Environments. doi:10.1109/IE.2013.24
Vivago. (2016, Aug. 1). Available: http://www.istsec.fi/vivago-pam
von Klot, S., Wölke, G., Tuch, T., Heinrich, J., Dockery, D. W., Schwartz, J., & Peters, A. 
et al. (2002). Increased asthma medication use in association with ambient fine and ultrafine 
particles. European Research Journals, 20(3), 691–702. doi:10.1183/09031936.02.01402001 
PMID:12358349
Voutyras, O., Bourelos, P., Kyriazis, D., & Varvarigou, T. (2014). An Architecture supporting 
Knowledge flow in Social Internet of Things systems. Wireless and Mobile Computing, Network-
ing and Communications (WiMob), 2014 IEEE 10th International Conference on.
Voutyras, O., Gogouvitis, S., Marinakis, A., & Varvarigou, T. (2014). Achieving Autonomicity 
in IoT systems via Situational-Aware, Cognitive and Social Things. Proceedings of the 18th 
Panhellenic Conference on Informatics. doi:10.1145/2645791.2645854
W3C. (1999). Composite Capability/Preference Profiles (CC/PP). World Wide Web Consortium. 
Retrieved from http://www.w3.org/TR/NOTE-CCPP/
Waldbott, G. L. (1978).Health effects of environmental pollutants (2nd ed.). The CV Mosby 
Company.

Compilation of References
334
Walkowiak, J., Wiener, J. A., Fastabend, A., Heinzow, B., Kramer, U., Schmidt, E., & Winneke, 
G. et al. (2001). Environmental exposure to polychlorinated biphenyls and quality of the home 
environment: Effects on psychodevelopment in early childhood. Lancet, 358(9293), 1602–1607. 
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(01)06654-5 PMID:11716887
Walton, B. H., Dajnak, D., Beevers, S., Williams, M., Watkiss, P., & Hunt, A. (2015). Understand-
ing the Health Impacts of Air Pollution in London For: Transport for London and the Greater 
London Authority. King’s College London.
Wan, Yang, Chen, & Zheng. (2011). Electrical Performance of Inkjet Printed Flexible Cable 
for ECG Monitoring. IEEE 20th Electrical Performance of Electronic Packaging and Systems 
(EPEPS 2011).
Wang, Q., Chen, W., Timmermans, A. A., Karachristos, C., Martens, J.-B., & Markopoulos, P. 
(2015). Smart rehabilitation garment for posture monitoring. In Proceedings of the 37th Annual 
International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC 
2015). doi:10.1109/EMBC.2015.7319695
Want, R. (2006). An introduction to RFID technology. Pervasive Computing, IEEE, 5(1), 25–33. 
doi:10.1109/MPRV.2006.2
WAPFORUM. (2001). User Agent Profile (UAProf). Wireless Application Protocol Forum. 
Retrieved from http://www.wapforum.org
Watson, J. P. (2015). Digital Health – health and fitness wearables. Blog Aging Sciences, Part 
3. WordPress.
Wattanapanitch, Fee, & Sarpeshkar. (n.d.). An Energy-Efficient Micropower Neural Recording 
Amplifier. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems, 1(2), 136-147.
Wattanapanitch, W., & Sarpeshkar, R. (2011). A Low-Power 32-Channel Digitally Programmable 
Neural Recording Integrated Circuit. IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Circuits and Systems, 
5(6), 592–602. doi:10.1109/TBCAS.2011.2163404 PMID:23852555
Wearable Health Monitoring. (n.d.). Retrieved from http://www2.imec.be/be_en/research/
wearable-health-monitoring.html
Wearable Technologies. (2015). A Look at Smart Clothing for 2015. München, Germany: Newsletter.
Wears, R. L., & Leveson, N. G. (2008). Safeware: Safety-critical computing and healthcare informa-
tion technology. Advances in Patient Safety: New Directions and Alternative Approaches, 4, 1-10.
Weiser, M. (1991). The Computer of the Twenty-First Century. Scientific American, 265(3), 
94–100. doi:10.1038/scientificamerican0991-94
Weiss, P. S. (2010). Nanoscience and nanotechnology: Present and future. ACS Nano, 4(4), 
1771–1772. doi:10.1021/nn100710n PMID:20420466

Compilation of References
335
What is Diabetes ? (n.d.). Retrieved January 24, 2016, from http://www.diabetesresearch.org/
what-is-diabetes
White, S. A. (2004). Process modeling notations and workflow patterns. Workflow handbook, 
2004, 265-294.
Whittemore, A. S. (1981). Air pollution and respiratory disease. Annual Review of Public Health, 
1(1), 397–429. doi:10.1146/annurev.pu.02.050181.002145 PMID:7348558
WHO. (2013). Review of evidence on health aspects of air pollution – REVIHAAP Project. 
Retrieved from http://www.euro.who.int/__data/assets/pdf_file/0020/182432/e96762-final.pdf
WHO. (2016). Burden of disease from ambient and household air pollution. Retrieved on June 
16, 2016, from http://www.who.int
WHO. (2016). World Health Organization. Retrieved January 28, 2016, from http://www.who.
int/en/
Wieland, M., Martin, D., Kopp, O., & Leymann, F. (2009). SOEDA: A Method for Specification 
and Implementation of Applications on a Service-Oriented Event-Driven Architecture. In W. 
Abramowicz (Ed.), Business Information Systems (pp. 193–204). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
doi:10.1007/978-3-642-01190-0_17
Wilson, W., Mage, D., & Grant, L. (2000). Estimating Separately Personal Exposure to Ambient 
and Non-ambient Particulate Matter for Epidemiology and Risk Assessment: Why and How. 
Journal of the Air & Waste Management Association, 50(7), 1167–1183. doi:10.1080/1047328
9.2000.10464164 PMID:10939210
Winkley, J., Jiang, P., & Jiang, W. (2012). Verity: An ambient assisted living platform. IEEE 
Transactions on Consumer Electronics, 58(2), 364–373. doi:10.1109/TCE.2012.6227435
Wjst, M., Reitmeir, P., Dold, S., Wulff, A., Nicolai, T., von Loeffelholz-Colberg, E. F., & von 
Mutius, E. (1993). Road traffic and adverse effects on respiratory health in children. British 
Medical Journal, 307(6904), 596–600. doi:10.1136/bmj.307.6904.596 PMID:7691304
Wohed, P., van der Aalst, W. M., Dumas, M., ter Hofstede, A. H., & Russell, N. (2006). On the 
suitability of BPMN for business process modelling (pp. 161–176). Springer Berlin Heidelberg. 
doi:10.1007/11841760_12
Wooldridge, M., & Jennings, N. (1995). Agent theories, architectures, and languages: a survey. 
In Intelligent agents. Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
World Health Organization. (2016, September 27). Burden of disease from ambient and household 
air pollution. Retrieved September 27, 2016, from World Health Organization: http://www.who.
int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases/en/

Compilation of References
336
Xie, L., Yang, G., Mäntysalo, M., Jonsson, F., & Zheng, L.-R. (2012). A System-on-Chip and 
Paper-based Inkjet Printed Electrodes for a Hybrid Wearable Bio-Sensing System. IEEE 34st 
Annu.Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC2012). doi:10.1109/
EMBC.2012.6347122
Xie, L., Feng, Y., Yang, G., Chen, Q., & Zheng, L.-R. (2015, October). C-RF Interconnections 
for Paper Electronics. IEEE Microwave and Wireless Components Letters, 25(10), 684–686. 
doi:10.1109/LMWC.2015.2468572
Xie, L., Yang, G., & Linlin Xu, F. (2013). Characterization of Dry Biopotential Electrodes. IEEE 
35st Annu.Int. Conf. of the Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society(EMBC2013).
Xie, L., Yang, G., Mäntysalo, M., Xu, L. L., Jonsson, F., & Zheng, L.-R. (2012, December). 
Heterogeneous Integration of Bio-Sensing System-on-Chip and Printed Electronics. IEEE 
Journal on Emerging and Selected Topics in Circuits and Systems, 2(4), 672–682. doi:10.1109/
JETCAS.2012.2223554
Xin, T. J., Min, B., & Ji, J. (2013). Carry-on blood pressure/pulse rate/blood oxygen monitoring 
location intelligent terminal based on internet of things. Patent no. CN 202875315 U.
Xu, T. (2013). The context-aware middleware in ambient intelligence. Ecole Centrale de Lyon.
Xu, X., Zou, X., Yao, L., & Lian, Y. (2008). A 1-V 450-nW fully integrated biomedical sensor 
interface system. In IEEE Symposium on VLSI Circuits.
Yamabe, T., Takagi, A., & Nakajima, T. (2005). Citron: A context information acquisition frame-
work for personal devices. Paper presented at the Embedded and Real-Time Computing Systems 
and Applications. doi:10.1109/RTCSA.2005.32
Yang, Chen, Jonsson, Hannu, & Zheng. (2012). A Multi-Parameter Bio-Electric ASIC Sensor 
with Integrated 2-Wire Data Transmission Protocol for Wearable Healthcare System. Design 
Automation & Test in Europe (DATE 2012).
Yang, G., Chen, J., Cao, Y., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2008). A Novel Wearable ECG Monitor-
ing System Based on Active-Cable and Intelligent Electrodes. IEEE Proc. of 10th International 
Conference on e-Health Networking, Applications and Services (HealthCom2008).
Yang, G., Chen, J., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2009). Intelligent Electrode Design for Long-Term 
ECG Monitoring at Home. IEEE Proc. of 3rd International Conference on Pervasive Computing 
Technologies for Healthcare (PervasiveHealth 2009).
Yang, G., Chen, J., Jonsson, F., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2009). A 1V 78uW Reconfigurable 
ASIC Embedded in an Intelligent Electrode for Continuous ECG Applications. 31stAnnual In-
ternational Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and Biology Society (EMBC 2009). 
doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2009.5335120

Compilation of References
337
Yang, G., Mao, J., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2010). Design of a Self-organized Intelligent 
Electrode for Synchronous Measurement of Multiple Bio-signals in a Wearable Healthcare 
Monitoring System. The 3rd International Symposium on Applied Sciences in Biomedical and 
Communication Technologies (ISABEL 2010).
Yang, G., Wan, Q., & Zheng, L.-R. (2011). Bio-Chip ASIC and Printed Flexible Cable on Paper Sub-
strate for Wearable Healthcare Applications. The 4th International Symposium on Applied Sciences 
in Biomedical and Communication Technologies (ISABEL 2011). doi:10.1145/2093698.2093774
Yang, Xie, & Zheng. (2013). Evaluation of non-contact flexible electrodes connected with a 
customized IC-steps towards a fully integrated ECG sensor. Norchip 2013.
Yang, Xie, Mäntysalo, Chen, Hannu, & Zheng. (2012). Bio-Patch Design and Implementation 
Based on a Low-Power System-on-Chip and Paper-based Inkjet Printing Technology. IEEE 
Transactions on Information Technology in Biomedicine, 16(6), 1043-1050.
Yang, G., Chen, J., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2009). An ASIC Solution for Intelligent Elec-
trodes and Active-cable Used in a Wearable ECG Monitoring System. International Conference 
on Biomedical Electronics and Devices (BIODEVICES 2009).
Yang, G., Chen, J., Xie, L., Mao, J., Hannu, T., & Zheng, L.-R. (2013, May). A Hybrid Low 
Power Bio-Patch for Body Surface Potential Measurement. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and 
Health Informatics, 17(3), 591–599. doi:10.1109/JBHI.2013.2252017 PMID:24592461
Yang, G., Xie, L., Mantysalo, M., Zhou, X., Pang, Z., Da Xu, L., & Zheng, L. R. et al. (2014). A 
Health-IoT Platform Based on the Integration of Intelligent Packaging, Unobtrusive Bio-Sensor, 
and Intelligent Medicine Box. Industrial Informatics. IEEE Transactions on, 10(4), 2180–2191.
Yang, G., Xie, L., Mantysalo, M., Zhou, X., Pang, Z., Xu, L., & Zheng, L.-R. et al. (2014, No-
vember). A Health-IoT Platform Based on the Integration of Intelligent Packaging, Unobtrusive 
Bio-Sensor and Intelligent Medicine Box. IEEE Transactions on Industrial Informatics, 10(4), 
2180–2191. doi:10.1109/TII.2014.2307795
Yap, R. (2012). How to Build an AirCasting Air Monitor. Retrieved on June 16, 2016 from 
habitatmap.org/habitatmap_docs/HowToBuildAnAirCastingAirMonitor.pdf
Yazicioglu, R. F., Merken, P., Puers, R., & Van Hoof, C. (2007). A 60 uW 60 nV/vHz Readout 
Front-End for Portable Biopotential Acquisition Systems. EEE Journal of Solid-State Circuits., 
42(5), 1100–1110. doi:10.1109/JSSC.2007.894804
Yoon, Y., Cho, J. H., & Yoon, G. (2009). Non-constrained blood pressure monitoring using ECG 
and PPG for personal healthcare. Journal of Medical Systems, 33(4), 261–266. doi:10.1007/
s10916-008-9186-0 PMID:19697692
Yu, J., Kim, M., Bang, H. C., Bae, S. H., & Kim, S. J. (2015). IoT as a applications: Cloud-based 
building management systems for the internet of things. Multimedia Tools and Applications. 
doi:10.1007/s11042-015-2785-0

Compilation of References
338
Zang, C., Fan, Y., & Liu, R. (2008). Architecture, Implementation and Application of Complex 
Event Processing in Enterprise Information Systems Based on RFID. Information Systems Fron-
tiers, 10(5), 543–553. doi:10.1007/s10796-008-9109-0
Zeng, D., Guo, S., & Cheng, Z. (2011). The web of things: A survey. Journal of Communica-
tion, 6(6), 424–438.
Zhang, H., Qin, Y., & Hong, Z. (2009). A 1.8-V 770-nW biopotential acquistion system for 
portable applications. In IEEE Biomedical Circuits and Systems Conference, 2009. BioCAS.
Zhang, Y. T., Yan, Y. S., & Poon, C. C. Y. (2007). Some Perspectives on Affordable Healthcare 
Systems in China. In IEEE 29th Annual International Conference of the Engineering in Medicine 
and Biology Society. doi:10.1109/IEMBS.2007.4353757
Zhu, N., Diethe, T., Camplani, M., Tao, L., Burrows, A., Twomey, N., & Craddock, I. (2015). 
Bridging e-health and the internet of things: The SPHERE project. IEEE Intelligent Systems, 
30(4), 39–46. doi:10.1109/MIS.2015.57
Zmuda, D., Psiuk, M., & Zielinski, K. (2010). Dynamic Monitoring Framework for the SOA Execu-
tion Environment. Procedia Computer Science, 1(1), 125–133. doi:10.1016/j.procs.2010.04.015
Zorzi, M., Gluhak, A., Lange, S., & Bassi, A. (2010). From today’s INTRAnet of things to a 
future INTERnet of things: A wireless- and mobility-related view. IEEE Wireless Commun., 
17(6), 44–51. doi:10.1109/MWC.2010.5675777
Zualkernan, I., & Aloul, F. (2010).A Mobile GPRS-Sensors Array for Air Pollution Monitoring. 
IEEE Sensors Journal, 10(10), 1666–1671.
Zulas, A., Crandall, A., Schmitter-Edgecombe, M., & Cook, D. (2012). Caregiver needs from 
elder care assistive smart homes: Nursing assessment.Proceedings of the Human Factors and 
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting, 56, 125-129. doi:10.1177/1071181312561003

  339
About the Contributors
Catarina I. Reis is a lecturer in the School of Technology and Management of 
the Polytechnic Institute of Leiria (ESTG) since 2002. She holds a degree in Com-
puter Science from the University of Coimbra and a PhD in Multimedia Engineer-
ing from the Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya. She lectures software engineer-
ing and programming classes to the undergraduate courses of Healthcare 
Informatics and Informatics Engineering at ESTG. Her research topics include but 
are not restricted to healthcare informatics topics (e-therapy, mobile health, ...), 
general mobile development (android, iOS and Web) and agile software develop-
ment practices. She is a Professional Scrum Master and the co-author of the book 
“Desenvolvimento em iOS”, FCA. Currently, she is a member of the Computer 
Science and Communication Research Center (CIIC) of the Polytechnic Institute 
of Leiria (CIIC).
Marisa da Silva Maximiano is an adjunct Professor in the Dept. of Computer 
Science, School of Technology and Management (ESTG) of the Polytechnic In-
stitute of Leiria, Portugal. She holds a PhD from the University of Extremadura, 
Spain, in Informatics Technologies, under the topic “Applying Multiobjective 
Metaheuristics to the Frequency Assignment Problem in GSM Networks”. She 
lectures mainly in the areas of Systems Integration, Information Technologies and 
Standards in Healthcare Informatics from the undergraduate course of Informatics 
Engineering and the master in Healthcare Information Systems Management at 
ESTG. These are also areas where her research topics have more impact. Member 
of the several Technical Program Committee in International Conference. Member 
of the scientific-pedagogical commission of the master in Healthcare Information 
Systems Management and member of the Computer Science and Communication 
Research Center (CIIC) of the Polytechnic Institute of Leiria. She has published in 
several international journals, all with impact factor and in international conferences.
* * *

About the Contributors
Sally A. Applin is a Doctoral Candidate in Anthropology with a technology 
focus at the University of Kent, Canterbury, working with the Centre for Social 
Anthropology and Computing (CSAC). Sally’s research interests are on human in-
vention and adaptation of digital technologies; sociability in automation; the impact 
of multiple, multiplexed communications on human relationships and cooperation; 
how groups evolve, grow, and communicate; brand development; ubiquitous au-
tomated services, automated vehicles, drones, robotics, and the Internet of Things 
(IoT). She is a member of the Internet of Things Council. Her work can be found 
at www.posr.org and www.sally.com.
Ilze Black, before starting her PhD at Media and Arts Technology at Queen 
Mary University London, was a media arts practitioner, curator and researcher. She 
has exhibited and produced projects in Europe and Asia. With MSc in Media Arts 
and Technology and MA Visual Culture her projects and research interests focus 
on network populism, open communities and transnational society. Her current 
PhD research is concerned with the rise of the Internet of Things, citizen science 
and maker culture.
Juan Boubeta-Puig received his Degree in Computer Systems Management, 
and his BSc and PhD in Computer Science from the University of Cádiz, Spain, in 
2007, 2010 and 2014, respectively. He has been honoured with an Extraordinary 
PhD Award. Since 2009, he has been working as an Assistant Professor in the 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering at the University of Cádiz. His 
research focuses on the integration of complex event processing in event-driven 
service-oriented architectures, the Internet of Things, and model-driven develop-
ment of advanced user interfaces.
Samiha Brahimi is a part-time teacher in the national polytechnic school of 
Constantine in Algeria. She has obtained her PhD degree in Computer Science 
from university of Constantine2, Algeria in 2015. Her research interests include 
Datamining, query optimization and information retrieval.
Fulvio Corno, Ph.D., is an Associate Professor at the Department of Control 
and Computer Engineering of Politecnico di Torino since 2002. He is an IEEE and 
IEEE Computer Society member, and Associate Editor of the IT Professional IEEE 
Magazine.
340  

About the Contributors
Luigi De Russis is a postdoctoral research assistant in the Department of Control 
and Computer Engineering at Politecnico di Torino, Italy. His research interests 
include human computer interaction, ambient intelligence and internet of things. 
De Russis received a PhD in computer engineering from Politecnico di Torino in 
2014. He is a member of ACM and IEEE.
Dulce Domingos has a PhD in Informatics from the University of Lisbon. She 
is an assistant professor at the Informatics Department of the University of Lisbon 
and a senior researcher of the Large Scale Computer Systems Laboratory (LaSIGE). 
She participates in the EPIWORK project within the Epidemic Marketplace de-
velopment. Her current research interests are on business processes, Internet of 
Things (IoT), and access control systems and design. She is the coordinator of the 
master program in information security of Faculdade de Ciências, Universidade de 
Lisboa. She has been the principal investigator of two national projects in the area 
of IoT-aware business processes.
Michael D. Fischer is the Professor of Anthropological Sciences at the Uni-
versity of Kent, UK, the Director of the Centre for Social Anthropology and Com-
puting (CSAC), Vice-president of the Human Relations Area Files (HRAF), Yale 
University, a Director of HRAF Advanced Research Centres [Kent and Yale] and 
Software Sustainability Institute Fellow (2014—Ongoing) . His research interests 
are the representation and structure of indigenous knowledge, cultural informatics, 
invention, and the impact of mobile communications on social networks and agency.
Amina Hameurlaine is a PhD in computer science, Constantine 2 University, 
Algeria. She was supervised by Professor Mohamed-Khireddine Kholladi. Her 
works are mainly focuses on pervasives computing, dynamic adaption, context-
awareness, and ontologies.
Hwa Lee earned her Ph.D in special education from the University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign. She is an associate professor at Bradley University, teaching 
special education courses including assistive technology. Her research focuses on 
assistive technology services for individuals with disabilities.
  341

About the Contributors
Ricardo Martinho is an Associate Professor at the School of Technology and 
Management – Polytechnic Institute of Leiria, Portugal. He teaches several subjects 
related to enterprise information systems, enterprise application development, 
software engineering (agile methods) and healthcare computer programming and 
information systems. He graduated in Electrical Engineering – Computer Science 
at University of Coimbra, received his MSc in Computer Science - Information 
Systems Programming from IST - Technical University of Lisbon, and his PhD 
from University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro. He is currently the Head of 
the Healthcare Informatics BSc. degree, and participates as a consultant in several 
enterprise and healthcare-related research projects. He supervises several MSc and 
PhD theses in the Computer Science – Healthcare Informatics research areas. He 
has several publications in conference proceedings, book chapters and journals, 
related to the Business Process Management, Software Engineering and m-health 
research areas. He serves as editor-in-chief, member of editorial board and reviewer 
for several books and international journals, and has served in several committees of 
international conferences. He is a co-founder of HCist – International Conference on 
Health and Social Care Information Systems and Technologies (http://hcist.scika.org).
Inmaculada Medina-Bulo received her PhD in Computer Science at the Uni-
versity of Seville (Spain). She has been a Professor in the Department of Computer 
Science and Engineering of the University of Cádiz (Spain) since 1995. She has 
been a member of the Council of the School of Engineering (ESI) and a Erasmus 
Program Coordinator for several years. In 2010 she was appointed Degree Coordina-
tor for the Computer Science Studies and a member of the Board of the ESI. Since 
September 2013 she hold the post of Chief Information Officer of the University. 
Her research was supported by research stays at the USA, the UK and Germany. 
She has served in program and organizing committees at different conferences. She 
has published numerous papers in international journals and conferences. She is 
the main researcher of the UCASE Software Engineering Research Group and of 
Spanish Excellence Network on Search-Based Software Engineering.
Alberto Monge Roffarello is a research assistant in the e-Lite research group 
at the Department of Computer Science and Automation of Politecnico di Torino. 
He received his M.S.degrees in Computer Engineering from Politecnico di Torino 
in 2015. His current research focuses on Semantic Web and Human Computer 
Interaction.
342  

About the Contributors
Guadalupe Ortiz completed her PhD in Computer Science at the University of 
Extremadura (Spain) in 2007. From 2001 to 2009 she worked as an Assistant Pro-
fessor as well as a research engineer at the University of Extremadura’s Computer 
Science Department. In 2009 she joined the University of Cádiz as Professor in the 
Department of Computer Science and Engineering. She has published numerous 
peer-reviewed papers in international journals, workshops and conferences. She has 
been a member of various programme and organization committees of scientific 
workshops and conferences over the last years and acts as a reviewer for several 
journals. Her research interests embrace aspect-oriented techniques as a way to im-
prove Web service development, with an emphasis on model-driven extra-functional 
properties and quality of service, as well as service context-awareness and their 
adaptation to mobile devices. Additionally, her research focuses on trending topics 
such as the complex-event processing integration in service-oriented architectures.
Ana Respício (female) is an Assistant Professor at the Informatics Department 
of the Faculty of Science of the University of Lisbon (DIFCUL) and a member of 
the Center for Mathematics, Fundamental Applications and Operations Research. 
She holds a degree in PhD in Statistics and Operations Research (U. Lisbon, 1989), 
a MSc degree in Operations Research and Systems Engineering (Technical U. of 
Lisbon, 1992) and a PhD in Statistics and Operations Research (U. Lisbon, 2003). 
Currently, she is vice-president of DI-FCUL and vice-chair of the IFIP Working 
Group 8.3 in Decision Support Systems. She has published more than 50 refereed 
scientific papers and her research interests include decision support systems (theory 
and technologies), cyber security risk management, optimization, and simulation. She 
has participated in several R&D projects funded by Portuguese scientific agencies, 
international cooperation programs and cooperation with industry projects. She is 
a member of the editorial board of IDT Journal and IJIDS. More information about 
her is available at http://www.di.fc.ul.pt/~respicio.
Lambert Spaanenburg started his academic journey at Twente University (Neth-
erlands) and has continued over Johan Goethe University (Germany) and Groningen 
University (Netherlands)) to finally Lund University (Sweden). In the meantime, 
he has taken sabbatical breaks at Siemens (Germany) and KPN (Netherlands), and 
even broke out to research jobs at ICN Software (Netherlands) and IMS Stuttgart 
(Germany). Overall, Lambert ‘s interests have developed from VLSI design and 
embedded systems to intelligent systems. Spaanenburg has been involved in 10 
  343

About the Contributors
long-term knowledge transfers, 8 framework proposals, and 6 university spin-offs. 
From his department at IMS in Stuttgart came the neural control for the Daimler 
OSCAR 1992 prototype, currently an upcoming standard car safety measure. From 
his chair at Groningen University, Dacolian was founded in 2002 that held 60% of 
the license plate recognition world market before it merged into Q-Free ASA. Cur-
rently, Lambert is creating the health technology of the Swedish start-up Comoray.
Corneliu Octavian Turcu received the B.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in automatic 
systems, from the University of Iasi, Romania, in 1991, and 1999, respectively. He 
also holds a degree in Informatics (M.Sc.) from the University of Suceava, Romania. 
Since 1991, he has been with the Faculty of Electrical Engineering and Computer 
Science, University of Suceava, where he is a full professor of System Theory and 
Intelligent Systems and also holds a joint appointment as head of Programmes Man-
agement Department. At University of Suceava he is also a supervisor for Ph.D. and 
M.S. theses. He has published over 90 research papers and 4 books. His research 
interests include intelligent systems, RFID, IoT and automatic control system design.
Cristina Elena Turcu is a Professor and currently vice-dean at the Faculty of 
Electrical Engineering and Computer Science, Stefan cel Mare University of Suceava, 
Romania. During the period 2004-2011, she was Head of Computer Department. 
Her research interests include software engineering, intelligent systems and Internet/
Web of Things. She was an Editor for 6 books. She has served on various program 
committees of conferences in computing and Internet of Things. She also has served 
as a reviewer for numerous referred journals and conferences. She is an Associate 
Editor of the International Journal of Engineering Business Management. She has 
published over 80 publications in books or book chapters, refereed journals, techni-
cal reports, and refereed conference/workshop/seminar proceedings.
Li Xie received the B.Eng. degree in Electronic Information Engineering from 
Beihang University, China, in 2003, the M.S. degree in Information and Commu-
nication from Beijing Institute of Technology, China, in 2009, and the Ph.D. degree 
in iPack Vinnova Excellence center, the school of Information and Communication 
Technology, Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, in 2013. She 
is currently a senior integration and assembly engineer in Thin Film Electronics ASA, 
Linköping, Sweden. Her interests include printed and flexible electronics, hybrid 
system integration and its application for wearable devices and intelligent packages.
344  

About the Contributors
Geng Yang received his Ph.D. degree from Department of Electronic and Com-
puter Systems from the Royal Institute of Technology (KTH), Stockholm, Sweden, 
in 2013. From 2013 to 2015, he worked as a Post-Doc researcher in the School of 
Information and Communication Technology (ICT), KTH, Stockholm, Sweden. He 
developed low power, low noise bio-electric SoC sensors for m-health. His research 
interests include flexible and stretchable electronics, mixed-mode IC design, low-
power biomedical microsystem, wearable bio-devices, human-computer interface, 
intelligent sensors and Internet-of-Things for healthcare.
Li-Rong Zheng is a professor chair in media electronics at the Swedish Royal 
Institute of Technology (KTH), founder and director of iPack VINN Excellence 
Center, and Senior Specialist of Ericsson Networks in Stockholm, Sweden. He re-
ceived his Ph. D. degree in electronic system design from KTH, Stockholm, Sweden 
in 2001. Since then, he was with KTH as a research fellow and project leader in 
Laboratory of Electronics and Computer Systems. He became an associate profes-
sor in electronics system design in 2003 and a full professor in media electronics at 
KTH in 2006. Dr. Zheng is a guest professor of the state key laboratory of ASICs 
and Systems at Fudan University in China since 2008, and a distinguished professor 
of Fudan University since 2010. He has authored and co-authored over 300 interna-
tional reviewed publications. His research experience and interest includes electronic 
circuits and systems for ambient intelligence and media applications, wireless SoC/
SiP for sensing and identification, and signal integrity issues in electronic systems.
  345

346
Index
A
Air Pollutants 141-142, 153, 168, 180, 183
Air Quality 138-144, 146-153, 155-160, 
162, 166, 168, 170-172, 178-196, 
285-286
Air Quality Egg 138, 147, 150, 157-158, 
168
Air Quality Index 178, 193, 195-196
Ambient Assisted Living (AAL) 65-67, 
95-97, 214, 216, 230-231, 243-247
Artificial Intelligence 30, 246-247, 255, 
264, 291
Assistance Requests 67, 74, 78, 94
Assisted Living Facilities 66-67, 70-72, 
75, 95
Assistive Technology (AT) 32-33, 40, 51, 
56-57, 60-64
Asynchronous 10, 88, 174, 198, 209, 255, 
265
B
Body Area Network (BAN) 212
Business Process 214-217, 223, 240, 242-
243, 245-248
Business Process Management (BPM) 
215-216, 240, 243, 247-248
Business Process Management System 
(BPMS) 240, 248
Business Process Modelling and Notation 
(BPMN) 248
C
Calibration 138, 146, 153-157, 161, 168, 
232
Caregivers 16, 36-37, 44, 55, 66-68, 70-83, 
85-95, 124, 231, 283
Citizen Science 138-139, 144-147, 150, 
156, 160, 163-165, 168
Cloud Computing 34, 37-38, 57-58, 61-62, 
64, 131
Collective Sensor Networks 145, 163, 168
Complex Event 170-171, 174-175, 182, 
186, 188, 191-194, 196
Complex Event Processing 170-171, 174-
175, 192-194, 196
Context-Aware Computing 1-2, 4-6, 11, 
24, 30, 49, 57, 64, 282
Context-Awareness 1-2, 4-5, 11, 14-16, 18, 
24, 28, 56, 281, 292
Context-Aware Systems 1, 6-11, 15, 24, 
27-28, 31
Context Modelling 6-7, 11-15, 24-25, 27, 
29
Context Reasoning 7, 13-14, 19, 25, 29
D
Disabilities 32-38, 40, 44-46, 48, 50-51, 
53-56, 58, 60-65, 67-68, 70-73, 75-77, 
81, 89-91, 94-96
E
eHealth 130, 212, 277
Enterprise Service Bus 174, 192, 196
Event-Driven Architecture 173, 193, 195-
196, 208, 212
Event Pattern 182, 185-188, 191, 196
Event Processing Language 185, 196

347
Index
F
Flexible Electronics 105
H
Healthcare 1-2, 16-19, 21-24, 27-29, 31-33, 
35-36, 38, 40, 49, 54-56, 59, 66-76, 
78-79, 81-82, 84, 89-90, 94-96, 98-
107, 117, 128-129, 131, 133, 135-137, 
161, 180, 212, 214-217, 220, 230, 233, 
239-242, 244-246, 249-256, 258-269, 
272, 278-280, 282-284, 286-287, 291-
292, 294
Healthcare Assistants 67, 71-72, 75, 78, 
81-82, 84, 89
Healthcare Devices 98-100, 107
Healthcare Professionals 18, 54, 161, 249, 
279, 286
Healthcare Services 2, 17-18, 23, 215, 279
Health Risk 40, 171
Heterogeneity/Heterogeneous 265
Hybrid Integration 98, 100-102, 105, 120-
121, 124-125, 127
I
Internet of Things (IoT) 32, 34, 56-64, 66-67, 
95-96, 128, 131, 138-139, 144, 161-
166, 168, 171-172, 192, 195, 209-210, 
214, 217, 242-244, 248-250, 263-264, 
266-269, 272-273, 275-276, 278, 280-
282, 284-295
IoT Applications 32, 36, 38-40, 42-45, 48, 
51, 55, 60, 64, 160, 172, 251, 262
L
Location-Aware 249-250, 253, 255, 258, 
260, 263, 265
M
medical monitoring devices 269-270
Meta-Agent 257, 265
Mobile Health 61, 197-198, 210, 212, 244, 
294
multi-agent systems 258, 266, 279, 281, 
288
Multiplexed 250, 252-253, 255-256, 263, 
265
O
ontologies 13, 15, 19, 21, 23, 25-27, 266-
267, 279
Oximetry 212
P
People with Disabilities 32-38, 40, 44-46, 
48, 51, 53-56, 58, 65-68, 71
Perfusion 212
Pervasive Computing 1-3, 5-7, 12, 14-16, 
24, 27-30, 64, 69, 96, 129, 133, 136, 
242, 249, 263
Photoplethysmography 197, 199, 212
P-medicine 266
PolySocial Reality (PoSR) 249, 254-255, 
263, 265
PPG 199-204, 211-212
Printed Electronics 98, 100, 103, 105, 115, 
127, 135
Pulse Oximetry 212
Q
Quantified Self 63, 212
R
Radio Frequency Identification (RFID) 17, 
34-35, 64, 280
Reflective Light 212
S
Sensor Network 34, 36, 38, 58, 64, 155, 
157, 216, 247
Sensors 2, 4, 6-7, 9-10, 13, 17-18, 20-21, 
24, 34, 36-38, 40-41, 43, 45, 48-49, 
53, 56-59, 61, 63-65, 68-69, 81, 96, 98, 
100, 102-107, 112, 115-116, 120-122, 
128-131, 134-136, 144-145, 147-148, 
150-156, 158-163, 167-168, 180-183, 
189-190, 200-201, 205-207, 212, 215-
218, 231-242, 245-255, 258-259, 261, 
265, 268, 270-272, 275, 285, 288, 292, 
294

348 
Index
Sensor Technologies 144-145, 168
Service-Oriented Architecture 170-172, 
174, 196
smart environments 32, 36-38, 61, 63, 130, 
249-250, 252-256, 258-260, 262-263, 
265
Smart Homes 15, 33, 65, 97, 144, 164
Smart Phone 44, 104, 205, 212
Smart Sensors 48-49, 59, 65, 69, 104, 106
Smart Watch 213
Social Internet of Things 266-267, 269, 
273, 275-276, 278, 281-282, 284-286, 
288-293, 295
Spectroscopy 213, 271
Synchronous 10, 136, 198, 255, 265
T
Thing-Agent 256-261, 265
Time-Triggered Architecture 209, 213
U
Ubiquitous Computing 3, 6-7, 26, 28-29, 
56-57, 60, 96-97, 244, 249, 269, 274, 
289-291
Ubiquitous Systems 1
U-Healthcare Systems 18, 24, 27
User Experience 44, 55, 121
W
Wearable Devices 35, 43, 66, 69, 78, 80-
81, 85-86, 90, 94, 101, 103, 112, 115, 
125, 128, 197
Wearable Sensor Systems 98, 106
Wearable Technology 43, 69, 128, 213
Web Service 88, 196, 242-243

