Thanassis Tiropanis
Athena Vakali
Laura Sartori
Pete Burnap (Eds.)
 123
LNCS 9089
Second International Conference, INSCI 2015
Brussels, Belgium, May 27–29, 2015
Proceedings
Internet Science

Lecture Notes in Computer Science
9089
Commenced Publication in 1973
Founding and Former Series Editors:
Gerhard Goos, Juris Hartmanis, and Jan van Leeuwen
Editorial Board
David Hutchison
Lancaster University, Lancaster, UK
Takeo Kanade
Carnegie Mellon University, Pittsburgh, PA, USA
Josef Kittler
University of Surrey, Guildford, UK
Jon M. Kleinberg
Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
Friedemann Mattern
ETH Zürich, Zürich, Switzerland
John C. Mitchell
Stanford University, Stanford, CA, USA
Moni Naor
Weizmann Institute of Science, Rehovot, Israel
C. Pandu Rangan
Indian Institute of Technology, Madras, India
Bernhard Steffen
TU Dortmund University, Dortmund, Germany
Demetri Terzopoulos
University of California, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Doug Tygar
University of California, Berkeley, CA, USA
Gerhard Weikum
Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Saarbrücken, Germany

More information about this series at http://www.springer.com/series/7409

Thanassis Tiropanis · Athena Vakali
Laura Sartori · Pete Burnap (Eds.)
Internet Science
Second International Conference, INSCI 2015
Brussels, Belgium, May 27–29, 2015
Proceedings
ABC

Editors
Thanassis Tiropanis
University of Southampton
Southampton
UK
Athena Vakali
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki
Thessaloniki
Greece
Laura Sartori
University of Bologna
Bologna
Italy
Pete Burnap
Cardiff University
Cardiff
UK
ISSN
0302-9743
ISSN 1611-3349
(electronic)
Lecture Notes in Computer Science
ISBN 978-3-319-18608-5
ISBN 978-3-319-18609-2
(eBook)
DOI 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2
Library of Congress Control Number: 2015937738
LNCS Sublibrary: SL3 – Information Systems and Applications, incl. Internet/Web and HCI
Springer Cham Heidelberg New York Dordrecht London
c⃝Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved by the Publisher, whether the whole or part of the
material is concerned, speciﬁcally the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of illustrations, recitation,
broadcasting, reproduction on microﬁlms or in any other physical way, and transmission or information stor-
age and retrieval, electronic adaptation, computer software, or by similar or dissimilar methodology now
known or hereafter developed.
The use of general descriptive names, registered names, trademarks, service marks, etc. in this publication
does not imply, even in the absence of a speciﬁc statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use.
The publisher, the authors and the editors are safe to assume that the advice and information in this book
are believed to be true and accurate at the date of publication. Neither the publisher nor the authors or the
editors give a warranty, express or implied, with respect to the material contained herein or for any errors or
omissions that may have been made.
Printed on acid-free paper
Springer International Publishing AG Switzerland is part of Springer Science+Business Media
(www.springer.com)

Preface
The 2nd International Conference on Internet Science “Societies, governance and inno-
vation” took place in Brussels during May 27–29, 2015, under the aegis of the European
Commission, by the EINS project, the FP7 European Network of Excellence in Internet
Science.
The main objective of this highly multidisciplinary conference is to foster dialogue
among scholars and practitioners in Internet science; an interdisciplinary area that draws
on Computer Science, Sociology, Art, Mathematics, Physics, Complex systems anal-
ysis, Psychology, Economics, Law, Political Science, Epistemology, and other disci-
plines in order to study the Internet as a sociotechnical phenomenon closely related to
various areas of human activity, under technological and humanistic perspectives. This
year the focus was on the contribution and role of Internet science on the current and fu-
ture multidisciplinary understanding of societal transformation, governance shifts, and
innovation quests.
This conference was built on the achievements of the 1st International Conference
on Internet Science, which was successfully held during April 9–11, 2013 at the Royal
Flemish Academy of Belgium for Science and the Arts, Brussels, organized by the
EINS project, with the support of the European Commission DG CONNECT and at-
tracted over 140 participants.
The accepted papers of the 2nd International Conference on Internet Science are
organized into the following thematic topics:
• Internet and Society
• Internet and Governance
• Internet and Innovation
May 2015

Organization
Executive Committee
General Chair
Thanassis Tiropanis
University of Southampton, UK
Program Committee Co-chairs
Athena Vakali
Aristotle University of Thessaloniki, Greece
Laura Sartori
University of Bologna, Italy
Organizing Co-chairs
Anna Satsiou
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Greece
Franco Bagnoli
University of Florence, Italy
Hugo Vivier
Sigma Orionis, France
Cindy Temps
Sigma Orionis, France
Event Coordinator
Roger Torrenti
Sigma Orionis, France
Proceedings Chair
Pete Burnap
Cardiff University, UK
Program Committee
Andreas Fischer
University of Passau, Germany
Anna Satsiou
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Greece
Anne-Marie Oostveen
University of Oxford, UK
Armin Haller
Australian National University, Australia
Barbara Catania
University of Genoa, Italy
Bart Lannoo
iMinds, Belgium
Ben Zevenbergen
University of Oxford, UK
Clare Hooper
University of Southampton, UK

VIII
Organization
Chris Marsden
University of Sussex, UK
Dimitri Papadimitriou
Alcatel Lucent, Bell Labs, Belgium
Donny McMillan
Mobile Life, Sweden
Federico Morando
Nexa Center for Internet and Society, Italy
George Iosiﬁdis
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Greece
Heiko Niedermeyer
Technical University of Munich, Germany
Ioannis Stavrakakis
University of Athens, Greece
Jonathan Cave
University of Warwick, UK
Karmen Guevarra
Cambridge University, UK
Konstantinos Kafetsios
University of Crete, Greece
Mahdi Bohlouli
University of Siegen, Germany
Mark Rounceﬁeld
University of Lancaster, UK
Merkourios Karaliopoulos
Centre for Research and Technology Hellas, Greece
Mayo Fuster Morell
Harvard University, USA
Meryem Marzouki
University Pierre and Marie Curie, France
Nathalie Mitev
London School of Economics and Political Science,
UK
Panayotis Antoniadis
ETH Zürich, Switzerland
Patrick Wüchner
University of Passau, Germany
Pete Burnap
Cardiff University, UK
Sara Helen Wilford
De Montfort University, UK
Tamas David-Barrett
University of Oxford, UK
Tim Chown
University of Southampton, UK
Tim Davies
University of Oxford, UK
Xin Wang
University of Southampton, UK
Ziga Turk
University of Ljubljana, Slovenia

Contents
Internet Science in Reﬂection
Privacy and Empowerment in Connective Media . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
Jo Pierson
Engaging with Charities on Social Media: Comparing Interaction on
Facebook and Twitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15
Christopher Phethean, Thanassis Tiropanis, and Lisa Harris
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT in A Group of Selected
Arab Countries and Brazil . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
Mona Farid Badran
Celebgate: Two Methodological Approaches to the 2014 Celebrity
Photo Hacks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
49
Rebecca Fallon
Internet Science and Societal Innovations
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
63
Clare J. Hooper, Bruna Neves, and Georgeta Bordea
Analysing an Academic Field through the Lenses of Internet Science:
Digital Humanities as a Virtual Community . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
78
Alkim Almila Akdag Salah, Andrea Scharnhorst, and Sally Wyatt
EINS Evidence Base: A Semantic Catalogue for Internet
Experimentation and Measurement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
90
Xin Wang, Thanasis G. Papaioannou, Thanassis Tiropanis,
and Federico Morando
Living with Listening Services: Privacy and Control in IoT . . . . . . . . . . . .
100
Donald McMillan and Antoine Loriette
Internet and Innovation
Communication Forms and Digital Technologies in the Process
of Collaborative Writing . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
113
Kaja Scheliga
Ethics of Personalized Information Filtering . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
123
Ansgar Koene, Elvira Perez, Christopher James Carter,
Ramona Statache, Svenja Adolphs, Claire O’Malley, Tom Rodden,
and Derek McAuley

X
Contents
IAA: Incentive-Based Anonymous Authentication Scheme in Smart
Grids . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
133
Zhiyuan Sui, Ammar Alyousef, and Hermann de Meer
Mediated Community from an Intergroup Perspective:
A Literature Review. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
145
Vilma Lehtinen, Eeva Raita, Mikael Wahlstr¨om, Peter Peltonen,
and Airi Lampinen
Author Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
161

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet Science in Reflection 
 

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 3–14, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_1 
Privacy and Empowerment in Connective Media 
Jo Pierson() 
Vrije Universiteit Brussel (iMinds-SMIT), Brussels, Belgium 
jo.pierson@vub.ac.be 
Abstract. In order to explore the roadmap and future directions of social, 
mobile and ubiquitous media technologies for privacy from an Internet Science 
perspective we take an interdisciplinary perspective, building on research in 
Media and Communication Studies and Science and Technology Studies. In 
order to assess to what extent and how people are effectively 'empowered' in 
relation to their privacy, we investigate how they socially engage with these 
media and how their communication is being (re)configured. For this we first 
take a macro perspective by discussing recent interdisciplinary views on the 
changing internet landscape. Next we take a micro perspective on the position 
of users of ‘connective media’. We then explain and situate user empowerment 
in relation to online privacy and how this is related to vulnerability. This 
perspective is used for discussing (young) people and their privacy 
management, based on the findings of online privacy research projects. 
Keywords: Privacy · Empowerment · Connective media · Interdisciplinarity · 
Vulnerability 
1 
Socio-Technical Context 
1.1 
Culture of Connectivity 
Institutional economists Freeman and Soete [1] and Perez [2] identify the current era 
– since the end of 20th century – as the fifth techno-economic paradigm shift, based 
on computing and information and communication technology (ICT). The current 
wave of technological invention and economic disruption, with its hallmarks of 
computer power, connectivity and data ubiquity, promises to deliver a similar mixture 
of social stress and economic transformations like former industrial revolutions [3: 3]. 
More in particular two big socio-technological transformations have taken place in 
the past decade, which have substantially affected our experience of sociality: (1) the 
transformation from a participatory culture to a culture of connectivity and (2) the 
transformation from networked communication to a 'platformed' sociality [4]. 
The concept of 'participatory culture' was born in the 1990s. It reflects the 
Internet's potential to nurture connections, build communities and advance 
democracy. It was a need for connectedness that drove users to the web in the first 
place. In the beginning of the new millennium more and more people started using 
websites for making and maintaining connections, by sharing creative content and 

4 
J. Pierson 
enjoying their social lives online. As people's lives became permeated with social 
media platforms, they started to move their social, cultural and professional activities 
to an online environment. Van Dijck [4: 4-5] notices that existing or new media and 
technology companies incorporated the existing social platforms. These companies 
were not so much interested in the ideals of the participatory culture, as they were in 
the (personal) data that the users delivered, as a by-product of maintaining 
connections online. They made use of algorithms that engineer and manipulate the 
social connections. The latter is labeled as 'connectivity': an automated process behind 
the real-life connections, which made it possible to recognize people's desires. As 
such, a profitable form of sociality has been created. Therefore it would be better to 
use the term 'connective media' instead of 'social media'. As stated by van Dijck [4: 
13-14] "What is claimed to be 'social' is in fact the result of human input shaped by 
computed output and vice versa – a sociotechnical ensemble whose components can 
hardly be told apart. The norms and values supporting the 'social' image of these 
media remain hidden in platforms' technological textures". The first transformation 
goes hand in hand with the second one: from networked communication to 
'platformed' sociality. "It is a common fallacy, though, to think of platforms as merely 
facilitating networking activities; instead, the construction of platforms and social 
practices is mutually constitutive." [4: 6]. As the online platforms are no longer sheer 
carriers for communication, human sociality is being brought to these platforms and 
at the same time mediated by them.  
So the culture of connectivity is a culture where perspectives, expressions, 
experiences and productions are increasingly mediated by digital media and their 
algorithms [5]. It is this mediation and manipulation of social relationships and the 
gathering of people's preferences that influenced the privacy of individuals online. 
Mere outings of sociality online have become structured and tracked; they are 
released on an electronic platform, which can have far-reaching and long-lasting 
effects [5: 7]. 
1.2 
Mass Self-Communication 
The transitions in this culture of connectivity on macro level go together with a shift 
from mass media and personal media to media for 'mass self-communication' on 
micro level [6]. Castells [7: 55] sees the latter as the new kind of communication in 
contemporary society. On the one hand mass communication because social media 
can potentially reach a worldwide internet audience. On the other hand 'self-
communication' because the message production is typically self-generated, the 
potential receiver(s) definition is self-directed and the message or content retrieval is 
self-selected. The different forms of communication (mass media, interpersonal 
communication and mass self-communication) complement rather than substitute 
each other. 
The rise of mass self-communication also intensifies the move towards 'networked 
individualism' where the individual person becomes the portal or hub for different 
networks around him or her [8]. This gives media producers/distributors/consumers a 
lot of freedom and leverage in how, when, what and with whom communication takes 

 
Privacy and Empowerment in Connective Media 
5 
place. However at the same time the increased level of individual control often 
implies more responsibilities given the possible serious consequences. 
1.3 
User (Dis)Empowerment 
These pros and cons are linked to notions of respectively 'user empowerment' and 
'user disempowerment'. Empowerment is a widely used concept charged with 
meaning. It has a long tradition in social sciences, more in particular in social welfare 
and civil society literature, but also in science, business and policy fields. User 
empowerment is described by Zimmerman and Rappaport [9] as the process of 
strengthening individuals, by which they get a grip on their situation and 
environment, through the acquisition of more control, sharpening their critical 
awareness and the stimulation of participation. In the saturated media environment 
user empowerment can be defined as the capability for interpreting and acting upon 
the social world that is intensively mediated by social media [10: 409]. User 
empowerment is then dependent on knowledge of how mechanisms operate and from 
what premise, as well as on the skills to change them [4: 171]. 
In a culture of connectivity where our social lives are increasingly mediated by 
mass self-communication, people do not always own the necessary capabilities to 
optimally interpret and act upon other people and institutions for acquiring an equal 
position in society [6: 104]. In this lies a risk of disempowerment that is visible in 
issues of digital media and privacy. 
1.4 
Vulnerability 
As mentioned before the unprecedented autonomy of media users and hence 
increased self-directed control over time, place and content of communication and 
interaction with many more people, increases the chance of positive – but also 
negative – consequences and implies more responsibilities. There is for example a 
substantial chance that online user practices via social media are more persistent in 
time, have a broader geographical reach and are picked up by unwanted receivers. 
This means that the 'vulnerability' of people engaging in mass self-communication 
changes and possibly increases, which intensifies the need for empowerment and 
aggravates the risk of disempowerment. Where vulnerability defines the 
circumstances of potential risk as they are, disempowerment refers to people actually 
losing power and capabilities to gain control over their lives mediated by social 
media.  
The concept of 'vulnerability' (and its opposite 'security') has been intensively 
discussed in the studies on human development, geography, disaster reduction, and 
risk communication [11]. It is often – wrongfully – equaled with 'poverty', but it in 
fact it has (or can have) a much broader meaning. However, vulnerability has not yet 
a developed theory and accepted indicators and methods of measurement, though 
Chambers [12] sees an external side of vulnerability related to 'exposure' (see also 
Ball [13: 647]) and an internal side related to 'coping capacities'. Watts and Bohle 
[14] and Bohle [15] have further expanded this differentiation, keeping the structure 

6 
J. Pierson 
of external and internal sides of vulnerability. They have defined vulnerability as a 
multi-layered and multi-dimensional social space defined by the political, economic, 
and institutional capabilities of people in specific places and times. The external 
perspective refers mainly to the structural dimensions of vulnerability exposure, while 
the internal dimension of vulnerability focuses on coping and action to overcome or at 
least mitigate negative effects [15]. 
This twofold approach of vulnerability is also reflected in the way social media 
technologies have been approached from a Science and Technology Studies (STS) 
perspective, confronting the structural element of 'affordances' with the action-
oriented element of 'practices'. Exposure to vulnerability results from the 
'affordances', defined as the combination of perceived and actual properties of the 
(social media) technology, primarily those fundamental properties that determine just 
how that technology could possibly be used [16, 17]. Coping with vulnerability 
happens in the 'practices', defined as 'recognisable entities', but at the same time 
"require constant and active reproduction or performance" [18]. In this way a 
'practice' is seen as a routinised type of behaviour. From an STS perspective there is 
no essential use to be derived from the technological (social media) artefact itself, 
because technologies should be studied in their context of user practices and users and 
technologies should be seen as co-constructed [19]. We use the structure of external 
and internal sides of vulnerability and the related affordances and practices of social 
media, for our further analysis. For this we take a closer look at how people's 
vulnerability (and possible disempowerment) is reconfigured within the changing 
media landscape of mass self-communication. To illustrate these transitions, we focus 
on privacy issues in a culture of connectivity. 
In the next paragraphs we discuss key empirical findings from three online privacy 
research projects. 
• 
USEMP (User empowerment for Enhanced Online Management) in EU 
(http://www.usemp-project.eu), a three-year STREP research project funded by 
European Commission 7th Framework Programme for research, technological 
development and demonstration (Grant agreement no. 611596) (2013-2016). 
• 
SoLoMidem 
(SOcial, 
LOcal 
& 
Mobile 
IDEntity 
Management) 
in 
Flanders/Belgium (http://www.iminds.be/en/projects/2014/03/18/solomidem), a 
two-year interdisciplinary ICON research project, supported by iMinds and the 
Flemish Agency for Innovation by Science and Technology (2012-2014). 
• 
SPION (Security and Privacy for Online Social Networks) in Flanders/Belgium 
(www.spion.me), a four-year interdisciplinary Strategic Basic Research research 
project (SBO) by four universities, funded by IWT (2010-2014). 
By integrating results from these projects we are able to demonstrate the changing 
vulnerability with regards to exposure to and coping with online privacy. The 
interdisciplinary theoretical background is based on combining insights from Media 
and Communication Studies (MCS), STS and sociology. 

 
Privacy and Empowerment in Connective Media 
7 
2 
Vulnerability in Managing Online Privacy 
2.1 
Exposure to Online Privacy: Case Study on Location-Based Social 
Networks and Privacy1 
We first look at the way that users are exposed to (risks of) online privacy in different 
internet and media technologies. For this we highlight privacy scripts in location-
based social networks. With the increasing adoption of smartphones, location-based 
social networks and applications (e.g. Foursquare, Find My Friends) gain widespread 
popularity. However, the disclosure of location information within these networks can 
cause privacy concerns among mobile users. In most of the research on privacy in 
location-based social networks, technology is researched as a context factor for 
explaining privacy related behaviour. However in the SoLoMidem project we noticed 
– from an STS perspective – how the privacy situation is formatted in the relation 
between so-called technical scripts and user practices. Following the work of Akrich 
[20], we studied the privacy scripts in two location-based social networks. In a 
qualitative user study we researched their framework of action and how they shape 
privacy concerns. 
Introduction 
A technology can shape a framework of action, but users might also use the 
technology in a way not foreseen by the designer. Akrich [20] refers to this as the 
script or the scenario of a technology. The design of a technology defines what 
decisions can be made by the user, and what is controlled by the 'machine'. 
Technologies define a framework of action for the user, the space in which they are 
supposed to act and way in which they interact. We apply these insights to study the 
Location-Based Social Networks (LBSN) users' (location) privacy concerns. To 
explore how these concerns can guide privacy practices, we also have to scrutinize the 
LBSN and how the user is inscribed or scripted into these technologies. Users 
nowadays make privacy decisions in a not so transparent market. In their search for 
creating a good user experience and a valid business model, different location-based 
service providers embed the user location sharing practices into their applications in 
different ways. We study the scripts of LBSN and how users' privacy concerns exist 
in the framework of action of these scripts. 
Research Set-up 
The study was done in 2013 and had two parts: a comparative analysis of the privacy 
scripts of two commercial LBSN (Foursquare and Glympse) and a qualitative user 
study (field trial) in which we study how the privacy scripts of these LBSN shape 
privacy concerns.  
                                                           
1 Based on: Coppens, Paulien, Claeys, Laurence, Veeckman, Carina & Pierson, Jo (2014) 
Privacy in location-based social networks: Researching the interrelatedness of scripts and 
usage, Paper at SOUPS 2014 - Symposium On Usable Privacy and Security - Workshop on 
Privacy Personas and segmentation (PPS), 9-11 July 2014, Menlo Park (CA), US. 

8 
J. Pierson 
Findings 
The analysis of the privacy scripts of Foursquare (www.foursquare.com), a check-in 
service, and Glympse (www.glympse.com), a location tracking service, demonstrate 
that the two LBSN have very different privacy scripts. Glympse is an application 
designed to give users almost full control over their location sharing settings. 
Foursquare on the other hand, defines another framework of action for the user. It 
appears to be in the interest of the Foursquare application, contrary to Glympse, that 
as many personal data or settings are set as public. For a rather big set of data, users 
have no possibility to set it as private and the privacy settings that are adjustable, are 
set public by default. A possible explanation for this is the fact that Foursquare works 
together with local businesses and brands that have access to aggregated and 
anonymous data. We could thus say that, contrary to Glympse, the preferred reading 
of Foursquare limits users in the management of online privacy. 
The user study focused on how the privacy scripts of Foursquare and Glympse 
shape participants' privacy concerns and practices and on users' coping mechanisms in 
redefining this framework of action. The comparative analysis of the privacy scripts 
revealed that Glympse is a more privacy preserving LBSN. However, the respondents 
of our study perceived Glympse to be more privacy-invasive than Foursquare. 
Glympse is a location-tracking service, typically causing higher privacy concerns than 
the position-aware service Foursquare (see also Barkhuus and Dey [21]). On top of 
that, we have to take into account the control factor. Although the analysis of the 
privacy scripts shows that Glympse gives users more control mechanisms (e.g. 
control over audience), most of the participants felt they have a higher control over 
the disclosure of their location when using Foursquare. Important here, contrary to 
actual control, is thus the notion of perceived control or the "illusion of control" (see 
also Brandimarte et al. [22]). Within the check-in service Foursquare, they each time 
can to make the conscious decision to share a specific location, while in Glympse a 
longer location path is shared. When taking a closer look at the participants' practices, 
we can see that, although the importance of control over location data is continuously 
stressed, they do not always act upon this. However, we should also note that when a 
LBSN does not offer enough control features to protect location information, the 
participants of our study sometimes applied very inventive strategies to protect their 
location to compensate the lack of control. An example here is a participant who 
reports to never check in with Foursquare every day and/or at the same time at work 
and at home to not make it easy for someone with malicious intents to discover daily 
routines.  
Although respondents say they want full control over privacy settings, our study 
shows that they are not willing to each time define elaborate sharing settings. This 
also continuously makes the process of sharing personal information more visible for 
users, and users do not always like to be confronted with that. The challenge for 
LBSN providers is to find the right balance between privacy-preserving affordances 
and an optimal user experience. 
The study shows that Glympse responds to mobile users' privacy concerns by 
giving them more options to control the disclosure of location information. 
Foursquare defines another framework of action for the user. It appears to be in the 

 
Privacy and Empowerment in Connective Media 
9 
interest of Foursquare that users provide many personal data that are set as public. 
This is illustrated, among others, by the fact that, although all the respondents want 
high control over the (location) privacy settings, almost none of them ever checked 
Foursquare's privacy settings before. However when thoroughly investigating the 
usage, Foursquare is considered by users as less privacy invasive than Glympse. This 
is partly due to the properties of the LBSN. Glympse is a location-tracking service, 
which decreases the respondents' feeling of control. But also to the fact that the 
check-in service Foursquare makes it easier for the respondents to apply their own 
strategies to control location disclosure, hereby opposing the application's framework 
of action. 
2.2 
Coping with Online Privacy: Case Study on Adolescents, Young Adults 
and Intergroup Privacy Management2 
In order to have a complete picture of the vulnerability in managing online privacy, 
we need to complement exposure by media technologies with coping capabilities of 
users. On the latter level we focus on young people, as they are the first generation 
that have incorporated digital media into their everyday life. In this way we are able 
to see how these young people are indeed more vulnerable – as is often claimed – or 
are able to cope with issues of online privacy. 
For this we have investigated adolescents, in order to understand how they are 
dealing with online disclosure individually and in group. This is especially relevant as 
the properties of social media challenge young people's boundary coordination and 
privacy management. Most research on privacy management within the context of 
Online Social Networks (OSNs) treats the people as individual owners of private 
information. Privacy, however, is beyond individual control and is also managed on 
an intergroup level. In order to investigate this we have studied how youth 
organizations negotiate their offline and online privacy. The theoretical framework of 
Goffman [23] and the communication privacy management theory [24] are used to 
frame privacy management and boundary coordination. The results indicate how 
spatial, temporal, and social boundaries are lengthened and translated online to 
maintain privacy. The collapse of boundaries in OSN, however, forces youth 
organizations to adopt explicit privacy rules that are routinized and more implicitly 
present in an offline environment, and creates tension between individual and group 
privacy rules. 
Introduction 
Through interacting with others and the self, individuals create various types of 
identities. Adhering to the symbolic interactionist viewpoint in sociology, identity 
formation is not an individual project but a socially constructed and negotiated one, 
which constitutes an essential component of the self [25]. On the one hand, 
                                                           
2 Based on: De Wolf, Ralf & Pierson, Jo (2014) Security and Privacy for Online Social 
Networks (SPION): Deliverable 7.7 – User practices profile on everyday technologically and 
non-technologically privacy practices & Deliverable 7.8 – Identification of online and 
offline community factors, Brussels: iMinds-VUB-SMIT, 13 August, 32. 

10 
J. Pierson 
individuals differentiate themselves from others, tacitly affirming their uniqueness 
and distinct individuality to their peers. On the other hand, individuals share common 
goals and sentiments, which provide them with a social identity [26]. To constitute 
personal and social identities, it is necessary to manage multiple boundaries and 
control individual and group information flows. Boundary coordination, however, is 
challenged by new media, in general, and the properties of OSN, in particular. The 
properties of media in current digital and networked society have altered dramatically, 
and they influence everyday life experience: online content persists long after the 
situation it once originated in, has multiple (invisible) audiences, and is easy to 
(re)share and find [27, 28]. Moreover, people engage with multiple interconnected 
networks (e.g., Facebook, Instagram, Snapchat), using multiple artifacts (e.g., 
smartphones, tablets, different forms of wearable computing technologies) spread 
over different life spheres, ultimately introducing a new age of living 'in' media, 
instead of 'with' media [29]. In this study, this age of living in media is labeled with 
the term 'in-media environment.' 
Research Set-up 
Over the years, much research has been devoted to the study of boundary 
coordination in the in-media environment (e.g. [30-34]). Most research is focused on 
how privacy management manifests itself with a focus on the individual. This study, 
instead, is focused on how privacy is negotiated and how boundaries are established 
in youth organizations. The question is: how do youth organizations manage and 
negotiate their online and offline privacy? 12 focus groups were organized with a 
total of 78 members (adolescents) and leaders (young adults) of youth organizations 
to answer this question. 
Findings 
The results indicate how youth organizations use spatial, temporal, and social 
boundaries to maintain their online and offline privacy. Youth organizations develop 
rules about accepting and deleting Facebook friends and what content can be posted, 
and they sometimes even create a control agent (e.g., 'Facebook police'). Although the 
context collapse is dealt with by youth organizations, there are two interconnected 
factors that challenge their boundary coordination: (1) explicit versus implicit privacy 
rules and (2) individual versus group privacy rules. 
First in an online environment, the privacy rules have to be expressed more 
explicitly. This forces users to actively create boundaries that were not necessary or 
routinized in an offline environment. For example, in an offline environment, the 
leaders had difficulties in defining their relationships with older members. OSNs, like 
Facebook, force users to define relationships by accepting or refusing Facebook 
friend requests. Even though other means are available to fine-tune those relationships 
and content sharing (e.g., allowing users access to the main Facebook profile but 
limiting what content they are able to see), it still requires individuals and groups to 
think about and define their relationships. Moreover, because privacy rules have to be 
more explicit, the consequences can also be more prominently present, such as a 
member being confronted with an ignored friend request from his or her leader. As to 

 
Privacy and Empowerment in Connective Media 
11 
the second factor people interact with multiple audiences in even more situations by 
which they develop layered personal and social identities. In OSNs, a compromise has 
to be found between individual and group privacy rules, which can be difficult 
because of the opposite needs of both – that is, the need for a distinct individuality 
and sharing of common goals and sentiments. 
Other studies have found that youngsters can be very creative in managing privacy 
when not using the privacy settings that they are offered by OSNs (e.g. [28]). It 
would, therefore, be false to state that not using privacy settings is a sign of not caring 
about one's privacy. In our study, it was found that group privacy rules are often 
routinized in the practices of youth organizations, and they often proceed 
unconsciously, which partially explains the inverse relationship between group 
privacy rules and perceived privacy control being expressed by the respondents. A 
similar mistake would be made if youth organizations – or any other type of 
organization or group, for that matter – that do not express any privacy management 
strategies were labeled as not caring about how their group information is managed. 
Therefore, in order to fully understand privacy and boundary coordination in an in-
media environment it is useful to differentiate between implicit and explicit privacy 
rules and take into account the potential tension between different sets of privacy 
rules. 
It is not argued, however, that youth organizations should not actively create 
boundaries for managing their privacy because many privacy rules are implicit. On 
the contrary, because of the collapse of boundaries in OSNs, actively formulating 
certain strategies is not a frivolous luxury either, and helps in coping with privacy 
turbulences. Moreover, such strategies ensure that organizations translate their 
notions of privacy into the structure of the platform that is used, rather than the other 
way around, and it can also help in harmonizing between individual and group 
privacy rules. 
Contemporary western life is media saturated and provides for new and open ways 
in communicating with each other and constructing social and personal identities. 
Focusing on the topic of privacy, the results of this study indicate that the adoption of 
explicit privacy rules and tension between individual and group privacy rules further 
complicate online boundary coordination. For adequate privacy management in 
OSNs, it is argued, in line with the recommendations of Wisniewski et al. [34] that 
service providers should invest in facilitating the negotiation process of content and 
audiences for both individuals and groups. 
3 
Conclusion 
In order to assess if and to what extent people are 'empowered' in relation to their 
privacy, different socio-technological aspects were taken into account. For this we 
have built on insights from studies of digital media and communication in humanities 
and social science disciplines. 
We found that – related to the notion of vulnerability – it is important to 
understand how technological systems are encoded with regards to privacy (exposure) 

12 
J. Pierson 
and then how these systems are decoded by people (coping). The first depends on the 
interests and context in which a technology comes into existence. The latter depends 
then on the awareness, attitude, capabilities and practices of people themselves, and 
how they become configured in their social, cultural and psychological context. 
Technology is not neutral, but designed to be biased in one way or another. However 
people can have different readings of these technologies. 
The findings also confirm earlier research on how users state that they are 
concerned about privacy in general [35]. However it has been observed that people's 
actual behaviour does not correspond to these claims regarding their own privacy 
[36]. These discrepancies between their claimed attitude towards privacy and their 
actual privacy behaviour is called the privacy paradox [37]. The research being 
discussed, stemming from MCS and STS, helps in better understanding and solving 
the privacy paradox. It gives us a deeper insight into how people engage with social, 
mobile and ubiquitous media and the possible consequences for managing online 
privacy. 
As to solutions and recommendations this means that we need to extend initiatives 
based MCS research such as furthering digital literacy practices with educational 
tools via schools and other organisations, developing appealing Privacy Enhancing 
Technologies (PET) based on valid user input, setting up clever awareness 
campaigns, and supporting evidence-based policies and regulations for safeguarding 
privacy and data protection. 
References 
1. Freeman, C., Soete, L.: The economics of industrial innovation. Continuum, London 
(1997) 
2. Perez, C.: Technological revolutions and financial capital: the dynamics of bubbles and 
golden ages. Edward Elgar Pub., Cheltenham (2003) 
3. NN: The third great wave. The Economist: Special report - The world economy, pp. 3–4 
(2014) 
4. van Dijck, J.: The culture of connectivity: a critical history of social media. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford (2013) 
5. van Dijck, J.: Flickr and the culture of connectivity: sharing views, experiences, memories. 
Memory Studies 4, 1–15 (2010) 
6. Pierson, J.: Online privacy in social media: a conceptual exploration of empowerment and 
vulnerability. Communications & Strategies (Digiworld Economic Journal) 4, 99–120 
(2012) 
7. Castells, M.: Communication power. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2009) 
8. Haythornthwaite, C.A., Wellman, B.: The Internet in everyday life. In: Wellman, B., 
Haythornthwaite, C.A. (eds.) The Internet in Everyday Life, pp. 3–41. Blackwell, Oxford 
(2002) 
9. Zimmerman, M., Rappaport, J.: Citizen participation, perceived control and psychological 
empowerment. American Journal of Community Psychology 16, 725–743 (1988) 
10. Mansell, R.: From digital divides to digital entitlements in knowledge societies. Current 
Sociology 50, 407–426 (2002) 

 
Privacy and Empowerment in Connective Media 
13 
11. Villagran, J.C.: Vulnerability: a conceptual and methodological review. United Nations 
University - Institute for Environment and Human Security (2006) 
12. Chambers, R.: Vulnerability, coping and policy (Editorial introduction). IDS Bulletin 37, 
33–40 (2006) 
13. Ball, K.: Exposure: exploring the subject of surveillance. Information, Communication and 
Society 12, 639–657 (2009) 
14. Watts, M.J., Bohle, H.-G.: The space of vulnerability: the causal structure of hunger and 
famine. Progress in Human Geography 17, 43–67 (1993) 
15. Bohle, H.-G.: Vulnerability Article 1: Vulnerability and Criticality. IHDP Newsletter 
UPDATE, p. 4. International Human Dimensions Programme on Global Environmental 
Change Bonn (2001) 
16. Norman, D.A.: The psychology of everyday things. Basic Books, New York (1988) 
17. Pierson, J., Jacobs, A., Dreessen, K., Van den Broeck, I., Lievens, B., Van den Broeck, W.: 
Walking the interface: uncovering practices through ‘proxy technology assessment’. In: 
Ethnographic Praxis in Industry Conference - EPIC. American Anthropological Association 
(2006) 
18. Hand, M., Shove, E., Southerton, D.: Explaining Showering: a Discussion of the Material, 
Conventional, and Temporal Dimensions of Practice. Sociological Research Online 10 
(2005) 
19. Oudshoorn, N., Pinch, T.J.: How users matter: the co-construction of users and 
technologies. MIT Press, Cambridge (2003) 
20. Akrich, M.: The de-scription of technical objects. In: Bijker, W., Law, J. (eds.) Shaping 
Technology/Building Society: Studies in Sociotechnical Change, pp. 205–223. MIT Press, 
Cambridge (1992) 
21. Barkhuus, L., Dey, A.: Location-based services for mobile telephony: a study of users’ 
privacy concerns. In: Interact 2003, pp. 709–712. IOS Press (2003) 
22. Brandimarte, L., Acquisti, A., Loewenstein, G., Babcock, L.: Privacy concerns and 
information disclosure: an illusion of control hypothesis. In: iConference. IDEALS, 
Chapel Hill (2009) 
23. Goffman, E.: The presentation of self in everyday life. Penguin, Harmondsworth (1971) 
24. Petronio, S.S.: Boundaries of privacy: dialectics of disclosure. State University of New 
York Press, Albany (2002) 
25. Mead, G.H., Morris, C.W.: Mind, self and society from the standpoint of a social 
behaviorist. University of Chicago Press, Chicago (1934) 
26. Hewitt, J.P.: Self and society: a symbolic interactionist social psychology. Allyn and 
Bacon, Boston (2007) 
27. Boyd, D.: It’s complicated: the social lives of networked teens. Yale Univesity Press, New 
Haven (2014) 
28. Boyd, D., Marwick, A.: Social privacy in networked publics: teens’ attitudes, practices, 
and strategies. In: Oxford Internet Institute Decade in Internet Time Symposium, p. 22 
(2011) 
29. Deuze, M.: Media life. Polity, Cambridge (2012) 
30. De Wolf, R., Willaert, K., Pierson, J.: Managing privacy boundaries together: exploring 
individual and group privacy management strategies in Facebook. Computers in Human 
Behavior 35, 444–454 (2014) 
31. Lampinen, A., Lehtinen, V., Lehmuskallio, A., Tamminen, S.: We’re in it together: 
Interpersonal management of disclosure in social network services. In: SIGCHI 
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 3217–3226. ACM (2011) 

14 
J. Pierson 
32. Litt, E.: Understanding social network site users’ privacy tool use. Computers in Human 
Behavior 29, 1649–1656 (2013) 
33. Stutzman, F.D., Hartzog, W.: Boundary regulation in social media. In: ACM Conference 
on Computer Supported Collaborative Work and Social Computing, pp. 769–778. ACM 
(2009) 
34. Wisniewski, P., Lipford, H., Wilson, D.: Fighting for my space: Coping mechanisms for 
SNS boundary regulation. In: SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, pp. 609–618. ACM (2012) 
35. Pötzsch, S.: Privacy awareness: A means to solve the privacy paradox? In: Matyáš, V., 
Fischer-Hübner, S., Cvrček, D., Švenda, P. (eds.) The Future of Identity. IFIP AICT, 
vol. 298, pp. 226–236. Springer, Heidelberg (2009) 
36. Deuker, A.: Addressing the privacy paradox by expanded privacy awareness – the example 
of context-aware services. In: Bezzi, M., Duquenoy, P., Fischer-Hübner, S., Hansen, M., 
Zhang, G. (eds.) Privacy and Identity. IFIP AICT, vol. 320, pp. 275–283. Springer, 
Heidelberg (2010) 
37. Barnes, S.B.: A privacy paradox: social networking in the United States. First Monday 11 
(2006) 

Engaging with Charities on Social Media:
Comparing Interaction on Facebook and Twitter
Christopher Phethean(), Thanassis Tiropanis, and Lisa Harris
Web Science Institute, University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
{C.J.Phethean,T.Tiropanis,L.J.Harris}@soton.ac.uk
Abstract. Social media are commonly assumed to provide fruitful online
communities for organisations, whereby the brand and supporter-base en-
gage in productive, two-way conversations. For charities, this provides a
unique opportunity to reach an audience for a relatively low cost, yet some
remain hesitant to fully embrace these services without knowing exactly
what they will receive in return. This paper reports on a study that seeks
to determine the extent to which these conversations occur, and compares
this phenomenon on Facebook and Twitter for a sample of UK-based char-
ities. Focus was placed on analysing conversations as signs of developing
relationships, which have previously been shown to be a key target for
charities on social media. The results of this study ﬁnd that while there
is an expected proportion of the audience who prefer to listen rather than
engage, there is strong evidence of a core group of supporters on each site
who repeatedly engage. Interestingly, disparities between how this occurs
on Facebook and Twitter emerge, with the results suggesting that Face-
book receives more conversations in response to the charities’ own posts,
whereas on Twitter there is a larger observable element of unsolicited mes-
sages of people talking about the charity, which in turn produces a dif-
fering opportunity for the charity to extract value from the network. It
is also found that posts containing pictures receive the highest number
of responses on each site. These were a lot less common on Twitter and
could therefore oﬀer an avenue for charities to increase the frequency of
responses they achieve.
Keywords: Social media · Charities · Marketing · Communication
1
Introduction
Social media’s popularity in the contemporary world makes it easy to think
that people interacting and engaging online can transform the process of infor-
mation production and dissemination and produce a constant stream of brand
advocates, supporters and critics for any organisation. In an idealistic sense,
analysing this at scale would allow the organisation to determine the current
perception of their services, which they could then use to encourage further en-
gagement and generate a more loyal supporter base who help to contribute to
their own marketing eﬀorts. For charities, it is essential that they know whether
or not this is really possible when they are making the decision on whether to
c
⃝Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 15–29, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_2

16
C. Phethean et al.
allocate limited funds to developing and maintaining a social presence online. A
problem arises, however, in that the level of understanding around how eﬀective
these services actually are for establishing these social relationships is limited. It
is easy to assume, given the constant media hype around them, that these sites
breed user engagement and citizen activism. However, there are also established
‘rules’ to suggest that the percentage of any community online which actually
engages is small [10]. If this is the case for a charity’s online presence, then this
could have great implications on their perception of the ‘value’ or ‘worthiness’
of social media to them as an organisation.
This paper, therefore, seeks to assess what evidence there is on social media
of developing relationships between charity and supporter. This is motivated by
previous work interviewing members of social media teams at various charities
in the UK which found that relationship building was seen as one of the key aims
and values of using social media [13]. Therefore, the goal of this paper is to show
to what extent this phenomenon is actually apparent. Further contributions are
made by comparing two of the largest social networks—Facebook and Twitter—
to examine whether there is any diﬀerence in the levels by which people appear to
engage and how these each contribute to the information transformation oﬀered
by the Internet. Studies into social media frequently look at Twitter due to the
ease of use of the API to collect data, yet few compare this phenomenon to what
occurs on other networks. While some (e.g. [11], [15]) do explore this diﬀerence
from a brand perspective, it remains an under-researched area for a topic with
as much interest as social media.
Most signiﬁcantly, however, this paper emphasises that statistics measuring
social media interactions which may represent a developing relationship can only
reveal so much about this area, and that a more holistic approach which moves
away from looking solely at social media statistics is required. A qualitative
analysis of some of the most engaging messages is provided to investigate the
content and themes that lead to the most signs of interaction. Future directions
are outlined that insist on the integration of quantitative social media statistics,
qualitative social media content analysis and the views, goals and needs of the
charity itself.
2
Background
2.1
Relationship Building by Charities on Social Media
For both corporations and nonproﬁt organisations such as charities, social media
can oﬀer an opportunity to produce a number of diﬀerent outcomes. Spreading
awareness of a new product or campaign, referring users to websites in order to
increase traﬃc, generating buzz to gain media attention, and building relation-
ships with audience members are all possibilities. Additionally each social media
site oﬀers a unique set of features that aﬀords diﬀerent types of interaction and
which may make certain aims more suitable for particular sites. However, there
is an equal sense that sometimes use of these sites maybe does not match their
perceived value. Twitter, for example, is often presented as a great way to oﬀer

Engaging with Charities on Social Media
17
rapid customer service and to interact with supporters through two-way engage-
ment. A content analysis of USA-based nonproﬁts’ tweets instead indicates that
their focus is more on sending one-way messages in order to broadcast informa-
tion [19], and similar studies have also suggested a reluctance to move away from
primarily information spreading behaviour [9].
A case study of the American Red Cross elicits aims for social media including
the discovery of public perception, highlighting areas of improvement and generat-
ing media attention [3]. It is claimed by the authors of the study that the American
Red Cross can be used as a model to follow for organisations wanting to eﬀectively
utilise social media, with an interactive two-way communicative approach essen-
tial [3]. Familiar beneﬁts of this were listed: rapid community service and the elic-
itation of positive and negative feedback [3]. It must be questioned, however, how
representative this feedback is if it is only sourced from a small subset of the audi-
ence who are responding. Nonetheless, interactivity on social media is said to be
essential in allowing productive relationships to develop with supporters; a lack of
it could potentially turn supporters away [18], and it can generally increase trust
[8]. Consequently, even if the relative proportion of engaging users is low, just by
showing that there is a two-way, responsive conversation could increase the trust
of those users who do not with to interact online.
Interviewing members of charities who were involved in their social media
presence, the current authors identiﬁed recurring themes about why social media
was used, and what they hoped to get out of using it [13]. One of the most impor-
tant reasons for using social media was to develop relationships with supporters,
and achieving ‘action’ through donations was seen as a positive side-eﬀect of
doing this rather than a primary aim. There was a slight favouring towards
Facebook for achieving this, especially as it provided a centralised location for
people to provide support and advice—both from the charity to supporter, and
supporter-to-supporter [13]. There was less clarity regarding the actual success
of these sites in achieving relationship building. Accounts of favourable outcomes
were given relating to the number of ‘likes’ content received on Facebook, which
does not necessarily indicate that the users involved have a strong relationship
with the charity [13].
2.2
Online Listeners and Slacktivists
Within any community - online or oﬀ- there will be a portion of it that does
not interact or contribute, but frequently consumes the content created by oth-
ers. Throughout the 1990s and early 2000s, it began to be established that for an
online community, around 90% of members would fall in to this category - often
labelled as ‘lurkers’ (for example, see [10]). [16] claims that there is a diﬀerence
between “passive lurkers” and “active lurkers’ who go on to use the information
gathered from the online community in an oﬄine setting, providing the begin-
ning of an argument to suggest that the common negative perception towards
these users may be undeserved. More recently, [6] discusses the stigma attached
with the term ‘lurker’ and suggests a reconceptualisation to ‘listener’ instead - re-
ﬂecting an equally important role in any online conversation as that of speaking.

18
C. Phethean et al.
This also more accurately reﬂects the activities that many of these users will be
carrying out but while a listener can be engaged in a conversation just as much
as a frequent commenter, they may be missed by social media analyses looking
solely for interactions. Furthermore, research on Facebook has shown that people
frequently underestimate the size of the audience that is exposed to a post, as in-
accurate measures such as amounts of feedback and friend counts are used, which
do not reﬂect how many people actually listened [1].
What may be possibly more misleading when examining social media for these
interactions is the phenomenon of ‘slacktivism’ - described in [14] as activities that
are low cost and risk, and generate satisfaction in the actor. If this satisfaction is
generated to replace that gained by actually doing something - rather than just
clicking ‘like’, for example - then these actions can be misinterpreted by charities
whose returns will not correlate with the actions occurring on social media.
2.3
Conversations as Indications of Relationships?
While actions that just require ‘clicking’ to complete - such as liking on Face-
book and retweeting on Twitter - may be looked at as being possible instances
of slacktivism, other actions on these sites can reﬂect more meaningful signs
of engagement, and may indicate a stronger relationship between charity and
supporter. In earlier work by the current authors, a preliminary framework for
social media measurement was presented (focusing at the time on Twitter), with
retweets and replies listed as indications of engagement [12]. Previous work has
provided methods of analysing retweets as a mechanism for communication and
disseminating topics through the network ([2, 17]). However, while these papers
show the reasons behind retweeting are varied, the replies metric appears to
be a more appropriate measure for discovering strong, developed relationships:
a reply requires a larger investment in terms of time and eﬀort than simply
clicking retweet, and as such [4] describes textual comments on Facebook as
the highest possible level of engagement. In addition, to facilitate the two-way
communication discussed above on Twitter, replies - and posts by the audience
mentioning the charity that can be replied to - are essential aspects that must be
analysed. Likewise, on Facebook, the reply or comment feature would showcase
more than a like, and represent evidence of a strengthened relationship. In [7],
the ﬁnding that ‘requests and suggestions’, ‘expressing aﬀect’ and ‘sharing’ are
popular intentions for participation, also suggests that textual comments will
play a key role in users’ interactions. In addition, overcoming users opting for
the ‘safest’ options - those that do not provoke reactions from other members
of the community, e.g. liking - should be encouraged and that improving the
level of activity through conversational interactions should be sought [7]. This
again suggests a signiﬁcant value in conversations on social media, as they go
beyond the ‘easy’ and ‘safe’ options, to show the organisation that there really
is a valuable relationship present.
For the purposes of this paper, replies and mentions on each site will be used
as a representation of engagement. While retweets, likes and shares are not being
focused on, the authors do not disregard their impact - indeed it is appreciated

Engaging with Charities on Social Media
19
that each of these mechanisms plays a vital role in the social media marketing
mix. In the current study, however, the evidence for strong relationships is sought
based on the discussion above about this being a key aim for charities on social
media, and that replies seem to be a viable channel to indicate this. The current
study seeks to answer the following questions:
RQ1. Does either Twitter or Facebook show evidence of more sustained rela-
tionships between supporters and charity?
RQ2. Do posts by a charity on either Twitter or Facebook tend to generate
more engagement than on the other?
RQ3. Do certain types of posts by a charity on either site tend to generate more
or longer conversations with the audience?
3
Methodology
Based on the research questions devised above, a number of hypotheses are pro-
posed. For RQ1, examining whether Twitter or Facebook creates more sustained
relationships, it will be necessary to identify commenting users as discussed above
to signify users who have a more developed relationship, and to determine how
developed those relationships are through the intensity by which they engage.
To further explore this area, and to indicate whether achieving engagement on
one site could be down to the strategies carried out on that site, rather than an
underlying popularity and tendency for users to engage anyway, the correlation
between the scores on the two sites will be examined. This leads to the ﬁrst two
hypotheses:
H1a. Engaging supporters for each charity will post signiﬁcantly more com-
ments on one of Facebook or Twitter than the other.
H1b. If engagement is related to the overall popularity of the charity, then
charities with more engaged supporters on Facebook will also have more
engaged supporters on Twitter.
After testing these two hypotheses, it will be important to relate this back to
the authors’ previous work, which suggested that charities believed Facebook is
the better platform for developing relationships [13].
Looking at RQ2, it can be seen that providing insights in to this question will
help reinforce this argument, and go on to provide recommendations to charities
as to which site would be worth spending more time on—or which would be
better to dedicate limited resources to. As with the hypotheses for RQ1, it is
expected that from the opinions shared in [13], there will be noticeable diﬀerences
in the ways in which users respond to posts on each of the two networks. Whereas
H1a and H1b looked at overall engagement towards the charity, RQ2 focuses on
the responses to the charities’ posts in order to discover the importance of the
charity showing an interactive presence on the site, which emanates from the
discussion above about this being a vital part of building relationships [8, 18].
The following hypotheses are proposed, focusing on the conversational responses
to posts by an audience:

20
C. Phethean et al.
Table 1. Data overview
Facebook Data
Twitter Data
Charity Likes Charity’s
Root Posts Commenters Followers Charity’s
Root Tweets Mentioners
DUK
57834
135
3012
76808
820
11472
DT
583569 451
12787
115687
1249
21083
WH
529
76
27
586
424
179
HfH
324490 269
7371
224259
2901
82154
JfG
4973
252
495
12045
3818
17104
NT
144701 311
8144
210241
763
27040
WT
40067
142
2941
48449
1227
7890
H2a. There is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the number of comments per
supporter on charities’ posts on Facebook and Twitter.
H2b. There is a signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the number of supporters who
comment on the charities’ posts on Facebook and Twitter.
H2c. If conversations between the charity and an engaged audience are occur-
ring on each of the two sites, then on days when the charity posts more
messages, the audience will also post more messages on the same site.
Finally, in order to investigate RQ3, based on a ﬁnding in [13] that suggested
charities thought posts containing pictures were particularly ‘successful’, it is
hypothesised that:
H3a. On each site, posts containing pictures will on average produce more com-
ments than any other post format.
By investigating H3a, it is hoped to be able to suggest strategies that will work
most eﬀectively for charities that wish to develop engagement and relationships
with their supporters.
3.1
Dataset
A sample of 7 charities was used for this study, the 5 from the authors’ previous
study [13] (Diabetes UK, The Dogs Trust, Help for Heroes, Jeans for Genes, The
Woodland Trust), along with two more: The National Trust and Wessex Heart-
beat. The sample ensured that charities of various sizes (regarding their income)
were chosen, and 6 of the 7 charities have been interviewed to ensure their views
towards social media and their intended uses for it are known beforehand. For
each charity, a dataset of 6-months worth of data was collected for each site:

Engaging with Charities on Social Media
21
from Twitter, a variation of the University of Southampton Tweet Harvester1
was used to collect tweets over the course of the study, whereas the Facebook
dataset was collected retrospectively using a combination of the Facebook Graph
API and Facebook FQL. For both sites, the collected data covered the period
June–December 2013. The Twitter dataset consisted of any tweet sent by the
charity, to the charity, or mentioning the charity, while from Facebook every
post and associated comment made on the charity’s page was collected (includ-
ing posts by a supporter directly on to the page and their resulting comments).
For each conversation the root post ID, the root post format, conversation chain
length, number of conversation participants, whether or not the charity started
the conversation, and whether or not the charity replied in the conversation were
recored. While this was trivial for analysing responses to Facebook posts by sim-
ply collecting and analysing the list of comments, the process was more complex
for Twitter and as such an algorithm based on the work in [5] was produced to
form tweets into conversation chains.
Additionally, each user who participated in a conversation was recorded along
with how many posts they made in the 6 month period, and how many con-
versations these fell in to. In addition, for each charity the follower count (on
Twitter, as of 5th February 2014) and the number of page likes (for Facebook,
as of 4th February 2014) were collected to enable proportional calculations to be
carried out. A summary of the dataset is provided in Table 1. In total, 493328
posts (root posts, comments and replies) were analysed, from 201699 users.
The top 5 posts sorted by number of comments from each network for each
charity were extracted so that qualitative content analysis could be carried out in
order to determine whether there were any charity-speciﬁc or overall themes that
appeared to cause the highest levels of conversation. This would assist in making
any recommendations to the charities about what type of content produces the
most desirable results, and is essential in order to contextualise the statistical
work that will be used to assess the hypotheses above.
4
Results
4.1
Commenter Analysis
For RQ1, it was necessary to examine the behaviours of commenters on both sites
towards each charity. Calculations were made to assess how many posts each user
made, with the results shown in Table 2. A Wilcoxon signed-rank test was then
carried out on these values to determine whether one site produced signiﬁcantly
higher values. With Twitter observably higher in each case, the test indicated
that there was a diﬀerence (z=-2.366, p<0.05, r=-0.63). To examine this area
further, the number of commenters who posted more than once (repeated en-
gagers) and 6 or more times (once per month) were calculated. These values are
displayed in Table 3. Using the monthly observers values (and acknowledging
that this does not necessarily mean one post per month was made—a single
1 http://tweets.soton.ac.uk

22
C. Phethean et al.
Table 2. Commenter Statistics
Charity Average Posts Per Com-
menter (FB)
Average Posts Per Com-
menter (TW)
DUK
2.66904
2.98087
DT
2.27573
2.33973
WH
1.82853
4.90465
HfH
1.65227
2.04518
JfG
1.72773
3.19667
NT
2.51088
3.19667
WT
1.86335
2.26464
conversation of 6 posts could also place a user into this category), a Wilcoxon
signed-rank test was again carried out showing that there is a diﬀerence be-
tween the two sites in favour of Twitter (z=-2.197, p<0.05, r=-0.59). For repeat
engagers the same calculation showed that there was no signiﬁcant diﬀerence
between the sites (z=-1.352, p>0.05, r=-0.36). This section of analysis therefore
indicates that per interacting supporter, more interactions are made on Twitter
than Facebook, which therefore supports H1a.
An ‘engagement index’ was then made for each charity on each site. On Face-
book this was the average of Z-scores for the number of commenters per likes
(M=0.055, SD=0.026), the average number of conversations each user partici-
pated in (M=1.776, SD=0.258) and the average number of posts made by each
user per conversation (M=1.163, SD=0.084). On Twitter these were the number
of posters per followers (M=0.388, SD=0.464), the average number of conver-
sations (M=2.668, SD=0.818) and the average number of tweets made by each
user in each conversation (M=1.062, SD=0.050). Creating Z-scores for each char-
ity’s own score in relation to these, and averaging them provided an index for
each site. To test whether charities with more engaged users on one site also
had more engaged users on the other, a Spearman correlation was calculated on
these values, and showed no signiﬁcant correlation (r=0.321, p=0.482), therefore
H1b was not supported.
4.2
Audience Response Analysis
RQ2 focused more on how the audience responded to the charities’ posts on each
network. Looking at the data from the perspective of the posts, rather than the
posters, calculations were made to ﬁnd the number of comments or replies per
charity-authored post on the two networks. Again, a Wilcoxon signed-rank tests
were carried out on the results. Firstly on the average number of comments per
post per like (or follower), which this time showed Facebook as being consis-
tently higher (z=-2.366, p<0.05, r=-0.63), meaning that per supporter on each
site, Facebook produced a higher number of comments or replies on each of the
charities’s posts than Twitter, and supported H2a. This was shown again when

Engaging with Charities on Social Media
23
Table 3. Repeated Engager Statistics (out of supporters who have commented at least
once)
Repeat Engagers
Monthly Engagers
Charity FB
TW
FB
TW
DUK
1159 (38.5%) 4134 (36%)
207 (6.9%)
1000 (8.7%)
DT
5091 (32.2%) 6182 (29.3%) 884 (5.6%)
1152 (5.5%)
WH
10 (37.0%)
59 (33%)
2 (7.4%)
14 (7.8%)
HfH
1894 (25.7%) 16922 (20.6%) 180 (2.4%)
3308 (4%)
JfG
130 (26.3%)
4637 (27.1%) 10 (2%)
769 (4.5%)
NT
2896 (35.6%) 9904 (36.6%) 545 (6.7%)
2205 (8.2%)
WT
916 (31.1%)
2462 (31.2%) 129 (4.4%)
427 (5.4%)
Table 4. Post Replies Statistics (out of all supporters (likes or followers))
Average Responses Per
Post Per Supporter
Average Responders Per
Post Per Supporter
Charity FB
TW
FB
TW
DUK
0.00055
0.0005
0.00042
0.00002
DT
0.00010
0.00001
0.00009
0.00001
WH
0.00077
0.00029
0.00062
0.00021
HfH
0.00010
0.00000
0.00009
0.00000
JfG
0.00050
0.00002
0.00042
0.00001
NT
0.00033
0.00003
0.00022
0.00001
WT
0.00138
0.00002
0.00126
0.00002
looking at the average number of commenters or posters per like or follower on
each site, with Facebook again consistently higher (z=-2.366, p<0.05, r=-0.63).
This data is summarised in Table 4 and provides an indication that Facebook
provides a higher proportion of interacting or engaged supporters than Twitter,
supporting H2b.
Finally, to test H2c, a Spearman correlation was calculated as a rudimentary
analysis of the timestamps of charity posts and audience posts. For each day in
the 6 month study period, a tally of how many posts were made by charity and
audience was gathered. Table 5 shows that for each charity there is a signiﬁcant
correlation between when the charity itself posts, and when their audience posts.
While H2c is supported, it is clear that the strengths of the correlations are varied
and many comments may well be being made in an unsolicited way. When run
through the Wilcoxon signed-rank test, these correlations showed that there was
no signiﬁcant diﬀerence between the strengths in correlation between each site
(z=-0.338, p>0.05, r=-0.09).

24
C. Phethean et al.
Table 5. Charity and Supporter Post Date Correlation
Charity FB Correlation
TW Correlation
DUK
r=0.643 p<0.01
r=0.6 p<0.01
DT
r=0.413 p<0.01
r=0.718 p<0.01
WH
r=0.341 p<0.01
r=0.269 p<0.01
HfH
r=0.522 p<0.01
r=0.302 p<0.01
JfG
r=0.54 p<0.01
r=0.662 p<0.01
NT
r=0.541 p<0.01
r=0.53 p<0.01
WT
r=0.666 p<0.01
r=0.621 p<0.01
Table 6. Post Format Responses (Facebook)
Format Comments/Posts
Commenters/
Posts
ResponseIndex
Statuses 23.68
19.71
-0.289
Videos
24.43
21.69
-0.163
Pictures 43.74
37.62
1.406
Links
15.36
13.07
-0.954
4.3
Post Format Analysis
The quantities of each diﬀerent post type (statuses, pictures, videos and links)
sent by the charity were counted on the two sites. For each, the average number
of comments per post (FB: M=26.806, SD=12.012, TW: M=1.496, SD=0.873)
and the average number of commenters per post (FB: M=23.020, SD=10.406,
TW: M=0.966, SD=0.571) were calculated (across the entire dataset for each
site), with Z-scores calculated on each. An index for the engagement with each
post format was then calculated as the average of these two values (Table 6
and Table 7). On Twitter, no posts were returned labelled as containing video
content, so this row was excluded from the calculation. Posts containing pictures
were shown to be the most engaging from a conversational point of view on
both sites, receiving far higher amounts of commenters, from more commenters,
than any other format. Particularly noteworthy was that on Facebook, a picture
posted by a charity received on average over 37 unique commenters—on Twitter
this was only 1.56 commenters per post. These results help to support H3a, and
can be used to provide a strong recommendation to charities looking to increase
the amount of comments that they receive.
4.4
Top Post Content Analysis
From looking qualitatively at the content of the messages that received the
highest number of comments, several recurring types of message were discovered.

Engaging with Charities on Social Media
25
Table 7. Post Format Responses (Twitter)
Format Replies/Posts
Repliers/Posts
ResponseIndex
Statuses 0.64
0.423
-0.966
Videos
N/A
N/A
N/A
Pictures 2.38
1.56
1.030
Links
1.46
0.91
-0.065
On Facebook, posts asking an informal question to the fans of the charity’s page
were common (12/35 posts), as were those promoting a competition (10/35).
7 of the posts directly referred to pictures included in them, and 21 of the 35
were classed as being informational messages for a variety of purposes (such
as linking to relevant content or reporting media attention). Informally toned
messages (10/35) were more common than any formal or authoritative messages
(combined 4/37). On Twitter, informal questions were again a popular type of
content to be commented upon (16/35), and informational messages (14/35)
also tended to be replied to. Promoting a competition (4/35) in messages were
less commonly popular than on Facebook, but general messages of thanks (4/35)
indicated that these types of tweet gained a fair amount of replies. In two cases on
both Facebook and Twitter, informal questions made up the majority (5/5, 5/5,
and 4/5, 4/5) of all the charities’ most popular tweets. There are indications
here that informal questions are particularly eﬀective at generating responses
from the audience.
5
Discussion
It is interesting to discover that for the sample of charities in this study, Twitter
appeared to accomodate supporters who made more interactions each, compared
to Facebook (H1a). Yet when looking at the data from the point of view of
responses to the charities’ own posts and in relation to the number of likes or
followers each charity possessed, Facebook posts received more comments (H2a),
and more commenters (H2b) than Twitter. It is possible that the disparity arises
from H1a and could be down to the nature by which the data was collected:
while the Twitter Search API allowed any messages mentioning the charity to
be gathered, the Facebook data collection was restricted to what appeared on
their page only, and so reﬂects the observable interacting users (as H2a and H2b
focused on responses to the charities’ posts, this is not an issue). However, with
the publicity of conversations such as these one of the major advantages of social
media, this suggests a great opportunity on Twitter to discover these unsolicited
discussions and for the charity to then take advantage.
There is clearly a signiﬁcant amount of discussion about charities occurring
on Twitter, so why are the values in Tables 4, 6 and 7 so much smaller than for

26
C. Phethean et al.
Facebook? Returning to the literature discussed earlier, it is possible that this
is symptomatic of the ‘wrong’ types of messages being sent by the charities—
messages that are not conducive to conversation, and are one-way broadcast
messages instead [19], [9]. With pictures appearing to be the post format that
produces the most comments in response (H3a), it is interesting to note that
pictures accounted for nearly 76% of the charities’ posts on Facebook, while on
Twitter it was a little under 14%.
Alternatively, the diﬀerence in post response rate could be down to the fact
that charities do not see Twitter as a channel for relationship building in the
way that they do with Facebook, supporting the views presented in the current
authors’ previous study [13]. It is important to note that this does currently
appear to be the case, and their actual use does correlate with their perceived
intentions and beliefs. If charities do see Twitter as more of a mechanism for
promoting awareness and spreading information—as claimed in [13]—then signs
of conversation in response to their posts would be less apparent. However it
appears from the qualitative aspects of this study that there is some evidence
to suggest that tweets attempting to elicit a reaction—primarily asking informal
questions—are still the most popular on Twitter in terms of replies received, and
engagement in this way is still possible. However a more in-depth examination
of content-type and popularity is required to verify this further.
At this point, another interesting question arises. What signiﬁes a stronger
relationship: a supporter repeatedly replying to a charity’s post, or a supporter
regularly posting messages without a prompt from the charity itself? This is a
key question to move forward in this area, requiring further study of the types
of message being sent. Something is occurring which statistics are failing to ac-
count for, suggesting more in-depth qualitative methods are required now that
a general understanding of the area has been obtained. The suggestion, how-
ever, is that there is a disparity of value between Facebook and Twitter—while
Facebook may by better for developing relationships with continually interested
supporters, Twitter’s value may be in harbouring unsolicited mentions of what
a wider range of people choose to do for the charity, which the charity itself
can utilise for promotion. A more detailed time-series analysis of this area could
provide additional understanding of this relationship.
Insights are gained from the unsupported hypothesis, H1b, which stated that
charities with more engaged supporters on one site would have more engaged
supporters on the other. The correlation showed that this was not supported,
and suggests that engaging users on one site may not be symptomatic of a pre-
engaged and more active audience—if this was so then both sites would tend to
receive high levels of engagement compared to charities that did not. Instead,
it suggests that something the charity is doing on one of the sites is probably
‘working’ more than on the other to stimulate conversation—again this comes
down to what they look to get out of each, and requires further research to
establish the overall state of a community spanning multiple social networks.

Engaging with Charities on Social Media
27
5.1
Limitations and Summary of Contribution
This paper examined social media interactions around 7 UK charities on Face-
book and Twitter. This is a small sample and caution must be taken before
inferring the indications to the wider population. There was also limited quali-
tative analysis carried out which could provide much richer insights in to what
people are actually conversing about. Only textual interactions were analysed,
and this was only examined from the perspective of relationship building—there
are other aims that are also important to charities.
The ﬁndings of this study suggest that the ways in which supporters engage
with charities diﬀers between sites, supporting the perceptions of the charities
themselves presented in [13]. There is evidence to back proposals that Facebook
could be better for posting messages to encourage a known supporter-base to re-
spond, whereas Twitter appears to be a more valuable for discovering unsolicited
mentions and accounts of support from any users on the network. Whether this
is the cause of, or eﬀect of, the results of studies such as [19] that claim charities
in the USA focus on sending one-way messages rather than encouraging con-
versation is yet to be discovered. The qualitative part of this study showed that
informal questions were regularly the most replied to type of tweet, and this gives
some indication that the claim of ‘wrong use’ can not be entirely supported.
While the proportions of commenters compared to the number of supporters is
low, the proportion of users posting more than once in 6 months is encouraging. It
is to be expected, given the literature review, that the majority of the community
will be content to listen. These results help to highlight how valuable small
portions of an audience are in creating a large amount of conversation around a
topic—and the techniques used to locate these users can now be taken further
to assess their overall contribution to the buzz around the charity.
Based on the discoveries in this paper, we can make some suggestions to
charities wishing to develop their relationship building strategies on social media.
Facebook appears to be the more suitable choice for generating discussions about
relevant topics with the dedicated, committed supporter base. Twitter seems to
hold great potential value for ﬁnding the extra, satellite discussions about the
charities, and then supporting and amplifying these using Twitter’s ability to
quickly disseminate and spread messages. On both sites, pictures should be used
when the charity desires a conversation or many replies. It seems apparent,
however, that a statistical approach such as this to analysing social media can
only say so much, despite providing initial insights and an overall picture of
this area. Further qualitative analysis of messages is required, and this must be
used in conjunction with the aims and view of the charities discovered in [13] to
determine further where the value in social media truly arises from.
Acknowledgement. This research was funded by the Research Councils UK
Digital Economy Programme, Web Science Doctoral Training Centre, University of
Southampton. EP/G036926/1.

28
C. Phethean et al.
References
1. Bernstein, M.S., Bakshy, E., Burke, M., Karrer, B.: Quantifying the invisible au-
dience in social networks. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Factors in Computing Systems, CHI 2013, pp. 21–30. ACM, New York (2013),
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2470654.2470658
2. Boyd, D., Golder, S., Lotan, G.: Tweet, tweet, retweet: Conversational aspects of
retweeting on twitter. In: 2010 43rd Hawaii International Conference on System
Sciences (HICSS), pp. 1–10 (2010)
3. Briones, R.L., Kuch, B., Liu, B.F., Jin, Y.: Keeping up with the digital age: How
the american red cross uses social media to build relationships. Public Relations
Review 37(1), 37–43 (2011), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/
pii/S0363811110001335
4. Cho, M., Schweickart, T., Haase, A.: Public engagement with nonproﬁt organiza-
tions on facebook. Public Relations Review 40(3), 565–567 (2014),
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0363811114000241
5. Cogan, P., Andrews, M., Bradonjic, M., Kennedy, W.S., Sala, A., Tucci, G.: Recon-
struction and analysis of twitter conversation graphs. In: Proceedings of the First
ACM International Workshop on Hot Topics on Interdisciplinary Social Networks
Research, HotSocial 2012, pp. 25–31. ACM, New York (2012),
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2392622.2392626
6. Crawford, K.: Following you: Disciplines of listening in social media. Con-
tinuum 23(4), 525–535 (2009), http://www.tandfonline.com/doi/abs/10.1080/
10304310903003270
7. Cvijikj, I.P., Michahelles, F.: Understanding the user generated content and inter-
actions on a facebook brand page. International Journal of Social and Humanistic
Computing 2(1), 118–140 (2013), http://dx.doi.org/10.1504/IJSHC.2013.053270
8. Jo, S., Kim, Y.: The eﬀect of web characteristics on relationship building. Journal of
Public Relations Research 15(3), 199–223 (2003), http://www.tandfonline.com/
doi/abs/10.1207/S1532754XJPRR1503_1
9. Lovejoy, K., Saxton, G.D.: Information, community, and action: How non-
proﬁt organizations use social media. Journal of Computer-Mediated Communi-
cation 17(3), 337–353 (2012), http://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1111/
j.1083-6101.2012.01576.x/abstract
10. Nielsen, J.: Participation inequality: Encouraging more users to contribute (Octo-
ber 2006), http://www.useit.com/alertbox/participation_inequality.html (last ac-
cessed: November 26, 2014)
11. Paek, H.J., Hove, T., Jung, Y., Cole, R.T.: Engagement across three social media
platforms: An exploratory study of a cause-related PR campaign. Public Rela-
tions Review 39(5), 526–533 (2013), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S0363811113001379
12. Phethean, C., Tiropanis, T., Harris, L.: Measuring the performance of social media
marketing in the charitable domain. In: Web Science 2012, Evanston, IL, USA
(June 2012)
13. Phethean, C., Tiropanis, T., Harris, L.: Rethinking measurements of social media
use by charities: A mixed methods approach. In: Web Science 2013. ACM, Paris
(2013)
14. Rotman, D., Vieweg, S., Yardi, S., Chi, E., Preece, J., Shneiderman, B., Pirolli, P.,
Glaisyer, T.: From slacktivism to activism: participatory culture in the age of social
media. In: Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. ACM, Vancouver
(2011), http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1979543

Engaging with Charities on Social Media
29
15. Smith, A.N., Fischer, E., Yongjian, C.: How does brand-related user-generated
content diﬀer across YouTube, Facebook, and Twitter? Journal of Interac-
tive Marketing 26(2), 102–113 (2012), http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1094996812000059
16. Takahashi, M., Fujimoto, M., Yamasaki, N.: The active lurker: inﬂuence of an
in-house online community on its outside environment. In: GROUP 2003 Pro-
ceedings of the 2003 International ACM SIGGROUP Conference on Supporting
Group Work. ACM Press (2003), http://portal.acm.org/citation.cfm?doid=
958160.958162
17. Tinati, R., Carr, L., Hall, W., Bentwood, J.: Identifying communicator roles in
twitter. In: Proceedings of the 21st International Conference Companion on World
Wide Web, WWW 2012 Companion, pp. 1161–1168. ACM, New York (2012),
http://doi.acm.org/10.1145/2187980.2188256
18. Waters, R.D., Burnett, E., Lamm, A., Lucas, J.: Engaging stakeholders through
social networking: How nonproﬁt organizations are using facebook. Public
Relations Review 35(2), 102–106 (2009), http://linkinghub.elsevier.com/
retrieve/pii/S0363811109000046
19. Waters, R.D., Jamal, J.Y.: Tweet, tweet, tweet: A content analysis of nonproﬁt
organizations’ twitter updates. Public Relations Review 37(3), 321–324 (2011),
http://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0363811111000361

 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 30–48, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_3 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT  
in A Group of Selected Arab Countries and Brazil 
Mona Farid Badran() 
Faculty of Economics and Political Science, 
Cairo University, Giza, Egypt 
samifarah.mona@gmail.com 
Abstract. This research paper embarks on a comparative empirical study to 
investigate the impact that ICT plays on empowering women entrepreneurs in 5 
developing/emerging countries, namely Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Algeria, as a 
group of Arab countries and Brazil. The World Bank's Investment Climate 
Assessment Surveys (ICA) is the primary source of data for the four Arab 
countries and Brazil. The ICA database provides comparable enterprise level 
data based on similar sampling techniques. The results obtained from the 
empirical study reveal that in the selected Arab countries, the increase in female 
owned SMEs is associated with a decrease in the Internal Rate of Return. 
However, when we control for ICT in terms of ICT index constructed using the 
Principal Component Analysis technique (PCA), the female owned SMEs 
becomes statistically insignificant; this is also the case with the ICT index. This 
implies that IRR is negatively associated with the female owners of the SME, 
and there is a no association between IRR and the access and use of ICT. In 
Brazil, however, neither gender nor ICT plays any role in the profitability of 
SMEs.  However, as for the other measure for economic performance, namely 
the labor intensity, the findings reveal that in the selected Arab countries, the 
ICT index has a positive, statically significant,  association with labor-intensity, 
while in Brazil the usage of a Website has a negative, statistically significant,  
association with the labor-intensity. 
Keywords: SMEs · Females · Arab countries · Brazil · ICT · ICA survey  
JEL-classification: J16 · M13 
1 
Introduction 
Empowering women in developing countries, including the Arab countries,  as well as 
in  emerging countries such as Brazil, is considered a vital issue for social and 
economic development [22] [17]. Female entrepreneurship represents a potentially 
valuable tool for promoting growth and elevating poverty and combating gender 
inequality[14]. In this respect, it is important to refer to the Grameen Bank model and 
other micro-finance schemes that lend mainly to women, to buy cell-phones and 
provide mobile pay phone services [21][18]. It is an established fact that one of the 
UN Millennium Development Goals is gender equality and women empowerment, 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
31 
 
and it has been argued that ICT can be the vehicle to achieve this goal[2]. In the realm 
of SMEs in the considered countries, female-owned firms represent 30-37 percent of 
all SMEs.  Furthermore, jobs in small and medium enterprises (SMEs) account for 
more than half of all formal employment worldwide [13]. 
Historically, starting in the 1990, many SMEs in developing countries, albeit a 
smaller number, began to include modern information and communication 
technologies in their enterprises. This trend can result in an increase in the returns for 
enterprises and an increase in their productivity. In addition, it can make training and 
education more accessible for workers. This can eventually lead to increase of 
employability of low skilled workers [13]. 
Another vital motivation of the present study is the fact that female-owned SMEs 
can, by using the Information and Communication Technologies (ICT), move up the 
value chain and reach higher value–added products. Thus, owners of SMEs reach out to 
new technologies and innovations, while the latter require more skilled workers [13]. 
This progress can also result in reduction of poverty, especially since the majority 
of female owned SMEs are entering the business because of necessity rather than 
opportunit[7]. 
In some cases, business owners and managers, regardless of their gender, lack the 
requirement to manage and promote their businesses using new technologies. This 
results in limiting their potential for growth and job creation. Innovation and 
technology advances can be regarded as a solution for the obstacles facing SMEs, by 
promoting the skills of the labor force   in general and  the female owners of SMEs in 
particular [13]. Women entrepreneurs are offered new opportunities by ICTs to start 
and grow their businesses. By using traditional and new ICTs, female–owned SMEs 
are connecting with their clients, becoming more productive and innovative. Thus, 
without access to these, entrepreneurs are not totally exploiting the business 
opportunity in their market. First and foremost, thanks to the mobile revolution and 
the new concept of ubiquitous Internet access, access to ICT tools is now much easier 
even to the rural poor, including females. 
In most developing countries, female-run enterprises tend to be undercapitalized, 
and to have poorer access to machinery, fertilizers, information and credit than male-
owned enterprises do. Laws, regulations, and customs restrict women's ability to 
manage property, conduct business, or even travel without their husbands' consent.  
Disparities also exist in women's workforce participation. Women are three times 
as likely as men to be hired informally, and are much more likely to be among the 
unpaid workers who contribute to the family's business [28].  
Such discrepancies impair women's ability to participate in development and to 
contribute to higher living standards. From a competitiveness perspective, women's 
disproportionately low participation in the workforce can reduce the pool of 
applicants and distort the allocation of talent and the productivity of human capital, 
thereby reducing the average productivity of the labor force [28]. 
Recently, the increase in the number of female-owned enterprises is much higher 
than that of their male counterparts in developed countries, according to Niethammer 
2013. Furthermore, there is no evidence that women-owned enterprises fail at a faster 
rate. In this respect, it is important to mention that the percentage of women, who start 

32 
M.F. Badran 
 
their businesses motivated by an opportunity, is higher in high-income countries than 
in low-income/middle-income country groups; meanwhile, in the latter case, women 
entrepreneurs are more likely to start their businesses just for necessity reasons.[18]  
A key impetus of the study at hand is the substantial percentage of female owned 
SMEs in emerging countries. Although they don’t constitute the majority of SMEs 
owners in developing countries, female-owned small and medium enterprises (SMEs) 
represent 30 to 37 percent (8 million to 10 million) of all SMEs in emerging markets, 
according to the IFC in 2013.  Several case studies show that ICT can, and actually is, 
empowering women in developing countries [2]. For example, ICT provides women 
entrepreneurs with access to worldwide e-business channels, which can be operated 
24 hours a day from home in real time [11].  Tele-working, call centers, the software 
industry and offshore services all call for more IT education and training in all levels 
of education, which would enhance girls and, later on, women, to become active 
contributors to the Egyptian economy’s growth and development. [2] 
 
1A                                                                                         1B 
Fig. 
1A. 
Distribution 
of 
male/female 
enterprises according to region 
Source: GEM Report 2012 
Fig. 1B. Women participation in ownership 
and top management 
 
In Figure 1A, according to the 2012 Global Entrepreneurship Monitor Report, 
[7]female entrepreneurship rates are significantly high in Latin America and the 
Caribbean region, and are relatively low in the Middle East and the North Africa 
regions. An important trend in this respect is that the number of female entrepreneurs 
reflects the general trend for entrepreneurship conditions in the specific country. In 
addition, Latin America and the Caribbean region are efficiency driven economies, 
while the Middle East/North Africa (MENA) regions contain predominantly factor-
driven economies [7]. Figure 1B is taken from to the World Bank’s Enterprise Surveys 
(ES)[29-33]. It depicts that for those females who are engaged in SMEs, female 
participation in ownership is much higher compared to the females in top management, 
especially in developing countries compared to other regions in the world.  
Policymakers are progressively investigating and developing new ways of 
empowering women by promoting economic activity and growth among them in 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
33 
 
developing countries. Furthermore, the increased uptake of access ICTs such as 
access and use of the Internet and Broadband, having a website for the small 
businesses, using emails, etc. [29], should be contributing to overall growth and 
increased productivity level of female-owned enterprises.  This is quite important and 
relevant to empowering females in general and female-owned entrepreneurs per se, as 
those SMEs, that adopt these new techniques of doing business, enjoy a competitive 
edge compared to the rest of the SMEs that don't incorporate ICT in their production 
technique.  Other ways that ICT can contribute to the growth of the female-owned 
SMEs include tele-working, e-commerce, and outsourcing[15]. .  
On the macro-level, which has been well documented and researched, the vital role 
of ICT in development allows the developing and emerging countries to leapfrog and 
excel in their economic and social development ( for example[2];[1]; [19]) Thus the 
question remains whether these technologies can help female-owned SMEs to 
overcome their disadvantages and become more productive and profitable 
entrepreneurs.  
This research paper embarks on a comparative study based on empirical techniques 
to investigate the impact that ICT plays on empowering women entrepreneurs in 5 
developing/ emerging countries, namely Egypt, Jordan, Morocco, Algeria, and Brazil. 
The majority of the empirical literature on entrepreneurship discusses solely the 
hurdles that male entrepreneurs might be confronting when establishing SMEs. [4] . 
Little empirical evidence has been found on the impact of ICT services such as 
Internet access and use on the economic performance of female-owned SMEs. 
In addition, studies that have investigated the gender dimensions and explored the 
topic of women entrepreneurs have concentrated on developed countries, as well as 
the determinants of female entrepreneurs [22].  
Thus, the research question of the present study can be summarized by the 
following questions:   
 
• Does ICT play a role in empowering women entrepreneurs in these Arab 
countries and Brazil?  
• Examining the lessons learned from Brazil's experience, what is the 
difference in ICT impact on entrepreneurship between the two regions?  
 
It is worth noting that the present research has a twofold value added:  it focuses on 
the research question of empowering female entrepreneurship in Arab countries and 
Brazil. Further, it adds a new dimension to the existing literature by focusing on the 
role that ICT is playing to empower these female owned SMEs in the two regions 
considered. 
In the next section, we examine the main characteristics of female entrepreneurship 
in Brazil and in Arab countries. This is followed by a survey of the pertaining 
literature. Then, we present a description of the data and methods used to estimate the 
suggested indicators that measure the performance of female-owned SMEs. Finally, 
the results are discussed and analyzed. We conclude with a summary of the key 
findings and suggested policy recommendations.     

34 
M.F. Badran 
 
2 
Female Entrepreneurship in Brazil and Selected Arab 
Countries 
In the outset, in the selected Arab countries combined female–owned SMEs constitute 
approximately only 15% of the total entrepreneurs, while females in developing 
countries own around 34.3 percent of the small firms [13]. Thus the female–owned 
SMEs in the selected Arab countries are below the indicated level. However, in Brazil 
female-owned SMEs are accounting for more than half of the total SMEs owners. 
Secondly, females per se tend to own firms in the services sector and they are smaller 
in terms of sales, assets, profits, and employees. Finally, literature refers to the fact 
that entrepreneurs’ wage gap between male and female is large [13]. 
Female Entrepreneurship in Brazil constitutes an important benchmark for the 
female- owned SMEs in other developing countries such as Arab countries. Most 
businesses in Latin America and in Brazil are micro- and small enterprises. The 
motivation for most entrepreneurs in this region is the necessity or finance, rather than 
the opportunity.  Small enterprises in Latin America have an immense impact on job 
creation, and economic diversification. Middle class firms in Brazil specifically are 
recognized for being more involved in creating knowledge–based companies (i.e. new 
communication and software firms as well as internet-related services, and other 
branches of applied electronics) (World Bank 2013).  The present paper draws 
attention to Brazil based on the following reasons: Brazil is one of the leading 
emerging countries (BRICS), and it is a leader in entrepreneurship, with an estimated 
one in eight adults being entrepreneurs. Much of the business that occurs in Brazil is 
done by single business people either selling their homemade goods or providing their 
services. Also half of the entrepreneurs in Brazil are women (46%) in 2004, while 4 
years ago it was only 29%. New programs have recently been started to help women 
become even more involved in business. Opportunity-based entrepreneurship and 
need-based entrepreneurship are close to being equal [7]. 
One of the major hurdles in starting a new enterprise in Brazil is paperwork. Thus, 
bureaucracy and gender credit gap in Brazil are considered  major hurdles. Despite 
this, Brazil ranks very high on the Global Entrepreneurship Monitor (GEM) list of 
countries with the highest entrepreneurial activity (International Entrepreneurship.org). 
It is worth mentioning that Brazil ranks high (62) in the Gender Gap Index 2013, 
where it has succeeded in closing the gender gap in both sub indexes of the health & 
survival and education attainment.[8] 
Female-owned enterprises in Arab countries tend to choose the service business 
sector  [20]. Mostly, the services sector can  provide better working conditions than 
agriculture, and more chances for women to be promoted professionally. The size of 
their business is relatively small, and they are prone to employ fewer employees. The 
latter study has empirically proved that the average size of female-owned enterprises 
in Bahrain and Oman is small. The number of personnel employed by the women 
entrepreneurs in both Bahrain and Oman ranges between 2 to 60 people [17]. 
Generally, the main features of the services sector is the low initial requirement of 
capital and thus low barriers to entry and easier way of starting a business[ 22]. In 
general, the services sector can provide better working conditions than agriculture, as 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
35 
 
well as more chances for women to be promoted professionally [13]. According to the 
latest GEM Report 2012, in the Middle East and North Africa region, males have  
demonstrated four times the likelihood of entering a business compared to females. 
Women entrepreneurs in this region have large families, with an average of five 
people per household, and they operate primarily as one-woman businesses with no 
employees. 
However, being a women entrepreneur in a developing country entails many 
hurdles that are worth investigating. These hurdles include limited access to credit, 
limited pool of human capital, hampering legal environments, and very expensive and 
complicated ways to have access and use of ICT to promote their businesses. In the 
latter case, the impact of having access and  using ICT for women-owned SMEs has 
not been well researched in empirical studies, especially in developing countries, such 
as the above-mentioned Arab countries and Brazil.  
Other external factors that form an obstacle to Arab female entrepreneurship 
include family and community opinions and social norm [2]. It is imperative in the 
context of the current research to highlight the relationship between women 
Entrepreneurship and business climate. In the economic aspect, we find that women 
frequently face gender bias in the socioeconomic environment when it comes to 
establishing and developing their own enterprises and accessing economic resources.  
These are not only disadvantages to women, but they also reduce growth potential, 
productivity, and performance of the economy as a whole. Gender-based inequalities 
impose significant development costs on societies. Women are active economic 
participants as business owners, workers, and managers globally. Apparently, there 
are positive correlations between women's representation on corporate boards and 
corporate performance, suggesting that women are good for business. Fortune 500 
firms with the highest percentage of women corporate officers yielded on average 
35.1 % greater return on equity and 34 percent greater return to shareholders than 
those with the lowest percentage of women corporate officers [26][27]. 
3 
Literature Review 
There are only few empirical studies investigating the impact of use and access of 
ICT in female-owned enterprises in general, not to mention Arab or emerging 
countries.  
Examining this topic across the developing countries, there are a few studies that 
are worth mentioning. One of the most notable recent papers in this area of research 
was developed  by the World  Bank team of researchers, [4] . The paper discusses the 
performance gaps between male-owned and female-owned enterprises using the ICA 
surveys but it is confined to four regions, namely Eastern Europe and Central Asia, 
Latin America, and Sub-Saharan Africa. They report that on average, female- owned 
enterprises are significantly smaller in terms of overall sales than those of their male-
owned enterprises in each region. The concentration of women and men in specific 
industrial sectors follows very similar patterns in all regions, and there was no strong 
evidence of credit constraints. Some exceptions were found in the Latin America 

36 
M.F. Badran 
 
region. They conduct an empirical analysis using a multiple regression model to 
estimate their model. They also examine gender gaps in firm growth over a 3-year 
period, both in terms of employment and sales. In addition, they measure the gender 
gap and its impact on productive efficiency in terms of the revenue that they generate 
from given inputs. 
An important paper [6] focuses on measuring the effect of ICT on the economic 
performance of SMEs in three East African countries: Kenya, Tanzania and Uganda. The 
study uses diffusion of ICT among East African SMEs, which is both industry and country 
specific, where industries covered in the analysis include food processing, textile and 
tourism. In their empirical analysis, they tackle three performance indicators: internal rate 
of return, labor productivity, and domestic and export market expansion.  Data obtained 
from ICA surveys covers East Africa, especially Kenya and Tanzania. The survey that 
was carried out from November 1999 to May 2000 includes enterprises from three sectors: 
food processing, textiles and tourism. The entire sample includes 300 enterprises. The 
distribution is 150 enterprises from Kenya and Tanzania each, distributed equally among 
the three sectors. In the selection of enterprises, the survey followed a simple random 
sampling procedure where the sample enterprises are randomly selected from major 
commercial corridors in the countries. Findings reveal that investment in ICT has a 
negative impact on labor productivity and a positive impact on general market expansion. 
However, such investment does not have any significant impact on enterprises’ return, nor 
does it determine enterprises exporter (non-exporter) status[6]. 
As to the female-owned SMEs performance in developed countries such as in the 
United Kingdom and the USA, another strand of literature is under consideration.  One 
paper that discusses the gender aspect in firm performance is the one by Robb et al 
2012[20]. Although in their paper they focus on the US, many important conclusions 
are revealed regarding the impact of gender on SMEs performance. They come to the 
conclusion that females in the US are not in a disadvantageous status in terms of 
necessary skills and financial resources to open their enterprise. Thus, according to this 
study, there is no empirical evidence that female-owned SMEs underperform male-
owned ones because they are smaller or because females  in the US prefer to take 
fewer risks. Gender has no impact on the performance of the firm, and the differences 
within each gender are much larger than the average differences between the two 
genders.  
Papers that have tackled the ICT impact of female-owned SMEs are scarce. One 
study by Martin et al 2005 [ 16] , investigated how ICT and the Internet influence the 
development of women entrepreneurs in the UK using qualitative techniques. This 
paper's main focus is on female-owned ICT small enterprises. It has found that 
female-owned SMEs gained advantage by experimenting with new ideas at work and 
at home. ICT and the Internet empowered female-owned SMEs, where they became 
more autonomous and organized in their work.  New business opportunities were 
explored with the help of ICT. Outsourcing, for example, were considered an 
important option to the female-owned ICT firms, where emphasis was put on new 
ideas and innovation. In general, ICT enabled these female entrepreneurs to become 
low-cost producers, specializing for differentiation and reaching more markets due to 
the adoption of the Internet in their businesses, making ICT a key factor in their 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
37 
 
improved performance and running the business. Examples of new techniques such as 
tele-working and e-commerce were cited in this research.  
Thus we can conclude that there exists a knowledge gap, and an ambiguous 
analysis, regarding the relationship between female owned SMEs performance, and 
the role that ICT is playing in empowering them. ICA surveys had already been used 
by several studies to investigate the performance of SMEs across various regions. 
However, a new perspective, that addresses gender dimension and how ICT can be a 
tool or a vehicle used to empower female-owned SMEs, has not yet been rigorously 
researched or examined using the ICA surveys.   
4 
Research Methodology 
Data: 
This research uses the World Bank's Enterprise survey or the Investment Climate 
Assessment Survey (ICA) as the source for data,   for the four Arab and emerging 
countries, namely Egypt (ICA 2008), Jordan (ICA 2006), Morocco (ICA 2007), 
Algeria (ICA 2007), and Brazil (ICA 2009). The ICA database provides comparable 
enterprise level data because it uses similar sampling techniques (ES Global sampling 
methodology). The definition of SMEs is uniform across all sectors in the Investment 
Climate Assessment (ICA) Survey in all sectors, in which small firms have 5-19 
employees; medium–size firms are ones with 20-99 and firms with 100 or more 
employees are classified as large. One of the points of strength of the ICA surveys 
includes identifying the gender of the principal owner of the enterprise, the size of the 
firm and its age thus far. Another outstanding fact about these investment surveys 
includes their completion on a regional level. Thus we can compare countries or a 
group of countries of two different regions such as the Arab countries and Brazil. The 
Enterprise Surveys cover small, medium, and large companies. The surveys are 
conducted to a representative sample of firms in the non-agricultural formal private 
economy.   (http://www.enterprisesurveys.org)[29-33].  In this study the data for four 
Arab countries were pooled, because of the small data set available for each 
individual country, so the pooling served the purpose of increasing the sample size.   
Services sector in the ICA survey includes the following industries (commercials, 
information technology, construction and building, tourism services and transportation, 
restaurants and others). The Brazil survey includes both the manufacturing and the 
services sector. This is due to the fact that ICT is used by both manufacturing and services 
sectors in Brazil, which is different from the case in Arab countries. The manufacturing 
sector in Brazil includes food, textiles, garments, shoes and leather, chemicals, machinery 
& equipment, auto parts, furniture and other manufacturing; and the services sector 
comprises construction, wholesale, retail, hotels and restaurants, transportation and others. 
The Enterprise Surveys provide indicators that describe several dimensions of 
technology use and innovation. ICT indicators shed light on the use of information and 
communication technologies (ICT) in business transactions. ICT, such as the Internet, is 
considered an important tool for all firms, especially SMEs. ICT tools should empower 
enterprises, especially SMEs, so that they can arrive at national and international markets 

38 
M.F. Badran 
 
at lower costs [25] The questions that are extracted from the individual level survey will 
be used for this study to construct the ICT index. (see Table 2) 
The performance of the enterprise is measured using two different indicators, 
namely the internal rate of return and the labor productivity. Why is Internet such an 
essential ingredient for a successful SMEs, for example in the Egyptian market? 
SMEs in general report sizable benefits from having online presence. These include 
the following advantages: improved returns from their advertising campaign; 
increased productivity; greater ease in recruiting; enhanced ability to provide  a large 
range of products to customers. The biggest benefit reported by SMEs that are active 
online  is their ability to expand their geographic footprint (especially into other 
regions in Egypt). However , the biggest challenge is lack of awareness [5]. 
5 
Data Analysis 
Preliminary analysis of the data of the four Arab countries: Jordan, Egypt, Morocco 
and Algeria, reveals the dominance of male entrepreneurs in the selected Arab 
countries under study, compared to Brazil. In the latter case, we observe that the 
female-owned SMEs outweigh the male-owned SMEs in number. Analyzing the 
breakdown of the female-owned SMEs on a country level; we become aware that they 
are the highest in Algeria, followed by Morocco, Jordan and finally Egypt. This is an 
unexpected result, since Egypt is the most populous country of the four Arab 
countries investigated. 
Table 1. The distribution of SMEs owners in Selected Arab Countries and Brazil, based on 
Gender  
Country
Male
Female 
Algeria
85%
15%
Jordan
85%
15%
Morocco
88%
12%
Egypt
72%
28%
Brazil
44%
56%
Source: ICA Survey 
On the other hand, in Brazil we find that female-owned SMEs are much more (614 
SMEs) compared to male–owned ones (486 SMEs).  We also notice that the major 
type of enterprises in the selected countries is SMEs. 
Moving to the ICT indicators, Jordan is ranked the first in terms of the usage of 
high speed internet access, usage of Internet for making purchases, usage of Internet 
for doing research on new products, and usage of the web to communicate with 
customers. However, when it comes to using emails to communicate with clients, 
Morocco ranks number one (Table 2). Brazil, on the other hand, shows different 
results. The number of females who are connected to the the internet in Brazil are 
higher compared to the males. However, in the rest of the ICT indicators, the males 
are leading the access and use of the Internet.   
As to Algeria & Morocco: It stands out that “the establishment uses E-mail to 
communicate with clients or suppliers”; this represents approximately 46 % and 57%,  
 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
39 
 
Table 2. The ICT indicators in ICA surveys 
Country 
The 
establish
ment 
uses 
website 
to 
communi
cate with 
clients or 
suppliers 
The 
establish
ment 
uses E-
mail to 
communi
cate with 
clients or 
suppliers 
The 
establish
ment has 
high 
speed 
internet 
connecti
on with 
its 
premises 
The 
establish
ment 
uses 
internet 
to make 
purchase
s 
The 
establish
ment 
uses 
internet 
to deliver 
services 
The 
establish
ment 
uses 
internet to 
do 
research 
and 
develop 
ideas on 
products 
and 
services 
Algeria 
24% 
46% 
12%
5%
5%
8% 
Jordan 
20% 
26% 
20%
15%
9%
9% 
Morocco 
25% 
57% 
6%
4%
4%
4% 
Egypt 
21% 
21% 
13%
15%
15%
16% 
Brazil 
33% 
50% 
5%
4%
4%
4% 
Source: ICA Surveys 
 
respectively, of the overall percentage representing the usage of ICT in SMEs 
measured by the ICA survey. However, in Egypt and Jordan, the share of the various 
ICT services and products in the idea of including ICT in the SMEs is more evenly 
distributed among the various services. In Brazil, we also find out the fact that “the 
establishment uses E-mail to communicate with clients or suppliers” is quite popular 
among female-owned SMEs. In Brazil, data reveal that the number of females who 
are connected to broadband  are higher compared to the males. However, in the rest of 
the ICT indicators, the males are leading the access and use of the Internet.  
In this respect, it is worth noting that these findings are consistent with the general 
performance of the ICT sector in the respective Arab countries. According to the ITU 
data, in 2008 and 2009 Brazil had a surge in Internet penetration rate, as in the one 
depicted by ITU data (Figure 2).   
 
 
Source: www.itu.int 
Fig. 2. Fixed Internet subscriptions per 100 inhabitants in selected Arab countries and Brazil 

40 
M.F. Badran 
 
The Empirical Model  
The present paper is based on the same research methodology applied by Chowdhury 
et al 2003 in “Use of ICTs and the Economic Performance of SMEs in East Africa”.  
The new dimension, added to the previously mentioned study, is conducting a 
comparative study between two different countries, where lessons learned can be 
drawn from Brazil's experience. The second additional dimension in this study 
focuses on women entrepreneurs in both countries, thus paying attention to the gender 
dimension and women empowerment. An ICT index is constructed using the 
questions pertaining to the following ICT and R&D services, given that R&D uses 
ICT quite intensively using the Principle Component Analysis Technique, as 
discussed previously.   We will measure the impact of using and spending on ICT for 
female owned firms on the following two economic performance indicators for the 
countries under study: 
 
A: The internal rate of return for female-owned SMEs in Arab countries and Brazil 
B: The labor intensity and labor productivity or female-owned SMEs in Arab 
countries and Brazil  
The Internal rate of return is our dependent variable and it will be measured using 
the following formula: Revenue minus Variable costs divided by aggregate capital 
stock. Then, to measure the impact of ICT on female-owned enterprises on the IRR, 
the following equation will be estimated using OLS:  
 
IRR =β0+ β1 ln(K /Y)+ β2ln(ICT/K)+β3ln(EQ/K)+ β4Female Owned SMEs+β5ICTindex+ε  (1) 
The first indicator, namely the Internal Rate of Return (IRR), is regressed on 
aggregate capital intensity (K/Y) or capital deepening, the ratio of ICT capital to total 
capital and the ratio of non-ICT capital to total capital (ICT/K), which is the method 
to model capital by breaking down capital into ICT and non ICT assets (EQ / K) [ 5], 
in addition, we include other control variables such as female-owned SMEs and ICT 
index in Arab countries. In Brazil's regression model, we control for using Website to 
communicate with clients and suppliers variables as a proxy for ICT variables 
discussed previously, since there are a huge number of missing values in the rest of 
the ICT variables in Brazil’s ICA report. The method of estimation is OLS and the 
regression is a level–log Regression.   
The second performance indicator for measuring the impact of ICT in female-
owned SMEs is the Labor intensity variable. In order to measure the impact of ICTs 
on labor intensity in female-owned enterprises, a similar relationship can be derived. 
Applying a Cobb-Douglas production function and assuming constant returns to scale, 
the following equation will be estimated:  
 
                ln(L / Y ) =α1 +α2 ln(K / Y ) +α3 ln(ICT / K ) +α4 ln(EQ / K )+  
α5Female Owned SMEs  + α6 ICT Index +ε                               (2) 
 
where the independent variable is  (L/Y ), which measures labor intensity. Method 
of estimation is OLS, where the regression is a log-log Regression.  In the selected 
Arab countries, we control for the ICT index, while in the case of Brazil we control 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
41 
 
for one of the ICT variables, namely the establishment uses Website to communicate 
with clients or suppliers, for the same reason stated previously. 
Prior to running the regression analysis, a correlation matrix of the variables was 
prepared. Table 1 in the appendix shows the means and the standard deviations, and 
Tables 2 and 3 show the correlations of the variables used in subsequent regression 
for SMEs in the selected Arab countries and Brazil. The pair wise correlations were 
not large enough to warrant concern about possible multicollinearity problems.  In 
order to estimate the previous multiple regression models using ordinary least square 
(OLS), we verified the five assumptions of OLS, namely; linearity, constant variance 
(Homoscadasticity), Multicollinearity, weak exogeneity, and independence of errors, 
then we pooled the data and performed the regressions. Pooled  cross sections are 
obtained by collecting random samples from large population independently of each 
other at different points in time, assuming that they have homogenous slopes.    Model 
1 captures the impact of female-owned SMEs and ICT among other control variables 
on the profitability of the SMEs i.e. the internal rate of return in the selected Arab 
countries (Egypt, Jordan, Morocco and Algeria). The model is overall significant with 
probability of F statistics equal to zero. For the Arab countries, all predictors in the 
model 1A have a significant economic and statistical impact on IRR except for the 
Non-ICT capital, which is statistically not significant.  We notice that the female-
owned SMEs have a negative association with the internal rate of return or simply 
their profits are lower compared to male - owned SMEs. 
In model 1B, the ICT index is controlled for in the regression in addition to the 
female–owned SMEs explanatory variable. We notice that the coefficients for the ICT 
index and the female–owned SMEs are statistically insignificant.  
Model 2 captures the impact of female-owned SMEs on labor intensity. There were 
log transformations to most of the variables in addition to the dependent variable as 
per the literature (Berndt et al 1992). This is a log–log regression where the estimated 
parameters are elasticities.  
Results reveal that the female-owned SMEs have a negative association with the 
labor intensity. However, this association is not statistically significant. The ICT 
index is statistically significant, and has a positive impact on the labor intensity in the 
selected Arab countries.  
As for Brazil, we find in Model (2A), where the dependent variable is the Internal 
Rate of Return (IRR), and we controlled for female–owned SMEs and the case of 
having a web site, we find that there is a negative association, not statistically 
significant, between the IRR and the female- owned SMEs, and there is a positive 
association, not statically significant, association between using a website by the 
SMEs and their IRR.  
The labor intensity model reveals that all the controlled variables are statistically 
significant, except for the female–owned SMEs. However, there exists a negative, 
statistically significant, association between the labor intensity and the case of having 
a website to communicate with clients or suppliers.  
6 
Analysis of the Results 
In the selected Arab countries, the increase in female-owned SMEs is associated with a 
decrease in Internal Rate of Return. However, when we control for ICT in terms of 

42 
M.F. Badran 
 
ICT index constructed using the Principal component analysis technique (PCA), the 
female-owned SMEs becomes statistically insignificant; the same is true about the ICT 
index. This implies that IRR is negatively associated with the female owners of the 
SME, and there is a no- association between IRR and the access and use of ICT. In 
Brazil, however, neither gender nor ICT played any role in the profitability of SMEs.  
However, as for the other measure for economic performance, namely the labor 
intensity, the findings reveal that in the selected Arab countries and in Brazil, the ICT 
index has a positive, statically significant,  association with labor-intensity; 
meanwhile in Brazil the usage of Website has a negative, statistically significant,   
association with the labor-intensity. 
The female ownership of SMEs seemed to impact only the internal Rate of Return 
in the selected Arab countries and it has a negative association. On the other hand, we 
can conclude that gender plays no role on the economic performance of the SMEs in 
Brazil.  
In order to understand the impact that ICT has on the labor intensity as a measure 
for economic performance of SMEs, it is worth mentioning that the impact of ICT on 
labor intensity can be positive or negative.  As the productivity of a worker, who 
works in SMEs, increases, fewer workers are needed to produce one unit of output. If 
the firms do not change the amount of goods they produce, productivity leads to 
losses in jobs, which is a negative effect of productivity growth and thus on labor 
intensity. However, if we conclude that there is a positive impact and productivity 
increase, this will be due to the fact that an increase in productivity reduces the cost of 
production per unit. Thus, the price of goods decreases and consumers are able to buy 
more goods, a case which also increases the demand for these goods. In addition, 
firms become more competitive in prices at the international level, a case which could 
result in increased exports and global demands for their goods. As a result, firms can 
sell and produce more, and therefore may end up expanding and hiring more 
workers([13]. However, in the long-term, job growth and productivity are positively 
correlated. Investing in training can help raise firms’ profits and labor market 
outcomes due to positive productivity returns from worker education, especially in the 
long run.  With respect to the control variables, controlling for the enterprise’s age did 
not turn out to be significant in any case, and the results of the analysis were similar 
to those showed in Table 6. Thus, it was decided to not include it in the models of 
regression. 
7 
Conclusion and Policy Recommendations 
This empirical study reveals that female-owned SMEs have a negative and significant 
association on the internal rate of return in Arab countries; meanwhile gender plays 
no role in SMEs performance in Brazil. ICT shows a positive association with IRR in 
the selected Arab countries, while negative association is shown in Brazil. Thus, we 
can conclude that in Brazil ICT replaces, or substitutes, labor and this results in 
reducing labor intensity; comparatively, in the selected Arab countries, ICT leads to 
an increase in labor intensity. In addition,  we can conclude that due to the various 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
43 
 
and numerous constraints that women face in Arab countries, such as limited access 
to commercial credit, lack of required ICT skills, conservative social norms, among 
other things, female-owned SMEs tend to be less profitable and less productive.  
One of the main hurdles facing the female-owned SMEs is the skill mismatch for 
the owner as well the employees in the enterprise. It is a serious problem that 
threatens the potential of SMEs, especially in developing countries. It can be ascribed 
to the deficiency in the education sector and the lagging behind in important advances 
in technology.  
Furthermore Entrepreneurs fall into the trap of the weakness in recognizing the 
benefits from upgrading and updating their skills according to recent technological 
advances, such as new technologies in Internet access and mobile communication and 
usage of smart phones and social media to promote their businesses. Thus, female-
owned SMEs could help themselves if they invest more in human capital, updating 
their skills and using new technologies to improve their business performance. 
It is worth noting that in Brazil, policy makers made concrete milestones in 
empowering women in the Brazilian society, in terms of giving mothers financial 
support conditional on them being responsible for their children’s health and 
education progress (Bolsa Familia program). This resulted in Brazilian women 
contributing more to the economic development of their country and having more 
chances to succeed in their businesses. Only through the existence of the political 
will, women can be empowered to play a major role in their countries' development 
process.   
Policy makers in Arab countries face the critical responsibility of addressing some 
policy relevant issues, such as incorporating the women's entrepreneurial dimension 
in the formation of all SMEs-related policies. This can be done by ensuring that the 
impact on women's entrepreneurship is taken into account in the design stage of 
SMEs-related policies.  It is thus recommended that ICT policies drafted by the 
designated governmental entities should support the women entrepreneurship in the 
Arab countries.  The awareness of gender issues is important when considering 
strategies to improve the business environment and promote private-sector 
development.  Mainstreaming gender and creating greater economic opportunities for 
women have compelling economic reasons, to the extent that inequalities impose 
development costs on the society. Thus we can conclude that socio- cultural context 
as well as institutional context play a major role in the success of female 
entrepreneurs. 
Thus, suggested steps to enhance women's participation in economic activities in 
the Arab countries include the following: 
 
- 
continuing to improve the business environment and giving females in 
Arab countries more responsibilities in the society as well as financial  
support (Drawing from the Brazilian experience); 
- 
addressing norms, traditions and legal discrimination; For example legal 
and political empowerment of female in terms of giving them more 
authority to make decisions regarding their children's education and 
health aspects.  
- 
encouraging women to join the labor force;  

44 
M.F. Badran 
 
- 
improving employment conditions for female workers; 
- 
increasing women's access to finance, including access to Microcredit; 
which entails an institutional reform in banking system to encourage 
female-owned SMEs to obtain lines of credit. 
- 
enhancing vocational training for girls and training for female workers; 
especially given the fact of low female unemployment rates among 
vocational school graduates. 
- 
eliminating digital illiteracy among women, and raising awareness of the 
merits of incorporating ICTs in the management of SMEs;  
- 
giving incentives to women entrepreneurs who already adopt new 
technologies in their businesses, such as tax reductions or cash loans to 
upgrade their businesses; 
- 
providing role models 
 
Limitations of this study include the treatment of all Arab countries as 
homogeneous group of countries as well as not controlling for regional or inter-state 
differences across Brazil i.e. of how female empowerment varies according to the 
region in Brazil. In addition, data limitations related to absence of answers to some of 
the ICT questions in ICA survey of Brazil of 2009.  
References 
1. Badran, M.F., Hosein, H.F.: Promoting Economic Growth by Broadband Development in 
Emerging countries: An Empirical Study, Telecom World (TW), ITU (2011),  
http://www.ieeexplore.ieee.org (retrieved) 
2. Badran, M.F.: Is ICT Empowering Women in Egypt? An Empirical Study. In: Proceedings 
of the Research Voices from Africa Workshop, IFIP WG 9.4, Markerere University, 
Uganda (2010) 
3. Badran, M.F.: What Determines Broadband Uptake in Emerging Countries? An empirical 
study. In: IFIP 9.4. Conference, Assessing the Contribution of Computers in Achieving 
Development Goals, Dubai, UAE (2009) 
4. Bardasi, E., Sabarwal, S., Terrell, K.: How do female entrepreneurs perform? Evidence 
from three developing regions. Small Business Economics, Springer Science and Business 
Media 37, 417–441 (2011) 
5. Berndt, E.R., Morrison, C.J.: High-tech Capital Formation and Economic performance in 
US Manufacturing Industries: An Exploratory Analysis. Journal of Econometrics 65, 9–43 
(1995) 
6. Boston Consulting Group, Egypt at a Crossroads How the Internet Is Transforming 
Egypt’s Economy Report (November 2012) 
7. Chowdhury, S.K., Wolf, S.: Use of ICT and the Economic Performance of SMEs in East 
Africa United Nations University, World Institute for Development Economics Research 
(WIDER), Discussion Paper No. 2003/06 (2003) 
8. Global Entrepreneurship Monitor Report, Global Report (2012) 
9. Gender Gap Report, World Economic Forum (2013) 
10. El-Hamidi, F.: How Do Women Entrepreneurs Perform? Empirical Evidence from Egypt. 
Alma Laurea Working Papers 23: Bologna (2011) 
11. Heckman, J.: Sample selection bias as a specification error. Econometrica 47(1), 153–161 
(1979) 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
45 
 
12. Hilbert, M.: Digital gender divide or technologically-empowered women in developing 
countries? A typical case of lies, damned lies, and statistics. Women’s Studies 
International Forum 34(6), 479–489 (2011) 
13. I.F.C. Issue Brief / Women and Business, http://www1.ifc.org/wps/wcm/connect/ 
bb0b20004d0481febbebfff81ee631cc/IFC-issue-Brief_AM12_Women-and-
Business.pdf?MOD=AJPERES 
14. IFC Jobs Study, ASSESSING PRIVATE SECTOR CONTRIBUTIONS TO JOB 
CREATION AND POVERTY REDUCTION. IFC Report: Washington DC, USA (2013), 
http://www.internationalentrepreneurship.com 
15. Klapper, L., Parker, S.: Gender and Business Environment for New Firm Creation The 
World Research Observer. Oxford University Press, USA (2010) 
16. Maier, S., Naier-Reichert, U.: Empowering Women Through ICT-Based Business 
Initiatives: An Overview of Best Practices. E-Commerce/E-Retailing Projects 4(2), 43–60 
(2007) 
17. Martin, L.M., Wright, L.T.: No gender in cyberspace? Empowering entrepreneurship and 
innovation in female–run ICT small firms. International Journal of Entrepreneurial 
Behavior & Research 11(2), 162–178 (2005) 
18. Nasr, S. (ed.): Egyptian Women Workers and Entrepreneurs. Maximising Opportunities in 
the Economic Sphere. World Bank, Washington DC (2010) 
19. Niethammer, C.: Women Entrepreneurship and the opportunity to promote development 
and Business. Brookings Blum Roundtable (2013) 
20. Qiang, C.: Broadband Infrastructure Investment in Stimulus Packages: Relevance for 
Developing Countries. World Bank, Washington D.C (2009) 
21. Robb, A.M., Watson, J.: “Gender differences in firm performance: Evidence from new 
ventures in the United States. Journal of Business Venturing 27, 544–558 (2012) 
22. Teltscher, S.G., ICT and Development: Electronic Commerce and Development Report, 
UNCTAD: Geneva, Switzerland. 2002  
23. Verheul, I., Van Stel, A., Thurik, R.: Explaining female and male entrepreneurship at the 
country level. Entrepreneurship & Regional Development 18, 151–183 (2006) 
24. World Bank. Engendering development through gender equality in rights, resources, and 
voice. World Bank Publication (2001)  
25. Lora, E., Castellani, F.: World Bank & Inter-American Development Bank: Entrepreneurship 
in Latin America, A Step Up the Social Ladder (2013) 
26. World Bank, Mary Hallward-Driemeier. Enterprising Women, Expanding Economic 
Opportunities in Africa. African Development Forum (2013)  
27. World Bank Report. Capabilities, opportunities and participation: gender equality and 
development in the Middle East and North Africa region. World Bank Publication (2011)  
28. World Development Report: Gender Equality and Development (2012)  
29. World Bank : Investment Climate Assessment Survey (ICA) for Egypt, Washington DC 
(2008)  
30. World Bank : Investment Climate Assessment Survey (ICA) for Algeria, Washington  
DC (2007)  
31. World Bank : Investment Climate Assessment Survey (ICA) for Jordan, Washington DC 
(2006)  
32. World Bank : Investment Climate Assessment Survey (ICA) for Morocco, Washington  
DC (2007)  
33. World Bank : Investment Climate Assessment Survey (ICA) for Brazil, Washington DC 
(2009)  
 
 

46 
M.F. Badran 
 
Annex 1  
Table 3. Correlation Matrix 
 
IRR 
Ln L/ Y 
Ln  K/Y 
Ln 
ICT 
/K 
Ln 
Non 
ICT/K 
FSMES 
ICT Index 
IRR 
1.0000 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Ln L/Y 
0.1180 
1.0000 
 
 
 
 
 
Ln K/Y 
0.4012 
0.5473 
1.0000 
 
 
 
 
Ln ICT/K 
-0.1935 
0.1630 
-0.5031 
1.0000 
 
 
 
LN Non 
ICT /K 
0.1698 
-0.3329 
0.0761 
-0.6646 
1.0000 
 
 
FSMEs 
0.0653 
-0.0133 
0.0479 
0.0133 
0.0647 
1.0000 
 
ICT 
Index 
0.0688 
0.1892 
0.1077 
0.0643 
-0.1084 
0.2351 
1 
Table 4. Descriptive Statistics 
Variable 
Obs 
Mean 
Std.Dev. 
Min 
Max 
IRR 
929 
-40.87816 
1251.523 
-101540.99 
32847.36 
Ln K/Y 
1085 
-3.027191 
2.309253 
-9.400566 
6.327937 
Ln ICT/K 
976 
-2.008448 
2.123184 
-9.723474 
0 
Ln 
Non 
ICT/K 
841 
-0.2260372 
0.474148 
-5.433059 
0 
Ln L/Y 
1757 
-12.12837 
0.474148 
-25.04858 
2.690088 
FSMES 
1754 
0.1510832 
0.3582321 
0 
1 
 
Table 5. Dependent variable Internal Rate of Return: (IRR) in female-owned SMEs in Selected 
Arab Countries  
Model (1A) 
Level –Log Regression  
 
Explanatory  
Variables 
Parameter  
t-statistics  
P- value  
Constant  
152.2638*** 
4.29 
0.000 
Ln K/y 
34.66043*** 
5.69 
0.000 
lnICT/K 
20.6042*** 
2.90 
0.004 
Ln Non ICT /K 
25.00185 
1.35 
0.179 
FSMES 
-69.28906*** 
-3.08 
0.002 
 
 Number of observations: 472 
 Adj-Rsquared= 10% 
 Prob>F=0.000 
 *p < 0.1. 
 **p < 0.05. 
 ***p < 0.01 

 
Empowering Female-Owned SMEs with ICT 
47 
 
Table 6.  
Model (1B): Dependent Variable: Internal Rate of Return (IRR) in female–owned 
SMEs in Selected Arab Countries controlling for ICT Index 
Level-Log Regression 
 
Explanatory  
Variables 
Parameter  
t-statistics  
P- value  
Constant  
113.8147*** 
2.77 
0.007 
Ln K/y 
27.57132*** 
4.47 
0.000 
Ln ICT/K 
14.8127 
1.53 
0.129 
Ln Non ICT /K 
0.1142882*** 
2.32 
0.022 
FSMES 
2.356242 
0.10 
0.922 
ICT Index 
1.73022 
0.19 
0.849 
Number of observations: 111 
Adj-R squared: 17% 
P>F-stat: 0.000 
*p < 0.1. 
**p < 0.05. 
***p < 0.01 
Table 7.  
Model 2: Dependent in (Labor intensity) 
Log-Log Regression   
 
 
Explanatory  
Variables 
Parameter  
t-statistics  
P- value  
Constant  
-2.887595*** 
-3.24 
0.000 
Ln K/y 
1.165607*** 
9.54 
0.000 
lnICT/K 
0.2102365*** 
5.05 
0.000 
Ln Non ICT /K 
0.2102365 
0.29 
0.769 
FSMES 
-0.6092088 
-1.50 
0.137 
ICT Index 
0.2741077* 
1.70 
0.093 
 
Number of observations: 107 
Adj-Rsquared= 52% 
Prob>F=0.0000 
*p < 0.1. 
**p < 0.05. 
***p < 0.01. 
 
 
 
 
 

48 
M.F. Badran 
 
Brazil: 
Table 8. Model ( 2A): Dependent Variable: Internal Rate of Return (IRR) in female–owned 
SMEs in Selected Brazil controlling for Web  
Explanatory  
Variables 
Parameter  
t-statistics  
P- value  
Constant  
3224.431 
3.52 
0.000 
Ln K/y 
1163.33*** 
7.27 
0.000 
lnICT/K 
-45.92594 
-0.16 
0.874 
Ln Non ICT /K 
847.5376*** 
3.55 
0.000 
FSMES 
-730.9831 
-1.37 
0.172 
Web  
35.07294 
0.06 
0.950 
 
Number of observations: 467 
Adjusted R-squared: 10% 
P>F-stat.=0.0000 
*p < 0.1. 
**p < 0.05. 
***p < 0.01Table 9: 
Model (2B): Dependent Variable: Labor Intensity (ln L/Y) and controlling for 
female–owned SMEs  and having a website 
 
Explanatory  
Variables  
Parameter  
t-statistics  
P- value  
Constant  
-9.627593*** 
-41.42 
0.0000 
Ln K/Y 
0.5930852*** 
14.43 
0.0000 
lnICT/K 
0.1551133** 
2.06 
0.0400 
Ln Non ICT /K 
0.2281846*** 
3.80 
0.0000 
FSMES 
0.2039671 
1.50 
0.135 
Web  
-0.6261691*** 
-4.32 
0.0000 
 
Number of observations: 541 
Adjusted R-squared: 35% 
P>F-stat.=0.0000 
*p < 0.1. 
**p < 0.05. 
***p < 0.01 

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 49–60, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_4 
Celebgate: Two Methodological Approaches  
to the 2014 Celebrity Photo Hacks 
Rebecca Fallon() 
Oxford Internet Institute, Oxford, UK 
rebecca.fallon@oii.ox.ac.uk 
Abstract. On August 31st, 2014, nearly 500 sensitive images captured from the 
mobile phones of various celebrities were released onto 4chan.com. With 
alarming alacrity, these stolen personal photographs made their way to slightly 
more mainstream content sites, including Reddit, Tumblr and Twitter. Internet 
users and media respondents have termed the phenomenon “Celebgate” or, 
more popularly and vulgarly, “The Fappening” (a portmanteau between 
‘happening’ and ‘fap’—slang for masturbation). The leak raised numerous 
questions about privacy rights online, iCloud security, and the responsibilities 
of host sites. This paper will examine two research designs for the study of this 
viral content; the first considers the leak structurally and examines the 
relationship between search terms and centralization of information, the second 
considers the leak morally and questions variation in the relationship between 
the purported morality of a website and those of its users. This is primarily an 
exploratory methodological paper; and the sensitivity of the topic brings its own 
limitations to the types of data a researcher can ethically and practically 
capture. 
Keywords: Search · Privacy · Viral 
1 
A Quantitative Approach 
Viral content generally lends itself well to big data studies because it leaves a long 
trail. Viral video phenomena like PSY’s “Gangnam Style” or the meme “Harlem 
Shake” that spread across Twitter can be mapped across the platform and analyzed in 
terms of geographic, temporal, and nodal diffusion.1 Because this content is all 
unquestionably public, the persistent metadata it generates (i.e. time, location, 
originator of post) can be easily scraped from social platforms. However, in the case 
of our viral celebrity photo outbreak, the sensitivity of the content demanded its 
censorship on some of the most prominent sites to host it. While this censorship of 
stolen private property may be morally commendable, it does present some challenges 
to what information can be accessed about the spread of the phenomenon. 
                                                           
1 D’Orazio, Francesco. (2013, May 8). “How Stuff Spreads #1: Gangnam Style Vs. Harlem 
Shake—Full Study and Data Visualization.” FACE blog. Online:  
 http://www.facegroup.com/blog/how-stuffspreads-1-gangnam-style-vs-harlem-shake.html 

50 
R. Fallon 
Different platforms responded with different stances towards removing the leaked 
content. Most of the requests for removal cited the Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
rather than privacy rights, as it is some of the toughest legislature available for forced 
content removal. Following suit, sites had to adopt the language of property rather 
than privacy in justifying their policies. Reddit, which quickly became a principle hub 
for hosting the stolen images, shut down the dominant forum (or subreddit) 
centralizing them about a week after their initial upload. They stated publically on 
their blog that, “In accordance with our legal obligations, we expeditiously removed 
content hosted on our servers as soon as we received DMCA requests from the lawful 
owners of that content, and in cases where the images were not hosted on our servers, 
we promptly directed them to the hosts of those services.”2 In removing the pivotal 
nucleus for these images, Reddit decentralized ways in which Internet users could 
find them. Similarly, for the first time in its eleven-year history, 4chan also 
acknowledged compliance with the DMCA, though the effectiveness of their new 
self-policing system remains to be seen.    
Google was faced with similar legal pressure to remove links to the stolen content. 
Yet while they publically stated that “We’re removing these photos for community 
guidelines and policy violations (e.g. nudity and privacy violation) on YouTube, 
Blogger and Google+. For search we have historically taken a different approach as 
we reflect what’s online—but we remove these images when we receive valid 
copyright (DMCA) notices.”3 However, in practice, Google has allowed many links 
to stolen content to remain findable in their results. For instance, Justin Verlander, the 
boyfriend of hacking victim Kate Upton, filed a copyright claim with the request to 
remove 444 URLs hosting Upton’s stolen photos. In a transparency report, Google 
states that no action was taken in 41% of these cases; 41% of the images requested for 
removal still appear in Google search results.4 While they did remove the majority of 
links to the most central sites, they allowed many of the more peripheral domains to 
remain. For instance, though Reddit removed The Fappening, Google could still 
reveal links to Upton’s photos on subreddits like /r/Celebs or /r/ledzepplin. 
Bearing in mind this discrepancy in censorship as well as the knowledge that 
Google is typically the first port of call for enquiries online, both for specific host 
websites and detached content, we arrive at an interesting research question. How 
does centralization and decentralization of content create a shift in search terms? 
Specifically, when Reddit shut down /r/TheFappening, how did individuals adapt 
their Google search terms to locate the decentralized content? This research question 
would require a trend analysis of different search terms given a timeline of major host 
censorship. 
                                                           
2 “Every Man Is Responsible For His Own Soul” (2014, 6 September). Blog.Reddit. Online: 
http://www.redditblog.com/2014/09/every-man-is-responsible-for-his-own.html 
3 Stern, Marlow. (2014, October 5). “ ‘The Fappening 4’: More Celeb Nudes Leak Online 
Including the First Man, Seems to Be Dying Down.” The Daily Beast. Online: 
http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/10/05/the-fappening-4-more-celeb-nudes-leak-
onlineincluding-the-first-man-seem-to-be-dying-down.html 
4 Google. (2014, December 1). “Transparency Report; Request ID: 1445734” Google. Online: 
http://www.google.com/transparencyreport/removals/copyright/requests/1445734/ 

 
Celebgate: Two Methodological Approaches to the 2014 Celebrity Photo Hacks 
51 
An analysis of the search terms is interesting, because it provides insight into not 
only how a viral phenomenon diversifies or concentrates, but also how individuals 
must conceptualize the phenomenon in order to access it. Previous studies on search 
patterns surrounding events are numerous, from work on seasonal queries5 to tracking 
the spread of diseases.6 It would be quite another thing to track the actual content as it 
spread through different domains. This sort of mapping might be easier to accomplish 
with texts, which tend to be far more searchable than images. Additionally, mapping 
the spread of content within a specific platform (like Twitter) is far easier than 
mapping content spread across the web at large—it is nearly impossible to determine 
exactly where someone picked up a viral image. Images are not only picked up from 
host sites, but can be sent through email, USB drives, mobile devices or messaging 
clients. Also, as many host sites rigorously remove this sensitive content, and many of 
those sites are themselves removed for one reason or another, the trail these photos 
leave are likely full of (literal) missing links. For this reason, choosing to look not at 
where people ultimately locate content but how they try to get there may be a stronger 
and more productive option for quantitative research on this topic. 
Google itself provides tools for examining trends on the site, and allows for an 
indepth comparison of interest in topics over time and across geographical regions. 
Using these, paired with tools like the Internet Archive which map popularity of 
certain webpages over time, could provide interesting visualization and statistics for 
changes in searches after centralized censorship. They would also offer a nice 
mechanism for comparison between different kinds of search terms, ie. host platforms 
vs. decentralized content. Hypothetically, if someone knew he could no longer access 
certain content on Reddit, he might instead look for the content itself in a more 
detached form, like ‘Jennifer Lawrence Photos.’ This methodology could also reveal 
the extent to which interested Internet users are committed to finding content at all if 
it is not made easily available on a centralized platform. Would people still continue 
to search for the photos if they were not aggregated on an established, centralized 
source? What is the threshold of effort that people are willing to put in to search for 
content that isn’t made as easily findable? This type of trend analysis could give some 
interesting results towards answering these questions. 
One problem with analysis of search terms about such a taboo viral phenomenon is 
the inability to distinguish between those looking for the content itself and those 
looking to learn about the leaks without actually consuming the photos. If a person 
searches “Celebgate” in Google, he could equally be trying to find the Daily Mail 
article on the matter as the actual pictures themselves. Perhaps one could infer based 
on connotations of the terms used, but those assumptions are risky ones. Thus, a 
weakness of this approach is the inability to separate the phenomenon itself from the 
meta-phenomenon of its public interest and media response. 
 
                                                           
5 Shokouhi, Milad. (2011) “Seasonal Queries by Time-Series Analysis” SIGIR. Available 
Online: http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/150746/sigir0196-shokouhi.pdf 
6 Valdivia and Monge-Corella (2010) “Diseases Tracked by Using Google Trends, Spain” 
Emerg Infect Dis. Jan 2010; 16(1). Pg 168. 

52 
R. Fallon 
Moreover, it is difficult to gauge the actual effectiveness of a given search term for 
finding the viral content, though one may be able to guess given the longevity of its 
popularity. While more people may search “Jennifer Lawrence Photos,” it could be 
that “Jennifer Lawrence pics” yields a greater number of relevant and direct results. 
This is particularly salient given the intensity with which these search terms spiked 
and peaked. “The Fappening” (for example) may not have yielded the best results 
immediately, but quickly became a term around which results could aggregate. In this 
sense, our method is also limited in its ability to reveal findability of content under a 
given search term, and one must be cautious in specifying that its results reflect what 
is searched for, not necessarily what is found. 
An additional weakness could be the assumption that Google is the first port of call 
for the particular demographic of Internet users interested in these photos. Yes, 
Vaidhyanathan hardly exaggerates when he writes, “Google has permeated our 
culture…[it] is on the verge of becoming indistinguishable from the Web itself.”7 
However, it is entirely possible that this particular subset of Internet users—many of 
whom may be more or less peripherally connected to hacking communities already—
could use alternate means of finding their content, using browsers like Tor and its 
accompanying TorSearch. Especially in light of recent public awareness of search 
engine surveillance and collective suspicion about data collection, Internet users (and 
especially ones looking for illicit content) might be more wary than ever about what 
they type into Google. Therefore, Google could provide a very skewed sample of 
those interested in search terms. 
Despite certain limitations on the forms of trend analysis proposed here, such 
methods can still elucidate important findings about what people search for in 
response to decentralization of viral content. It may also shed light on the function of 
naming a phenomenon (i.e. Celebgate or The Fappening) and the relationship between 
appellation and online findability. More philosophically, we can speculate at how 
naming something reframes the way that we think about it. 
1.1 
Possible Findings 
Preliminary investigation reveals interesting findings related to I) queries for 
platforms vs. queries for content and II) queries about aggregated content vs. queries 
about more specific photographs. The first chart looks at two ‘content’ terms, 
“fappening” and “Jennifer Lawrence photos” and searches two of the most prominent 
platforms hosting the stolen content, 4chan and Reddit. 
While Reddit, 4chan, and “Jennifer Lawrence photos” spiked immediately during 
the first outbreak of photos, it took a bit of a lag for “fappening” to peak. This could 
have something to do with the newness of the term as it related to the phenomenon. 
However, during the second outbreak of photos on September 21st, the established 
term “fappening” rose at the same rate as 4chan and Reddit. This could be an 
indicator that once the leak was classified with a name, the images began to be 
                                                           
7 Vaidhyanathan, Siva. (2011). The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should Worry). 
University of California Press: Berkeley: 2-3. 

 
Celebgate: Two Method
searched collectively rather
for Jennifer Lawrence’s ph
Moreover, while 4chan was
highly searched during the 
which could be the more 
itself on its obscurity, Redd
Fig. 1. Searches for “fappenin
August 1 and September 31, 2
The next cursory graph 
four different celebrities aff
Searches for both “Jenn
than searches for “fappenin
the release of their own pr
while certain individuals 
phenomenon gained notabl
implications for how victim
class. Additionally, the pe
especially given the censor
images are less findable o
heavily searched. Rather, it
longer reliably provide it, 
recognized sources. Howev
the viral content itself, but
brief attention span of the 
private photos. 
 
dological Approaches to the 2014 Celebrity Photo Hacks 
r than by specific victims of the theft—we can see searc
hotos drop below searches for the movement as a wh
s the first port of call during the first leak, Reddit was m
second wave. There could be many reasons for this, one
‘mainstreaming’ of the phenomenon; while 4chan pri
dit proclaims itself “The Front Page of the Internet.”  
ng”, “Jennifer Lawrence photos,” “4chan” and “reddit” betw
014. 
looks at “fappening” as a term, and then search terms 
fected by the photo leak.  
nifer Lawrence” and “Kim Kardashian” are notably hig
ng,” and specific peaks for each celebrity correspond w
rivate photos. Looking at this graph, it would appear t
generated interest on their own, “The Fappening” a
le interest as well. These findings could have interest
ms of the cyber-thefts are viewed; as individuals or part o
eaks for queries on each celebrity are surprisingly sha
ship of photos on host sites. One might hypothesize tha
on a given site, the decentralized content might be m
t appears that when established sources for the content
those looking for it lose interest rather than dig into l
ver, it is also possible that these search queries are not 
t for the news media generated around it, and reflect 
media rather than disinterestedness among those seek
53 
ches 
ole. 
more 
e of 
ides 
 
ween 
for 
gher 
with 
that 
as a 
ting 
of a 
arp, 
at as 
more 
t no 
less 
for 
the 
king 

54 
R. Fallon 
Fig. 2. Searches for “fappeni
Kardashian” and “Rihanna” be
1.2 
Communicating Re
In communicating the resu
limitations discussed above
about public interest, we 
individuals who actively av
the very ones most intere
Particularly given the kno
(though not all search resul
more likely to turn to other
off in searches could indic
Google. While the signifi
phenomenon could be nota
speculate on a causal relatio
In order to draw more sp
for what, the study would 
these could be based on a 
threads, or even a survey a
what would you search?” 
would need to be very awar
“Jennifer Lawrence” may 
Games trilogy. A report 
phenomenon at large more 
the illicit content. It would
searches yielded the desired
that could be desired. I
ing”, “Jennifer Lawrence photos,” “Kate Upton photos,” “K
etween August 1 and October 31, 2014. 
esults 
ults of this study, it would be wise to keep in mind 
e. While Google is a powerful tool for culling informat
must be aware of what groups could be excluded. T
void using the world’s most popular search engine may
ested in the illegal content released in this photo le
owledge that Google itself was removing search res
lts), people looking for the content would have been e
r search engines or corners of the Internet. The steep dr
cate either a drop-off in interest or a drop-off in use
icance of platform censorship on longevity of the v
able, using this methodology, we would only be able
onship. 
pecific conclusions about who was using Google to sea
need to employ very specific search terms. Selection
semantic analysis of key words in Anonymous or Red
asking “If you were to find leaked celebrity photos onl
If terms were not made adequately specific, the rep
re of the breadth of its terms’ implications; those search
simply be interested in her upcoming role in the Hun
on broader terms could discuss “The Fappening” a
safely than it could purport to focus only on those seek
d also need to be cautious about assuming that trend
d results, as there are at least two distinct forms of cont
In essence, a trends analysis could yield interest
 
Kim 
the 
tion 
The 
y be 
eak. 
ults 
even 
rop-
e of 
viral 
e to 
arch 
n of 
ddit 
ine, 
port 
hing 
nger 
as a 
king 
ding 
tent 
ting 

 
Celebgate: Two Methodological Approaches to the 2014 Celebrity Photo Hacks 
55 
visualizations of macro-level interest in terms over time, but may not target the 
specific population or content of greatest interest. 
Communicating these results to academics would require a rigorous explanation of 
how search terms were selected and assurance of comprehensive comparison between 
them. It may also require situating the results in theoretical discourse about how our 
search inputs do and do not relate to our conceptualizations of the content we seek, as 
well as a thorough discussion of the shortcomings of our methodology. The general 
public may respond more strongly to visualizations of findings and a language that 
recognizes popular jargon for the phenomenon. 
2 
A Qualitative Approach 
As well as generating interesting questions about the structural spread censored viral 
content, Celebgate ignited interesting moral issues surrounding voyeurism, 
responsibility, and compliance online. Is hacking a celebrity different than hacking a 
noncelebrity? To what extent do individuals feel accountable for viewing content that 
others have shared? If a hack never enters public knowledge, is it equally 
reprehensible? The research question that this paper will choose to pursue is: To what 
extent do users of Reddit respect the morality that the site espouses as a platform, and 
to what extent do they disrespect it? I have chosen to focus on Reddit as it became a 
predominant hosting platform for “The Fappening,” and its users are fairly explicit in 
their discussions of the site’s principles. 
There are a number of effective qualitative methodologies one could employ in 
pursuit of this research question. This paper examines the possibility of a discourse 
analysis methodology, which would analyze text that users have already contributed 
on the site in response to policy decisions made by the site’s administrators. The 
analysis could explore ways in which different forums on Reddit contextualize and 
shape debate: how is the morality of those who post on /r/beatingwomen different 
than those who post on /r/feminism? Which of these dialogues aligns more closely to 
the moral policies encouraged by the site’s creators? What tone does the conversation 
take on in broader reaching forums, like the comments on official policy statements? 
Other studies have used discourse analysis to elucidate ideological leanings of 
newsgroups8 and commentary on news articles.9 Yet in order to unearth the heart of 
this discourse on Reddit, one would need to examine carefully selected subreddits, 
rather than the random sample one might propose for a survey. It is likely that 
/r/freespeech would have more to say on the subject of Reddit’s censorship particular 
subreddits than, say, /r/saxophonics. Looking at forums selected primarily for their 
                                                           
8 Herring et al. (2004) “Women and Children Last: The Discursive Construction of Weblogs” 
Into the Blogosphere. University of Minnesota. Available Online:  
 
http://blog.lib.umn.edu/blogosphere/women_and_children.html 
9 Diakopoulos and Naaman. (2011) “Towards quality discourse in online news comments.” 
CSCW. Available Online:  
 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1958844&dl=ACM&coll=DL&CFID=648040872&CFTO
KEN=10450748 

56 
R. Fallon 
ideological charge, the aim of the study would be to assess diverging or converging 
ideologies between platform hosts and platform users. Size of subreddit should be 
taken into account, as those with greater followings may have claim to broader 
community representation. 
Specifically, this study would need to assess particular conceptions across the 
different forums. Firstly, we could look at the idea of responsibility: who is 
responsible for protecting private content from being viewed? Is it those who view it, 
those who share it, those who host it, those who hack it, or those who create it—the 
victims themselves? Secondly, we could look at the related notion of property: to 
whom do these photos belong and in what kind of economy should they be 
exchanged? 
2.1 
Responsibility 
In the public statement that Reddit released after closing down /r/TheFappening, the 
site’s administrators explicated their ideological stance towards hosting morally 
questionable materials. They wrote:  
We uphold the ideal of free speech on reddit as much as possible not because 
we are legally bound to, but because we believe that you—the user—has the 
right to choose between right and wrong, good and evil, and that it is your 
responsibility to do so. When you know something is right, you should 
choose to do it. But as much as possible, we will not force you to do it… 
Virtuous behavior is only virtuous if it is not arrived at by compulsion. This 
is a central idea of the community we are trying to create.10 
This philosophy raises critical questions about the politics of voyeurism on Reddit 
and the location of responsibility for the diffusion of illicit content. It shoulders the 
position that it is not the responsibility of the platform to prevent such content from 
being viewed, but rather that of the site’s users. However, more extreme opinions 
place the responsibility much farther back in the chain of dissemination. One video 
claiming to be an interview with the hacker responsible for the leaks states his 
position as such:  
I have two pieces of advice. Whenever you send a photo to someone else… 
Your boyfriend, friend or… Anytime, if you hit ‘Send’, then you should 
imagine that it gets sent to the whole world. Do you understand what I’m 
saying? Once you press ‘Send’ it’s not yours anymore. It’s not your image. It 
belongs to everyone.11 
While the video is of questionable authenticity, it espouses an extreme ideology in 
which private communication online no longer exists and property online is 
collectively owned. Thus, while Reddit’s official stance diffuses responsibility for 
                                                           
10 “Every Man Is Responsible For His Own Soul” (2014, 6 September). Blog.Reddit. Online: 
http://www.redditblog.com/2014/09/every-man-is-responsible-for-his-own.html 
11 CAPSLOCK. (2014, September 3) “THE FAPPENING 2014 iCloud hacker Interview (Full 
Version)” YouTube. Online: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zZ_OeL2GTw8 

 
Celebgate: Two Methodological Approaches to the 2014 Celebrity Photo Hacks 
57 
viewing content among online voyeurs, this position places the responsibility on the 
victims. The discourse analysis proposed would look at conceptions of responsibility 
across several different forums, and draw conclusions not only about distinctions in 
ideology, but the relationships between those ideological discourses, the extents to 
which they are impacted by platform ideology, and the extents to which they actively 
subvert that ideology.  
2.2 
Property 
The video mentioned above also exposes interesting arguments related to property on 
the Internet. Not only does it claim that the leaked photos are property of all Internet 
users who choose to consume them, but that they should be treated as free goods in a 
sharing economy. This notion dissolves typical treatment of celebrity nudes, which 
are traded regularly on the darknet between trusted peers in exchange for other 
images. This sort of direct exchange sounds like one of Lessig’s hybrid economies,12 
in which nonfinancial trading supplants traditional commercial relationships. Security 
researcher Nik Cubrilovic states, “Most members of these rings are not financially 
motivated,” and explains that the in order to enter a ring, you need to bring your own 
novel stolen material.13 The 2014 leaks breached not only the traditional rules of how 
celebrity nudes are shared online, but (in allowing these images to attract media 
attention) the knowledge of those from whom they were stolen. Both of these 
breaches have notable consequences for how these images are conceptualized as 
property. 
Numerous commenters on Reddit pointed to the forum /r/photoplunder, which self-
describes as “A place to share interesting pictures of women that we find in public 
view.”14 The subreddits generally features non-celebrities who are almost certainly 
unaware that their sensitive photos are being shared at large on this forum. If victims 
are unaware that their images are being shared, is the leak still equally damaging? A 
discourse analysis might reveal differing sentiments expressed by Reddit 
administrators and Reddit users on the matter. 
Cubrilovic finds, “It appears the intention was never to make these images 
public,”15 and that some opportunist decided to take advantage of their availability. 
Yet to what extent are celebrities already viewed as public property? We share music 
and paparazzi photographs about celebrities openly, and claim a familiarity with them 
that is certainly nonmutual. As cultural icons, celebrities are arguably of enough 
                                                           
12 Lessig, Lawrence. (2008) Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy. 
New York: Penguin. Print. 
13 Popper, Ben. (2014, September 4) “Inside the strange and seedy world where hackers trade 
celebrity nudes.” The Verge. Online:  
 
http://www.theverge.com/2014/9/4/6106363/celebgatefappening-naked-nude-celebrities-
hack-hackers-trade 
14 mechesh, (2012) “Reddit: photoplunder” Reddit. Online:  
 
http://www.reddit.com/r/photoplunder/ 
15 Cubrilovic, Nik. (2014, September 2). “Notes on the Celebrity Data Theft” New Web Order. 
Online: https://www.nikcub.com/posts/notes-on-the-celebrity-data-theft/ 

58 
R. Fallon 
public interest to consider their lives collectively owned. However, fame does not 
negate personhood and rights to personal property and privacy. To what extent do 
Reddit users and administrators treat celebrity property as collectively owned, and to 
what extent do they acknowledge it as private? 
2.3 
Possible Findings 
One might expect to find varying results on all three of these questions as discourses 
develop in disjoint forums on the site. Cursory analysis of two different subreddits 
reveals highly divergent conclusions about the first question: whose responsibility is it 
for protecting the privacy of Fappening victim? On /r/news, one of the more 
mainstream forums attracting diverse respondents, discussion takes on a freedom of 
speech debate. In response to a post criticizing new California laws against revenge 
pornography, one user writes,  
You may not feel as though law enforcement has the authority to tell you 
what to do with nude photos of your ex-girlfriend, but surely you have a 
moral obligation to avoid publicly exposing and shaming another person. If 
that exposure makes a person feel that their right to privacy has been 
violated, involving law enforcement is the logical next step.16 
This user concludes that the responsibility for preventing privacy breaches is on 
those who share the photo beyond their intended reach—in the case of the Celebgate 
leaks, that would leave the blame on the hackers who dispersed them. This view is 
debated heavily on /r/news, with many others arguing that the responsibility for 
protecting privacy should be the burden of the individual featured in the photo who 
shared it in the first place. 
Most of the users posting on the forum /r/MensRights take a different stance on 
responsibility. One user argues, 
I’m not saying what should or should not be illegal. I’m just saying that to the 
best of my lay knowledge, if the boyfriend takes the pictures, then he owns 
the copyright. Period…So if an ex-boyfriend publishes nude pictures, not 
with the purpose of causing emotional harm, the CA law wouldn’t be 
applicable and there would be no copyright claim.17 
Under this argument, the responsibility for protecting privacy would fall to the 
victims of the leak, not those who share them. The pushback for this viewpoint is 
                                                           
16 SlimLovin. (2014, December 3). “‘Revenge’ porn law: Ex-boyfriend who posted nude 
photos gets jail time.” Reddit: /r/news. Comment. Online: 
 
http://www.reddit.com/r/news/comments/2o1pky/revenge_porn_law_exboyfriend_who_post
ed_nude/cmixy4y 
17 grocket. (2014, December 3). “Am I off base? While I agree “revenge porn” should probably 
be illegal, I can’t help feeling like it’s going to be yet another large weapon in the ammo box 
for false accusers.” Reddit: /r/MensRights. Comment. Online:  
 
http://www.reddit.com/r/MensRights/comments/2o5d5j/am_i_off_base_while_i_agree_reve
nge_porn_should/ 

 
Celebgate: Two Methodological Approaches to the 2014 Celebrity Photo Hacks 
59 
much less aggressive than it is on the broader site discussion on /r/news; already we 
can discover divergent discourses developing on different platforms. The number of 
subscribers to each platform should impact discussion of what can truly be considered 
prevailing attitudes on the site. Hopefully our results would reflect not only 
differences in discourse development on different forums within Reddit, but would be 
able to compare those fractured sentiments to the conclusions reached on more 
centralized platform discussions.  
2.4 
Communicating Results 
Again, in communicating our results we must keep in mind the limitations of our 
methodology. A discourse analysis reveals sentiments of the more vocal members of a 
community, but might fail to capture a body of users who consume Reddit content 
without adding to it. One could perhaps ameliorate this by combining a discourse 
analysis with interviews, though the problems with these are, again, outlined above. It 
would be of critical importance to communicate these results in a way that treated a 
spectrum of Reddit users with dignity. Because their communications on the site are 
publically available and already pseudonymous, there would be little work to do in 
terms of obscuring their identities or acquiring consent for use—perhaps those to be 
included in publication could be contacted in advance via Reddit’s messaging system. 
Moreover, looking only at forums that tend toward ideological discussion might 
cause us to miss those in which users are actively not complying with the policies laid 
out by the site. In other words, while users on /r/MensRights might advocate against 
punishment of those sharing leaked photos, the real photo leaks are taking place 
elsewhere, on places like /r/Celebs or /r/ledzepplin. On the other hand, many 
subreddits featuring sensitive actively remove leaked photographs from their forums, 
exhibiting compliance with site policy. One could arguably expand the breadth of 
subreddits analyzed in order to include information on compliance or lack of 
compliance. However, this may require a broader conception of what constitutes a 
discourse and fall outside the purview of this project. 
3 
Conclusion 
As a viral phenomenon, the celebrity photo leaks of 2014 were not the first of their 
kind, but they were certainly the most public. The rapidity with which they gained 
attention and were subsequently suppressed provokes interesting structural and ethical 
questions about online censorship. A variety of quantitative and qualitative 
methodologies are well suited to the study of different questions related to the 
phenomenon, and the most fruitful projects would do well to combine several. 
Celebgate was a critical cultural moment, as it raised important questions about 
how secure we ought to feel in sharing our information, how responsible we are for its 
protection, and how others might go about obtaining it. Surely this heightened 
awareness of the risks involved in sending sensitive content could alter the extent to 
which that behavior manifests. For all of these reasons, these leaks are important to 

60 
R. Fallon 
study; ways in which our privacy can be breached and who is responsible for 
protecting it are topics of the highest salience for Internet scholars and broader publics 
alike. 
References 
1. CAPSLOCK. THE FAPPENING 2014 iCloud hacker Interview (Full Version) YouTube 
(September 3, 2014), https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=zZ_OeL2GTw8  
2. Cubrilovic, N.: Notes on the Celebrity Data Theft. New Web Order (September 2, 2014), 
https://www.nikcub.com/posts/notes-on-the-celebrity-data-theft/  
3. D’Orazio, F.: How Stuff Spreads #1: Gangnam Style Vs. Harlem Shake—Full Study and 
Data Visualization. FACE blog (May 8, 2013),  
http://www.facegroup.com/blog/how-stuff-spreads-1-gangnam-style-vs-harlemshake.html  
4. Diakopoulos, Naaman: Towards quality discourse in online news comments. CSCW 
(2011), 
http://dl.acm.org/citation.cfm?id=1958844&dl=ACM&coll=DL&CFID=648040872&CFT
OKEN=10450748 
5. Every Man Is Responsible For His Own Soul. Blog.Reddit (September 6, 2014), 
http://www.redditblog.com/2014/09/every-man-is-responsible-for-his-own.html 
6. Google. Transparency Report; Request ID: 1445734. Google, (December 1, 2014), 
http://www.google.com/transparencyreport/removals/copyright/requests/1445734/ 
7. grocket. Am I off base? While I agree “revenge porn” should probably be illegal, I can’t 
help feeling like it’s going to be yet another large weapon in the ammo box for false 
accusers Reddit: /r/MensRights. Comment (December 3, 2014), http://www.reddit.com/ 
r/MensRights/comments/2o5d5j/am_i_off_base_while_i_agree_revenge_porn_should/ 
8. Herring, et al: Women and Children Last: The Discursive Construction of Weblogs into 
the Blogosphere. University of Minnesota (2004), http://blog.lib.umn.edu/blogosphere/ 
women_and_children.html  
9. Lessig, L.: Remix: Making Art and Commerce Thrive in the Hybrid Economy. Penguin, 
New York (2008) (print) 
10. mechesh, Reddit: photoplunder, Reddit (2012), http://www.reddit.com/r/photoplunder/ 
11. Popper, B.: Inside the strange and seedy world where hackers trade celebrity nudes. The 
Verge (September 4, 2014), http://www.theverge.com/2014/9/4/6106363/celebgate-
fappening-naked-nudecelebrities-hack-hackers-trade 
12. Shokouhi, M.: Seasonal Queries by Time-Series Analysis. In: SIGIR (2011), 
http://research.microsoft.com/pubs/150746/sigir0196-shokouhi.pdf 
13. SlimLovin. Revenge’ porn law: Ex-boyfriend who posted nude photos gets jail time. 
Reddit: /r/news. Comment (December 3, 2014), http://www.reddit.com/r/news/comments/ 
2o1pky/revenge_porn_law_exboyfriend_who_posted_nude/cmixy4y  
14. Stern, M.: The Fappening 4’: More Celeb Nudes Leak Online Including the First Man, 
Seems to Be Dying Down.The Daily Beast (October 5, 2014),  
http://www.thedailybeast.com/articles/2014/10/05/the-fappening-4-more-celebnudes-leak-
online-including-the-first-man-seem-to-be-dying-down.html  
15. Vaidhyanathan, S.: The Googlization of Everything (And Why We Should Worry),  
pp. 2–3. University of California Press, Berkeley (2011) 
16. Valdivia, Monge-Corella: Diseases Tracked by Using Google Trends, Spain. Emerg. 
Infect. Dis. 16(1), 168 (2010) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet Science and Societal 
Innovations 

 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 63–77, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_5 
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science 
Clare J. Hooper1(), Bruna Neves1, and Georgeta Bordea2 
1 The University of Southampton IT Innovation Centre, Southampton, UK 
cjh@it-innovation.soton.ac.uk 
2 Insight, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland 
georgeta.bordea@insight-centre.org 
Abstract. Internet Science is an interdisciplinary field. Motivated by the un-
foreseen scale and impact of the Internet, it addresses Internet-related research 
questions in a holistic manner, incorporating epistemologies from a broad set of 
disciplines. Nonetheless, there is little empirical evidence of the levels of disci-
plinary representation within this field.  
This paper describes an analysis of the presence of different disciplines in 
Internet Science based on techniques from Natural Language Processing and 
network analysis. Key terms from Internet Science are identified, as are nine 
application contexts. The results are compared with a disciplinary analysis of 
Web Science, showing a surprisingly low amount of overlap between these two 
related fields. A practical use of the results within Internet Science is described. 
Finally, next steps are presented that will consolidate the analysis regarding rep-
resentation of less technologically-oriented disciplines within Internet Science. 
Keywords: Internet Science · Disciplinary analysis · Interdisciplinarity · 
Bibliometrics · Natural language processing 
1 
Introduction 
Internet Science involves interdisciplinary collaboration to deepen our understanding 
of the Internet as a societal and technological artefact, whose evolution is increasingly 
intertwined with that of human societies [1]. Like the fields of Web Science and  
Human-Computer Interaction [2], Internet Science’s interdisciplinarity is a key 
strength but at times a challenge: conducting successful collaborations across disci-
plinary boundaries can be difficult, demonstrated by efforts to discuss [3] and address 
[4] [5] such issues. 
This paper builds on previous work in which we established a method to empirical-
ly evaluate the presence of disciplines in an interdisciplinary field based on a Natural 
Language Processing (NLP) analysis of a corpus of data [6]. This method has been 
applied in the related field of Web Science, but here we focus on its application to 
Internet Science, identifying key topics and application contexts of the field. 
The benefits of such an analysis are wide-ranging, relating to: 
1. Quality: work by Lungeanu [7] has shown that collaborator diversity is 
positively correlated with the quality of work. 

64 
C.J. Hooper et al. 
 
2. Credibility: the Internet Science community claims to be interdisciplinary 
[1], but at this time has little evidence to back this up. 
3. Insight: By identifying over- and under-representation of disciplines in 
Internet Science, we become able to take corrective action if needed. For 
example, we can reach out to under-represented communities by writing 
targeted calls for papers and co-locating Internet Science workshops and 
conferences with appropriate events. 
4. Communication: By better understanding what disciplines are active 
within Internet Science and what we mean by the term ‘Internet Science’, 
we can communicate better as a community. This has positive benefits for 
internal and external communication, as well as for curriculum planning. 
The analysis in this paper is made possible by the EU Network of Excellence in In-
ternet Science (EINS), a European-funded research instrument to coordinate and inte-
grate European research in the area of Internet Science [1]. Among other things, EINS 
has fostered the formation of a group of academics actively working in this area, and 
this group have published widely on a variety of Internet Science topics. These publi-
cations are the key input to the analysis described in this paper.  
This paper is structured as follows: We first introduce the area of bibliometrics and 
the use of NLP to analyse a corpus of data, and describe our previous work in this 
area. We then describe the disciplinary analysis method, from initial data gathering, 
through processing and visualising the data, to conducting a ‘community analysis’ of 
that data. We then present our results, including an analysis of application contexts 
within the resultant graph. After discussing these results, including a comparison of 
Internet Science and Web Science results as well as a discussion of how the results 
have been applied within current Internet Science work, we discuss avenues for future 
work and present our conclusions. 
2 
Background and Related Work 
2.1 
Bibliometrics, Natural Language Processing, and Disciplinary Analysis 
This work uses a base assumption from bibliometric mapping [8], that a research field 
can be described by a list of important keywords. Previous bibliometrics work ranges 
from co-citation analysis [9] and examination of conferences [10] to geospatial visual-
isation of collaboration [11]. Previous work has typically used author assigned key 
phrases and pre-built domain taxonomies [12], but such resources are not readily 
accessible here. For this reason we apply an automatic method [13] for extraction of 
domain terms. 
Implicit relations between the extracted topical descriptors can be discovered and 
described through word co-occurrence analysis, a content analysis technique that was 
effectively applied to analyse interactions in different scientific fields [8] [12]. This 
technique was applied to analyse the interconnections between a main field, i.e., fuzzy  
 
 

 
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science 
65 
 
logic theory, and other computing techniques [14], a setting that is similar to our 
analysis of the Internet Science field. A more recent work on co-word analysis [15] 
outlines several limitations related to the use of keywords and proposes a method to 
integrate expert knowledge into the process. A main issue with this approach is that it 
requires a considerable amount of human intervention for the construction of domain 
specific thesauri. We alleviate this challenge by completely automating the process of 
identifying topical descriptors and by automatically constructing a domain taxonomy 
(topical hierarchy). 
Internet Science is at the crossroad of domains as diverse as Civic Planning, Psy-
chology and Economics. Each domain has a different level of formality, with a vary-
ing number of natural language terms and a more or less deterministic syntax. This 
has a direct impact on the performance of term extraction tools, with a larger number 
of correct terms extracted for some domains than for others. The portability of term 
extraction systems is rarely evaluated across domains, with most studies considering 
only one domain for evaluation [16] [17]. In [18], different term extraction approach-
es are evaluated over two domains, a biology corpus and a small general knowledge 
corpus of Wikipedia articles; term extraction performance is shown to vary depending 
on the domain. More recent work [19] studies the performance of term extraction 
systems over three domains (Computer Science, Biomedicine, and Food and Agricul-
ture). That work showed that Saffron, our NLP tool, produces stable results across 
different domains, and for that reason we use that approach in our work studying Web 
Science. 
This paper builds on previous work conducted by the authors in the related domain 
of Web Science. A WebSci’12 paper presented initial work in this area [20], and was 
built upon in a WebSci’13 paper [6] that analysed almost 500 articles (compared to 69 
in 2012) and used a small expert survey to (1) aid our interpretations of graph struc-
tures and taxonomies and (2) dig deeper when distinguishing between disciplines. In 
this paper, we use those foundations as a starting point for applying the same ap-
proach in this related but distinct domain, in addition describing the practical use of 
the results in outputs for the Internet Science project, EINS. 
2.2 
Analysis of Internet Science 
Since our previous publication [6], steps include an approach to visualising a given 
domain’s literature based on co-readership [21] and, of particular note here, work to 
map the an EU FP7-funded Network of Excellence (NoE) [22]. This latter work ex-
amined the venues at which members of EINS published, surveying publications to 
include the word ‘Internet’ in their title, abstract or keywords; co-authorship networks 
were also considered. The authors found an imbalance between disciplines identified 
as predominant in EINS (computer science, physics) and the range of disciplines to do 
scholarly work about the Internet. This work differs by focusing on what disciplines 
are present in Internet Science publications, rather than what domains Internet Sci-
ence experts previously published in. 
 

66 
C.J. Hooper et al. 
 
Other work has explored Internet Science in different ways. At the first Internet 
Science conference, Dini and Sartori presented an excellent interdisciplinary dialogue 
(held between a sociologist and an engineer, both active within Internet Science) 
about the epistemological bases of different disciplines towards developing a method 
of analysis of the Internet [3]. They conclude that one unified interdisciplinary theo-
retical framework cannot be attained, but that it is both possible and deeply worth-
while for people with differing disciplinary perspective to collaborate towards a 
common goal. This is consistent with findings at a recent workshop held on overcom-
ing barriers to interdisciplinary collaboration [5]. 
3 
Disciplinary Analysis Method 
In brief, the method involves: gathering a corpus of data; conducting Natural Lan-
guage Processing to extract topics; a graph analysis and visualisation of the extracted 
topics; and conducting a ‘community’ analysis of that output. 
3.1 
Data Gathering Method 
The corpus consisted of the set of papers downloadable from the Internet Science 
bibliography, online at http://www.internet-science.eu/biblio. At the time of the 
download, August 2014, a total of 208 papers were available. The text-processing tool 
we use requires that files be in PDF or TXT format. Although some of the papers at 
the bibliography website were not in a suitable format, most of these papers could be 
found using Google Scholar. In total, 207 of the 208 papers were processed. 
3.2 
Natural Language Processing Method 
We processed the files using Saffron1, a knowledge extraction framework for under-
standing research communities [23]. Saffron uses information extracted from unstruc-
tured documents using Natural Language Processing techniques [24]. An automatical-
ly constructed domain model based on the corpus of data was used, with the approach 
described in [19]: this domain model was used to construct several linguistic patterns 
that identify candidate terms based on their context. Noun phrases of maximum 5 
words extracted in this way were considered as candidate terms and then ranked based 
on their length, frequency and embeddedness. 
As described in Section 3.1, 207 files were included in the analysis. The Saffron 
analysis yielded 29,016 phrases that were identified as research term candidates, with 
an average of 140 candidates per document. The extracted terms were further used for 
a manual analysis of the corpus and to automatically construct a topical hierarchy. 
Limitations related to graph visualisation and time constraints mean our analysis 
considers the best ranked 1000 terms.  
                                                           
1 http://saffron.insight-centre.org/ 

 
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science 
67 
 
The research terms are not manually curated and therefore include incorrect terms 
such as ‘research mobility’, which is not an Internet Science research term. Like any 
other tool, term extraction and analysis has some limitations, and the appearance of 
‘research mobility’ as an important term exemplifies the issue of incorrectly extracted 
terms. 
The index used in co-word analysis to measure the strength of relationships be-
tween two research terms is defined as: 
Iij = Dij / (DiDj) 
where Di is number of articles that mention the term Ti in our corpus, Dj is number of 
articles that mention the term Tj, and Dij is the number of documents in which both 
terms appear. 
Edges are added in the research terms graph for all the pairs that appear together in 
at least 3 documents. Saffron uses a generality measure to direct edges from generic 
concepts to more specific ones. This step results in a highly dense, noisy directed 
graph that is further trimmed using an optimal branching algorithm. An optimal 
branching is a rooted tree where every node but the root has in-degree 1, and that has 
a maximum overall weight. This algorithm was successfully applied for the construc-
tion of domain taxonomies in [25]. This yields a tree structure where the root is the 
most generic term and the leaves are the most specific terms. 
3.3 
Graph Analysis and Visualisation Method 
We used a network graph tool, Gephi, to build a graph showing links between each of 
the 1000 terms: nodes are extracted terms and arcs are papers that link them. This let 
us visually identify clusters of closely related terms. We used the Force Atlas 2 algo-
rithm to layout the graph with the following parameters: Scaling: 2.0; Edge weight 
influence: 0.0. We used betweenness centrality to weight node importance. 
Betweenness centrality measures the fraction of shortest paths going through a node 
[26]: a high value indicates that nodes play an important bridging role in a network. 
The lines connecting nodes in the graph represented whether two nodes appeared 
in the same paper together. Lines could be thicker or thinner, according to the number 
of times the terms appeared together (thinner lines correspond to fewer co-
occurrences, while thicker lines indicate greater co-occurrence). Edges were only 
visualised for pairs that appeared together in at least 3 documents. 
3.4 
Community Analysis Method 
Finally, the Louvain method [27] was applied with resolution 15 to detect ‘communi-
ties’, clusters of nodes that were more closely linked with one another than with the 
rest of the graph. We interpreted ‘communities’ as application contexts ranging from 
technologies (i.e. open hardware) to disciplines (i.e. network science) and topic areas 
(i.e. energy).  

68 
C.J. Hooper et al. 
 
4 
Results 
In this section we first present the results of the graphing and visualisation, before 
moving onto the outputs of the community analysis. 
4.1 
Graph Analysis and Visualisation Results 
Figure 1 shows a visualisation of the extracted terms, in which larger nodes and label 
fonts indicate terms with a higher betweenness centrality. Table 1 lists terms with a 
particularly high betweenness centrality, showing for comparison the top-rated terms 
obtained by applying the same procedure to a corpus of Web Science papers [6]. 
 
Fig. 1. Visualisation of the extracted Internet Science terms, where different colours indicate 
different detected ‘communities’ (application contexts) 

 
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science 
69 
 
4.2 
Community Analysis Results 
The community detection algorithm returned many ‘communities’ (henceforth: appli-
cation contexts) with a very sparse distribution. We observed a long tail where most 
communities were poorly connected and constituted only a very small portion of the 
graph. For this reason, only application contexts representing at least 1% of the graph 
were considered, a total of 11/60 detected application contexts. Of the remaining 49 
communities, which were very small and not linked to a substantial part of the visual-
ised graph, many consisted of only one term. 
Table 1. The 20 terms with highest betweenness centrality 
Internet Science term 
Internet Science  
Betweenness centrality 
Web Science term [2013] 
Internet governance 
322 
semantic web 
Internet Science 
310 
social media 
data set 
211 
information retrieval 
renewable energy 
192 
social networking site 
centrality metrics 
192 
social science 
charging stations 
185 
search engine 
electricity consumption 
183 
social networking 
energy consumption 
180 
learning network 
operator networks 
165 
web page 
parking spots 
164 
personal learning environment 
data collection 
162 
social interaction 
personal data 
160 
mobile device 
data flows 
153 
future research 
hardware designs 
147 
internet user 
centrality indices 
147 
uniform resource identifier 
connected component 
144 
web science research 
access technologies 
140 
user interface 
access ISPs 
138 
web community 
social interaction 
138 
web application 
content delivery 
135 
linked data principle 
 
 
Table 2 summarises the 11 considered application contexts, showing for each: a 
given name; its root node (the node with the highest betweenness centrality); the 
percentage of the graph that it covered; its number of ‘hot terms’ (terms with a 
betweenness centrality > 100); and its top 5 terms as ranked by betweenness cen-
trality.  
Application context names were chosen based on the topics within each application 
context, with a weighing towards those topics with a high betweenness centrality.  

70 
C.J. Hooper et al. 
 
Table 2. Summary of the 11 application contexts 
Name 
Root 
node 
% graph 
# hot terms 
Top 5 terms 
Measurement 
technologies 
data set  
13.2 
8 
data set; operator networks; 
data collection; access technol-
ogies; social interaction 
Energy 
renewable 
energy  
13 
7 
renewable 
energy; 
charging 
stations; electricity consump-
tion; energy consumption; sen-
sor networks 
Social  
Networking 
opportun-
istic  
networks  
12.1 
1 
opportunistic networks; infor-
mation privacy; social network-
ing; online social networking; 
information sharing 
Internet  
governance 
internet 
govern-
ance  
11.2 
6 
internet governance; personal 
data; data flows; content deliv-
ery; data protection 
Network  
Science 
tie 
strength  
9.8 
1 
tie strength; ego networks; pub-
lic key; additional information; 
tie strength evaluations 
Parking 
parking 
spots  
8.3 
5 
parking spots; parking search; 
opportunistic networks using 
cognitive heuristics; parking 
space; cognitive heuristics 
Network  
Science II 
centrality 
metrics  
7.3 
3 
centrality 
metrics; 
centrality 
indices; connected component; 
video systems; content place-
ment 
Architecture / 
design 
internet 
science  
6.6 
4 
internet science; internet archi-
tecture; virtual network map-
ping; network mapping; current 
internet 
Open hardware 
and infrastruc-
tures 
hardware 
designs  
5 
1 
hardware designs; internet de-
sign; open hardware; open 
source hardware; software code 
ISPs and  
Network traf-
fic 
access 
ISPs  
4.7 
1 
access ISPs; transit traffic; con-
tent distribution; access ISP; 
traffic patterns 
Research  
mobility 
infor-
mation 
collected  
3.3 
1 
information 
collected; 
route 
selection; BGP datasets; re-
search mobility; routing system 

 
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science 
71 
 
5 
Discussion 
This section is divided into four parts. Firstly, we discuss the key terms and applica-
tion contexts identified in the above analysis. This is followed by a comparison of 
these results with the results of applying the same method to Web Science data. 
Thirdly, we describe the application of our results in EINS outputs, before finally 
evaluating our approach and discussing future work. 
5.1 
Internet Science Terms and Application Contexts 
Our analysis yielded a ranked list of Internet Science terms and a set of application 
contexts. Topics reflected by the topmost terms include: 
• 
Governance (reflected by the term ‘Internet governance’) 
• 
Energy (‘renewable energy’, ‘charging stations’, ‘electricity consumption’, 
‘energy consumption’) 
• 
Network science (‘centrality metrics’, ‘centrality indices’) 
• 
Internet Science (‘Internet Science’) 
Terms with less clear mappings include: data set; operator networks; parking spots; 
data collection; personal data; data flows; hardware designs; connected component; 
access technologies; access ISPs; social interaction; content delivery. 
As can be seen, some terms clearly map to a given topic or discipline, as in the 
terms mapped to network science above. Other terms, in the above paragraph, are 
applicable in any of a number of disciplines. ‘Social interaction’, for example, is rele-
vant to disciplines including but not limited to communication, human-computer 
interaction, psychology, and sociology. 
In addition to the ranked terms list, the 11 largest application contexts were ana-
lysed. These contexts relate to the terms: for example, the community named ‘meas-
urement technologies’ contains a number of the more ambiguous terms above (data 
set; operator networks; data collection; access technologies; social interaction). This 
implies that that particular set of terms co-occurred with one another, perhaps in a 
particular series of papers. 
Among the 11 application contexts, ‘network science’ appeared twice, perhaps rep-
resenting two sets of network science-driven work that happened not to overlap (i.e. 
addressing different research questions). It is reasonable to consider ‘network science’ 
as a single application context of Internet Science, leaving 10 application contexts. 
It should be noted that the ‘research mobility’ application context was found due to 
text referring to the Research Mobility aspect of EINS2, rather than to a bona fide 
research topic: this term can also be discarded, leaving 9 application contexts. 
The EINS introductory webpage3 describes the focus of EINS as focused on “net-
work engineering, computation, complexity, networking, security, mathematics, phys-
ics, sociology, game theory, economics, political sciences, humanities, and law, as 
                                                           
2 http://www.internet-science.eu/mobility 
3 http://www.internet-science.eu/network-excellence-internet-science 

72 
C.J. Hooper et al. 
 
well as other relevant social and life sciences.” The above findings corroborate part of 
that statement (i.e. terms about energy and network science map clearly with areas 
including engineering, computation and networking), but do not provide strong evi-
dence at this time for presence from, for example, sociology, game theory, economics, 
political science, humanities, or law. It is possible that NLP may be less good at 
showing results relating to disciplines which use more varied words (compared with 
arguably more repeatable terminology in technology fields), and it would be prema-
ture to conclude whether fields such as the humanities are definitely under-
represented in Internet Science or simply not highlighted by the NLP-led analysis. 
5.2 
Comparing Internet Science with Web Science 
The precise delineation between Internet Science and Web Science is not always 
clear. One might argue that Web Science is a subset of Internet Science (because web 
technologies are a subset of Internet technologies), while at a 2013 Internet Science / 
Web Science workshop [28] it was argued that one could view Internet Science as a 
subset of Web Science. It is beyond the scope of this paper to analyse the relationship 
between these fields, but nonetheless of interest to provide an initial comparison of 
the results of applying disciplinary analysis to the two fields. 
Table 1 shows the top-ranked terms from an analysis of Web Science papers 
alongside the top-ranked terms identified from Internet Science in this paper. What is 
most striking is the almost complete lack of overlap between the two lists of 20 terms: 
one single term, ‘social interaction’, is the only one to appear on both lists. Further-
more, among the two remaining sets of 19 terms, there are few thematic connections: 
the Internet Science terms, as discussed above, typically concern topics such as gov-
ernance, energy and network science, while the Web Science terms centre on topics 
such as semantic web technologies, social media and information retrieval. 
We may also consider the application contexts identified in Internet Science and 
Web Science. Although initial analysis revealed 11 Internet Science and 8 Web Sci-
ence contexts, consideration of irrelevant terms such as ‘research mobility’ and syn-
onymous contexts left a total of 9 Internet Science and 4 Web Science contexts, 
shown in Table 3. 
Table 3. Internet Science and Web Science application contexts 
Internet Science application contexts 
Web Science application contexts [2013] 
Measurement technologies 
Information retrieval 
Energy 
Personalised learning / elearning 
Social networking 
Semantic web  
Internet governance 
Social networking 
Network Science 
 
Parking 
 
Architecture / design 
 
Open hardware and infrastructures 
 
ISPs and Network traffic 
 

 
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science 
73 
 
This suggests that even if Internet Science and Web Science do not have funda-
mental differences and overlap substantially, the two communities that were analysed 
here and in the 2013 Web Science work [6] do not overlap. Given that, at minimum, 
the two communities share similar challenges with respect to overcoming barriers of 
interdisciplinarity, organisations silos and the like, a greater flow of collaboration 
between the two is surely desirable. 
We note a difference in the number of communities first detected when running the 
Louvain algorithm on the two datasets. In Web Science, a total of 9 contexts were 
initially detected, while in Internet Science, 60 were found. There is no significance to 
this result, which is merely due to one of the parameters of the algorithm. 
We also note a difference in the number of candidate terms in each dataset. The 
Web Science corpus yielded 5361 candidate terms (54 per document), compared with 
29,016 candidate terms (140 per document) here. This is not due to a difference be-
tween Internet Science and Web Science, but from settings in the algorithm: the first 
analysis used a manually defined domain model (i.e. domain-specific lexicon) for 
Computer Science. The analysis presented in this paper used an automatically con-
structed domain model derived from the corpus itself, which is more specific and 
adapted to the domain, hence increasing the number and coverage of terms. 
5.3 
Application of Results 
A key EINS output within Emergence Theories and Design is an online repository of 
Internet Science design methods4. The results of the Internet Science disciplinary 
analysis were used to structure the repository, which is a wiki containing a list of 
design methods. Figure 2 illustrates the front page of the repository. 
 
Fig. 2. Screenshot of the EINS repository of design methods 
                                                           
4 http://wiki.internet-science.eu/index.php/Repository_of_design_methods 

74 
C.J. Hooper et al. 
 
At the time of writing, the repository contains 49 methods from a diversity of dis-
ciplines. A key usability goal is to make the methods accessible by classifying them in 
useful ways. Application contexts are a key component in that strategy, offering an 
ideal lens by which to structure (and help users understand) the methods. 
Each repository entry consists of: a title; a free text description; a table of relevant 
links; a table of relevant publications; a list of applicable disciplines; a list of applica-
tion contexts; any tags; a contributor. Figure 3 shows part of an entry, focusing on the 
later, more structured parts of the entry. 
 
Fig. 3. Screenshot of part of an entry in the EINS repository of design methods 
As can be seen, the method shown in Figure 3 is relevant to the application context 
of social networking. 
Use of application methods to structure the repository offered an additional benefit: 
the ability to analyse the distribution of repository entries according to application 
context, and hence to identify under-represented areas. For more on the use of disci-
plinary analysis to structure and analyse the repository, see [29]. 
5.4 
Evaluation and Future Work 
As noted in Section 3.2, the terms identified by the NLP analysis are not manually 
curated and therefore include incorrect terms such as ‘research mobility’. This exem-
plifies a typical limitation of approaches such as NLP, where powerful computation is 
used to rank terms based on factors such as frequency and co-occurrence, but there is 
no understanding of term meaning (and hence relevance) to the topic in question. 
Section 5.1 observed that some terms clearly map to a discipline (i.e. centrality 
metrics with network science), but others (such as social interaction) do not. Gaining 
more robust insights into the link between terms and disciplines would enhance the 

 
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science 
75 
 
insights gained thus far; an expert survey offers an ideal way to complement the 
strengths of NLP and gain such insights.  
Getting input on the term-discipline link from a wide variety of experts overcomes 
the issues of individual assessment of such linkages, which apply particularly strongly 
in the context of an interdisciplinary field such as Internet Science. The issue is that 
two or three researchers, even ones from different fields, cannot represent sufficient 
disciplinary diversity to analyse and understand the implications of a set of terms 
sourced from highly interdisciplinary materials. 
An example of applying a small survey to bolster the results of disciplinary analy-
sis can be found in [6]: domain experts were asked for their views on what disciplines 
were most closely related to the top-ranked terms from the dataset. We hope to con-
duct a similar survey of Internet Science experts in the near future: the upcoming 
Internet Science conference offers an ideal opportunity to conduct this survey. 
An additional benefit from the survey relates to the point in Section 5.1 that NLP 
may be less good at showing results from disciplines that use more varied words 
(such as the humanities). Internet Science survey results, combined with existing 
survey results from Web Science, will let us clarify whether less technologically-
oriented disciplines are under-represented in Internet Science or simply less well 
detected by the NLP-led method used to date, providing insight not only into Internet 
Science but also into NLP itself.  
Concerning other paths for future work, this paper has already presented a brief 
comparison of results from Internet Science and Web Science. Clarification of the 
boundaries between Web Science and Internet Science has been identified as an im-
portant area for future research [30] [31], and a full NLP-led comparison of Internet 
Science and Web Science materials represents a way forward in this area. 
Finally, this work raises future questions regarding the use of NLP to understand 
differences in disciplines according to context: for example, how might sociology 
appear in a Internet Science corpus compared to within a pure sociology corpus? 
Issues include gaining datasets that are representative of a given domain: for example, 
the BAWE dataset at Insight has only 111 sociology documents, many of which are 
short student essays.  
6 
Conclusions 
We have described the application of techniques from NLP and network analysis to 
gain insight into disciplinary representation within Internet Science, revealing a focus 
on governance, energy and network science (from terms) as well as social network-
ing, parking, and open hardware (from application contexts). We found evidence for 
the presence of disciplines such as network engineering, computation and networking, 
and plan further analysis to investigate the presence of less technology-oriented disci-
plines such as sociology, humanities and law. This supplementary analysis, to be 
implemented via an expert survey, will also provide insight into the efficacy of NLP 
when working with non-technology disciplines. 

76 
C.J. Hooper et al. 
 
In addition to providing an initial disciplinary analysis of Internet Science, we have 
demonstrated the applicability of our results for structuring a repository of design 
methods according to application contexts. We have also described a comparison of 
the Internet Science results with results from a disciplinary analysis of Web Science, 
finding a surprising lack of overlap between the two analyses, suggesting that the two 
communities do not strongly overlap in their current research activities.  
Acknowledgements. The research leading to these results received funding in part from the EU 
FP7 EINS under grant agreement No 288021 and from the Science Foundation Ireland (SFI) 
under Grant Number SFI/12/RC/2289 (Insight). The authors gratefully thank the survey partic-
ipants for their time and energy. 
References 
1. Network of Excellence in Internet Science, Grant agreement 288021, Description of Work 
(December 06, 2011)  
2. Hooper, C.J., Dix, A.: Web science and human-computer interaction: forming a mutually 
supportive relationship. ACM Interactions 20(3), 52–57 (2013) 
3. Dini, P., Sartori, L.: Science as Social Construction. In: International Conference on Inter-
net Science, pp. 42–51 (2013) 
4. Guevara, K., Blackwell, A.: A Reflective Examination of a Process for Innovation and 
Collaboration in Internet Science. In: International Conference on Internet Science,  
pp. 37–46 (2013) 
5. Hooper, C.J., Millard, D.E., Azman, A.: Interdisciplinary Coups to Calamities (work-
shop). In: Web Science, Bloomington, Indiana, USA (2014) 
6. Hooper, C.J., Bordea, G., Buitelaar, P.: Web Science and the Two (Hundred) Cultures: 
Representation of Disciplines Publishing in Web Science. In: ACM Web Science, Paris, 
France (2013) 
7. Lungeanu, A.: Understanding the assembly of interdisciplinary teams. Journal of 
Informetrics 8(1), 59–70 (2014) 
8. Callon, M., Cortial, J., Turner, W., Bauin, S.: From Translations To Problematic Networks 
– An Introduction To Co-Word Analysis. Social Science Information 22(2), 191–235 
(1983) 
9. Chen, C., Carr, L.: Trailblazing the literature of hypertext: author co-citation analysis 
(1989–1998). In: 10th ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hypermedia (1999) 
10. Henry, N., Goodell, H., Elmqvit, N., Fekete, J.: 20 Years of 4 HCI Conferences: A Visual 
Exploration. International Journal of Human Computer Interaction - Reflections on  
Human-Computer Interaction 23(3), 239–285 (2007) 
11. Nagel, T., Duval, E., Heidmann, F.: Exploring the Geospatial Network of Scientific Col-
laboration on a Multitouch Table. In: 22nd ACM Conference on Hypertext and Hyperme-
dia, demo (2011) 
12. Coulter, N., Monarch, I., Konda, S.: Software engineering as seen through its research lit-
erature: A study in co-word analysis. Journal of the American Society for Information Sci-
ence 49(13), 1206–1223 (1998) 
13. Bordea, G., Buitelaar, P.: DERIUNLP: A context based approach to automatic keyphrase 
extraction. In: Proceedings of the 5th International Workshop on Semantic Evaluation, 
Stroudsburg, PA, USA (2010) 

 
A Disciplinary Analysis of Internet Science 
77 
 
14. Lopez-Herrera, A., Cobo, M., Herrera-Viedma, E., Herrera, F.: A bibliometric study about 
the reseach based on hybridating the fuzzy logic field and the other computational intelli-
gent techniques: A visual approach. International Journal of Hybrid Intelligent Sys-
tems 7(1), 17–32 (2010) 
15. Wang, Z.Y., Li, G., Li, C.Y., Li, A.: Research on the semantic-based co-word analysis. 
Scientometrics 90(3), 855–875 (2012) 
16. Ananiadou, S.: A methodology for automatic term recognition. In: The 15th Conference on 
Computational Linguistics (1994) 
17. Velardi, P., Sclano, F.: Termextractor: a web application to learn the common terminology 
of interest groups and research communities. In: 7th Conference on Terminologie et Intel-
ligence Artificielle (2007) 
18. Zhang, Z., Iria, J., Brewster, C., Ciravegna, F.: A comparative evaluation of term recogni-
tion algorithms. In: Proceedings of the Sixth International Conference on Language Re-
sources and Evaluation, Marrakech, Morocco (2008) 
19. Bordea, G., Buitelaar, P., Polajnar, T.: Domain-independent term extraction through  
domain modelling. In: The 10th International Conference on Terminology and Artificial 
Intelligence, Paris, France (2013) 
20. Hooper, C., Marie, N., Kalampokis, E.: Dissecting the Butterfly: Representation of Disci-
plines Publishing at the Web Science Conference Series. In: Proc. ACM WebSci 2012 
(2012) 
21. Kraker, P., Jack, K., Schloegl, C., Trattner, C., Lindstaedt, S.: Head Start: Improving Aca-
demic Literature Search with Overview Visualizations based on Readership Statistics.  
In: Proc. ACM WebSci 2013 (2013) 
22. Sahal, A., Wyatt, S., Passi, S., Scharnhorst, A.: Mapping EINS–An exercise in mapping 
the Network of Excellence in Internet Science. In: The 1st International Conference on  
Internet Science (2013) 
23. Monaghan, F., Bordea, G., Samp, K., Buitelaar, P.: Exploring Your Research: Sprinkling 
some Saffron on Semantic Web Dog Food. In: Semantic Web Challenge at the Interna-
tional Semantic Web Conference (2010) 
24. Bordea, G.: Domain adaptive extraction of topical hierarchies for Expertise Mining (Doc-
toral dissertation) (2013) 
25. Navigli, R., Velardi, N., Faralli, S.: A graph-based algorithm for inducing lexical taxono-
mies from scratch. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Second International Joint Conference 
on Artificial Intelligence (2011) 
26. Barthélémy, M.: Betweenness centrality in large complex networks. The European Physi-
cal Journal B - Condensed Matter and Complex Systems 38(4), 163–168 (2004) 
27. Blondel, V.D., Guillaume, J.-L., Lambiotte, R., Lefebvre, E.: Fast unfolding of communi-
ties in large networks. Journal of Statistical Mechanics: Theory and Experiment 2008(10), 
P10008 (2008) 
28. Fdidia, S., Tiropanis, T., Brown, I., Marsden, C., Salamatian, K.: 1st International Work-
shop on Internet Science and Web Science Synergies. In: ACM Web Science 2013, Paris, 
France (2013) 
29. Hooper, C.J. (ed.): EINS Deliverable 2.1.2: Repository of methodologies, design tools and 
use cases. Network of Excellence in Internet Science FP7-288021 (2014) 
30. Hooper, C.J., Hedge, N., Hutchison, D., Papadimitrious, D., Passarella, A., Sourlas, V., 
Wuchner, P.: EINS Deliverable 2.3: Whitepaper on recommendations for funding agen-
cies. Network of Excellence in Internet Science FP7-288021 (2014) 
31. Stavrakakis, I., Hutchison, D.: EINS Deliverable 13.2.1: Internet Science - Going Forward: 
Internet Science Roadmap (Preliminary Version). Network of Excellence in Internet Sci-
ence FP7-288021 (2014) 

Analysing an Academic Field
through the Lenses of Internet Science:
Digital Humanities as a Virtual Community
Alkim Almila Akdag Salah(), Andrea Scharnhorst, and Sally Wyatt
eHumanities Group, Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
almila.akdagsalah@ehumanities.knaw.nl
http://www.ehumanities.nl
Abstract. Digital Humanities (DH) has been depicted as an innovative
engine for humanities, as a challenge for Data Science, and as an area
where libraries, archives and providers of e-research infrastructures join
forces with research pioneers. However DH is deﬁned, one thing is cer-
tain: DH is a new community which manifests and identiﬁes itself via
the Internet and social media. In this paper we propose to describe DH
as a virtual community (VC), and discuss the implications of such an
epistemic approach. We start with a (re)inspection of the scholarly dis-
course about VCs, and the analytic frameworks which have been applied
to study them. We discuss the aspects that are highlighted by taking
such a stance, and use the guidelines proposed by the FP7 European
Network of Excellence in Internet Science (EINS) in our investigation.
Keywords: Virtual communities · Emergence of new scientiﬁc ﬁelds ·
Network analysis · Digital humanities · Bibliometrics
1
Introduction
The concept of a Virtual Community (VC), just like the concept of commu-
nity, deﬁes a generic deﬁnition. On the Internet, social links are formed through
capabilities created in the online medium (e.g. blogs, shared online platforms
that allow comments and messages, hyperlink references, etc.), thus bringing
together people and organizations with shared interests. In this paper, we use
approaches developed to investigate virtual communities to analyse Digital Hu-
manities, treating it as a virtual -scientiﬁc- community.
There are diﬀerent links between the study of the emergence and evolution
of VC and the study of scientiﬁc communities. Both rely on work about the
formation of social communities, the role of communication (networks) in this
process and the institutional and economic base of human activity leading to
the formation of communities.
c
⃝Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 78–89, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_6

Analysing an Academic Field Through the Lenses of Internet Science
79
Scientiﬁc communities, from the Republic of Letters1 to the modern invisible
colleges [1], can be seen as the archetype of virtual communities. They existed even
before the emergence of the Internet, and they are well studied. The Republic of
Letters is itself an object of study in the Digital Humanities, which sometimes also
appears to model itself after this early global network of knowledge exchange.
In this paper, we ask to what extent current research on Virtual Communities
can help us to better conceptualize and analyze Digital Humanities, which from
the very beginning has embraced digital environments, and with them an active
online life. Which aspects of the emergence and continuous functioning of virtual
communities then are relevant when reﬂecting about the current state and future
course of DH?
In the next two sections we brieﬂy describe both objects (VC and DH, respec-
tively) using techniques of information retrieval, bibliometrics and visualization.
In the case of virtual communities, we list important topics and analytic dimen-
sions in the form of a baseline matrix. As we will argue, Digital Humanities
scholars show similar behavioral patterns to the members of a generic virtual
community. With this argument in mind, the question we highlight throughout
this paper is, how can research on virtual communities be beneﬁcial in analyzing
Digital Humanities as an academic discipline?
2
Mapping Virtual Communities
One of the oldest and best known deﬁnition of virtual communities comes from
Rheingold in 1993: “[all] social aggregations that emerge from the Net when
enough people carry on those public discussions long enough, with suﬃcient hu-
man feelings, to form webs of personal relationships in cyberspace” [2]. At that
time, the Internet was not part of everyday life and did not oﬀer more than
a ﬂeeting platform to build a community (amongst the academics and com-
puter professionals who had access to it). Some scholars questioned whether the
internet would destroy community building altogether, rather than generating
spaces for new communities to emerge, or if the new communities oﬀer the same
intimacy of oﬄine communities [3].
A ﬁrst exploration of the term Virtual Communities with a new interactive
visual interface Ariadne2 reveals many journals whose textual space resonates
with the search term [4] (see Fig. 1). Many of these are situated at the inter-
face between computer sciences, information sciences, sociology and economics.
1 The ‘Republic of Letters refers to the community of scholars that emerged
in the late 17th century, who developed and maintained long-distance corre-
spondence and exchange of ideas. To see diﬀerent projects that use computa-
tional techniques to map the relationships between people and ideas check e.g.
‘Mapping the Republic of Letters. See: http://www.culturesofknowledge.org/ and
http://ckcc.huygens.knaw.nl/epistolarium/
2 Ariadne (thoth.pic.nl/relate?) allows to surf through context of search terms in the
ArticleFirst database of OCLC.

80
A.A. Akdag Salah et al.
Jo
o Libra
nship and Info
f rmation...
Journal of Organizational and End User Computing,...
Journal of Material Cul
e
Education and I
rmation Technologies
rarian
ra i n
ra ian
LraLrLr iarbririan.
Journal of Global Info
f rmation Management,...
International Journal of Hospitality & Tourism...
American Behaviou
entist
Journal of library administration.
Multimedia Systems
International journal of human-computer interaction....
Text & Talk
International Journal Of Distance Education...
Communication Theory
Mind Culture And Activity
Alt J.
Scie
d
eSy
Sci:i 30ti2t
Health Promotion Practice
J
of
urnal
o
l
ou
l
deJeJw
Jo
Jw
ou
w
ow
oue
urny
na:l0o0o0o0o2f L
2f 6
Li
Mm. Journal of mark
r eting management.
Consumption, Mark
r ets and Culture
Info
f rmation services & us
International Journal of Cultural Studies...
Social Epistemology
of Or
of Org
of Or
Journal Of Management Info
f rmation Systems....
I
ContinuuIn
uIuIuIm
nt
Journal of Info
f rmation & Knowledge Management...
Prometheus -st Lucia Queensland-
Journal
omputing in Higher Education
Journal of Visual Art Practice
ou
Be
did
havidod
ehavid
havi
Sage Public Adminisdtdtdtdtdr
nyAb3s30t0r02a2cts
P
Ethics And Info
f rmation Technology
Technology Pedagogy And Education
Action Research -sage Publications-.
dewey:601
ulture
Cul re
Cul re
V
ialilsuall Sutudies
International Journal of Value-based Management...
Behaviour And Info
f rmation Technology
Gazette
Journal of info
f rmation science.
The Communication Review
New Review of Hypermedia and Multimedia
tion
ation
ation
dewey:0
Education, Communication and Info
f rmation
Human-computer interaction.
Pinersonaltiand
n. Ubiquitous Computing
International Journal of Computer-supported...
ervices
de
:0
d
i
025
i
0
d
i
0
d
d
eyey:e:w0w0w02
w0w0 e25y5:d0de0e0d0d 2
J2eJw
Jow
Jw
2e 0
u0
w
ou
w
ow
o e
u
Journal of consumer policy.
Culture and Organization
e-service Journal
Learning, Media and Technology
Journal of Mark
r eting Communications ࣟι
Bt Technology Journal
Jo
se.
Jo
s
Jo
s
L&
L&i
&burusaseasas rey Trends
M
atio Ma
n
on M
on M
Journal of organizational computing and electronic...
dewey:659
Communication Research
International Journal of Law and Info
f rmation .
dewey:790
Asian Journal Of CommunicatCiCoConom
Journal of Communicati
K:3
K
A:b3n30
s0w
02
r2l2cectdtsge, Technology, and Policy
Jorormumran
atiaiolonO
n..f. Elec
c Commerce
Organizations...
tion
titi
M
of CaCsosomC
mmo
mum
unm
icauatntio
ntntiioc
ona
n tion and Society
mmer
mmer
mmer
International Journal of Electr nic Commerce...
Info
f rmation Polity
dewey:070
Codesign
e
Technoetic Arts
urn
urn
urn
Internet Research -westport Then Bradfo
f rd-....
Info
f r
I f rm
Infor
Journalcofti C
onomputner Am
Arm
Arm
Armssitstoed
n TL
TeeI arniolngg
ti
e In Or
ctroni
e
Or
ctr nic
e
Or
ctr nic
Eulure tronif c Cleommerce R
omesearch
e.
l of Co
ation
l
o
ation
l
o
ation
Journal of TJechnolollllog
ofy
f Ci
Cin Humian Si erHv
Hiiicehs
Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Network
r ing...
Netnomics
International Review of Law, Computers &;...
Jmm -print Edition-
Communicatio
Journal of community practice.
on Ma
on M
Electronic Mark
r ets
dewey:3
J38
ou4
ur
ctronic
al Jou
Eoul
c
c
al Jou
Eul
c
c
al Jou
Eul
J
maoatutiorolonnO
naOl
OfoEfElInterniEeiEleltletltltl CC
ectotrmonm
nicec CrCc
Coeom
ia
diaia
Computers In Human Behavior
Computer Supported Cooperative Work
r
Journal of Info
f rmation Technology & Politics...
Digital Creativity
J
New Review of Info
f rmatuiuron Nofetlworkry
r iy ng
Community DevelopmenJoto Jurornu
naralnoaoflf
Social science computer revdideew
ew.
g
Cyberpsychology And Behavior
International Journal Of Web Based Communities...
R
n Re
n Re
Convergence -london-
Ai & society.
The info
f rmation
ciety.
IInn
nfffo
f o
orm
fo rmm
matatitoiononnP&
oli;t C
y ommunications Technology...
dewey:
ge, T
w
Info
f rmation, Communication and Socie
Scy
Sc
io
y
idioidsdt
n
ormat
uralal S
alalwlweS
ueuew
traw
eae twiwo
w
u l SeS
ou
deu
dtdr
ur l S
leS
ou
deu
tdr
N
Adedmw
miMd
nisd
Md
Msddrdedreaeaedrdr w
iew
iaw
aew
aew
aw
twiw&e&ne&
we&
o
wene&ne&
one SySAyK
AySyAyK:3
A:b3s3n3s30i0
s0t0r0w
0r0t2
r2a2y2c2l2cec
n soc
n
c
n
c
Journal O
ThfheC
e ionm
fo
f prmumt
maeatrti M
onMnM
onMn esdoicaie
acaciac teeS
etyd
S
y Ciom
l miunication...
ety
e
virtual communities
ώ journal
ώ Knowledge
ώ Social-sciences
ώ Technology
ώ Arts/recreation
Fig. 1. Contextual exploration of Virtual Communities
A search in the bibliographic database Web of Knowledge3 retrieves 1418 doc-
uments. In a global map of science [5] those documents are situated mostly in
various branches of the Computer Sciences, Information and Library Science,
Management and Business, Education and Communication. The papers citing
this core set follow the same distribution, except here, we see also publications
from Psychology and Cognitive Sciences (see Fig.2 (b)).
If we take a closer look at the scholarly publications around the term, we
see that in the early years of the Internet, the deﬁnitions mostly were grounded
in the usage of certain tools: Email, chat rooms such as Internet Relay Chat
(IRC), discussion forums, etc. Access to such tools of course required a certain
socio-economic background (to own a computer, to have access to the Internet,
to be technologically literate enough to use these tools, etc.) which could be
excused for at least a general combining factor for these loosely deﬁned com-
munities. However, probably a closer look at their shared interests, goals, and
needs would inevitably crumble these communities into subgroups. These ﬁrst
attempts can be called the ﬁrst wave in Virtual Communities research. The
second wave, seeing the shortcomings of basing community formation on tech-
nological advancement only, extended the deﬁnition to focus on the process not
the technological infrastructure. Thus, virtual communities started to be ex-
plored around the ideas of shared beneﬁts and goals [6]. The most recent wave
brings the economic aspects of virtual communities to the fore [7].
A manual inspection of documents from this information retrieval exercise
led to a number of prevailing topics such as PROTOCOLS (these constitute
3 TOPIC: (“virtual communities”) Timespan: All years, Web of Science Core collec-
tion, DOCUMENT TYPES: (ARTICLE OR REVIEW OR BOOK OR PROCEED-
INGS PAPER OR EDITORIAL MATERIAL OR BOOK CHAPTER), Feb 25, 2015.

Analysing an Academic Field Through the Lenses of Internet Science
81
(a)
(b)
Fig. 2. Scientometric exploration of Virtual Communities. (a) Overlay Map of VC as
a topic. (b) Overlay Map of all citing papers VC as a topic.
the background of virtual communities such as infrastructures, platforms, tools,
software as well as norms and standards of the web), MEANS (this topic fo-
cuses on the perspective of the user: needs, goals, interests, i.e. human emotions
that holds the community together), and CURRENCIES (these are more the
economical factors: investment in social capital, time, and the expected beneﬁts
from participating in a virtual community). In Fig. 3 these topics are arranged
on the left side. JRA6 developed another categorization of topics relevant to the
study of virtual communities, shown at the right side of the same ﬁgure. These
are socio-technical requirements (community members’ social and technological
needs, and requirements that arise from the interaction of social and technical
domains), Virtuality (the connection and interactions between online and oﬄine
world(s)), and topologies (e.g. features of interfaces and type of activities, such
as gaming or writing). The two sides of the table, i.e. Protocols, Means and
Currencies and Socio-technical requirements, Virtuality and Topology of VC in-
teract on several levels with each other. Through these interactions the shape of
the virtual communities remains in a constant transformation.
3
Digital Humanities
Digital Humanities still struggles in its self-perception and deﬁnition [8]. Similar
to other emerging or (relatively) newly emerged ﬁelds in humanities (i.e. Visual
Cultural Studies), the community is still very much engaged with questions [9]
such as: What is Digital Humanities? What are its main methods? and more
importantly, What is its object of analysis?
Even the origins of Digital Humanities is open to debate: some proponents
suggest the pioneering work of priest Roberto Busa, who lemmatized the works

82
A.A. Akdag Salah et al.
PROTOCOLS
MEANS
CURRENCIES
Infrastructure
Platforms
Software
Tools
Goals
Needs
Interests
Social Capital
Time
Shared Beneﬁts
Trust/privacy
Interactivity
Portability
Regulation
Online
offline (f2f)
onlife
Private/Public
Interface
Identity Creation
SOCIO-TECHNO
REQUIREMENTS
DEGREES OF 
VIRTUALITY
TOPOLOGY OF
VIRTUAL 
COMMUNITIES
Fig. 3. A baseline matrix for Virtual Communities
of Saint Thomas Aquinas even before computers were invented, as the starting
point of DH [10]. Others have argued that a connection between humaniora and
other sciences actually was the norm in times of natural philosophy, and that
Digital Humanities is now the bridge between the ‘two cultures’ that grew apart
with the emergence of disciplines in the 19th and 20th centuries [11].
Digital Humanities (DH) are often deﬁned as research and teaching activities
which combine computing and information technologies with scholarly practices
in humanities ﬁelds. But, current aspirations of DH go far beyond methodolog-
ical innovation. A White Paper written to support the foundation of a new
center lists as challenges: “1) transformational progress in humanities research
and understanding to address societal challenges, 2) signiﬁcant improvements in
algorithms and computational instruments that deal with heterogeneous, com-
plex, and social data, and 3) societal beneﬁts through novel understandings of
language, culture, and history.” (p.8) [12]. With such aspirations the group of
possible members of the community is large: scholars in humanities ﬁelds and
in computer sciences, those involved in education, science and education policy
makers, and basically every citizen.
A ﬁrst exploration again with Ariadne reveals another active community: li-
braries and archives. The map in Fig. 4 shows a group of library journals at
12 o’clock, and then clockwise: computer & information science journals (e.g.
about ontologies); education and various speciﬁc humanities areas (e.g., architec-
ture, visual arts, literary history and archaeology). The heterogeneity of oﬀ-line
communities concerned with Digital Humanities is also visible in a bibliometric
analysis of its formal scholarly communication.
The query “Digital Humanities” in the Web of Science4 retrieves a set of 390
papers. All the articles citing this set is another set of 281 articles5. First of all,
4 TOPIC: (“digital humanities” or “humanities computing” or “e-humanities” or
“computational humanities”) Timespan: All years, Web of Science Core collection,
DOCUMENT TYPES: (ARTICLE OR REVIEW OR BOOK OR PROCEEDINGS
PAPER OR EDITORIAL MATERIAL OR BOOK CHAPTER), Feb 25, 2015.
5 Total Citing Articles (without self-citations) of the TOPIC: (“digital humanities”
or “humanities computing”) Timespan: All years, Web of Science Core collection,
DOCUMENT TYPES: (ARTICLE OR REVIEW OR BOOK OR PROCEEDINGS
PAPER OR EDITORIAL MATERIAL OR BOOK CHAPTER), Feb 25, 2015.

Analysing an Academic Field Through the Lenses of Internet Science
83
this is a relatively small number, even one recognizes that Arts & Humanities
are not well-represented in this database and that the citation culture of the
humanities prefers books to articles as the primary publication venue. The ﬁeld
is extremely small, and so a traditional bibliometric analysis produces rather a
restricted map.
Fig. 4. Contextual exploration of Digital Humanities
Earlier bibliometric studies of Digital Humanities have already shown that
citation analysis reveals a limited perspective of its activities [13,14,15]. For ex-
ample, even though one of the main funding (and hence research) for DH is
in digitization projects, and software, platform and tool building, these activi-
ties do not have a visible publication venue in the community [13]. Moreover, a
deeper analysis of DH by extracting data not only from ISI, but also from Google
Scholar with its broader coverage, shows that the community is focused on “on
collaboration, institutional forms, library & information science, and a more lim-
ited visibility for substantive ﬁelds, including education, history, linguistics” [15].
Fig. 5 shows the overlay maps for Digital Humanities. They support these gen-
eral ﬁndings: the community seems to be publishing in ﬁelds such as Computer
Science and Information Studies mainly. The humanities disciplines which sur-
face in the overlay maps are Literature, Linguistics, Educational Research and
History. The overwhelming presence of Computer Science and related ﬁelds also
suggests that when humanities scholars involved with DH research publish in
their home disciplines they do not use DH as a keyword in their publications.
To see how widely DH has inﬁltrated humanities citation literature, it may be
useful to use a combination of webometrics and scientometrics (where the names
of every humanities scholar who claims to do research on DH is collected, and
used as the starting point for data collection from ISI).
In the data collected for overlay map analysis, a handful of publications are
listed as “Humanities, multidisciplinary”, and this categorization veils the ﬁne-

84
A.A. Akdag Salah et al.
(a)
(b)
Fig. 5. Scientometric exploration of Digital Humanities. (a) Overlay Map of DH as a
topic. (b) Overlay Map of all citing papers DH as a topic.
grained details of which humanities disciplines actually collaborate for Digital
Humanities research. To see the international and the institutional collaboration
of Digital Humanities, the same data sets are combined and an analysis is run
with the tools developed by Loet Leydesdorﬀ[16]. The resulting networks clearly
captures the main players in the ﬁeld: UK and USA as the main collaborators,
followed by the usual suspects in Europe: Holland, Finland, Sweden, France,
Germany. Fig. 6 (a) shows unexpected names to pop-up as well, for example na-
tions geographically not connected to Europe are already connected to the main
players: Kuwait, Tanzania, South Korea. Fig. 6 (b) renders the interdisciplinary
nature of DH with interconnected but small groups, hence a main component
and many smaller cliques dominate the visualization.
It is not by chance that one of the best-known mapping exercise about DH
- the infographic Quantifying Digital Humanities6 contains a lot of altmetrics,
including:
– subscriptions to the Humanist discussion list
– number of people on Twitter identiﬁed as Digital Humanities scholars
– registered users of thatcamp.org - a platform to organize conferences in the
ﬁeld.
This infographic was published in 2012. Since then, DH has grown, and now
exhibits many of the characteristics of an emergent ﬁeld which has left the stage
of prematurity and lonely pioneers and moved even beyond the stage of early
adopters. The ﬁeld has its own professional organization, local and international
6 http://melissaterras.blogspot.nl/2012/01/infographic-quanitifying-digital.html

Analysing an Academic Field Through the Lenses of Internet Science
85
(a)
(b)
Fig. 6. Collaboration analysis of Digital Humanities. (a) International collaborations.
(b) Institutional collaborations.
conference series, dedicated journals, speciﬁc funding programmes, and an in-
crease in DH minors, master and PhD programmes.
DH has fully embraced all forms of digital scholarship [17]. However, this
is not the only feature of a virtual community. What about the connection
and tension between oﬀ-line and on-line identity; the relevance of the physical;
the importance of access to sustainable and adaptive infrastructures; and most
importantly, what about the goals, needs, interests of its members?
4
Digital Humanities as Virtual Community
There are many online outlets that are regularly used by academicians: email,
library/publication databases and their information retrieval systems, personal
websites, course websites, teaching platforms such as Moodle, Blackboard, and
massive online courses (MOOCs). The academy generally provides the infras-
tructure and necessary platforms for these online outlets, covering certain is-
sues that the JR6 pointed out in its reports: trust/privacy, user interfaces,
operability, durability, public/private, etc. On the other hand, there are many
tools/platforms that are not generated for academic use, but used by some schol-
ars: blogging, podcasting, Twitter, Facebook, Flickr (as a visual data repository
and sharing), Youtube, Dropbox, etc. Then, there are platforms speciﬁcally de-
signed for (collaborative) research: Mendeley, Academia.edu, Researchgate, etc.
Mundane and speciﬁc digital activities are continuously intertwined.
Digital Humanities, among this plethora of possibilities, not only make the
most from infrastructure, platforms, tools and software, but DH scholars are also

86
A.A. Akdag Salah et al.
actively involved in building all these for their special needs and purposes7. They
also keenly advocate for e-publication and open data policies. A possible change
in the current standards of evaluation in academia to include diverse online
activity is also an important point discussed in DH. This discussion takes place
under the heading of how to reward for other, often invisible labor [18], such
as professionally kept blogging sites, or developing and sharing new curricula.
DH tries to expand the boundaries of academical infrastructure, poses questions,
experiments with diﬀerent practices, and helps evolving new services, platforms
and tools. Hence, to a large extent DH operates as a VC, and/or is a part of
a non-academic VC. The Network of Excellence EINS (JRA6 in particular) has
emphasized several dimensions which are important in a user-centric analysis
of virtual communities, including socio-technical requirements; virtuality and
topology [19]. In the following, we use those dimensions to discuss current aﬀairs
in Digital Humanities.
The Role of Socio-technical Requirements and User Needs. One could
possibly write the history of DH as a history of tools and platforms that were
developed and used. Some were incorporated into daily practices and emergent
infrastructures; others were project-speciﬁc and faded away. It is quite evident
that with the on-going technological evolution tools used in DH will continue
to change. One continuing problem in DH has been and still is the need to
build protocols and norms, and to stop generating similar tools and platforms.
A proper information ﬂow between funding agencies, and already ﬁnished projects
is a much needed, but still missed resource for the community. Another need is
in the dissemination and teaching of the developed tools and platforms. Work-
shops on how to apply tools will remain important, but what is also needed is to
reach a basic level of computer literacy across all humanities disciplines. Course
designs which equip users with skills that enables them to adapt to new develop-
ments will become more important than learning a speciﬁc tool which might be
outdated within a year. Standardization, i.e. the identiﬁcation and consolidation
of those techniques generic to many humanities ﬁelds, is another need coun-
terbalancing the ongoing innovation of methods, techniques and tools. Next to
machine-supported text analysis, such standardization also concerns other type
of material: audio, visual (static, i.e. images or dynamic, i.e. videos), numeric
information and information-ordering techniques as harmonization and mapping
between ontologies. All these activities (sometimes doubling an already ﬁnished
project) fall under the umbrella of PROTOCOLS, as much as the requirements
that arise from socio-technical needs.
Degrees of Virtuality. One important aspect of social communities in the In-
ternet age is that they are never only on-line or oﬀ-line, there will be always hybrid
7 A generous amount of funding for Digital Humanities projects are reserved for digiti-
zation of Humanities archives, as well as to build platforms so that such digitization
projects will be durable, and available for the wider scholarly community and public
at large

Analysing an Academic Field Through the Lenses of Internet Science
87
forms. Scientiﬁc communities are no exception to this. In an envisioned continuum
between virtual and real, diﬀerent activities of members of the DH community can
be placed at diﬀerent locations. From the point of view of MEANS, i.e. user needs,
goals and interest, scientiﬁc communities such as DH has already a binding focus
oﬄine, which is nurtured via standard academic outlets such as common publica-
tion venues, conferences, workshops etc. DH designs many of these outlets in forms
of online communications as well, i.e. attending a conference via a podcast, pre-
ferring e-publications and blogging for scholarly communication, or using online
data-repositories and platforms for collaboration are normal occurrences within
the community. But continuing from the perspective of future user needs, there
clearly is a need for not only Virtual Research Environments, but physical centers.
In times of project funding and competition, temporary centers, groups, network
organizations are rather the norm than the exception. But a sustainable develop-
ment of a new emerging ﬁeld needs some stable institutional form. The establish-
ment of chairs at universities might be one way to add more stability. There is also
another lesson learned from VC, which is a plea for oﬀ-line counter parts. In con-
trast to oﬀ-line communities, on-line communities require more often a renewal of
membership by activities. This is a burden on limited time resources,and one of the
reasons that VC cease to function. Without an oﬀ-line counterpart, a physicality,
one cannot expect persistence and continuation [20].
Topology of Virtual Communities. Under topology we understand the in-
frastructures and the content which is created using them. Also in this case,
project-based funding might counter consolidation. Excellent for exploration,
short- and mid-term funding instruments are counterproductive when it comes
to the maintenance of infrastructures, and to the consolidation of knowledge.
The sheer size of current information spaces in academia entails the danger of
a balkanization of knowledge, and the wasting of resources in imitation and re-
dundancy, instead of using them for knowledge discovery and innovation. For
DH there are many information sources on-line and oﬀ-line, but there is - as for
almost all ﬁelds - also a great need for registries, catalogues, interactive maps
to resources, in short intelligent information management. Next to this stands
the question of access to those topologies. Access to literature but also access to
servers.
5
Implications and Future Work
One way to build continuity in VC is the generation of norms and rules. For sci-
entiﬁc communities this was already articulated in the 1960s by Robert Merton
and others. However, it is equally important to note that while we can righ-
teously talk about norms, values and an academic culture, we should not forget
that this culture relies on infrastructure, not only technical, but also centers for
education and research, and all funding mechanisms which help these centers

88
A.A. Akdag Salah et al.
to thrive. Here, the struggle of DH for further growth and maturity is part of
the overall battle of the humanities against marginalization8.
So far we have reﬂected about the current stage of DH using categories relevant
for VC. But what the above considerations also reveal is that we have little
empirical evidence for good arguments towards funding bodies to further support
and establish DH - as virtual and as real-world community. Mapping of newly
emerging ﬁelds happens only occasionally, and we are far monitoring their birth
more regularly, and check if they are part of sciences, economy or society. We
have seen in the case of DH that the well-established monitoring tools, based
on bibliometrics of formal scholarly communication, fail to capture essential
features. Having said this, VC, because of their on-line habitat, reveal in principle
possibilities of monitoring. Altmetrics has already paved this path. But, one can
also see that altmetrics starts from what is measurable, and these might not
always be the features one really would like to monitor in the emergence of a
new ﬁeld. What Digital Humanities need most is not altmetrics, but a good
management of information ﬂow. DH should function as they would be a VC,
and not as an enterprise distributed across numerous academic ﬁelds at once.
References
1. de Solla Price, D.J., Beaver, D.: Collaboration in an invisible college. American
Psychologist 21(11), 1011 (1966)
2. Rheingold, H.: The virtual community: Homesteading on the electronic frontier.
Perseus Books (1993)
3. Wellman, B., Gulia, M.: Net surfers don’t ride alone: Virtual communities as com-
munities. Networks in the Global Village, 331–366 (1999)
4. Koopman, R., Wang, S., Scharnhorst, A., Englebienne, G.: Ariadne’s thread: In-
teractive navigation in a world of networked information. In: CHI 2015 Extended
Abstracts (2015)
5. Rafols, I., Porter, A.L., Leydesdorﬀ, L.: Science overlay maps: A new tool for
research policy and library management. Journal of the American Society for in-
formation Science and Technology 61(9), 1871–1887 (2010)
6. Chiu, C.M., Hsu, M.H., Wang, E.T.: Understanding knowledge sharing in virtual
communities: An integration of social capital and social cognitive theories. Decision
Support Systems 42(3), 1872–1888 (2006)
7. Stokburger-Sauer, N.E., Wiertz, C.: Online consumption communities: An intro-
duction. Psychology & Marketing 32(3), 235–239 (2015)
8. Svensson, P.: The landscape of digital humanities. Digital Humanities Quarterly 4
(2010)
9. Terras, M., Nyhan, J., Vanhoutte, E.: Deﬁning digital humanities: A reader. Ash-
gate Publishing, Ltd. (2013)
10. Busa, R.A.: Foreword: Perspectives on the digital humanities. In: Schreibman, S.,
Siemens, R., Unsworth, J. (eds.) A Companion to Digital Humanities, pp. 187–188.
Blackwell Publishing Inc. (2004)
11. Bod, R.: A new history of the humanities: The search for principles and patterns
from antiquity to the present. Oxford University Press (2014)
8 http://4humanities.org/

Analysing an Academic Field Through the Lenses of Internet Science
89
12. Wyatt, S., Millen, D. (eds.): Meaning and Perspectives in the Digital Humanities.
Royal Netherlands Academy of Arts and Sciences (2014)
13. Akdag Salah, A.A., Scharnhorst, A., Leydesdorﬀ, L.: Mapping the ﬂow of digital
humanities. In: Digital Humanities Conference (DH 2010). Kings College, London
(2010)
14. Leydesdorﬀ, L., Salah, A.A.A.: Maps on the basis of the arts & humanities citation
index: The journals leonardo and art journal versus digital humanities as a topic.
Journal of the American Society for information Science and Technology 61(4),
787–801 (2010)
15. Wyatt, S., Leydesdorﬀ, L.: e-humanities or digital humanities: Is that the question?
In: Digital Humanities Workshop (2013)
16. Leydesdorﬀ, L., Wagner, C.S.: International collaboration in science and the for-
mation of a core group. Journal of Informetrics 2(4), 317–325 (2008)
17. Borgman, C.L.: Scholarship in the digital age. MIT Press (2007)
18. Wouters, P., Beaulieu, A., Scharnhorst, A., Wyatt, S.: Virtual knowledge: experi-
menting in the humanities and the social sciences. MIT Press (2013)
19. Marsden, C., David-Barrett, T., Pavan, E., Ciurcine, M., Arata, G., Mantelero, A.,
Brown, B., McMillan, D., Cave, J., Trossen, D., Pierson, J., Talboom, S., Passarella,
A., Antoniadis, P., Rounceﬁeld, M., Karaliopoulos, M.: Deliverable 6.1: Overview
of user needs analysis, plus draft catalogue of design responses to needs analysis
(2013)
20. McCarty, W.: Humanities computing: essential problems, experimental practice.
Literary and Linguistic Computing 17(1), 103–125 (2002)

EINS Evidence Base: A Semantic Catalogue
for Internet Experimentation and Measurement
Xin Wang1(), Thanasis G. Papaioannou2, Thanassis Tiropanis1,
and Federico Morando3
1 Web and Internet Science Group
Electronics and Computer Science
University of Southampton, Southampton, UK
xwang@soton.ac.uk, t.tiropanis@southampton.ac.uk
http://www.ecs.soton.ac.uk/
2 Information Technologies Institute
Center for Research and Technology Hellas (CERTH), Thessaloniki, Greece
thanasis.papaioannou@iti.gr
http://www.iti.gr/
3 Nexa Center for Internet & Society
Politecnico di Torino, Turin, Italy
federico.morando@polito.it
http://nexa.polito.it/
Abstract. To explore the socio-technical aspects of the Internet requires
infrastructures to properly foster interdisciplinary work and the devel-
opment of appropriate research methods. To this end we present a plat-
form called EINS Evidence Base (EINS-EB) which is developed as part
of the EINS project. The EINS-EB also aims to empower researchers,
academics, organisations and society to engage with Internet Science
research independent of background. Currently, it provides for the col-
lection and discovery of data resources, of analytic and simulation tools,
and, in the future, of the methodologies behind those tools an of relevant
scholarly activity. We explore issues of data representation, dataset de-
scription, dataset catalogues and method catalogues for Internet Science.
The evidence base adopts semantic technologies to provide an interop-
erable catalogue of online resources related to Internet science. We also
present activities on making the evidence base interoperable with related
e-Science activities by communities engaging in relevant interdisciplinary
collaboration.
Keywords: Evidence base · Schema.org · Web observatory · Semantic
catalogue
1
Introduction
The Internet Science community has been actively engaged in intensive research
with respect to networking parameters issues to performance, QoS, security and
availability guarantees. As this discipline evolves, Internet Science has become an
c
⃝Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 90–99, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_7

A Semantic Catalogue for Internet Experimentation and Measurement
91
“inter-discipline” that draws on disciplines such as computer science, economics,
sociology and law, and requires to go beyond the networking techniques to the
exploration of correlations between the evolution of the Internet infrastructure
and of the societal and business sectors of activity that increasingly rely on it. To
this end there is demand to set up e-Science infrastructures that are appropriate
to foster research collaboration among disciplines, empowering the communities
involved with access to methods, data resources, data collection tools, analytic
tools, and simulation tools. Many of those tools are available but they scattered
in diﬀerent repositories maintained by diﬀerent communities making it hard to
discover and use them especially by members of diﬀerent disciplines.
An appropriate representation of resources in the repository is essential in
order to transform mere data into information about the structure, function and
performance of the system. In addition, the ability to capture all (potentially)
relevant aspects of the broader context, repeat an experiment, reuse the same
data and combine various types of information for analytic purposes is vital to
establishing and communicating the robustness, generalisability and implications
of particular ﬁndings in line with accepted scientiﬁc methods. On the other hand,
an expressive representation usually comes at the cost of complexity. A main
challenge is to adopt and extend a representation that is expressive enough
to capture relevant characteristics of resources without introducing too much
complexity. We decided to use the Schema.org vocabulary which is a lightweight,
ﬂexible and extensible vocabulary that is supported by main search engines.
We adopt and extend the Schema.org vocabulary and build a Internet Science
resource repository called the EINS Evidence Base (EINS-EB). Furthermore we
deploy semantic enrichment technologies to assist users to record rich metadata
of published resources with minimum eﬀorts.
The remain of this paper is organised as following: we provide an overview
of the EINS-EB in Section 2; we discuss the design concerns and describe the
techniques of the EINS-EB in Section 3; details of data hosting and the infras-
tructure of EINS-EB are given in Section 4; we discuss the relationships and
diﬀerences between the evidence base and several related platforms in Section 5,
and the conclusion and future plan in Section 6.
2
Overview of the EINS-EB
The aim of the evidence base is to foster interdisciplinary work by creating an
online catalogue that will record and expose detailed metadata of existing se-
lected datasets, methodologies and tools. Interoperability of the representation
of catalogued resources is essential for the evidence base to be used by researchers
form diﬀerent disciplines, and a well designed community engagement mecha-
nism is crucial for gathering as many as possible resources that are related to
Internet science. With those requirements in mind, the EINS-EB is built to en-
able users to conveniently publish and share Internet science resources with rich
semantics.

92
X. Wang et al.
In the EINS-EB, there is emphasis on open datasets (as shown in Figure 1)
to ensure engagement with the wider community around Internet science. Apart
from datasets, the online resource will catalogue related tools that are required
to collect, analyse, visualise data, and e-infrastructures which are necessary to
carry out Internet science experiments in controlled environments.
For each resource catalogued in the EINS-EB, general information such as
title, description, keywords etc. are recorded to enable prompt searching. Based
on the textual description of each resource, a DBpedia1 classiﬁcation is automat-
ically generated by the system (and can be further speciﬁed or corrected by the
publisher). The evidence base does not facilitate direct access to listed resources,
but it requires publishers to provide URLs from where resources are available,
along with licensing information. All the above mentioned information is embed-
ded as Microdata in the web pages using Schema.org vocabularies. Notice that
pages are marked up using the simple Microdata syntax and the Schema.org vo-
cabulary, as explained below; nevertheless, a mapping from Schema.org to RDF
(expressed in RDF Schema) is available and applications can use services to ob-
tain a Linked Data representation of the Microdata. This makes our approach
simple and pragmatic, yet essentially compatible with the more ambitious eﬀorts
to build the Web of Data.
Fig. 1. The dataset view of the EINS evidence base
It is possible for anyone to create an account and share resources on the ev-
idence base. Listing a resource can be easily done by ﬁlling of form containing
required information as stated above. To reduce user eﬀorts, the evidence base
provides a list of common licenses from which users can choose the appropri-
ate ones. The evidence base also automatically analyses the descriptions and
if possible the “About” page of published resources to provide suggestions of
1 www.dbpedia.org/

A Semantic Catalogue for Internet Experimentation and Measurement
93
DBpedia classiﬁcation. More of this automatically classiﬁcation is given later in
Section 3.3. User account information is used to ﬁll in publisher information of
resources.
3
Cataloguing Resources with Rich Semantics
To provide a semantic-rich catalogue for Internet science related resources a key
factor is to have the appropriate vocabulary to express the metadata of resources.
Datasets take a signiﬁcant proportion of these resources and therefore the choice
of vocabulary is biased to capture as many as possible characteristics of datasets.
At the same time, the chosen vocabulary also needs the ability to be extended
to cover other resources such as tools and e-infrastructures.
The expressivity of a vocabulary usually comes at the cost of complexity. To
reduce user eﬀorts of providing accurate metadata, we employ a service called
TellMeFirst which assists users with candidate classiﬁcations of resources by
analysing their descriptions.
3.1
Microdata
An emerging approach supported by the dominant search providers is to use Mi-
crodata (http://schema.org) markup and vocabularies to describe Internet Sci-
ence datasets available online. Many sites are generated from structured data,
which is often stored in databases. When this data is formatted into HTML,
it becomes very diﬃcult to recover the original structured data. Schema.org is
a collection of schemas that webmasters can use to markup HTML pages to
describe the data structure in ways recognized by major search providers, and
that can also be used for structured data interoperability (e.g. in JSON). Search
engines that support Microdata including Bing, Google, Yahoo! and Yandex.
On-page markup enables search engines to understand the semantics of the in-
formation on web pages and provide richer search results in order to make it
easier for users to ﬁnd relevant information on the web. Markup can also enable
new tools and applications that make use of the structure.
Microdata is a simple semantic markup scheme that is an alternative to RDFa
and it has been developed by WHATWG.The Microdata eﬀort has two parts:
markup and a set of vocabularies. The vocabularies are controlled and hosted at
Schema.org. The markup is similar to RDFa in that it provides a way to identify
subjects, types, properties and objects. The sanctioned vocabularies are found at
Schema.org and include a small number of very useful ones: people, movies, etc.
When a taxonomy for the description of the various properties of online resources
is missing, then one can use DBpedia (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/
Wikipedia:Quick cat index) and other widely adopted taxonomies.
The Microdata markup consists of three basic tags: itemscope, itemtype, item-
prop. An itemscope attribute identiﬁes a content subtree that is the subject
about which we want to say something. The itemtype attribute speciﬁes the

94
X. Wang et al.
subjects type. An itemprop attribute gives a property of that type. As an ex-
ample, observe the embedded tags in the HTML markup of Figure 2 describing
a dataset collection.
<div itemscope itemtype="http://schema.org/Dataset>
<a href="http://snap.stanford.edu/data/" itemprop="name">
Stanford Large Network Dataset Collection</a>
<meta itemprop="http://schema.org/url"
content="http://snap.stanford.edu/data/">
</div>
Fig. 2. An example of Microdata using a Schema.org vocabulary. It describes a
dataset with the name Stanford Large Network Dataset Collection and the URL
http:// snap.stanford.edu/ data/ .
3.2
The Schema of the Evidence Base
Regarding online resource description, we employed Schema.org, as it is a solution
capable of oﬀering high searchability and simplicity. We chose to use at least those
properties and vocabularies from Schema.org corresponding to the onesspeciﬁed in
the standard Dublin Core (http://dublincore.org/documents/dces/). We brieﬂy
describe the main choices regarding our schemas for the online datasets, online
tools and e-infrastructures below.
Dataset We partially adopted the type Thing::CreativeWork::Dataset from
the Schema.org vocabularies for describing the various datasets available on-
line. This type inherits some interesting attributes (named “Properties”) from
the Thing type that can be utilized for describing the various Internet Science
datasets found, depicted in Table 1.
Tool and e-Infrastructure Schema. We employed a subset of the type Thing::
CreativeWork::SoftwareApplication from the Schema.org vocabularies for
describing the various Internet tools and eInfrastructures available online.
We again employ here the same attributes inherited from the types Thing and
CreativeWork that were employed for the description of an online dataset, de-
scribed in Table 1. In Table 2, we brieﬂy describe additional attributes from types
CreativeWork and SoftwareApplication that are employed in the schema of
the online tools and e-Infrastructures.
3.3
Description-Based Automated Classiﬁcation
TellMeFirst2 [2] is a tool for classifying and enriching textual documents via
Linked Open Data. TellMeFirst leverages natural language processing and
2 http://tellmeﬁrst.polito.it/

A Semantic Catalogue for Internet Experimentation and Measurement
95
Table 1. The Dataset schema
Attribute
Description
(inherited from type Thing)
description
Text description of the dataset at the original site.
sameAs
URL link to the original site of the dataset or the wikipedia
entry describing the datasets nature.
url
The URL of the dataset.
additionalType
Categorizes the type of the dataset using alternative vocab-
ularies or taxonomies than Schema.org ones, e.g. typeof Db-
pedia categories, etc.
(inherited from type CreativeWork)
author
It may coincide with the “creator” attribute below, and refers
to the creator of the dataset.
copyrightHolder
It refers to the license of the dataset.
copyrightYear
The year of the license.
datePublished
The date that the dataset became available online.
keywords
keywords describing the dataset. These are many times
given in the web page of the dataset, but more “stan-
dards” classiﬁcation keywords, e.g., from ACM taxonomy
http://www.acm.org/about/class/2012, can be used.
audience
The scientiﬁc community of the dataset.
creator
It may coincide with the “author” attribute above.
dateCreated
The date of the dataset creation.
dateModiﬁed
The date of the dataset update.
version
This attribute can be used in case that there are multiple
versions of the dataset available.
(inherited from type Dataset)
catalog
A data catalog which contains a dataset.
distribution
A downloadable form of this dataset, at a speciﬁc location,
in a speciﬁc format.
spatial
The range of spatial applicability of a dataset, e.g., for a
dataset on EU demographics, EU.
temporal
The range of temporal applicability of a dataset.
Semantic Web technologies to extract main topics from texts in the form of
DBpedia resources. Input texts may then be enhanced with new information
and contents retrieved from the Web (images, videos, maps, news) concerning
those topics.
3.4
Linking to Other Semantic Catalogues
Using TellMeFirst, the resources described in the evidence base may be tagged
using a very broad vocabulary (consisting of the more than 4.6 million of entries
of the English Wikipedia), which is also structured by the Wikipedia community,
so that entities (i.e., pages) are nested within categories, which are in turn sitting
within a three of higher level categories.

96
X. Wang et al.
Table 2. The schema for online tools and eInfrastructures
Attribute
Description
(attributes inherited from types Thing and CreativeWork listed in Table 1)
...
(additional attributes inherited from type CreativeWork)
audience
The intended audience of the item, i.e. the group for whom
the item was created.
citation
A citation or reference to another creative work, such as an-
other publication, web page, scholarly article, etc.
contributor
A secondary contributor to the CreativeWork.
provider
The organization or agency that is providing the service.
sourceOrganization
The Organization on whose behalf the creator was working.
version
The version of the CreativeWork embodied by a speciﬁed
resource.
(inherited from type SoftwareApplication)
applicationCategory
Type of software application, e.g. “Traﬃc Generator, Net-
work Simulator”.
downloadUrl
If the ﬁle can be downloaded, URL to download the binary.
featureList
Features or modules provided by this application (and pos-
sibly required by other applications).
ﬁleFormat
MIME format of the binary (e.g. application/zip).
ﬁleSize
Size of the application / package (e.g. 18MB). In the absence
of a unit (MB, KB etc.), KB will be assumed.
installUrl
URL at which the app may be installed, if diﬀerent from the
URL of the item.
memoryRequirements
Minimum memory requirements.
operatingSystem
Operating systems supported (Windows 7, OSX 10.6, An-
droid 1.6).
processorRequirements
Processor architecture required to run the application (e.g.
IA64).
releaseNotes
Description of what changed in this version.
requirements
Component dependency requirements for the tool.
softwareVersion
Version of the software instance.
The link with Wikipedia/DBpedia is also a gateway to the Web of Data: in
fact, DBpedia is at the centre of the Linked Open Data Cloud3 and linking
to this core resource indirectly generates semantic relations with many other
resources.
Furthermore, the Schema.org vocabulary used by the EINS-EB is compatible
with many other vocabularies, and it is straightforward to import metadata
from other semantic catalogues that use one of the compatible vocabularies.
For example, the Southampton University Web Observatory (SUWO) [5,4] also
adopts Schema.org. EINS-EB and SUWO can crawl each other’s pages and list
each other’s resources. CKAN4 provides DCAT documents about datasets which
3 http://lod-cloud.net/
4 http://ckan.org/

A Semantic Catalogue for Internet Experimentation and Measurement
97
are also compatible with the Schema.org vocabulary used in the EINS-EB, and
also can be imported to the EINS-EB. This interoperability virtually leads to
a global network of semantic catalogues and enables users to search with rich
semantics resources from any catalogue in the network.
4
Data Hosting and Infrastructure
A complementary service provided by the evidence base is data hosting. The
hosting service (as shown in Figure 3) is supported by various infrastructures
such as Hadoop Distributed File System (HDFS), MongoDB, SQL database etc.
Users can upload data into any of supported databases and provide a link on the
EINS-EB. The hosting service provides extra ﬂexibility for sharing and reusing
data. For example, the Neubot5 data consist of a large number of ﬁles which
can only be analysed after downloading them. By utilising the hosting service
the Neubot data are also served by MongoDB at the University of Southampton
from where users can query the data online.
Fig. 3. Data hosting infrastructure of the EINS evidence base
5
Related Work
The EINS-EB is aiming at harmonisation with a number of similar infrastruc-
tures and tools in the areas of measurement collection, analytics and data repos-
itories. This section outlines those related eﬀorts and how the EINS-EB aims to
interoperate with them.
Measurement Lab (M-Lab)6 is the largest repository of open Internet perfor-
mance data and has been backed many Internet measurement publications (e.g.
5 http://neubot.org/
6 http://www.measurementlab.net/about

98
X. Wang et al.
[3,1] ). It hosts a large collection of open source Internet measurement tools,
data collected by those tools and visualisations based on the data. Compar-
ing to M-Lab, the EISN evidence base focuses on providing rich metadata (via
Schema.org vocabularies and TellMeFirst service) for registered resources and
improving interoperability to other disciplines. M-Lab resources can be listed on
the evidence base to gain better discoverability.
Southampton University Web Observatory (SUWO) [5,4] is a portal for datasets
and analystics. It provides metadata of registered resources as well as facilitates
access to those resources in a secure way. Resources listed on SUWO can be pri-
vate and permission has to be required before accessing them. SUWO also gives
Schema.org Microdata, and thus the EINS-EB can import resources from SUWO,
and add extra classiﬁcation information using TellMeFirst.
DatCat7 is an online catalogue of datasets regarding Internet measurements.
They employ a proprietary list of object types to describe the data collections,
having each object comprising multiple ﬁelds, and maintain indices that allow
advanced data querying through their web site. However, their datasets are not
searchable through search engines, as opposed to our approach due to Schema.org
Microdata descriptions. Moreover, their vocabulary does not adhere or link to
any standard for describing data semantics.
CKAN8 is an open data catalogue platform widely used by several data hubs.
CKAN focuses on publishing metadata of datasets to increase discoverability,
while the EINS-EB fosters not only datasets but also other resources that are
related to Internet science, such as tools and e-infrastructures. CKAN provides a
Linked Data presentation of the metadata it catalogued while the evidence base
utilises Schema.org Microdata, which is better recognised by major web search
engines such as Google, Bing, Yahoo!, and Yandex. Furthermore, the EINS-EB is
assisted by the TellMeFirst service to automatically classify registered resources.
6
Conclusions and Future Plan
The EINS Evidence Base (EINS-EB) is fostering interdisciplinary research for
the Internet Science community by providing, at ﬁrst instance, a way to catalogue
and discoverer related data resources and analysis or simulation tools available
online. Requirements for harmonisation with existing repositories have led us
to technological choices for resource description (Schema.org) and a number of
utilities based on linked data and content analysis.
Leveraging the fact that Schema.org Microdata can be easily represented as
Linked Data expressed with the RDF formalism (as mentioned above), we could
couple the existing Microdata syntax with a formal and explicit RDF representa-
tion. This can easily be done within the HTML of the evidence base pages, using
the RDFa serialisation, but with some additional eﬀort dereferenceable IRIs can
also be provided, as well as a SPARQL end-point. In this way, our initial prag-
matic (and general purpose search-engine oriented) approach can be maintained,
7 http://imdc.datcat.org
8 http://ckan.org/

A Semantic Catalogue for Internet Experimentation and Measurement
99
while the interoperability with Linked Open Data catalogues, including CKAN,
may be increased. Note that TellMeFirst related data are already expressed as
DBpedia resources, so connecting these to the Linked Open Data cloud would
be trivial.
References
1. Basso, S., Meo, M., Martin, J.C.D.: Strengthening Measurements from the Edges:
Application-level Packet Loss Rate Estimation. In: ACM SIGCOMM Computer
Communication Review 2013 (2013)
2. Futia, G., Cairo, F., Morando, F., Leschiutta, L.: Exploiting Linked Data and Nat-
ural Language Processing for the Classiﬁcation of Political Speech. In: International
Conference for E-Democracy and Open Government 2014 (2014)
3. Masala, E., Servetti, A., Basso, S., De Martin, J.C.: Challenges and issues on
collecting and analyzing large volumes of network data measurements. In: Catania,
B., Cerquitelli, T., Chiusano, S., Guerrini, G., K¨ampf, M., Kemper, A., Novikov,
B., Palpanas, T., Pokorny, J., Vakali, A. (eds.) New Trends in Databases and
Information Systems. AISC, vol. 241, pp. 203–212. Springer, Heidelberg (2014)
4. Tiropanis, T., Hall, W., Hendler, J., de Larrinaga, C.: The Web Observatory: A
Middle Layer for Broad Data. In: Big Data, pp. 129–133 (2014)
5. Tiropanis, T., Hall, W., Shadbolt, N., De Roure, D., Contractor, N., Hendler, J.:
The Web Science Observatory. IEEE Intelligent Systems 28(2), 100–104 (2013),
http://eprints.soton.ac.uk/354604/1/TheWebScienceObservatory-postprint.pdf,
http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/lpdocs/epic03/wrapper.htm?arnumber=6547975

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 100–109, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_8 
Living with Listening Services:  
Privacy and Control in IoT 
Donald McMillan1() and Antoine Loriette2 
1Mobile Life Centre, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden 
don@mobilelifecentre.org 
2School of Computing Science, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, UK 
a.loriette.1@research.gla.ac.uk 
Abstract. In this paper we discuss the impact to home, work, and civil life from 
the deployment of continuous listening services. An example service we call the 
Continuous Speech Stream (CSS), would provide a real time list of keywords 
generated from the user’s spoken interactions with others. Based on a user-
study that engaged 10 users to record a full day of audio for processing into a 
sample stream, we report the concerns expressed by our participants on being 
misrepresented by their speech, unintentionally sharing sensitive data, and be-
ing unable to curate their presentation of self.  We offer an initial set of rec-
ommendations for the design, testing, and deployment of IoT based services 
built on such rich, personal data.  
1 
Introduction 
The success of commercial speech interfaces – such as Apple's Siri, Google’s Now, 
and Microsoft’s Cortana – has highlighted the increasing appetite for speech as in 
input to systems and services. Increasingly such systems work by leveraging the 
ubiquitous network connections of such devices to reduce power consumption and the 
need for processing power on the device itself by sending the audio over the internet 
to be analysed. This has lead to some concern. LG’s latest smart TVs [1] included a 
feature which allowed the user to command the television at any time, without 
needing to indicate that the system should start to listen. This means that in order for 
this feature to work the TV would have to listen continuously. The TV did not process 
the audio itself, it was then sent over the Internet to a third party that analysed the 
audio and returned the results for the OS to act upon. The audio clips themselves are 
not only destined for algorithmic analysis, which adds another level of concern. 
Recent articles in the news [14] have focused on the perceived breach of privacy in 
having people employed to listen to the clips sent via Apple and Microsoft to evaluate 
and improve the performance of these algorithms.  
The number of services that are based upon listening to their surroundings 
continuously in order to recognise speech is increasing. Amazon’s Echo and The Ubi 
(theubi.com) not only signpost the acceptability of such listening services to 
consumers, but highlight the need for research in understanding the implications of 
their deployment. Most of these current commercial speech systems focus on a 

 
Living with Listening Services: Privacy and Control in IoT 
101 
dialogic model of interaction, where users enter a dialogue with a system, with speech 
results recognised for immediate system activity, often with spoken responses, and the 
possibility for further dialogue. Yet recent advances in battery life, bandwidth, and 
processing power of mobile devices as well as the move towards multiple situated, 
connected sensing appliances offers the possibility of services that continually listen 
to natural conversation. With the opportunities of technologies such as smart watches 
or other wearable devices (such as the Motorola Hint earpiece), clear audio recording 
of everyday conversation is also easier to foresee. Technically, this offers 
opportunities for systems that could modify and change their behaviour based on a 
users’ implicit spoken interaction with others. For example, phones could 
automatically carry out actions based on spoken audio – searches could be 
opportunistically run and displayed on lock screens, adverts could be better based on 
user activities, and models of user behaviour could make use of richer descriptions of 
users' lives. Socially, professionally, and civically however the impact of having all of 
our speech recorded and available to third parties needs to be examined.  
2 
Exploring Listening Services 
Speech has been used as an input in HCI in a number of ways. The most common are 
dialogic systems where the user interacts with the system as part of a conversation, 
such as Siri. These are now commonly available on consumer devices. There has been 
research on improving the interface for speech dictation, by making it more 
immediate and interactive [8] and controlling a traditional touch and click based UI 
using speech input has also been tried in systems such as SpeechAct [24]. 
Using speech as a secondary input for information retrieval, for example automatic 
transcription and indexing of voice mails [22] and meetings [21] has received 
considerable research. Beyond transcription, problems such as topic extraction, 
detection of conversational ‘hot spots’, and recording speaker decisions have been 
addressed [20]. Systems where the speech is used in the background are rare, however 
one such example is the Ambient Spotlight [6] where supporting documents were 
retrieved to match the current topic in an ongoing meeting. It is also possible to 
perform tasks such as ‘mining’ sociometric data [23] to understand the social 
connections of subjects. This has been done with continual listening on mobile 
devices to extrapolate the audio levels and sound characteristics of social activity and 
to detect patterns of social interactions between users [3].  
Building on work that process the audio into text, and annotating it with other 
features, it is also possible to employ natural language processing to analyse the text 
extracted. There are many approaches that can be used, in particular text 
summarisation approaches, covered in detail by Lloret & Palomar [11], which support 
extraction of key phrases and words from text. One simple approach is to extract the 
subject term from sentences. This can be done with a fairly high accuracy – over 90%. 
The security implications of the systems outlined in this space come from two 
directions. The first being that the processing capacity required for accurate and quick 
transformation of audio to text or sociometric data combined with the desired 

102 
D. McMillan and A. Loriette 
mobility of the service means that there is a strong requirement to use a cloud based 
solution. The difficulties of securing cloud-based and IoT sensing services have been 
discussed by Kozlov et al [7]. That the pre-processed data will be transferred over the 
Internet for processing and stored by the services provider, with the results returned 
by the same channel opens up a number of security problems related to third parties, 
but there are other security concerns relating to the relationship between the user and 
the service provider and the split in hardware, infrastructure, and service control. 
The other driver for the security problems is the use of audio itself. A microphone is 
not a discriminating sensor, meaning that those in the surroundings will be recorded as 
well as the users. It is also an incredibly rich and detailed source of data. While we 
focus on the spoken words that users say in range of the microphone the data collected 
can be used for a number of activity recognition purposes [10], and a persons voice 
itself is a biometrically significant indicator in identifying an individual [5].   
In exploring the acceptability, impact, and opportunities surrounding always 
listening services we recruited 10 participants to record a day of their lives and be 
interviewed with regards to the Continuous Speech Stream (CSS) we manually 
produced. Participants wore a lapel microphone mounted onto their clothing, with 
small digital audio recorders worn on the belt or in a pocket. For privacy reasons we 
allowed participants to stop and start the recorder at will, and also offered to delete 
any sections from the audio that the participants did not want to share with us. This 
provided us with a small but rich dataset of naturalistically recorded speech. 
Participants ranged from an architect, an elementary school teacher, a brand 
consultant, a special needs carer and a mystery shopper. All participants were 
requested to inform those around them that they were recording and to wear the 
microphone openly during the day. Four participants recorded a day during which 
they were not working, six participants recorded a weekday comprising of work and 
after work.  
The service we envisioned would combine automatic speech recognition and 
natural language processing. The first stage would be to use ASR to provide a 
transcript of the spoken words and phrases. The quality of the audio, volume of the 
speech and training on a particular person’s voice has a great impact on the accuracy 
of the automatic speech recognition. Taking this into account we decided that only the 
owner of the device would have their speech transcribed, background conversations 
and conversation partners would be ignored in their stream. This restrictive setup is 
arguably the most likely to be rolled out in a commercial product, using for example 
the affordance of ear bone microphone, by circumventing the problem of noisy input. 
We determined that natural language processing would be used to extract subjects 
and objects of speech, filtering out personal pronouns, for inclusion in the stream.  
We also decided to include time phrases and numbers wherever they appeared 
grammatically given their utility. Such processing of an ASR transcript we deemed to 
be computationally feasible. We note that the attributes of the ASR and the NLP 
stages could be tuned to include or exclude a number of attributes – grammatical, 
aural or statistical – however this simple definition of the CSS was compatible with 
both our goals for design and for privacy. Not providing a full transcription, not 
promising accuracy of recognition, not providing timestamps – all of these were to 

 
Living with Listening Services: Privacy and Control in IoT 
103 
introduce ambiguity, uncertainty and therefor deniability into the system. This 
produced a word list from the day for each participant, covering all the topics spoken 
about over this period. Overall, the corpus of word transcribed formed a dictionary of 
2500 distinctive words, with a flat distribution and top 10 words being uttered 5 to 15 
times a day. Participants completed a semi-structured, transcribed interview in which 
their word list was used as a prompt.  
3 
Impact of the Continuous Speech Stream as a Service 
In our initial design exploration of the possibilities afforded by such a service 
available on mobile devices [12] we determined possibilities at a personal level (such 
as reflecting on ones stream), on a shared level (such as subscribing to another’s 
stream for a period of time), and on an aggregate level (such as providing the 
sentiment of an area by counting the occurrences of a particular topic of 
conversation). Here we look at the different aspects of daily life that would be 
affected by the widespread adoption of continuous listening services. 
3.1 
Home Life 
One of the most straightforward uses of this information would be as a memory aids. 
The amount of conversation taking place, the topics (work related or personal), and 
the counts of certain words can be used for a number of self-reflective purposes. 
However the knowledge that such word counts and topics are being recorded, and that 
they would be available to share if one allows adds another dynamic to the 
conversational interactions taking place within the home. As with social media, the 
accountability of sharing and hiding can cause friction, and will continue to do so 
until the social conventions and expectations around its use settle. With more complex 
analysis of the streams relationships could be examined for their quantitative and 
qualitative attributes, such as the common topics of conversation, positivity of 
language used, and their similarities to other relationships, as well as the duration and 
frequency of interactions. This seemingly objective data on the on-going state of 
relationships within the home could cause problems – indeed, paraphrasing Schoeman 
[19], one view of privacy has at its core the right to your unadulterated self-image. 
Your personal perception of your closest relationships would necessarily be affected 
by such as system, and even without sharing the information it could be seen in this 
sense as a severe privacy violation. 
3.2 
Work Life 
Another of the service designs put forward was that of providing people awareness of 
your current situation through sharing the CSS. Actively sharing of a length of time in 
the style of the Glympse application for location sharing (glympse.com), a user could 
share a meeting with colleagues who are not present. Active reading, where the 
participants of a meeting could allow their streams to be accessible during that time, 

104 
D. McMillan and A. Loriette 
would provide the same service but with a different social dynamic. This would allow 
those arriving later to avoid topics that have been discussed, or prepare for what is 
currently under discussion in the room as they are arriving. 
Friends and family, or famous people, could in this way be subscribed to in order 
to increase awareness and connectedness, with simple filters set up to alert when two 
people are talking about the same topic or say each other’s name, for example. But in 
a work setting management could, as has been the case with Facebook and other 
social networking sites in the past, demand access to the streams of their employees. 
It would also be technically fairly simple to install listening software on corporately 
controlled machines, providing good coverage of the working environment. While 
this could be metricised to provide feedback on the mood in the office it could also be 
used to enforce productivity – talking about anything but work related topics could be 
quantified per employee, as could talking negatively about the company or product.  
In the same way as we outlined above in the home life scenario, sharing a stream 
that is by design an inaccurate snapshot of oneself could be even more problematic in 
a less casual environment. Being held accountable for a distorted transcript of one’s 
conduct in the workplace could have serious consequences, especially if these 
transcripts are stored in perpetuity by an employer used as part of a formal evaluation 
process or as a basis for something that could be seen as a ‘ground truth’ in letters of 
recommendation to future employers. 
3.3 
Civic Life 
One of the most interesting possibilities for even a small percentage deployment of 
such a system would be the ability to extract information on the topics of conversation 
in an area to form a new type of demographic. For advertisers this would lead to a 
new metric, the “talkthrough". It would allow those serving adverts to be alerted to 
the number of situations where keywords from their advertisement, be they the brand 
name or a other salient feature of the product, have entered the conversation of the 
viewer. In [12] we discussed the pattern of conversation around pre-purchase routines 
that would allow advertisements to be specifically targeted to those who are in the 
market for a competing product and to track if that consumer considered, talked 
about, or even bought the alternative.  
But while this could be seen as a natural extension of Google’s advertiser metric 
services this could also be employed by political parties. The action of polling an area 
or demographic for a sentiment could be augmented by allowing polling agencies to 
purchase the number of occurrences of certain words or phrases in a specific area or 
within a specific demographic group over a period of time. This could be used to 
measure statistics such as the dissemination of marketing campaigns or the political 
engagement of voters on a particular topic.  
Of course these are, in some sense, personal surveillance systems. The use of the 
distributed system not to help pollsters and advertisers, but to alert government 
authorities to the people and places involved when ‘subversive’ discourse is taking 
place is easily envisaged. It is even possible that such technologies are already used 
by security services. For example, the electronic privacy information centre used a 

 
Living with Listening Services: Privacy and Control in IoT 
105 
freedom of information request to obtain a list of ‘trigger words’ that the US 
department of homeland security uses as signs of terrorism. There are also 
organisations, such as Stratign (statigen.com), that sell GSM intercept systems that 
both break GSM encryption on calls and watch for particular ‘trigger phrases’ in 
speech or text. The importance of these devices to law enforcement has been 
highlighted by reports that the authorities would rather drop prosecution on a range of 
offences rather than expose how they work and what information is being collected 
about suspects and bystanders [18]. 
Even without these sinister uses there is cause for concern on the use of these 
services by polling agencies and political parties. As covered in the review of research 
on the quantification of society by Espeland and Stevens [4], the use of metrics to 
drive policy has changed the cause and effect of societal change. As correlations are 
found with data science and acted upon with greater conviction the rate of this change 
is increasing. In light of this, providing a shortcut to seemingly objective truth of 
political sentiment could greatly empower the demographics feeding data into the 
system at the expense of the technologically or economically excluded.  
4 
Participants’ Concerns 
Our self-selected trial participants voiced some discomfort with being recorded at all 
times, and that in itself suggests that such continuous listening services may be slow 
to reach wide acceptance. Confidential information being inadvertently disclosed 
during the use of this system was one such concern, with one of our participants 
modifying his speech to not include the name of a particular client.  
 “I didn’t say the name, because it is, the client is a secret client, but [co-worker] 
said it all the time.” 
There was also some concern as to the persona that would be projected by a 
transcript of everything they say in a day. 
“I was a little apprehensive, because I thought, Oh God, everyone's going to know 
how stupid I am all the time.” 
But most of our participants reported some degree of normalisation to the process; 
with half of them reporting forgetting the recording at least for part of the time. 
There is considerable ambiguity in the keyword stream we produced, so the 
potential for a user to be held accountable for a particular topic of conversation was 
lower than it may first appear. This, of course, is taking the continuous speech stream 
as an isolated data point. When combined with other sources of data it provides yet 
another point of triangulation and in combination with location data and time could 
add enough context to a keyword to strongly suggest an action. The other side of the 
ambiguity of the stream is the potential for topics, or even errors in recognition, to be 
taken out of context causing concern and embarrassment: 
“Porn […] I think we were perhaps joking about something, but I can't remember 
exactly […] I really wouldn't want to share that word with family.” 

106 
D. McMillan and A. Loriette 
The image presented by participants through their CSS was also explored during 
the interviews, showing that the without the context surrounding the words spoken the 
readers preconceptions are strongly projected onto the producer of the stream. 
“This must be a girl that right here.x It’s the first person. It looked like it’s a person 
that is a bit stressed about the age because talking about Botox all the time and her 
legs.”  
This participant was in fact reading about a long-running joke between one the 
stream producer and a co-worker about being the youngest workers in the office – yet 
without the context, tone of voice, facial expression, and body language the conclu-
sion that the producer is vain and older than she is was drawn.  
Some of these concerns could be to do with the novelty of such close and 
continuous surveillance, however it has been shown that these concerns can drop over 
time – even among those opposed to such surveillance – as familiarity increases [16].   
5 
Recommendations 
While the continuous logging of sensor and usage data, such as location, browser 
history, or app usage is becoming commonplace a users’ speech and contextual audio 
is more personal and rich resource. Not only must the lessons learned in giving users 
graduated control of there exposure to logged data be applied in this area, the 
underlying implications that the device, and through it the service provider, is 
continuously listening must be dealt with honestly and openly if there is to be any 
chance of these technologies being accepted. That the audio clips Siri and Cortana’s 
speech recognition systems found hard to understand are listened to by office workers 
to produce an improved training set is not unexpected [14] – yet the implication that 
your audio is more likely to be listened to by a human being in situations where you 
are not interacting deliberately with the system, or when distracted from the 
interaction by a third party, is one that should be made clear to users. The idea of 
control and empowerment of users through ensuring their understanding of logged 
location data and use data has been positioned [15], and expanding this work to 
provide a better understand both users’ current understanding of their aural privacy, 
and how we can design to empower them when it is threatened by emerging 
technology is an active area of research. 
We recommend that the user should be given mechanisms to understand and 
intervene in the output of their processed audio data. In helping mitigate the risk of 
‘porn’ being shared as a topic of conversation as described above a system could offer 
users control through word, concept, or context filtering, or by obscuring new or 
unexpected content in some way until it is approved. This should include giving users 
the option to edit to the data they have produced in the system, with the consequences 
(such as reduced accuracy in the future, or inability to contribute to certain aggregate 
measurements) clearly explained. In many ways this control of the self projected 
through the system mirrors the controls on social media – yet there is an important 
difference between having the ability to selectively share and edit carefully content 

 
Living with Listening Services: Privacy and Control in IoT 
107 
carefully curated by the user and content that is automatically generated about the 
user.  
Control of the input to such a system is more complicated. Google gives access to 
all the audio clips you have sent to their cloud service for transcription; yet how 
useful is a list of time-stamped audio files for the task of managing your privacy? 
Indicators of how this data has been processed (such as what features are extracted, 
stored, and transmitted), how it will be processed (if it is flagged for human 
verification, or to be used in another system), and control over the future storage and 
processing should be commonplace for such personal data.  
RRI (Responsible Research and Innovation) has become an increasingly important 
field of research in Europe [17] may be affected by potential outcomes from 
prototypes and technology demonstrators. By moving away from the bio-medical 
based ethical framework taken as a starting point in many human centred technology 
fields  (HCI [13], for example) RRI seeks to provide a more accessible, flexible, and 
responsive way to ensure ethical conduct while fostering innovation that has societal 
impact and has at its heart the goal to change the basis of ethics in innovation to 
include the members of society who stand to be affected by the future implications of 
research prototypes and technology demonstrators [2]. By applying such a method to 
the design and development of continuous listening services the concerns and goals of 
users, those incidentally captured, representatives of law enforcement, and 
representatives of those with business interests in such a system would be taken into 
account at the research design phase.  
The acceptability of such services to the general public will not be a uniform. As 
we can see from Westin’s privacy indexes [9] the concern people feel for certain 
types of privacy sensitive sharing of data changes by personal outlook and is changed 
by events. In applying any form of RRI to the design and development of systems and 
services based on continuous listening devices stakeholders from across the range of 
these privacy indexes – High (Fundamentalist), Medium (Pragmatist), and Low 
(Unconcerned)  – should be involved.  
These recommendations should be seen as a starting point for the investigation into 
how users’ autonomy can be ensured when using such services, and research into 
securing transfer, storage, and processing of sensor based IoT services should be 
taken into account. Involving representatives from society in the design and 
development of systems that have the potential to touch every aspect of our lives is 
one way to not only demonstrate that ethical and responsible research is being 
undertaken, but to stay ahead of at least some of the potential problems of deploying 
such pervasive systems.  
6 
Conclusion  
We can see that the addition of continuous listening services could have a profound 
impact on all aspects of a users life, and impact those around them even if they are not 
active users of such a service. As what it means to be recorded, and the meaning of 
the metrics extracted from such recordings, are slowly understood by individuals and 

108 
D. McMillan and A. Loriette 
society the impact of such services will change and settle – as with all socially 
disruptive technologies.  
Coming back to one of Schoeman’s definitions of privacy including autonomy of 
self image, while objective information on the state of your exercising and dieting 
provided by health applications may intrude on this self-image it can be argued that 
they do so objectively, for your own good. The same is hard to argue for a system that 
counts the number of affectionate terms said to a particular person per week or 
compares the number of topics discussed by one couple against a demographically 
calculated average. The autonomy of the personal reflection on the state of a 
relationship is interfered with, but as yet there is no objective improvement or goal 
that can be offered. This is a generalizable problem with systems and services that 
move from exposing the objectively quantifiable towards the more qualitative aspects 
of life. Presenting information to users without understanding it fully, or without 
providing the tools for the users to understand and contextualize the data and the 
limits of its relevance could be harmful to the users in question, their friends and 
colleagues, and the IoT sector as a whole. 
References 
1. Not in front of the telly: Warning over ’listening’ TV, BBC News, http://www.bbc. 
co.uk/news/technology-31296188 (accessed on February 25, 2015) 
2. Bernd, C.S., Eden, G., et al.: Responsible research and innovation in infor-mation and 
communication technology: Identifying and engaging with the ethical implications of 
ICTs. Responsible Innovation 199 (1988) 
3. Chon, Y., Lane, N.D., et al.: Understanding the coverage and scalability of place-centric 
crowdsensing. In: Proceedings of the 2013 ACM International Joint Conference on Perva-
sive and Ubiquitous Computing, pp. 3–12. ACM (2013) 
4. Espeland, W.N., Stevens, M.L.: A Sociology of Quantification. European Journal of Soci-
ology / Archives Européennes de Sociologie 49(03), 401–436 (2008) 
5. Fazel, A., Chakrabartty, S.: An overview of statistical pattern recognition techniques for 
speaker verification. IEEE Circuits and Systems Magazine 11(2), 62–81 (2011) 
6. Kilgour, J., Carletta, J., et al.: The Ambient Spotlight: Queryless desktop search from 
meeting speech. In: Proceedings of the 2010 International Workshop on Searching Spon-
taneous Conversational Speech, pp. 49–52. ACM (2010) 
7. Kozlov, D., Veijalainen, J., et al.: Security and privacy threats in IoT architec-tures. In: 
Proceedings of the 7th International Conference on Body Area Networks, pp. 256–262. 
ICST (Institute for Computer Sciences, Social-Informatics and Tele-communications En-
gineering) (2012) 
8. Kumar, A., Paek, T., et al.: Voice typing: a new speech interaction model for dictation on 
touchscreen devices. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in 
Computing Systems, pp. 2277–2286. ACM (2012) 
9. Kumaraguru, P., Cranor, L.F.: Privacy indexes: a survey of Westin’s studies (2005) 
10. Lane, N.D., Miluzzo, E., et al.: A survey of mobile phone sensing. IEEE Communications 
Magazine 48(9), 140–150 (2010) 
11. Lloret, E., Palomar, M.: Text summarisation in progress: a literature re-view. Artificial  
Intelligence Review 37(1), 1–41 (2012) 

 
Living with Listening Services: Privacy and Control in IoT 
109 
12. McMillan, D., Loriette, A., et al.: Repurposing Conversation: Experiments with the Con-
tinuous Speech Stream. In: Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems. ACM (2015) 
13. McMillan, D., Morrison, A., et al.: Categorised ethical guidelines for large scale mobile 
HCI. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Sys-
tems, pp. 1853–1862. ACM (2013) 
14. Morris, I.: Apple’s Siri And Microsoft’s Cortana Record Your Voice, And Someone Is 
Listening, Forbes.com, http://forbes.com/2015/02/24/apples-siri-and-microsofts-cortana-
record-your-voice-and-someone-is-listening/ (accessed on February 25, 2015 ) 
15. Morrison, A., McMillan, D., et al.: Improving consent in large scale mobile HCI through 
personalised representations of data. In: Proceedings of the 8th Nordic Conference on Hu-
man-Computer Interaction: Fun, Fast, Foundational, pp. 471–480. ACM (2014) 
16. Oulasvirta, A., Pihlajamaa, A., et al.: Long-term effects of ubiquitous surveil-lance in  
the home. In: Proceedings of the 2012 ACM Conference on Ubiquitous Computing,  
pp. 41–50. ACM (2012) 
17. Owen, R., Macnaghten, P., et al.: Responsible research and innovation: From science in 
society to science for society, with society. Science and Public Policy 39(6), 751–760 
(2012) 
18. Pagliery, J.: FBI lets suspects go to protect ’Stingray’ secrets, CNN, http://money. 
cnn.com/2015/03/18/technology/security/police-stingray-phone-tracker/ 
(accessed 
on 
March 24, 2015) 
19. Schoeman, F.D.: Philosophical dimensions of privacy: An anthology. Cambridge Universi-
ty Press (1984) 
20. Tur, G., De Mori, R.: Spoken language understanding: Systems for ex-tracting semantic 
information from speech. John Wiley & Sons (2011) 
21. Waibel, A., Schultz, T., et al.: SMaRT: The smart meeting room task at ISL. In: Proceed-
ings of, IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech, and Signal Processing 
(ICASSP), vol. 754, pp. IV-752–IV-755. IEEE (2003) 
22. Whittaker, S., Hirschberg, J., et al.: SCANMail: a voicemail interface that makes speech 
browsable, readable and searchable. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human 
Factors in Computing Systems, pp. 275–282. ACM (2002) 
23. Wyatt, D., Choudhury, T., et al.: Inferring colocation and conversation net-works from 
privacy-sensitive audio with implications for computational social sci-ence. ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 2(1), 7 (2011) 
24. Yankelovich, N., Levow, G.-A., et al.: Designing SpeechActs: Issues in speech user  
interfaces. In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing 
Systems, pp. 369–376. ACM Press/Addison-Wesley Publishing Co. (1995) 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Internet and Innovation 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 113–122, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_9 
Communication Forms and Digital Technologies  
in the Process of Collaborative Writing 
Kaja Scheliga() 
Alexander von Humboldt Institute for Internet and Society, Berlin, Germany 
kaja.scheliga@hiig.de 
Abstract. The increasing use of digital technologies for research purposes is af-
fecting scholarly communication. This analysis of a nationwide survey with 
academics in Germany shows that, in the process of collaborative writing, co-
authors communicate across multiple channels. Communication forms based on 
digital technologies are used complementarily to face-to-face communication. 
Furthermore, it is evident from the data that the more digital technologies re-
searchers use, the more face-to-face meetings they hold.  
Keywords: Digital technologies · Communication · Face-to-face · Collabora-
tion · Internet science 
1 
Introducing Digital Scholarship 
Research, especially in science, technology, engineering and mathematics, is a col-
laborative effort [1]. Collaboration, however, is not limited to these areas of research; 
the social sciences, arts and humanities are also affected. There is a growing number 
of academic papers written in co-authorship [2,3]. At the same time, there is a grow-
ing number of digital technologies that are increasingly used for scholarly communi-
cation [4,5]. Scholarship is becoming digital and is subject to transformations 
throughout that process [6,7,8,9]. In light of the increasing use of digital technologies 
for research purposes, is there a tendency for communication between researchers to 
be mediated via technologies, consequently leading to a decline of face-to-face meet-
ings? In this paper I explore both digital and direct communication forms between 
researchers in Germany against the background of collaborative writing of academic 
papers. I compare the communication forms most frequently used by researchers who 
collaborate with co-authors working in the same place and those working in different 
places. I examine whether the ubiquity of digital technologies affects communication 
between co-authors, leading to communication that is largely mediated via digital 
technologies and thereby reducing face-to-face contact. The data shows that commu-
nication forms based on digital technologies do not lead to a decline of face-to-face 
communication among co-authors. I argue that researchers use multiple communica-
tion channels in the process of collaborative writing. Digitally mediated communica-
tion forms are used complementarily to face-to-face meetings. Drawing on my  
data analysis, I highlight a positive correlation between the use of digitally mediated 

114 
K. Scheliga 
communication forms and face-to-face meetings. The more researchers communicate 
digitally the more they communicate directly.   
2 
Shifting Towards Digitisation 
In light of the ubiquitous presence of digital technologies in the developed world, it can 
be argued that there is a gradual shift from a historical society that relies on information 
and communication technologies to record and transmit data, to a hyperhistorical soci-
ety that depends on information and communication technologies to record, transmit 
and process data [10]. Furthermore, the transition towards a hyperhistorical state evokes 
the notion of technology-in-betweenness [11]. Applied to digital scholarship, technol-
ogy-in-betweenness means that there is a digital technology between collaborating re-
searchers. Consequently, scholarly communication is mediated via digital technologies. 
This can also be referred to as hyperpersonal communication [12].   
3 
Science 2.0 Survey 
The empirical basis of my analysis is the quantitative Science 2.0 Survey (2014). It 
was conducted online as part of the Leibniz Research Alliance Science 2.0. The sam-
ple includes researchers from various disciplines, from universities as well as from 
research institutes across Germany. The survey consisted of a main part concerning 
communication forms and the use of online tools in academia (N=2083) and an op-
tional part concerning online text editors (N=1339). The analysis presented is based 
on the data from the optional part of the survey and is supplemented by demographic 
data from the main part of the survey. The statistical analysis was performed using 
IBM Statistics SPSS 22. The sample is not representative but offers good coverage of 
the academic landscape in Germany. 
4 
The Researchers 
The respondents to the Science 2.0 survey (N=1339) are researchers in Germany. 
They cover all age groups, although the majority of the researchers are between 25 
and 35 years old (Fig. 1). Correspondingly, a considerable proportion of respondents 
are at a relatively early stage of their academic career – many are doctoral students or 
work in research staff and postdoc positions (Fig. 2). However, 14% of the sample 
consists of professors and junior professors, which thus counteracts the skew towards 
“digital natives”.  In terms of academic disciplines the largest fraction of respondents 
work in the field of mathematics, the natural sciences, and computer science. Never-
theless, the linguistic- and cultural sciences as well as law, economics, the social sci-
ences and engineering are also well represented (Fig. 3).  There is a fairly representa-
tive distribution with regards to gender: 45% of respondents are female and 55% are 
male.  

 
Communication Forms and Digital Technologies in the Process 
115 
 
Fig. 1. Age of the researchers 
 
Fig. 2. Academic position of the researchers  

116 
K. Scheliga 
 
Fig. 3. Academic discipline of the researchers 
5 
Communication Forms among Researchers 
In exploring the impact of digital technologies on forms of communication, postal 
mail is an interesting case. In the context of collaborative writing, 21% of researchers 
claim to use postal mail as a form of communication with co-authors who work at a 
different place. Compared with 91% of email usage, this shows that while mail as a 
classical form of communication is still being used by researchers, it has been pushed 
back by the high usage of email.  
Another case worth considering is the use of the telephone in comparison with 
VoIP technologies such as Skype. While on the surface, both technologies transmit 
the voice of the sender to the receiver, the range of functionalities and the conventions 
of use are different. VoIP services make it easy to add participants to the conversation 
and to exchange additional information via the chat channel. Not all researchers, 
however, are online all the time. Furthermore, even with a stable internet connection 
the quality of the conversation is unpredictable and subject to disruptions. The tele-
phone, in contrast, is a more reliable communication medium, and it is therefore still 
frequently used by researchers. In this case there are no signs of VoIP technologies 
replacing the telephone, both technologies are used in parallel. 
Correspondingly, the question is whether there are any indications of digital tech-
nologies that imitate direct human contact, such as videoconferencing, reducing face-
to-face meetings. The data shows that only 46% of researchers who work at different 
places use videoconferencing while 92% of researchers have face-to-face meetings. 
Contrary to the initial assumption that scholarly communication is mediated by digital 

 
Communication Forms and Digital Technologies in the Process 
117 
technologies, this clearly indicates that digital technologies are used as a complemen-
tary form of communication. 
5.1 
Communication Forms in the Same Place 
The three most frequently used forms of communication among researchers in the pro-
cess of collaborative writing are face-to-face meetings, email, and telephone (see Fig. 
4). Face-to-face meetings are the communication form most frequently used among co-
authors who work at the same place. In total, 93% of researchers have face-to-face 
meetings during the process of collaborative writing and 64% stated that they have face-
to-face meetings very often. Communication via email is used very often by 54% of 
researchers, and total use of email amounts up to 93%. As mentioned above, the tele-
phone is still an important tool for researchers. In total, it is used by 85% of researchers, 
while 26% of researchers use it very often.  
In contrast to these three established communication forms, newer forms of commu-
nication based on digital technologies are used to a smaller extent by researchers work-
ing at the same place. Services such as chat or instant messaging are used by 29% of 
researchers, VoIP by 24% of researchers, and videoconferencing by 16% of researchers. 
Thus, new digital communication forms are used less frequently than face-to-face meet-
ings, email, and telephone.  
 
Fig. 4. Communication forms in the same place 

118 
K. Scheliga 
5.2 
Communication Forms Between Different Places 
As is the case for co-authors who work at the same place, co-authors who work at 
different places also predominantly use email, telephone, and face-to-face meetings to 
communicate with one another (see Fig. 5). When collaborating at different places, 
75% of researchers use email very often. In total, 91% of researchers rely on email 
when communicating with their co-authors. With physical distance between co-
authors, the use of the telephone increases to 92% in total, and 28% of researchers use 
it very often. In spite of working in different places, face-to-face meetings play an 
important role. 92% of researchers use this form of communication to collaborate and 
22% of researchers hold face-to-face meetings very often.  
The usage of newer digital communication forms is higher for co-authors who 
work in different places than for those who share a workspace. In total, 58% of re-
searchers use VoIP technologies, 46% use videoconferencing, and 37% use chat or 
instant messaging services.  
As the descriptive analysis shows, the general tendencies concerning the usage of 
communication forms during the process of collaborative writing are the same for co-
authors working both at the same and at different places. Established communication 
forms are used more frequently than those relying on newer digital technologies. 
 
 
Fig. 5. Communication forms between different places 
 

 
Communication Forms and Digital Technologies in the Process 
119 
5.3 
The Relation Between Digital and Face-to-Face Communication 
In order to thoroughly examine the relation between communication forms based on 
digital technologies and face-to-face meetings I conducted a statistical analysis.  
I constructed an index variable, grouping together all variables referring to communi-
cation forms based on digital technologies (videoconferencing, VoIP, chat, email,  
telephone), and correlated it with the variable capturing the frequency of face-to-face 
meetings. The correlation encompasses communication forms among researchers 
working both at the same and at different places. The results are summarised in  
Table 1. Communication forms based on digital technologies and face-to-face meet-
ings positively correlate with each other. This suggests that the more digitally medi-
ated forms of communication researchers use the more they also hold face-to-face 
meetings. The correlation is stronger between digitally mediated forms of communi-
cation and face-to-face meetings for researchers working in different places than for 
those who are working at the same place. Generally, however, the correlation is rela-
tively weak due to low values of the correlation coefficients. Nevertheless, it is statis-
tically significant. 
Table 1. Correlations between digital communication and face-to-face (F2F) communication 
 
 
Correlations
F2F (@same place) F2F (@different place) 
DigitalCommunication 
(@same place) 
Pearson Correlation
,126**
,255**
Sig. (2-tailed)
,000
,000
N
1338
1338
DigitalCommunication 
(@different place) 
Pearson Correlation
,167**
,306**
Sig. (2-tailed)
,000
,000
N
1338
1338
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).
Correlations (Spearman's rho)
F2F (@same place) F2F (@different place) 
DigitalCommunication 
(@same place) 
Correlation Coefficient
,074**
,187**
Sig. (2-tailed)
,007
,000
N
1338
1338
DigitalCommunication 
(@different place) 
Correlation Coefficient
,138**
,142**
Sig. (2-tailed)
,000
,000
N
1338
1338
**. Correlation is significant at the 0.01 level (2-tailed).

120 
K. Scheliga 
The initial question of whether communication between co-authors is largely  
mediated via digital technologies, consequently leading to a decline of face-to-face 
meetings, is not supported by the available data. Instead, the data shows that commu-
nication forms based on digital technologies are used in a complementary fashion. 
Researchers communicate using various – both digital and non-digital – channels 
simultaneously. Moreover, the more digital technologies researchers use the more 
they tend to meet face-to-face. 
6 
Discussing Communication Forms  
It is clear that digital technologies have an impact on scholarship in general and 
scholarly communication in particular. The high penetration of various forms of 
communication technologies in other areas of work and play may lead us to think that 
also scholarly communication is largely mediated by digital technologies. While there 
is a tendency for communication among researchers to increasingly rely on digital 
technologies, the presented results show that researchers use multiple channels for 
communicating with their co-authors. The analysis reveals no distinct signs that digi-
tal communication forms reduce face-to-face communication. This is also reflected by 
Borgman who explains that ‘[n]ew technologies did not result in shifting the balance 
among stakeholders as radically or rapidly as some had hoped, largely because social 
practices are much more enduring than are technologies.’ [13]. The social aspect of 
face-to-face communication seems to be of importance for researchers. Face-to-face 
meetings not only provide researchers with a means to discuss pressing issues, but at 
the same time, they satisfy the basic need for social interaction. After all, mutual in-
spiration and trust are crucial elements of successful collaboration.  
A possible explanation for the lower usage of newer technologies for scholarly 
communication can be found in a degree of conservatism among researchers when it 
comes to adopting new technologies [14]. Another reason could be that many digital 
technologies have not been developed with research in mind and therefore do not 
necessarily offer the functionalities most needed by researchers.  
The fact that researchers tend to communicate across multiple channels can be ex-
plained by the nature of the collaborative writing process. It seems that face-to-face 
meetings are important at the stages of the writing process where complicated prob-
lems are discussed or major decisions concerning the text are taken. At these mo-
ments, researchers are likely to want the full array of available information from their 
co-authors. This is something digital technologies imitate but cannot provide without 
a loss of information. The positive correlation between usage of digital technologies 
and face-to-face meetings seems to suggest that digital technologies do not suffice 
when it comes to discussing complex issues among collaborating researchers.  
At other stages of the collaborative writing process that involve tasks of a more or-
ganisational nature or the fine-tuning of the text, digitally mediated communication 
forms are likely to be of greater value. Email not only makes coordination fast and 
cheap but also leaves a record of the facts that is available to all co-authors. As one 
researcher elucidates in the context of open science, ‘when you use those things 
[online tools], the conversation you have gets recorded, and you can follow it, you can 

 
Communication Forms and Digital Technologies in the Process 
121 
remember the conversations you had with your colleagues’ [15]. This record, in con-
trast to the alterable memory of what was said during a face-to-face meeting, a tele-
phone conversation or a videoconference, is the same for all collaborators. Even 
though it can be interpreted in different ways it is not subject to change as is the case 
with memory.  
Moreover, the use of multiple communication channels among co-authors can ad-
ditionally be explained by the synchronous and asynchronous nature of these commu-
nication forms. Email or some forms of chat are asynchronous, which is relevant for 
co-authors who work at different places and possibly even across different time-
zones. Face-to-face meetings as well as videoconferencing, and telephone conferences 
are synchronous, which requires researchers to be available at the same time. These 
differences suggest that the various communication forms are relevant at different 
stages of the collaborative writing process and thus serve as complementary commu-
nication channels.   
7 
Conclusion  
As I have shown based on an analysis of the Survey Science 2.0, researchers use  
multiple communication channels in the process of collaboratively writing academic 
papers. Digitally mediated forms of communication are used complementarily to face-
to-face communication. The more digital technologies researchers use for communi-
cating in the process of collaborative writing, the more they tend to meet face-to-face. 
On the one hand, in light of increased usage of digital technologies for research pur-
poses, a stronger digitisation of communication is likely to occur. On the other hand, 
we should not expect digital technologies to completely replace face-to-face commu-
nication in the realm of research collaboration. What is important for the future is not 
to force more digital communication tools upon researchers but to continue develop-
ing digital technology in such a way that is beneficial to scholarly communication. 
Acknowledgements. This research has been supported by the Alexander von Humboldt Insti-
tute for Internet and Society. Many special thanks to Daniela Pscheida, Claudia Minet, and all 
others who collaborated on the Science 2.0 Survey 2014. Thanks to the reviewers of the second 
EINS Conference on Internet Science for their valuable remarks.  
References 
1. Bozeman, B., Boardman, C.: Research Collaboration and Team Science. A State-of-the-
Art Review and Agenda. Springer, Heidelberg (2014) 
2. Katz, J.S., Martin, B.R.: What is research collaboration? Research Policy 26, 1–18 (1997) 
3. Wuchty, S., Jones, B.F., Uzzi, B.: The Increasing Dominance of Teams in Production of 
Knowledge. Report. Science 316(5827), 1036–1039 (2007), doi:10.1126/science.1136099. 
4. Science 2.0 Survey 2013 Datareport. Pscheida, D., Albrecht, S., Herbst, S., Minet, C., 
Köhler, T.: Nutzung von Social Media und onlinebasierten Anwendungen in der 
Wissenschaft. 
Erste 
Ergebnisse 
des 
Science 
2.0-Survey 
2013 
des 
Leibniz-
Forschungsverbunds Science 2.0 (2013),  
http://nbn-resolving.de/urn:nbn:de:bsz:14-qucosa-132962 

122 
K. Scheliga 
5. Science 2.0 Survey 2014 Datareport. Pscheida, D., Minet, C., Herbst, S., Albrecht, S., 
Köhler, T.: Nutzung von Social Media und onlinebasierten Anwendungen in  
der 
Wissenschaft 
– 
Ergebnisse 
des 
Science 
2.0-Survey 
2014 
(2015),  
http://d-nb.info/1069096679/34 
6. Borgman, C.L.: Scholarship in the Digital Age. Information, Infrastructure, and the Inter-
net. MIT Press, Cambridge (2007) 
7. Weller, M.: The Digital Scholar. How Technology Is Transforming Scholarly Practice. 
Bloomsbury Publishing (2011) 
8. Nentwich, M., König, R.: Cyberscience 2.0. Research in the Age of Digital Social Net-
works. Campus, Frankfurt-on-Main (2012) 
9. Meyer, E.T., Schroeder, R.: Knowledge Machines. Digital Transformations of the Sciences 
and Humanities. MIT Press, Cambridge (2015) 
10. Floridi, L.: Hyperhistory and the Philosophy of Information Policies. Philosophy & Tech-
nology 25(2), 129–131 (2012), doi:10.1007/s13347-012-0077-4 
11. Floridi, L.: The 4th Revolution. How the Infosphere is Reshaping Human Reality. Oxford 
University Press, Oxford (2014) 
12. Walther, J.B.: Computer-Mediated Communication: Impersonal, Interpresonal, and 
Hyperpersonal Interaction. Communication Research 23, 3–43 (1996) 
13. Borgman, C.L.: Scholarship in the Digital Age. Information, Infrastructure, and the Inter-
net, p. 65. MIT Press, Cambridge (2007) 
14. Procter, R., Williams, R., Stewart, J., Poschen, M., Snee, H., Voss, A., Asgari–Targhi, M.: 
Adoption and use of Web 2.0 in scholarly communications. Philosophical Transactions of 
the Royal Society 368(1926), 4039–4056 (2010) 
15. Scheliga, K.: Open Science Interview with Carolina Ödman-Govender. Zenodo (2014), 
https://zenodo.org/record/12342?ln=en#.VOsmwvlfaSp 

 
© Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015 
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 123–132, 2015. 
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_10 
Ethics of Personalized Information Filtering 
Ansgar Koene(), Elvira Perez, Christopher James Carter,  
Ramona Statache, Svenja Adolphs, Claire O’Malley, Tom Rodden,  
and Derek McAuley 
HORIZON Digital Economy Research 
University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK 
ansgar.koene@nottingham.ac.uk,  
{first_name,last_name}@nottingham.ac.uk 
Abstract. Online search engines, social media, news sites and retailers are all 
investing heavily in the development of ever more refined information filtering 
to optimally tune their services to the specific demands of their individual users 
and customers. In this position paper we examine the privacy consequences of 
user profile models that are used to achieve this information personalization, the 
lack of transparency concerning the filtering choices and the ways in which per-
sonalized services impact the user experience. Based on these considerations 
we argue that the Internet research community has a responsibility to increase 
its efforts to investigate the means and consequences of personalized informa-
tion filtering. 
Keywords: Privacy · Transparency · Behavior manipulation · RRI · Filter bubble  
1 
Introduction 
In the world of on-line information services the dominant business model is one in 
which no monetary payment is taken from the users. In order to attract maximum user 
numbers, information businesses therefore find themselves competing primarily based 
on the perceived quality of their information provision. Since information quantity is 
usually virtually limitless (which is why quantity is not a viable option for differenti-
ating from competitors), information overload has become one of the main concerns 
for users. Perceived quality is therefore primarily determined by the ease with which 
the user can obtain some information that satisfies their current desires. The develop-
ment of personalized information filtering therefore represents a logical step in the 
evolution of on-line information services. For many of the most highly success inter-
net service, like Google, Amazon.com, YouTube, Netflix and TripAdvisor, the rec-
ommender system is a key element in their success over rival services in the same 
sector. Some, like Netflix, openly acknowledge this even to the extent of awarding 
large prizes for anyone that can improve their recommender system. 
The simple logic behind the business case for developing such filtering systems 
however is not sufficient to put to rest the numerous social and ethical concerns that 
are introduced by the use of these filters. From a Responsible Research and Innova-
tion (RRI) perspective [1], it is necessary for the internet research community to con-
sider the wider implications of such innovations on society.  

124 
A. Koene et al. 
 
One of the social concerns about personalized information filtering that has proba-
bly attracted the most attention is the fear that optimizing people’s information flows 
to focus on those things they have previously shown an interests/affinity for may 
cause a feedback loop by which people become isolated from new information due to 
a self-reinforcing filter bubble [2, 3]. To what extent this can, or does, happen as a 
consequence of search engine, social media and news feed personalized filtering, is 
not yet clear. While [4] provided a theoretical analysis showing that, under certain 
conditions, such a scenario is possible, little experimental work has been done to veri-
fy if the ‘filter bubble’ scenario is taking place. Under some circumstances, it was 
shown that a personalized Recommender System for music purchases appeared to 
widen the user’s interests [5] rather than narrowing it. In this context it should also be 
noted that some recommender systems are being specifically designed to promote 
‘serendipitous discovery’ [6]. 
Unfortunately, most of the research on the impact of personalization and recom-
mender systems has so far focused on their commercial success in increasing sales 
(e.g. [7]), web impressions (e.g. [8]), and their ability to increase the consumer inter-
est for niche goods (e.g. [9]). As we have argued in our previous position paper [10], 
this apparent imbalance in research efforts, seemingly focused on a corporate agenda, 
is exactly the kind of narrative that led to the GMO crop controversy in the EU in the 
1990s which dramatically impacted the funding and public support for the Bioscienc-
es. In order to avoid such a public backlash against Internet research it is necessary to 
show that the research community is not solely interested in furthering a corporate 
agenda, but rather is seriously engaged with identifying and improving the societal 
impact of Internet research and innovation. 
In the remainder of this paper we will focus on a number of other concerns associ-
ated with personalized filtering. The main social and ethical concerns we want to 
draw attention to in this paper are: 
1. The privacy intrusion that is unavoidably linked to the tuning of the user behavior 
profile models; 
2. The lack of transparency concerning the data that is used, how it is gathered and 
the way the algorithms work; 
3. The risks of covert manipulation of user behavior. 
2 
Brief Review of Recommender Systems 
Recommender systems emerged as an independent research area in the mid-1990s. 
These first recommender systems [11] applied collaborative-filtering which works on 
the principle that a user who has in the past agreed with certain other users (i.e. given 
similar ratings, or ‘clicked’ on similar items) will have similar interests to them and 
will therefore find relevant and recommendations for items that these users rated 
highly. Modern recommender systems using (combinations of) various types of 
knowledge and data about users, the available items, and previous transactions stored 
in customized databases.  The knowledge and data about the users is collected either 
through explicitly ratings by the users for products, or are inferred by interpreting user 

 
Ethics of Personalized Information Filtering 
125 
 
actions, such as the navigation to a particular product page which is interpreted as an 
implicit sign of preference for the items shown on that page. 
The two main classes of recommender systems are: 
• Content-based, where the system learns to recommend items that are similar to the 
ones that the user liked in the past. The similarity of items is calculated based on 
the features associated with the compared items. Figure 1 gives a high-level over-
view of the components and data flow in a content based recommender system. 
• Collaborative-filtering, users are given recommendations for items that other users 
with similar tastes liked in the past. The similarity in taste of two users is calculat-
ed based on the similarity in the rating history of the users. 
• Community-based, where the system recommends items based on the preference 
the user’s friends. This is similar to Collaborative filtering except that the selection 
of peers to be used for identifying the recommendation is based on an explicit 
‘friendship’ link instead of being deduced from patterns of similar past behavior. 
Such ‘social recommender’ systems are poplar in social-network sites [12]. 
In practice many of the recommender systems are hybrid systems that try balance 
the advantages and disadvantages of each class [13]. Collaborative and community 
based systems, for instance, suffer from an inability to recommend items that have not 
yet been rated by any of the potential peers of the user. This limitation however does 
not affect content-based system as long as the new item is supplied with a description 
of its features, allowing it to be compared to other items that the user has interacted 
with in the past.  
A comprehensive introduction to recommender systems is provided in [14]. 
 
Fig. 1. High level architecture of a Content-based recommender system 

126 
A. Koene et al. 
 
3 
Privacy Intrusion 
The filter parameters that determine the personalized selection and ranking of infor-
mation constitute an implicit user profile model, which is usually based for a large 
part on data about the past search and browsing behavior of the users when they pre-
viously interacted with the service [15]. To further refine the user profiles, services 
may also to gather information about the user behavior on other websites through the 
use of ‘tracking cookies’ [16] or by purchasing third-party access to such data from 
other services. Additionally, recommender systems may also use data concerning the 
behavior of people within the social network of the users [17]. 
From a privacy and digital human rights perspective, each of these data gathering 
methods is ethically troubling since they are all surreptitious, to varying degrees. The 
use of ‘tracking cookies’ is clearly the most troubling in this respect, however even 
the logging of users’ behavior when they are actively engaging with the information 
service itself lacks proper informed consent. At best, users may have read something 
about data logging in the terms-and-conditions they had to agree to when they first 
signed up to the service. Unfortunately the current reality of Internet usage is  
that terms-and-conditions policies of Internet sites are rarely read and are generally 
formulated in ways that are too vague and incomprehensible to constitute a means of 
gaining true informed consent [18]. Furthermore, it is not realistic to expect users to 
remain vigilantly aware of the information about data tracking in the terms-and-
conditions weeks, months and years after they signed up to the site. The “EU Cookie 
Law” [19] has gone some way towards providing a frequent reminder of data tracking 
by websites, however the standard notification of the type:  
“By continuing to use this site you consent to the use of cookies on your device as 
described in our cookie policy unless you have disabled them. You can change your 
cookie settings at any time but parts of our site will not function correctly without 
them.” [FT.com]  
is generally too vague for people to understand, resulting in the same dismissive 
‘click to close’ behavior that people have become accustomed to from the cryptic 
error/warning messages that are typically generated by software and the terms-and-
conditions agreements they did not read.   
Beyond the data collection process, the user profile models that form the basis of 
personalized information filtering pose an additional privacy concern in themselves. 
The profile models of users are in essence an operationalization of the data mining 
efforts by the service provider, built to anticipate the user’s behavior, interests and 
desires. Access to a perfect behavior model of a user would in principle enable any-
one to predict the user’s actions/decisions for a wide range of choices/conditions. 
Beyond the immediate commercial potential for guiding ‘relevant’ advertisements to 
a person, such person profiles could be used to plan targeted phishing campaigns or 
hacking related social engineering. To find a user’s weaknesses it would suffice to 
query the user’s behavior model with a range of choices and observe the predicted 
responses.  
Based on the analysis above, we observe that models of user behavior profiles are 
necessary for the functioning of personalized recommender systems and that these 

 
Ethics of Personalized Information Filtering 
127 
 
models are unavoidably linked to a certain level of privacy intrusion. We therefore 
propose that, within the RRI framework, the Internet research community should 
focus not only on ways to further fine-tune the recommendations from such systems, 
but also on developing recommender systems architectures where the user profile 
model, and the corresponding privacy sensitive information, stays within the access-
control domain of the user. One possible method for this might be based on a two-
layer architecture where the first layer, hosted by the information service provider, 
generates non-personalized search/recommendation results, which are provided to a 
second layer, hosted locally on the user’s device, which ranks the results based on the 
personalized user profile. 
4 
Transparency 
Due to the commercial advantage which information service providers hope to 
achieve through the use of personalized information filtering, the information about 
how exactly their filtering is done is not made publicly available. This lack of trans-
parency however also makes it impossible for users to gain a full understanding of 
how their data is being gathered and used, thus preventing them from truly providing 
informed consent. A key concern in this regard is the fact that most of the information 
service businesses do not earn their money from the users but rather from corporate 
customers who pay access to user data in order to push targeted advertising.  There is 
thus a valid argument for demanding greater oversight into functioning of the infor-
mation filtering in order to guarantee that the information provided to users best serv-
ers their needs. Due to the personal nature of the data used for the behavior profiles, 
and the user models themselves, there also needs to be transparent verification that 
these are store and handled in accordance with the jurisdictionally appropriate priva-
cy-related regulation and laws (e.g. [20][21]). While this might be viewed as primari-
ly the responsibility of regulatory oversight authorities, we propose that this should 
also be seen as a challenge to the Internet research community to develop tools with 
which the filtering criteria can be probed without access to the underlying 
code/algorithm. An obvious approach for developing such tools might be to follow 
existing Black-box testing practices which are commonly used in software and gen-
eral systems development for evaluation and functional testing [22]. An example for 
this is provided by [23], where a Black-box testing approach was used to investigate 
what kind of recommendation schemes were exploited by various movie recommen-
dation systems. 
In accordance with the principle of public engagement and dialog concerning re-
search and innovation, the RRI framework also suggests that the Internet research 
community should make user-friendly versions of recommender system testing kits 
available to the general public to enable people to evaluate for themselves if they find 
the level of profile personalization used by the recommender system acceptable of 
not.  

128 
A. Koene et al. 
 
5 
Behavior Manipulation 
Directly relating to the concerns about lack of transparency, as well as the issue of 
‘filter bubbles’ is the question of how much and for which agenda user behavior is 
being manipulated by the use of personalized filtering. To a certain extent, behavior 
manipulation is unavoidable in any information presentation system since people will 
invariably select the first items on a list more often than those much further down. 
Since it is impossible to place all information at the top of the list, the act of ranking 
involves a behavior manipulation. Provided the manipulation is based on mutual con-
sent, there is nothing wrong with this. It is in fact the desired function of a search or 
recommendation system, as long as the user knows and agrees to the ranking criteria 
that are used by the algorithm. Advertising, of course is all about attempting to per-
suade, i.e. manipulate, potential consumers into purchasing the product/service of the 
advertising agency’s client. The dominant business model of advertising funded 
online information service therefore constitutes a significant conflict of interests at the 
heart of the filter criterion selection.  
As long as the information filtering, and advertising targeting, were based on glob-
al statistical criteria it was usually relatively easy for users to judge if the information 
they were provided with was advertising motivated. The general coarseness of the 
match between the provided and the desired information also meant users engaged a 
more critical attitude towards evaluating the search results. The introduction of per-
sonalized information filtering however is improving the personalized targeting suc-
cess of advertisements at least as fast as the general filtering success. Also, due to the 
generally improved information services, people are less critical in their final selec-
tion. 
In case there was any doubt, the willingness of information service providers to 
engage in manipulating their information filtering for purposes other than the service 
to the user was clearly demonstrated by the “Facebook news feed experiment” [24].  
Once again, there is undoubtedly a role for regulatory oversight concerning these 
conflicts of interest, similar to such regulation in other media. The fact that the per-
sonalized filtering and advert targeting systems are developed by Internet researchers, 
however, means that the Internet research community will undoubtedly be implicated 
in any future scandals about manipulation of personalized information filtering, as it 
already was with [24]. In order to mitigate the impact of such events it is therefore 
important for the Internet research community to be visibly engaged with RRI agenda.  
The challenges in this case are simultaneously daunting and yet very familiar: how 
to prove beyond reasonable doubt that a statement/recommendation is objectively true 
and unbiased. Following the example of legal court cases, the first step might be to 
ask the defendant, i.e. the service provider who controls the recommender system, to 
provide evidence concerning the basis for the recommendation. 
In a bid to gain people’s trust, and interest in the offered recommendations, various 
recommender systems, e.g. Amazon.com, already provide some level of evidence by 
informing the users why certain recommendations are given with statements like: 
“Customers Who Bought This Item Also Bought”. While such information can clear-
ly help users to better understand, and thus evaluate and trust, recommendations it 

 
Ethics of Personalized Information Filtering 
129 
 
does not fully address concerns about possible behavior manipulation. Such concerns 
can only be addressed through the provision of trusted-third-party involvement, either 
in the form of regulatory oversight or by providing tools which can allow users to test 
the recommender system for un-accounted for recommendation biases. 
6 
Evidence of Public Concern about Recommender Systems 
In this section we summaries a number of news stories that illustrate the level of con-
cern, rightly or wrongly, over lack of transparency and potential bias in recommender 
systems. 
In 2011, the US Federal Trade Commission started an investigation into possible 
search results bias by Google. It took two years of investigating before Google was 
cleared of the charges [25]. 
In February 2014, Google agreed to a settlement with European competition regula-
tors following years of legal struggles with antitrust authorities, starting in 2010, con-
cerning complaints that Google search rankings unfairly favored Google products [26]. 
In 2010, Netflix decided to cancel the Netflix Prize sequel after the US Federal 
trade Commission raised concerns about Netflix user privacy and a lawsuit was filed 
against Netflix [27]. The Netflix Prize competition, and its planned sequel, challenged 
competitors to develop improved recommendation algorithms based on a published 
set of anonymized Netflix user data of the type. One of the reasons for the privacy 
concerns was the publications in 2008 of a paper showing that the data supplied for 
the recommender algorithms by the Netflix prize dataset was rich enough to allow it 
to be de-anonymized [28].  
7 
Conclusion 
Personalized information filtering by online search engines, social media, news sites 
and retailers represents a natural evolution in the development towards ever more 
finely tuned interaction with the users. Even leaving aside concerns about individual 
and social consequences of possible ‘filter bubbles’, the user profiling required to 
achieve this personalization raises numerous ethical issues around privacy and data 
protection. Further concerns arise due to the lack of transparency and the potential for 
increasingly covert manipulation of user behaviour in favour of the commercial inter-
ests of the predominantly advertising based business models of information services. 
Due to the frequently close involvement of the large information service providers 
with the Internet research community, there is a growing risk that scandals related to 
personalized information filtering by corporations might triggering a controversy and 
public backlash similar to the one that hit GM crops in Europe in the 1990s. In order 
to avoid such a controversy it is essential to retain the confidence and trust of the 
public by actively engaging with the Responsible Research and Innovation agenda 
and pro-actively working to mitigate these issues. In order to achieve this we propose 
a research programme aimed at: 

130 
A. Koene et al. 
 
• identifying and studying the socio-psychological impact of personalized filtering; 
• helping people to understand and regulate the level of privacy intrusion they are 
willing to accept for personalized information filtering; 
• developing a methodology to probe the subjective ‘validity’ of the information that 
is provided to users based on their own interests; 
• engaging with corporate information service providers to reinforce ethical practices. 
Project elements for such a research programme might include  
• Technical development of tools: 
─ Black-box testing kit for probing the characteristics of the user behavior profiles 
used in recommender systems. 
─ Recommendation bias detection system for identifying user behavior manipula-
tion 
─ A two-layer recommender architecture that de-couples the delivery of non-
personalized information by service providers from a user owned/controlled sys-
tem for personalized ranking of the information. 
 
• Psycho-social research on the impact of personalized information filtering on: 
─ General exploration-exploitation trade-off in action selection 
─ Attitudes towards trust and critical evaluation of information 
 
• Cybersecurity: 
─ Protection against mal-use of personalized recommender systems for phishing 
related social engineering 
 
• Policy: 
─ Development of guidelines for responsible innovation and use of recommender 
systems, protecting the privacy and freedom of access to information of users. 
 
• Public engagement: 
─ Develop educational material to help people understand how recommendations 
they receive from search engines, and other recommender systems, are filtered 
so that they can better evaluate the information they receive. 
Acknowledgement. This work forms part of the CaSMa project supported by ESRC grant 
ES/M00161X/1. 
For 
more 
information 
about 
the 
CaSMa 
project, 
see 
http://casma.wp.horizon.ac.uk/ . 
References 
1. Sutcliffe, H.: A report on Responsible Research & Innovation. Matter (2011),  
http://ec.europa.eu 
2. Pariser, E.: The Filter Bubble. Penguin Books (2011) 
3. Sunstein, C.R.: Republic.com. Princeton University Press, Princeton (2007) 

 
Ethics of Personalized Information Filtering 
131 
 
4. Van Alstyne, M., Brynjolfsson, E.: Global village or cyber-Balkans? Modeling and meas-
uring the integration of electronic communities. Management Science 51(6), 851–868 
(2005) 
5. Hosanagar, K., Fleder, D., Lee, D., Buja, A.: Will the Global Village Fracture into Tribes? 
Recommender Systems and their Effects on Consumer Fragmentation. Management  
Science 60, 805–823 (2014) 
6. Cao Zhang, Y., Ó Séaghdha, D., Quercia, D., Jambor, T.: Auralist: Introducing Serendipity 
into Music Recommendation. In: Proc. of the 5th ACM Int. Conf. on Web Search and Data 
Mining (WSDM 2012), Seattle, Washington, USA, February 8-12 (2012) 
7. De, P., Hu, Y.J., Rahman, M.S.: Technology usage and online sales: an empirical study. 
Management Science 56(11), 1930–1945 (2010) 
8. Das, A., Datar, M., Garg, A., Rajarm, S.: Google news personalization: scalable online 
collaborative filtering. In: Proc. of the 16th Int’l World Wide Web Conference,  
pp. 271–280 (2007) 
9. Fleder, D., Hosanagar, K.: Blockbuster culture’s next rise or fall: the impact of recom-
mender systems on sales diversity. Management Science 55(5), 697–712 (2009) 
10. Koene, A., Perez, E., Carter, C.J., Statache, R., Adolphs, S., O’Malley, C., Rodden, T., 
McAuley, D.: Research Ethics and Public Trust, Preconditions for Continued Growth of 
Internet Mediated Research. In: 1st International Conference on Information System Secu-
rity and Privacy (ICISSP), February 9-11 (2015) 
11. Goldberg, D., Nichols, D., Oki, B.M., Terry, D.: Using collaborative filtering to weave in-
formation tapestry. Commun. ACM 35(12), 61–70 (1992) 
12. Golbeck, J.: Generating predictive movie recommendations from trust in social networks. 
In: Stølen, K., Winsborough, W.H., Martinelli, F., Massacci, F. (eds.) iTrust 2006. LNCS, 
vol. 3986, pp. 93–104. Springer, Heidelberg (2006) 
13. Burke, R.: Hybrid web recommender systems. In: Brusilovsky, P., Kobsa, A., Nejdl, W. 
(eds.) Adaptive Web 2007. LNCS, vol. 4321, pp. 377–408. Springer, Heidelberg (2007) 
14. Rokach, L., Shapira, B., Kantor, P.B.: Recommender systems handbook, vol. 1. Springer, 
New York (2011) 
15. Speretta, M., Gauch, S.: Personalized search based on user search histories. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2005 IEEE/WIC/ACM International Conference on Web Intelligence, Septem-
ber 19-22, pp. 622–628 (2005), doi:10.1109/WI.2005.114 
16. Rohle, T.: Desperately seeking the consumer: Personalized search engines and the com-
mercial exploitation of user data. First Monday, [S.l.] (September 2007),  
http://journals.uic.edu/ojs/index.php/fm/article/view/2008/1883 ISSN 13960466 
17. Ma, H., Zhou, D., Liu, C., Lyu, M.R., King, I.: Recommender systems with social regular-
ization. In: WSDM 2011 Proceedings of the Fourth ACM International Conference on 
Web Search and Data Mining, pp. 287–296 (2011), doi:10.1145/1935826.1935877 
18. Luger, E.: Consent for all: Revealing the hidden complexity of terms and conditions.  
In: Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,  
pp. 2687–2696 (2013) 
19. The Privacy and Electronic Communications (EC Directive) Regulations (2003), 
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/uksi/2003/2426/contents/made 
20. European Union (EU) Data Protection Directive of (Directive 95/46/EC) (1995), http://eur-
lex.europa.eu/legal-content/EN/TXT/HTML/?uri=CELEX:31995L0046 
21. OECD Guidelines on the Protection of Privacy and Transborder Flow of Personal Data ( 
C(80)58/FINAL, as amended on 11 July 2013 by C(2013)79 ),  
http://www.oecd.org/sti/ieconomy/privacy.htm  

132 
A. Koene et al. 
 
22. Beizer, B.: Black-box testing: techniques for functional testing of software and systems. 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. (1995) 
23. Lee, N., Jung, J.J., Selamat, A., Hwang, D.: Black-box testing of practical movie  
recommendation systems: A comparative study. Computer Science and Information Sys-
tems 11(1), 241–249 (2014) 
24. Kramer, A.D.I., Guillory, J.E., Hancock, J.T.: Experimental evidence of massive-scale 
emotional contagion through social networks. PNAS 111(24), 8788–8790 (2014) 
25. Arthur, C.: Google cleared of search results bias after two-year US investigation. The 
Guardian (January 4, 2013) 
26. Miller, C.C., Scott, M.: Google Settles Its European Antitrust case; Critics Remain. The 
New York Times (February 5, 2014) 
27. Netflix official blog announcement (March 12, 2010),  
http://blog.netflix.com/2010/03/this-is-neil-hunt-chief-product-officer.html  
28. Narayanan, A., Shmatikov, V.: Robust de-anonymization of large datasets (how to break 
anonymity of the Netflix prize dataset). University of Texas at Austin (2008) 

IAA: Incentive-Based Anonymous
Authentication Scheme in Smart Grids
Zhiyuan Sui(), Ammar Alyousef, and Hermann de Meer
University of Passau, Innstr. 43, 94032 Passau, Germany
{suizhiyu,ammar.alyousef,demeer}@fim.uni-passau.de
Abstract. The traditional energy consumption calculation heavily re-
lies on manual work, which is ineﬃcient and error-prone. The Smart
Grid, which integrates information and communication technologies into
the electrical grid to gather information and manage energy production
and consumption, may be a solution to this challenge. However, the re-
sulting complex infrastructure and profusion of information may open
up new attack vectors exploitable by malicious parties that could attack
the grid itself or violate its consumers’ privacy. In this paper, we indicate
the increasing interests in providing conditionally anonymous authenti-
cation in the Smart Grid systems. While the consumption report stays
anonymous, the consumers who voluntarily curtail their energy consump-
tion, can conﬁrm their curtailments in the scheme. Moreover, compared
with the existing conditionally anonymous authentication schemes, our
scheme is more eﬃcient in computational and communication overhead
for Smart Grid systems.
Keywords: Smart Grids · Anonymous authentication · Demand and
response · Privacy preservation · Incentive
1
Introduction
Smart Grid systems combine advanced communication and automated control
technologies in order to increase ﬂexibility and resilience of the infrastructure,
save energy and reduce CO2 emissions [1]. The integration of new technolo-
gies however leads to a completely new infrastructure, where the formerly iso-
lated electrical grid, which is currently one of the most critical infrastructures,
is blended with methods from Information and Communication Technologies
(ICT). Households are equipped with intelligent smart meters and smart ap-
pliances and also the energy provider enhances its systems with new hardware
and IP-based networking [2]. Smart meters measure energy consumption in a
much higher temporal resolution than conventional meters and send the gath-
ered energy consumption data to the utility provider in order to achieve better
This work has received support by the EINS (FP7 NoE, grant no. 288021). The
research leading to these results was supported by the “Bavarian State Ministry of
Education, Science and the Arts” as part of the FORSEC research association. The
ﬁrst author is supported by the Chinese Scholarship Council.
c
⃝Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 133–144, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_11

134
Z. Sui et al.
monitoring, control and stability of the Smart Grid. At the power shortage time,
the utility provider provides incentive payments to consumers for reducing their
loads during reliability triggered events, but curtailment is voluntary. This new
combination of energy network and ICT technology puts the security of the
Smart Grid in question as it creates new ways to attack and tamper with the
highly critical energy supply [3]. Two of the most challenging tasks are privacy
and security. From an end user’s point of view, the ﬁne-granular energy con-
sumption readings of a smart meter could be used to spy on and expose an
user’s activities at home. As shown in [4], the Smart Grids, which gather and
analyze such information, lead to the large-scale creation of user proﬁles without
a victim’s consent or even his knowledge. This in turn could lead to personalized
advertisements or discrimination against a user who is negatively classiﬁed ac-
cording to his energy usage behavior. Therefore, the protection of a user’s privacy
is an essential necessity in the Smart Grid to achieve an adequate overall accep-
tance of this technology. On the other side, the security on the demand-response
communication also needs to be ensured. As consumption data are transmit-
ted through networks, the number of attack vectors vastly increased with the
introduction of networked ICT in electrical meters [5].
To ﬁnd a technological approach that provides both privacy as well as security
was a great research interest over the last couple of years. While there were many
diﬀerent approaches in this direction [6] [7], the reward distribution relies on the
trusted third party so far. Once it is attacked, consumers’ privacy will be leaked.
In this paper, we design an anonymous authentication scheme for incentive-based
demand response programs, named IAA. Speciﬁcally, the contributions of IAA
are twofold.
1. Firstly, IAA can achieve strong anonymity and reward support. The electric-
ity utility broadcasts the energy usage instruction to consumers and advises
them to reduce their energy consumption by an acceptable percentage, when
it ﬁnds an imbalance between the energy consumption and production. The
willing consumers will revoke their anonymity and get their corresponding
rewards, while no other party is able to identify the source of other con-
sumers’ usage data.
2. Secondly, compared with previous anonymous authentication schemes, which
can provide similar security properties, for one thing, IAA is identity-based;
for another, the computational and communication overhead is independent
with the number of consumers in IAA. Therefore, it is more suitable for large
group Smart Grid systems.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows: Section 2 describes the
works that employ cryptosystem to achieve the security in Smart Grids up till
now. In Section 3, the preliminaries, which are later on required in this paper, are
explained in detail, while Section 4 explains our proposed scheme that features
both anonymity and security. The security requirements are proved in Section
5. Section 6 compares the computational and communicational performance of
our scheme with previous works. Section 7 concludes this paper.

IAA: Incentive-Based Anonymous Authentication Scheme in Smart Grids
135
2
Related Work
In order to achieve security in the Smart Grid systems, identity based signature
schemes and anonymous authentication schemes are widely utilized.
Identity based signature (IBS) was introduced by Shamir [8]. The public key
is generated from the user’s identity in an IBS. IBS eliminates the overhead
for checking the validity of the certiﬁcates. In reference [9], So et al. propose
an IBS for Smart Grids, which does not require pre-device software setup from
the users, and simpliﬁes the key management mechanism. Nicanfar et al. [10]
propose an eﬃcient authentication and key management mechanism for Smart
Grid communication. It prevents from various attacks while reducing the man-
agement overhead. Li et al. [11] integrate a homomorphic encryption algorithm
and IBS to ensure the privacy and trustworthiness in Smart Grids. However, the
key pairs are generated from a key generation server (KGS) in IBS. It assumes
that the KGS is completely trustworthy.
Anonymous authentication schemes, e.g. group signatures and ring signatures,
are also widely used in Smart Grids for privacy and security. In [12], He et al.
employ the group signature to distribute the trustworthiness for the Smart Grid.
Only the law authority can ask the information from electricity utility and group
manager to revoke the anonymity of the target users. However, it assumes that
the law authority is fully trustworthy. Chu et al. [13] construct an anonymous
authentication to inquire the usage history records. This scheme cannot ensure
the voluntary consumers, who curtail their consumption, can get their rewards.
More than that, the computational cost and communication overhead are in-
creasing with the number of the members in the ring signature. There are usually
hundreds of smart meters in the Smart Grid system, while the computational
resources of smart meter are limited.
In this paper, in conjunction with IBS, we construct an incentive-based
anonymous authentication scheme to ensure the demand-response communication
between the electricity utility and smart meters. Consumers are categorized ac-
cording to their behavior. The consumers, who follow the electricity utility’s in-
structions, can get their rewards, while others still stay anonymous. Compared
with the previous schemes, on the one hand, IAA is third party free; on the other
hand, it is more eﬃcient in terms of the communicational and computational cost.
3
Preliminaries
We list several necessary notations and deﬁnitions for our work in this section.
3.1
Bilinear Map
In IAA, we employ the bilinear map to construct an anonymous authentication
scheme. The bilinear map operation is based on elliptic curves. κ is a random
integer. Input κ, a prime number p of size κ, is selected. G is a cyclic additive
groups of order p. GT is a multiplicative group of order p. P is a generator of

136
Z. Sui et al.
G. A function e : G × G →GT is said to be a bilinear map if it satisﬁes the
following properties:
1. Bilinearity: e(aP, bP) = e(P, P)ab for all P ∈G and a, b ∈Z∗
p.
2. Non-degeneracy: e(P, P) ̸= 1.
3. Computability: e(P, P) is eﬃciently computable, for all P ∈G.
3.2
Computational Assumptions
IAA is based on three computational assumptions
1. Gap-Discrete Logarithm (Gap-DL) Assumption. There is no proba-
bilistic polynomial time (PPT) algorithm that can compute a number x ∈Z∗
p
from a tuple (T, μ), where, μ ←G and T = xμ.
2. Decisional Diﬃe-Hellman (DDH) Assumption. There is no PPT al-
gorithm that can distinguish between a tuple (μ, xμ, μ′, T ) and a tuple
(μ, xμ, μ′, xμ′), where μ, μ′, T ←G and x ←Z∗
p.
3. q−Strong Diﬃe-Hellman (q−SDH) Assumption. There is no PPT al-
gorithm that can compute a pair (c, (1/(x + c))P), where c ∈Z∗
p, from a
tuple (P, xP, ..., xqP), where P ←G and x ←Z∗
p.
3.3
Zero Knowledge Proof
IAA extensively employs non-interactive zero knowledge proof (ZKP) protocol.
ZKP is ﬁrst proposed by Goldwasser et al. [14]. The purpose of ZKP, denoted
as PK{(x) : C = xP}, is to help a prover convince a veriﬁer that he holds the
knowledge x, without leaking any information about x during the veriﬁcation
process. ZKP are widely utilized in digital authentication schemes, e. g. Schnorr
Signature [15].
3.4
BBS+ Signature
BBS+ signature is initiated by Au et al. [16]. BBS+ signature is proved unforge-
able without random oracles under q−SDH assumption. It allows generation of
a single signature for a message. Nguyen constructs an eﬃcient knowledge proof
of the signature and message without revealing any useful information about
either [17].
3.5
Network Model
In our network model, we assume that the usage data is transmitted by the wide
area network (WAN). The network model mainly consists of two entities: the
electricity utility (EU) and the smart meter (SM). The communication between
SMs and the EU is through wireless network technology. We assume that each
EU communicates with multiple SMs in a concrete area, and the number of SMs
is large enough for each SM to cloak its real identity.

IAA: Incentive-Based Anonymous Authentication Scheme in Smart Grids
137
The SM is the energy consumption reporting device present at each con-
sumer’s site. The SM reports consumers’ energy usage report with the trans-
formed credentials to the EU regularly. Therefore, no one can link the usage
report to its source. In IAA, the cooperative consumer would like to curtail his
consumption and prove his cooperation. Because each SM corresponds to a con-
crete consumer, we assume that the cooperative consumer can be conﬁrmed via
the real identity of the SM.
The EU is an infrastructure that is controlled by the electricity company and
is in charge of the SMs in a concrete area. It collects and analyzes the usage
data from SMs periodically, and broadcasts consumption related instructions to
customers, according to the usage data. It is unnecessary for the EU to cloak its
real identity. In our scheme, the EU’s real identity is always considered public.
3.6
Security Requirements
In our anonymous authentication scheme, the main aim is to ensure trustworthi-
ness of the data from both EU and SMs while ensuring the privacy of legitimate
users habits. IAA can satisfy the following security requirements simultaneously:
1. The adversary is able to modify neither the consumption reports from SMs,
nor the instruction from the EU (data integrity).
2. The EU can determine whether the signature derives from a legitimate source
(identity authentication).
3. The consumer, who does not follow the instructions, cannot produce a valid
signature to cheat out of rewards (reward-support).
4. The adversary cannot trace an uncooperative consumer’s identity using the
usage report (strong anonymity).
4
Proposed Scheme
IAA consists of the following procedures: setup algorithm, joining, anonymous
report, demand generation and voluntary response protocols. In the setup algo-
rithm, the EU generates its key pair and publishes its public key. During the
joining procedure, each SM cloaks its secret key in the credential with Gap-DL
assumption. And then, the EU authorizes the credential with BBS+ signature.
Finally, the SM obtains a key pair authorized by the EU. After joining into the
Smart Grid system, the SM reports its energy consumption data regularly (nor-
mally every 15 minutes). The SM transforms all its credentials, and proves its
secret information to the EU by zero knowledge proof. Therefore, the EU can
conﬁrm whether the signature is from a legitimate SM without the SM’s identity.
The EU broadcasts the instructions with the signature to the SMs, once it ﬁnds
that the energy consumption is too large to produce in the demand generation
protocol. The consumer checks the timestamp and conﬁrms that the signature
is valid. During the voluntary response protocol, if the consumer would not like
to cooperate, he just ignores the instruction, and his usage proﬁle is still un-
der anonymity; otherwise, he curtails the energy consumption and proves his
curtailment with IBS during voluntary response.

138
Z. Sui et al.
4.1
Setup
The EU executes the setup algorithm to generate its long term key pair:
1. On input κ, the bilinear pairing instance generator returns a tuple (p, G, GT,
e, P) as deﬁned in Subsection 3.1.
2. Randomly choose three elements Q, H, G ←G and an integer γ ←Z∗
p, hide
its secret key in Ppub: Ppub = γP.
3. Choose collision resistant hash functions H1: {0, 1}∗→G; H2 : {0, 1}∗→Z∗
p.
4. Keep its secret key γ and publish its public key (P, Q, H, G, Ppub) and hash
functions (H1, H2).
4.2
Joining
The joining protocol is carried out between the EU and each SM. Each SM is
equipped with a tamper-resistant black box [18]. Each black box has its key
pair (SK, PK). The EU has access to the public key PK. In additional, each
black box would generate an internal private seed speciﬁc to itself. The seed is
stored securely within the black box and is never disclosed or changed, as the
black box is assumed to be tamper-resistant. Additionally, a secure public key
signature scheme, including a signing algorithm sig and a veriﬁcation algorithm
ver, has been selected for a SM with key pair (SK, PK). Each SM shows
its real identity and produces its key pair during the following protocol: At
ﬁrst, the SM randomly generates an integer x ←Z∗
p as its secret key using its
internal seed. Then, the SM computes a commitment C on the value x: C = xP
and generates a signature σ =sig(C∥ID). The SM sends C∥ID as well as its
signature σ to the EU. The commitment C essentially binds the SM’s secret
key x. Upon receiving C, the EU executes the veriﬁcation algorithm to check
the validity of the signature using PK. If ver(C∥ID, σ, PK)=valid, the EU
computes the credential α = H2(ID), S =
1
γ+α(C + Q) and sends S to the
SM. The SM conﬁrms the correctness of the credential by checking equation
e(S, αP + Ppub) = e(C + Q, P) holds. The SM’s secret key is x, and its public
key is (C, S).
4.3
Anonymous Report
In order to achieve the almost real-time usage report, a SM and the EU can run the
anonymous report protocol to produce a legitimate signature as following: Firstly,
by using the knowledge of x, the SM binds the usage data m and the timestamp t
with the element T . The SM computes μ = H1(m∥P∥Ppub∥G∥H∥Q∥t) and T =
xμ. The SM then proves e(S, αP + Ppub) = e(xP + Q, P) and T = xμ with the
following non-interactive zero knowledge proof Equation 1:
PK
 ⎛
⎝
S
x
α
⎞
⎠: e(S, αP + Ppub) = e(xP + Q, P)
T = xμ

(1)

IAA: Incentive-Based Anonymous Authentication Scheme in Smart Grids
139
The procedure of the proof is formally described below:
1. The SM randomly picks integers r, k0, k1, k2, k3 ←Z∗
p.
2. In order to cloak its identity information, the SM transforms its origi-
nal credential S into a temporary one U = S + rH, where r ∈Z∗
p,
and calculates R = rG, M1 = k1G, M2 = k2G −k3R, N
= k0μ,
V = e(P, P)k0e(H, Ppub)k1e(H, P)k2e(U, P)−k3.
3. The SM calculates g = H2(T ∥R∥U∥M1∥M2∥N∥V ∥m∥t), s0 = k0 + gx,
s1 = k1 + gr, s2 = k2 + grα, s3 = k3 + gα.
The SM can show that both the temporary credential and the element T
correspond to the same key pair x, α and S without leaking any information
of them. Given two signatures, it is impossible to determine whether they are
produced by the same SM, or to identify the SM. Consequently, anonymity is
achieved. In the end, the SM outputs (T, R, U, g, s0, s1, s2, s3) as the signature.
After the receipt of the usage report, the EU checks the validity of the time-
stamp. Then, the EU executes the report reading algorithm to check whether
the signature does prove the knowledge of a discrete logarithm x as well as the
knowledge of the valid credential S.
The
EU
computes
the
hash
values
μ
=
H1(m∥P∥Ppub∥G∥H∥Q∥t)
and
M ′
1
=
s1G −gR, M ′
2
=
s2G −s3R, N ′
=
s0μ −gT, V ′
=
e(P, P)s0e(H, Ppub)s1e(U, Ppub)−ge(Q, P)ge(H, P)s2e(U, P)−s3 , then conﬁrms
that equation g = H2(T ∥R∥U∥M ′
1∥M ′
2∥N ′∥V ′∥m∥t) holds. If it holds, the EU
accepts the usage report; otherwise, the EU rejects the usage report.
4.4
Demand Generation
Once the EU ﬁnds that the energy consumption is larger than production, it
executes the instruction generation protocol to advise some consumers to shut
down their appliances:
The EU ﬁrst deﬁnes the instruction (λ, tn). The EU then employ Schnorr
Signature to generate a valid signature to prove its identity: It randomly picks
k4 ←Z∗
p, computes W = k4P, f = H2(λ∥tn∥W∥P∥Ppub∥t) and s4 = k4 −fγ.
At last, the EU broadcasts the instructions and the signature (λ, tn, s4, f, t) to
all SMs.
Upon receiving the usage instructions, the SM checks whether the timestamp
and the instruction are valid. It computes W ′ = fPpub + s4P , checks whether
f = H2(λ∥tn∥W ′∥P∥Ppub∥t). If they hold, the SM informs the consumer to shut
down his appliances; otherwise, it just rejects the instruction and signature.
4.5
Voluntary Response
After receiving the instruction, if the consumers would like to curtail their con-
sumption by λ, they will execute the voluntary response protocol with the EU.
The SM should conﬁrm that its current usage data m and the usage data
m∗at the timestamp t∗satisfy the demand. The SM transforms his usage data

140
Z. Sui et al.
m∗timestamp t∗into a hash value μ: μ = H1(m∗∥P∥Ppub∥G∥H∥Q∥t∗), and
hides its secret information x into element T ′: T ′ = xμ. The SM proves that
it has the knowledge of x. The SM randomly picks k5 ←Z∗
p, and computes
A = (k5P + Q, P), B = k5μ, h = H2(m∗∥T ′∥A∥B∥C∥P∥Ppub∥G∥H∥Q∥t∗),
s5 = k5 −hx. The SM sends the proof (m, h, s5, ID) to the EU.
Upon receiving the proof, the EU conﬁrms that the signature σ∗and the
curtailment proof (m, T ′, h, s5, ID) have the same secret information x. The EU
computes A′ = e(S, αP + Ppub)e(s5P + (h′ −1)C, P), B′ = s5μ + h′T ′ and α =
H2(ID). The EU checks whether h′ = H2(m∗∥T ′∥A′∥B′∥C∥P∥Ppub∥G∥H∥Q∥t∗)
and T = T ′ hold. If they hold and (m −m∗)/m > λ, the EU determines that
the consumer curtailed his energy consumption, then sends incentive payments
to the consumer for his cooperation.
5
Security Analysis
In this section, we state the security analysis. The analysis is divided into four
classes: data integrity, authentication, reward support and strong anonymity.
5.1
Data Integrity
The integrity includes the integrity of anonymous reports and integrity of in-
structions in our IAA scheme. When the SM sends the energy consumption data
to the EU, it cloaks its credential (x, α, S), and proves the credential with zero
knowledge proof. During the demand response part, the EU’s consumption in-
struction is signed by a Schnorr short signature [15]. Since the Schnorr short
signature is provably secure under the Gap-DL problem in the random oracle
model, the integrity can be ensured. As the result, IAA can make sure the in-
tegrity of the anonymous report and the instruction.
5.2
Authentication
The authentication of the IAA scheme is based on the q−SDH assumption.
During the joining protocol, each SM’s credential C is signed by the EU with
the BBS+ signature. BBS+ signature has been proved against chosen plaintext
attack under the q−SDH assumption in the standard model. According to the
analysis of the integrity, the anonymous report protocol is secure. Therefore, the
third party cannot produce a valid signature without the help of the EU.
5.3
Reward-Support
The voluntary response protocol is a identity-based signature scheme that derives
from zero knowledge proof. It implies that the adversary cannot tamper the
public key α, which is from the collusion resistant function HID. According to the
analysis of integrity, the adversary cannot produce a valid but illegitimate usage
report to frame a legitimate consumer under the security of the zero knowledge
proof. Therefore, from above aspects, IAA can make sure that the voluntary
consumer can get corresponding rewards.

IAA: Incentive-Based Anonymous Authentication Scheme in Smart Grids
141
5.4
Strong Anonymity
The consumer’s anonymity is based on the DDH assumption in our IAA scheme.
A SM generates its energy usage data using its secure key x. The essence of the
anonymous report protocol is to shuﬄe the credential (x, α, S) to a temporary
one (T, R, U, g, s0, s1, s2, s3). After that, the SMs send their messages and signa-
tures through an anonymous network. Because H1 is a collision resistant func-
tion, under the DDH assumption, it is infeasible to decide whether two elements
T and T0 are generated using the same secret information x. As such, no one
can trace the legitimate signature from an honest SM unless he knows the secret
key. Hence, our IAA scheme satisﬁes the anonymity requirement.
6
Performance Analysis
In this section, we evaluate the computational cost and the communication over-
head required by our IAA scheme, and compare it with some previous works.
Table 1. Computational performance
Party
Computational cost
Mean
Deviation 95% conﬁdence interval
Set up
EU
4Gp + Gm
37.48ms
0.69ms
[37.15ms, 37.81ms]
Joining
EU
Gm
3.76ms
0.32ms
[3.60ms, 3.91ms]
SM
2Gp + 2Gm
18.74ms
0.35ms
[18.57ms, 18.90ms]
Report
SM
Gp + 3Ge + 8Gm
31,00ms
0.68ms
[30.68ms, 31.32ms]
EU
2Gp + 4Ge + 8Gm
48.62ms
0.74ms
[48.27ms, 48.98ms]
Demand EU
Gm
3.35ms
0.13ms
[3.29ms, 3.41ms]
SM
2Gm
4.57ms
0.10ms
[4.52ms, 4.62ms]
Response SM
Gp+2Gm
12.58ms
0.18ms
[12.50ms, 12.67ms]
EU
2Gp + 5Gm
34.91ms
0.75ms
[34.55ms, 35.26ms]
6.1
Computational Cost
Firstly, we discuss the computational cost in our IAA scheme. Compared with
exponentiation Ge, multiplication Gm and pairing evaluations Gp, the overheads
of hash evaluations and arithmetic operations are very small. We emulate the
scheme IAA on a Ubuntu 12.04 virtual operation system with a Intel Core i5-4300
dual-core 2.60 GHz CPU. We only use one core and 1 GB of RAM. To achieve
80 bits security level, we set the length of G to 161 bits and p to 160 bits. Some
bilinear pairing operation can be calculated in advance. The computational costs
and simulation results are presented in Table 1.
Secondly, we compare the Anonymous report’s computational cost variation
in terms of the number of SMs with conditionally anonymous ring signature
(CRS) [19] and deniable ring signature (DRS) [20], which can also achieve similar

142
Z. Sui et al.
security properties. The comparison is based on PBC cryptography libraries [21]
and MIRACL libraries [22]. Fig. 1 shows the comparison result of compuational
cost for an anonymous report between a SM and the EU. According to the
ﬁgure, it can be seen that the computational cost is constant in IAA. Instead,
the computational cost and the number of SMs are directly related in CRS and
DRS.
0
8
16
24
32
40
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
The number of consumers
Time[ms]
IAA
CRS
DRS
Length[kbits]
Fig. 1. Computational cost
0
8
16
24
32
40
0
4
8
12
16
20
The number of consumers
IAA
CRS
DRS
Fig. 2. Communication overhead
6.2
Communication Overhead
In this subsection, we discuss the communication overhead between a SM and
the EU. In the joining procedure, a SM sends a credential and its identity to
the EU in form of C∥ID, whose length is ∥G∥+ ∥ID∥. During the anonymous
report procedure, the EU reports the consumption data m with the timestamp
t and signature σ, which is in form of T ∥R∥U∥g∥s0∥s1∥s2∥s3. The size of σ is
3∥G∥+ 5∥p∥. In the Demand Generation protocol, the form of the signature
is f∥s4, whose size is 2∥p∥. After the SM curtails the energy consumption, it
sends the proof to the EU for asking the rewards. The form of the signature is
T ′∥s5∥h∥ID, whose size is ∥G∥+ 2∥p∥+ ∥ID∥. Here, we compare the signature
size among IAA, CRS and DRS. The result is depicted in Fig. 2.
According to the Fig. 2, it can be seen that the communication complexity
is O(1) in our scheme. Compared with CRS and DRS, whose communication
complexity is O(q), where q is the number of SMs in the system, the number of
smart meters will not aﬀect the communication cost in IAA.
In the both ring signature schemes, the authentication is based on the DL
assumption. A SM must utilize other peer SM’s public keys to cloak its identity.
This requires that the SM calculates the signature for all SMs’ public keys. The
authentication of IAA is based on the q−SDH assumption. The SM produces

IAA: Incentive-Based Anonymous Authentication Scheme in Smart Grids
143
its commitment. Then, the EU generates the credential to authorize the commit-
ment. The anonymous report part employs the non-interactive zero knowledge
proof to cloak the SM’s credential. Therefore, the communication and computa-
tional cost is constant in IAA.
7
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose an incentive-based anonymous authentication scheme
for demand-response management in Smart Grids. Our scheme guarantees the
cooperative consumers can conﬁrm their cooperation without harming the pri-
vacy of other consumers. The security analysis has demonstrated that our IAA
scheme can achieve data integrity, identity authentication, reward support and
anonymity simultaneously. According to the performance analysis, it can be seen
our scheme has more advantage over the existing conditionally anonymous au-
thentication schemes in terms of computation and communication overhead for
Smart Grid systems. Therefore, we conclude our scheme solves the challenge
of trading oﬀbetween performance and security. However, the cooperative con-
sumers have to revoke their anonymity to prove their curtailments. This leaks
cooperative consumer’s privacy at the power shortage time. For the future work,
we will explore the new technologies to improve the IAA and provide the anony-
mous cooperation proof to the consumers.
References
1. Litos Strategic Communication, The Smart Grid: An Introduction, Tech. rep., U.S.
Department of Energy, pp. 7, 14–19, 22 (2008)
2. Yarali, A., Rahman, S.: Smart grid networks: Promises and challenges. Journal of
Communications 7, 409–417 (2012)
3. Eckert, C., Krau, C., Schoo, P.: Sicherheit im Smart Grid - Eckpunkte fuer ein
Energieinformationsnetz. Stiftung-Verbundkolleg/Projekt Newise (90) (2011)
4. Efthymiou, C., Kalogridis, G.: Smart grid privacy via anonymization of smart
metering data. In: First IEEE International Conference on Smart Grid Communi-
cations (SmartGrid-Comm), pp. 238–243. IEEE (2010)
5. Fan, Z., Kalogridis, G., Efthymiou, C., Sooriyabandara, M., Serizawa, M.,
McGeehan, J.: The new frontier of communications research: smart grid and smart
metering. In: Proceedings of the 1st International Conference on Energy-Eﬃcient
Computing and Networking, pp. 115–118. ACM (2010)
6. McDaniel, P., McLaughlin, S.: Security and privacy challenges in the smart grid.
IEEE Security & Privacy 7(3), 75–77 (2009)
7. Lo, Y.-L., Huang, S.-C., Lu, C.-N.: Non-technical loss detection using smart distri-
bution network measurement data. In: Innovative Smart Grid Technologies - Asia
(ISGT Asia), pp. 1–5. IEEE (2012)
8. Shamir, A.: Identity-based cryptosystems and signature schemes. In: Blakely, G.R.,
Chaum, D. (eds.) CRYPTO 1984. LNCS, vol. 196, pp. 47–53. Springer, Heidelberg
(1985)
9. So, H.K.-H., Kwok, S.H.M., Lam, E.Y., Lui, K.-S.: Zero-conﬁguration identity-
based signcryption scheme for smart grid. In: IEEE First IEEE International Con-
ference on Smart Grid Communications (SmartGridComm), pp. 321–326 (2010)

144
Z. Sui et al.
10. Nicanfar, H., Jokar, P., Beznosov, K., Leung, V.C.: Eﬃcient authentication and
key management mechanisms for smart grid communications. IEEE Systems Jour-
nal (6), 1–12 (2013)
11. Li, H., Liang, X., Lu, R., Lin, X., Shen, X.: EDR: An eﬃcient demand response
scheme for achieving forward secrecy in smart grid. In: IEEE Global Communica-
tions Conference (GLOBECOM), pp. 929–934 (2012)
12. He, D., Chen, C., Bu, J., Chan, S., Zhang, Y., Guizani, M.: Secure service provi-
sion in smart grid communications. IEEE Communications Magazine 50(8), 53–61
(2012)
13. Chu, C.-K., Liu, J.K., Wong, J.W., Zhao, Y., Zhou, J.: Privacy-preserving smart
metering with regional statistics and personal enquiry services. In: Proceedings of
the 8th ACM SIGSAC Symposium on Information, Computer and Communica-
tions Security, pp. 369–380 (2013)
14. Goldwasser, S., Micali, S., Rackoﬀ, C.: The knowledge complexity of interactive
proof systems. SIAM Journal on Computing 18(1), 186–208 (1989)
15. Schnorr, C., Claus, P.: Eﬃcient signature generation by smart cards. Journal of
Cryptology 4(3), 161–174 (1991)
16. Au, M.H., Susilo, W., Mu, Y.: Constant-size dynamic k-TAA. In: De Prisco, R.,
Yung, M. (eds.) SCN 2006. LNCS, vol. 4116, pp. 111–125. Springer, Heidelberg
(2006)
17. Nguyen, L., Safavi-Naini, R.: Eﬃcient and provably secure trapdoor-free group
signature schemes from bilinear pairings. In: Lee, P.J. (ed.) ASIACRYPT 2004.
LNCS, vol. 3329, pp. 372–386. Springer, Heidelberg (2004)
18. Chen, L., Ng, S.L., Wang, G.: Threshold anonymous announcement in VANETs.
IEEE Journal on Selected Areas in Communications 29(3), 605–615 (2011)
19. Zeng, S., Jiang, S., Qin, Z.: An eﬃcient conditionally anonymous ring signature in
the random oracle model. Theoretical Computer Science 461, 106–114 (2012)
20. Komano, Y., Ohta, K., Shimbo, A., Kawamura, S.-i.: Toward the fair anonymous
signatures: Deniable ring signatures. In: Pointcheval, D. (ed.) CT-RSA 2006. LNCS,
vol. 3860, pp. 174–191. Springer, Heidelberg (2006)
21. Lynn, B.: PBC library, http://crypto.stanford.edu/pbc/
22. Multiprecision integer and rational arithmetic c/c++ library,
http://www.shamus.ie/

Mediated Community from an Intergroup
Perspective: A Literature Review
Vilma Lehtinen1(), Eeva Raita1,3, Mikael Wahlstr¨om2, Peter Peltonen3,
and Airi Lampinen1,4
1 Helsinki Institute for Information Technology HIIT, Espoo, Finland
vilma.lehtinen@helsinki.fi
2 VTT Technical Research Centre of Finland, Helsinki, Finland
3 Department of Social Research, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland
4 Mobile Life Centre, Stockholm University, Stockholm, Sweden
Abstract. The ways people organize themselves as communities shift
along with the digitalization of social interaction. We review studies on
mediated community to analyze which aspects of social interaction are
considered to characterize community today. We elaborate on their sci-
entiﬁc positioning, or as termed by Doise [14], levels of explanation from
the intra-individual to the societal level. Noticing that viewing mediated
community as an intergroup phenomenon has been marginal, we propose
a research agenda that addresses mediated community explicitly from
an intergroup perspective. To extend knowledge of how communities are
formed and maintained in digitalized, networked settings, we encourage
future research to better integrate this perspective, by focusing on (1)
the ways in which outgroups contribute to a sense of community (2)
the interaction that occurs on the borders of communities, and (3) the
ways in which intergroup relations delineate the symbolic construction
of communities.
Keywords: Community · Online · Virtual · Review · Intergroup
1
Introduction
Scholarly approaches to mediated community touch upon a core issue in social
sciences: the characteristics of social interaction in changing societal settings.
The goal of this paper is to review and organize academic understandings of
what aspects of social interaction make technologically mediated communities
into being. ”Online” and ”virtual” are used commonly as preﬁxes to the term
community with the purpose of denoting the use of digital and networked com-
munication technologies. We use the concept of ”mediated” as an umbrella term
to cover these two preﬁxes.
This paper is focused on how mediated community is understood and inves-
tigated as an intergroup phenomenon. The intergroup perspective to mediated
community is especially relevant now that scholars, activists and policy-makers
alike are increasingly concerned with the dynamics of hostile behaviour online
c
⃝Springer International Publishing Switzerland 2015
T. Tiropanis et al. (Eds.): INSCI 2015, LNCS 9089, pp. 145–159, 2015.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-18609-2_12

146
V. Lehtinen et al.
(e.g. [57]). Online hate groups, whose existence is based on the expression of
hostility toward other groups, such as ethnic or sexual minorities [15], are ex-
treme examples of ingroup formation based on intergroup comparisons. Others,
such as networks of knitting blogs, may not seem to build their social identity
on derogating outgroups, although they, too, can develop strong ingroup norms,
as Wei [52] has demonstrated. Both the polarization of opinions [57] and the
potential to use online interaction in improving intergroup relations [20] have
been identiﬁed in prior work. Postmes and Baym [42] note these possibilities,
arguing that the Internet changes the characteristics of intergroup contact so
critically that its role in aﬀecting intergroup relations cannot be overlooked.
Communities in general can be understood as groups in a social psychological
sense: they are collections of individuals who either interact with each other, are
interrelated in a micro-social structure, or share a common experience or destiny
[6]. Brown’s [6] deﬁnition of a group encapsulates the current understanding of
the concept in social psychology in stating that ”a group exists when two or more
people deﬁne themselves as members of it and when its existence is recognized
by at least one other”. Thus, the members of a group are not the only ones who
have a say in how the group is perceived. People external to a group can also
contribute to the formation of the group, challenge its value, or even deny its
existence. While being discriminated on the basis of one’s group membership
may lead to eﬀorts to quit the group [5], an external threat to a group’s identity
may strengthen the groups cohesiveness by encouraging its members to join
forces against a common enemy [46].
To elaborate on how mediated community is explained in current social
scientiﬁc literature and how well the literature captures it as an intergroup
phenomenon, we review approaches to mediated community in four academic
journals in the ﬁeld of social sciences and Internet research. To categorize these
approaches, we use Doise’s [14] framework of the levels of explanation in ex-
perimental social psychology. The framework includes four levels: 1) the intra-
individual level 2) the inter-personal and situational level 3) the positional level
and 4) the ideological level. With the intra-individual level, Doise refers to a
focus on the phenomena that can be measured by analyzing the individual, such
as the changes in an individual’s emotions or opinions. The inter-personal level
and situational level extends this view to phenomena occurring either between
individuals or within a situation, such as interaction within a group. The posi-
tional level includes examinations of the social categories that participants in an
interaction situation represent, such as gender or social status. Studies on the
ideological level aim to identify shared values, norms and understandings, and
to examine how these are formed in interaction. Doise emphasizes that these
levels are analytical distinctions that researchers make to focus their studies,
not straightforward reﬂections of reality.
None of these levels maps directly onto the intergroup perspective. However,
the positional level points towards this direction: it frames interaction as an
intergroup situation, as participants are considered to behave and be treated
as members of certain groups. In the following, we review prior literature on

Mediated Community from an Intergroup Perspective
147
mediated communities, assessing the relative prevalence of these four levels
across studies. We examine the extent to which the intergroup perspective is
already embedded in the reviewed research on diﬀerent levels of analysis. Our
analysis indicates that, despite of the aforementioned acknowledgements of the
importance of an intergroup approach, the perspective has been largely over-
looked in prior literature. In addition to organizing existing knowledge, we point
to future directions for research by suggesting how the state of the art could be
extended to better consider the integroup perspective. We argue that including
and articulating an intergroup viewpoint when theorizing mediated communities
will advance and complement current understandings of their dynamics.
2
Scope of the Review
To review the levels of explanation on which mediated community has been
approached in social sciences and Internet research, we focused our initial inquiry
on four databases that cover publications in the ﬁelds of ”social sciences” and
”communication studies”: ISI Web of Science: Social Sciences Citation Index
(SSCI); ProQuest: Sociological abstracts, and EBSCO: SocINDEX with Full
Text, and Communication & Mass Media Complete. We considered these four
databases suitable for our purposes of identifying key journals in which social
scientiﬁc discussion on mediated community takes place. The aim of our selective
review is to demonstrate the relative prevalence of diﬀerent approaches in studies
of mediated community, not to provide a comprehensive review of all research
on mediated community. We conducted the queries in January 2015.
2.1
Selection of Journals
Aiming to focus our enquiry on those journals where research on mediated com-
munity appears most frequently, we, ﬁrst, queried the selected databases for
peer-reviewed journal articles that include the term ”online community” in their
abstract. The journals for which the search returned most hits were (query hits
per journal in the databases are presented in parentheses): New Media and So-
ciety (34 hits); Computers in Human Behavior (27 hits); Journal of Computer-
Mediated Communication (18 hits) and The Information Society (16 hits). We
then searched the selected four journals for peer-reviewed articles that include
the term ”community”, with or without preﬁxes, in their abstract. This was done
to identify studies focused on community in mediated interaction, regardless of
the exact language the authors adopt (that is, whether the preﬁx to community
is ”online”, ”virtual”, or non-existent). These searches provided us with an ini-
tial set of 479 articles, including 123 articles from New Media and Society, 178
from Computers in Human Behavior, 90 from Journal of Computer-Mediated
Communication, and 88 from The Information Society.
2.2
Exclusion Criteria
The search for the term ”community” in the abstracts returned many articles
that did not consider mediated community in particular. To keep the review

148
V. Lehtinen et al.
focused on mediated community, we excluded altogether 215 of the 479 initially
selected articles from further analysis. Each author ﬁrst assessed a subset of the
initial selection of articles, and pinpointed those that they deemed should be
excluded as irrelevant to the topic. In discussing these suggestions, we identiﬁed
four common themes that formed our ﬁnal criteria for exclusion.
We excluded articles in which the term community referred solely to one (or
several) of these four options: (1) topics other than community as an entity (such
as community volunteers) (n=21), (2) community as a data source for studying
other topics, or an aspect to be brought up only in the implications (n=54),
(3) community solely as a geo-located entity (n=51), or (4) community solely
as a demographic, occupational, or religious entity (n=89) in cases where the
article did not study or otherwise elaborate on how these entities interact online.
After agreeing on the exclusion criteria, each author evaluated a subset of the
articles. As a result, we included 264 articles on mediated community, spanning
the period from 1981 to January 2015. The set includes 73 articles from New
Media & Society, 99 from Computers in Human Behavior, 62 from Journal of
Computer Mediated Communication, and 30 from Information Society.
2.3
Analysis
To identify approaches to mediated community from the selected articles, re-
gardless of what possible preﬁxes to community might be used, we inquired the
articles with the search term ”communit*”. We reviewed the articles for both
the theoretical conceptualizations of mediated community and the associated
methods of empirical investigation to deﬁne the level(s) of analysis that each
study represents. At this point, we excluded a further 104 articles that did not
explicitly deﬁne mediated community. Also, another 36 articles were excluded
since although they deﬁned mediated community, they did not cover any em-
pirical data. Thus, we were left with a ﬁnal set of 124 articles that did deﬁne
mediated community and that were based on empirical material.
The ﬁrst author initially reviewed the articles independently, after which all
authors discussed together the viability of the resulting categorizations. The
analysis was an iterative process in that after discussion among all authors, the
ﬁrst author revisited the work, consulting the other authors in borderline cases.
As Doise [14] pinpoints, a single study can reﬂect multiple levels of analysis. We
kept this option open in our review as well but through the iterative analysis
process we did in the end position each study on only one level explanation.
We will discuss the principles used to achieve this positioning as we present the
ﬁndings.
3
Findings
We now present how we applied Doise’s framework to our review set, considering
research on mediated community on each level of explanation in turn. We illus-
trate how the levels of explanation occur in the reviewed publications, and how

Mediated Community from an Intergroup Perspective
149
the levels diﬀer from each other. The qualitative examination of our review set
enables us to elaborate on the diﬀerent viewpoints that are manifest in studies
of mediated community, as well as to consider how these approaches could be ex-
tended to better address the intergroup perspective. Finally, we summarize how
the articles in our set are distributed across the four levels. While our review
set was otherwise equally divided across diﬀerent levels of explanation, very few
studies were placed on the positional level.
3.1
Intra-individual Level
Starting from the intra-individual level, we ﬁrst identiﬁed expressions that we
interpreted to analyze mediated community from the viewpoint of an individual.
We positioned on this level 35 studies that conceptualize and study mediated
community through individuals’ sentiments, traits, and perceptions. These pub-
lications focus both on how participation in mediated communities aﬀects in-
dividuals’ intrapersonal processes, and vice versa, the eﬀects of intra-individual
factors on the probability of participating in mediated communities. Most (n=33)
assessed these aspects with quantitative self-report measures, except for three
that applied a qualitative approach. The qualitative accounts address individual
motivations to join a certain community, and identify aspects of mediated inter-
action that are related to these motivations, including reasons for joining [44] as
well as personal experiences [12] and goals [27].
Themajorityoftheself-reportmeasuresapproachmediatedcommunitythrough
the notion of a ”sense of community” or related concepts. The sense of commu-
nity measure was originally developed by McMillan and Chavis [37] for face-to-face
communities. Seven publications used the original measure or its revised versions
[39], [3], including questions such as ”I think my community is a good place for
me to live”. Blanchard’s [3] revised version applies especially to mediated settings:
the concept of a ”sense of virtual community” is deﬁned as ”members’ feelings of
membership, identity, belongingness, and attachment to a group that interacts pri-
marily through electronic communication”. We also identiﬁed related constructs
that we considered to represent an intra-individual point of view to mediated com-
munity, including a sense of belonging [38], feelings of community [28], perceived
group cohesion [21] and user aﬃnity [58]. Each aims to identify mediated commu-
nity by analyzing individuals’ experiences in relation to their perceptions of the
mediated interaction in which they participate. To conclude, studies we included
on this level approach mediated community as the sentiment and perception of an
individual. While acknowledging emotions as a component of mediated commu-
nity, this view neglects the role outgroups can play in shaping these emotions.
3.2
Inter-personal and Situational Level
We positioned publications that aim to capture inter-personal phenomena in-
stead of individuals’ sentiments to the inter-personal and situational level, even
though self-reports were at times used as a method of investigation in these pub-
lications, too. Moreover, we included on this level a set of experimental studies in

150
V. Lehtinen et al.
which features of interaction were manipulated, and observations of interaction
occurred online. We positioned a narrow majority of the reviewed publications
(n=45) to this level of analysis. A strong undercurrent that we identiﬁed in
this level was the idea of mediated community as networks. A prominent ad-
vocate of this approach is Canadian sociologist Barry Wellman [53] who argues
that networks would be an illustrative term to describe social bonds in contem-
porary societies, suggesting it as an improvement over place-bound, detached,
aﬀectionally-laden notions of community. In brief, mediated communities are
viewed here as a set of connections between individuals. These connections can
be considered as social capital, that is, a repository of relationships that can be
drawn upon for diﬀerent forms of support when needed.
The publications representing the network view employ either survey mea-
sures assessing the amount, type or strength of interaction ties, or observations
of actual use by analyzing logged use data. The studies using surveys (n=15)
use measures of social capital and related constructs to identify mediated com-
munity. For example, Ellison et al. [17] adapt Williams’ [54] scales to assess
Internet-speciﬁc social capital. The authors then compare these measures to the
reported use of a social network site. This way of identifying mediated community
as individuals’ perceptions partly overlaps with the intra-individual approach.
However, we distinguish these two levels based on how much they emphasize
the interaction between individuals and individual sentiments directed towards
a more abstract entity of mediated community, respectively.
The emphasis on interaction between individuals is more apparent when me-
diated communities are identiﬁed by observing the interaction itself. A prevalent
method (n=14) for studying the structure of interaction was analyzing logged
data. This could take the form of either examining message content or conducting
social network analysis where researchers leverage hyperlinks connecting partic-
ipants and the networks of messages that they send to each other, focusing on
the frequency and direction of contact rather than on their content.
Message content, such as keywords [9], clusters of words that appear in user
proﬁles [8], [43] and interrelatedness of message topics [40] is also used to iden-
tify mediated community. A further group of 12 studies studied the content of
online interaction in a more qualitative manner. Rather than quantifying the in-
teraction taking place online, these studies applied qualitative methods such as
conversation analysis [19], case studies [55] and ethnography [51] to identify con-
nections between individuals that could be interpreted to constitute mediated
communities. Moreover, we positioned on this level three experimental studies in
which characteristics of interaction (moderation [56], persuasive strategies [22]
and social control [36]) were manipulated.
Finally, the inter-personal and situational level includes studies approaching
mediated communities as ”communities of practice” that are seen to exist when-
ever individuals collaborate around knowledge, regardless of how its members feel
or talk about the community. Seven studies in our review set explicitly referred
to this concept that was originally developed by Lave and Wenger [32]. In these
cases, mediated community was studied with both quantitative and qualitative

Mediated Community from an Intergroup Perspective
151
methods, and it was expected to be identiﬁed by examining the ways goals and
knowledge are shared. Four further studies employ concepts that we consider to
resemble this practice approach. In these, individuals collaborate around shared
(unintended) interests (e.g. [26]) or around consumption (e.g. [30]). Although
the approach pinpoints the importance of collaborative action in the formation
and maintenance of a community, it neglects the role that people external to
the community play in these eﬀorts. Thus, it fails to leverage the intergroup
perspective.
Moreover, while smaller groups can be identiﬁed within the networks, group
identiﬁcation is not a concern for the network approach, either. Studies repre-
senting the network approach pinpoint the connections that form communities
in online interaction. Simultaneously, they do not extend the perspective to the
gaps that keep some networks separate from each other, nor to the importance
of these gaps for keeping a single network cohesive. While this approach has the
potential to be extended beyond the boundaries of a single community, accom-
plishing such broadening would require a focus on the boundaries of the network
by examining the limits beyond which resources do not ﬂow. An exceptional
example of this, drawn from our review set, is Kazmer’s [29] study on the activ-
ities related to disengaging from an online learning environment. With a focus
on disengagement from these spheres of ”people who share activities, space, and
technology, and who communicate with one another”, Kazmer [29] points to-
wards an intergroup perspective by illustrating the tensions related to a change
in an individual’s social position.
3.3
Positional Level
Studies we placed on the positional level of explanation view mediated communi-
ties not solely from within the group, but also as situations in which individuals
representing diﬀerent social positions interact with each other. The positional
level of explanation has by deﬁnition the greatest potential to implement an
intergroup perspective to mediated community, as studies representing this level
focus on social positions, such as roles, status, or membership in a particu-
lar group. These social positions are acknowledged to have an impact on how
people orient towards each other. However, as we moved from considering indi-
viduals and the interaction between them to addressing memberships of social
categories, the amount of ﬁtting publications in our review set dropped sharply.
We identiﬁed only ﬁve publications to represent this approach from within our
review set. Three of these publications use experimental methods to investigate
how the salience of an individual’s group identity aﬀects self-presentation [45],
recommendation intentions [33] or group-orientation in the content posted [10].
In these studies, the salience of the participants’ group identity was primed by
changing the content on Web sites or by having the participants to read a short
story. Jahnke’s [25] ﬁeld study was the only qualitative study we included on this
level. It examines the construction of social categories in mediated interaction
by focusing on the diverse roles and social structures that emerge in a mediated
community over the years. Bjarnason [2], on the other hand, used a survey to

152
V. Lehtinen et al.
study how social stratiﬁcation in adolescent communities is reﬂected in mediated
communities.
The clear minority of the studies in our review can be considered to represent
the positional level of analysis, and even the articles included on this level do not
put the intergroup perspective forward very explicitly. For instance, none of the
studies manipulate group identities or social positions in order to cause conﬂicts
between social groupings. Judging by the diﬃculty of identifying studies that
ﬁt the description of the positional level, approaching mediated community as a
result of diﬀerent social positions seems to be an underrepresented perspective
in current literature.
3.4
Ideological Level
The studies included on this level (n=39) do not presume that mediated commu-
nity would exist as an immutable entity towards which individuals would target
their sentiments. Instead, they argue that individuals construct community to-
gether with each other, considering community as an outcome of negotiations
over what kinds of shared values, norms, practices and the like are constitu-
tive of the community. The most popular (used in 27 studies in our review set)
method on this level was a qualitative analysis of message content. For exam-
ple, this could take the form of discourse analysis or thematic categorization.
Ethnographic approaches, such as participant observation, were another popu-
lar method (used in 9 studies): here, message content is just one part of what
is observed in order to understand the processes of constructing community.
Additionally, researchers might take part in the interaction in the community,
observing activities and conducting interviews with participants.
Almost half of the publications on this level (n=18) were positioned as ex-
amples of the ideological level of explanation because they either analyzed the
understandings that individuals participating in a mediated community share,
or examined how these understandings are negotiated in interaction. For ex-
ample, Matei [35] analyzed postings to the platforms associated with an early
mediated community to address how the concept of a virtual community was
negotiated within them. Interviews and ethnographic approaches, too, were used
to assess shared, and at times conﬂicting, understandings. For example, Fern-
back [18] used interviews to pinpoint what the metaphor of community means in
mediated contexts. In these eighteen publications mediated community is seen
to be negotiated largely from within, and it is not explicit to which degree its
boundaries are impinged upon from the outside.
Another half (n=21) of the studies included on this level, however, consider
community not as a coherent entity but as diﬀerent groups which struggle for
their existence ”inside” it. This approach can be considered to implement the
intergroup viewpoint as it focuses on how groups are deﬁned in relation to other
groups. These groups may become deﬁned by a variety of aspects, including
gender [4], appropriate or inappropriate behaviour [49], legitimate aesthetics [11]
or activism [48]. The focus is thus on how the boundaries between these groups
are created through negotiations over what kinds of behavior is accepted from

Mediated Community from an Intergroup Perspective
153
its members, and how diﬀerent kinds of activities are valued. Straightforward
intergroup conﬂict is identiﬁed in Phillips’ [41] early study that covered the
practices that long-time members of a newsgroup used to defend the group’s
boundaries from newcomers. As the system did not technically support banning,
the long-time members communicated using inside jokes, educated newcomers,
or appealed to outsiders, such as service providers, to preserve their deﬁnition
of the community.
Finally, some of the studies we considered to represent this approach inves-
tigate how boundaries can be crossed. Lingel and Naaman [34] show how up-
loaded videos of pop and rock concerts connect not just individual users and fan
communities, but also fan communities to bands. Akoumianikis [1] exempliﬁes
that certain community-speciﬁc ways of using language and visual symbols may
function, not as a factor that separates communities from each other, but as a
potential means of connecting them. In Akoumianikis’ [1] study, a shared online
platform for tourism professionals, including features such as visualizations of
activities in a vacation package, functioned as a way to develop a shared under-
standing between the professionals and to encourage collaboration. Explicating
the ways in which ingroup boundaries are defended, and at times, crossed, these
studies acknowledge outgroups as contributors in the process. Mediated commu-
nity is in these cases understood as a process of constant negotiation that occurs
on its permeable boundaries.
3.5
Discussion
The distribution of articles in our review set on the diﬀerent levels of explana-
tion is quite equal, with the exception of the underrepresented positional level.
Only ﬁve publications were placed on it, while we identiﬁed 35 instances of the
intra-individual level, 45 of the situational level, and 39 of the ideological level.
Applying Doise’s framework of the levels of explanation in experimental social
psychology for this review allowed us to discern the relative prevalence of diﬀer-
ent approaches to mediated community and to determine gaps in this domain.
The most apparent ﬁnding is the relative scarcity of research on the positional
level of analysis. While such studies may exist outside our review set, our re-
view of publications in four prestigious journals serves to indicate the relative
distribution of currently dominant perspectives to mediated community.
4
The Potential for an Intergroup Perspective
Above, we observed that currently, mediated community is mostly conceptual-
ized and investigated from the inside, that is, with a focus on the community
itself. The contributions of individuals who are left outside of mediated commu-
nities, or on their borders, receive scarce attention. Addressing this shortcom-
ing, our analysis provides a basis for extending studies on mediated community
by taking the intergroup perspective into account. We see untapped potential
on each of the four levels of explanation to expand knowledge of how medi-
ated community evolves as an intergroup process. We will now focus on three

154
V. Lehtinen et al.
themes that provide particularly promising starting points for examining me-
diated communities from an intergroup perspective: (1) outgroups contributing
to intra-individual factors, such as the sense of community, (2) interpersonal
interaction occurring on group boundaries and the ﬂow of resources in social
networks, and (3) intergroup relations delineating the symbolic construction of
communities on the ideological level. We consider these three themes to represent
Doise’s levels of explanation, except the positional level that is, by deﬁnition,
inherent in these approaches.
4.1
Outgroups Contribute to How the Group is Perceived by Its
Individual Members
We found that the intra-individual level of explanation is emphasized, for ex-
ample, in the prevalent notion of mediated community as a sense of community.
Studies on how perceptions about outgroups contribute to a sense of community
as experienced by individual members could further the knowledge of how emo-
tions regarding mediated communities evolve. Focusing on the situation between
an ingroup and an outgroup (rather than a view from within a group) could il-
lustrate how intergroup relations may aﬀect the dynamics of creating sentiments
towards the ingroup. For example, as the theory of social identity [47] suggests,
to build up a positive social identity, ingroup is favored even in the absence of
any intergroup conﬂict over scarce resources. On the other hand, observed dif-
ferences between groups can be used to justify acts of favoring the ingroup [50].
Lampinen et al. [31] provide an example of outgroups contributing to the ways
the ingroup is perceived by its individual members. Their study illustrates how
IT students, a group of people who interact with each other actively both on-
line and oﬄine, build up their sense of community by distinguishing themselves
from the mainstream of their generation. This is done both discursively and with
technology choices, for example, by using older, less accessible, text-based forms
of online communication, such as the Internet Relay Chat (IRC).
Focusing on such intergroup processes could provide more detail on how me-
diated communities emerge in interactions between groups. The intergroup per-
spective would be crucial also to examine whether, how, and to what extent
mediated communities diﬀer from face-to-face communities in this respect. As-
sessing the formation of mediated communities as an intergroup phenomenon
would reveal whether mediated communities are based more on emphasizing in-
group similarities than intergroup diﬀerences. These studies could also assess the
consequences of mediated interaction for intergroup relations, such as the extent
to which ingroup sentiments are based on outgroup derogation.
4.2
Consequential Interaction Occurs on Group Boundaries
The notions of mediated community as a network, and other approaches posi-
tioned on the interpersonal level, are mostly concerned on how resources ﬂow
within the network. The limits beyond which the resources do not ﬂow typically
remain beyond the scope of this approach. To take advantage of the intergroup

Mediated Community from an Intergroup Perspective
155
perspective, the focus could be tilted towards the boundaries of resource sharing.
Even if these boundaries are permeable and transient, they can be located some-
where at particular points in time. For example, studies on social stratiﬁcation
in late modern societies have shown that social capital (or the lack of it) ﬂows
across generations (see, e.g. [24]). Examining the gaps in the networks of resource
sharing could explicate whether online networks are similarly aﬀected by per-
ceptions of who belongs to the network and who does not. It would also inform
us about the formation of densely knit communities within a dispersed network,
by illustrating how communities are juxtaposed with the broader network. Em-
pirical studies of mediated communities of practice could, for example, focus
their view on the practices that maintain the community, such as negotiations
on whether one is expert or reputed enough to join a community.
By examining the boundaries that delineate communities, we could ﬁnd out
whether new boundaries are created online, or whether they are diminished
altogether, and how. For example, studies on the so-called sharing economy
[23], [16] have pinpointed an ambivalent orientation to members of outgroups
on peer-to-peer exchange communities online. While being able to connect and
exchange with new people is central to these services, people tend to be selective
in choosing the ”strangers” with whom they interact. At times, this takes the
form of outright discrimination. An instance of the diminishing of boundaries,
on the other hand, is the process of becoming an insider member of a blogging
community through the actions of long-time members, such as when the long-
time members link to newcomers’ blogs from their own blogs [13].
4.3
Intergroup Relations Delineate the Symbolic Construction of
Communities
We suggest that research on the ideological level, covering the interactional pro-
cesses of constructing shared identities, should acknowledge participants’ mem-
berships in diﬀering social groups, as well as negotiations over who is allowed to
belong to a certain group. In our review set, Braithwaite [4] provides an example
of how intergroup relations delineate the symbolic construction of communities.
The study illustrates how the boundaries of a gaming community are policed
from feminism with explicit anger at feminists and anxiety over masculinity on
online forums associated with the game. The acknowledgment of intergroup re-
lations is essential to unravel their eﬀect on the dynamics of ingroup formation.
As Brown [6] points out, groups always exist in relation to other groups and
individuals. The ingroup is therefore not in full control of how it is constructed
in symbolic interaction. Outgroups make their own constructions of it. These
may aﬀect how members come to view their group, especially in the case of less
powerful minorities. Some of the studies we positioned on the ideological level
already acknowledge how communities are constructed in relation to other com-
munities, but the viewpoint remains still largely one from within the community.
This means, for example, focusing on how the community guards its boundaries
from outsiders. The power that outgroups have to deﬁne these boundaries are
not addressed, although such eﬀorts can range all the way to aggressive attacks.

156
V. Lehtinen et al.
We presume that a focus on outgroups contributions to the symbolic construction
of communities would help detailing the dynamics of mediated communities.
5
Conclusions
From our literature review, we conclude that there is a shortage of studies of me-
diated community that adopt an intergroup perspective. Yet, we argue that there
is strong potential to extend the state of the art by considering this perspective as
a part of future analyses. An intergroup perspective could help in providing new
understandings of how the boundaries of mediated communities evolve, and how
communities develop to extend their presumed boundaries. Each of the levels of
explanation provides insight to the dynamics of mediated community. However,
the intergroup perspective should be articulated explicitly to better support the
design of systems and policies related to mediated communities. In essence, the
intergroup perspective helps to identify barriers to community-building which lie
outside the community. On the intra-individual level, sentiments towards out-
groups could be identiﬁed as a variable aﬀecting how the ingroup is perceived.
On the interpersonal and situational level, barriers to resource sharing could be
located at the borders beyond which the sharing of resources does not extend.
The potential of the positional level could be fulﬁlled if intergroup relations
were acknowledged as a trigger for actions occurring within a community. On
the ideological level, the intergroup perspective shows how intergroup relations
delineate the discursive boundaries of a community.
Mediated communities diﬀer in the degree to which their formation is based
on juxtapositions between communities. In online hate groups [15], hostility to-
wards other groups is far more explicit than in knitting blogs [52]. However,
regardless of the extent to which the ingroup identity of a mediated community
is based on outgroup derogation, processes of ingroup formation always rely on
intergroup comparisons. Social categories, ranging from music genres and house-
hold types, to ethnicities and social class, become meaningful only in relation
to each other. Trash metal fans are distinguished from glam rockers, cohabiting
couples from single mothers, and so on. Intergroup relations do not always culmi-
nate in conﬂict, but the potential for it lies in the human tendency to strengthen
ingroup identities through intergroup comparisons [7]. Whether the boundaries
between groups are considered as symbolically constructed, as feelings, or as
observable interaction, people orient to their surroundings based on their group
identities. We argue that taking this tendency into account is productive for the
study of mediated communities. While mediated interaction can extend the no-
tion of community beyond geographical locality, it may reinforce other division
lines. Understanding mediated community as an intergroup process allows for
examining how these divisions emerge as a result of intergroup relations.

Mediated Community from an Intergroup Perspective
157
References
1. Akoumianakis, D.: Ambient aﬃliates in virtual cross-organizational tourism al-
liances: A case study of collaborative new product development. Comput. Hum.
Behav. 30, 773–786 (2014)
2. Bjarnason, T., Gudmunsson, B., Olafsson, K.: Towards a digital adolescent so-
ciety? The social structure of the Icelandic adolescent blogosphere. New Media
Soc. 13, 645–662 (2011)
3. Blanchard, A.: Developing a Sense of Virtual Community Measure. CyberPsychol.
Behav. 10(6), 827–830 (2007)
4. Braithwaite, A.: Seriously, get out: Feminists on the forums and the War (craft)
on women. New Media Soc. 16(5), 703–718 (2014)
5. Branscombe, N.R., Schmitt, M.T., Harvey, R.D.: Perceiving pervasive discrimi-
nation among African Americans: Implications for group identiﬁcation and well-
being. J. Pers. Soc. Psych. 77, 135–149 (1999)
6. Brown, R.: Group processes: dynamics within and between groups, 2nd edn.
Blackwell, Oxford (2000)
7. Brown, R.: Prejudice, 2nd edn. Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester (2010)
8. Cantador, I., Castells, P.: Extracting multilayered Communities of Interest from
semantic user proﬁles: Application to group modeling and hybrid recommenda-
tions. Comput. Hum. Behav. 27(4), 1321–1336 (2011)
9. Choi, S., Park, H.: An exploratory approach to a Twitter-based community cen-
tered on a political goal in South Korea. Who organized it, what they shared, and
how they acted. New Media Soc. 16(1), 129–148 (2014)
10. Cress, U., Schwmmlein, E., Wodzicki, K., Kimmerle, J.: Searching for the perfect
ﬁt: The interaction of community type and proﬁle design in online communities.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 38, 313–321 (2014)
11. Cristofari, C., Guitton, M.: Mapping virtual communities by their visual produc-
tions: The example of the Second Life Steampunk community. Comput. Hum.
Behav. 41, 374–383 (2014)
12. Crowson, M., Goulding, A.: Virtually homosexual: Technoromanticism, de-
marginalisation and identity formation among homosexual males. Comput. Hum.
Behav. 29(5), 31–39 (2013)
13. Dennen, V.: Becoming a blogger: Trajectories, norms, and activities in a commu-
nity of practice. Comput. Hum. Behav. 36, 350–358 (2014)
14. Doise, W.: Levels of explanation in social psychology. Cambridge University Press,
Cambridge (1986)
15. Douglas, K.: Psychology, discrimination and hate groups online. In: Joinson, A.,
McKenna, K., Postmes, T., Reips, U. (eds.) The Oxford Handbook of Internet
Psychology, pp. 115–164. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2007)
16. Edelman, B., Luca, M.: Digital Discrimination: The Case of Airbnb.com. Harvard
Business School NOM Unit Working Paper No. 14-054 (2014)
17. Ellison, N., Steinﬁeld, C., Lampe, C.: The beneﬁts of Facebook friends: Social
capital and college students use of online social network sites. J. Comput. Mediat.
Comm. 12(4), 1143–1168 (2007)
18. Fernback, J.: Beyond the diluted community concept: a symbolic interactionist
perspective on online social relations. New Media Soc. 9(1), 49–69 (2007)
19. Giles, D., Newbold, J.: Is this normal? The role of category predicates in con-
structing mental illness online. J. Comput. Mediat. Comm. 18(4), 476–490 (2013)

158
V. Lehtinen et al.
20. Hasler, B., Amichai-Hamburger, Y.: Online intergroup contact. In: Amichai-
Hamburger, Y. (ed.) The Social Net: Understanding Our Online Behavior, 2nd
edn., pp. 220–252. Oxford University Press, Oxford (2013)
21. Hsu, C., Lu, H.: Consumer behavior in online game communities: A motivational
factor perspective. Comput. Hum. Behav. 23(3), 1642–1659 (2007)
22. Kim, H., Sundar, S.: Can online buddies and bandwagon cues enhance user partic-
ipation in online health communities? Comput. Hum. Behav. 37, 319–333 (2014)
23. Ikkala, T., Lampinen, A.: Monetizing Network Hospitality: Hospitality and So-
ciability in the Context of Airbnb. In: Proc. CSCW 2015. ACM Press, New York
(forthcoming, 2015)
24. Jaeger, M.: Educational mobility across three generations: the changing impact of
parental social class, economic, cultural and social capital. Eur. Soc. 9, 4 (2007)
25. Jahnke, I.: Dynamics of social roles in a knowledge management community. Com-
put. Hum. Behav. 26, 233–546 (2010)
26. Josefsson, U.: Coping with Illness Online: The Case of Patients’ Online Commu-
nities’. Inform. Soc. 21, 133–141 (2005)
27. Jung, Y., Kang, H.: User goals in social virtual worlds: A means-end chain ap-
proach. Comput. Hum. Behav. 26(2), 218–225 (2010)
28. Kahn, A., Ratan, R., Williams, D.: Why We Distort in Self-Report: Predictors
of Self Report Errors in Video Game Play. J. Comput. Mediat. Commun. 19(4),
1010–1023 (2014)
29. Kazmer, M.: Beyond CU L8R: Disengaging from online social worlds. New Media
Soc. 9(1), 111–138 (2007)
30. Lampel, J., Bhalla, A.: The role of status seeking in online communities: Giving
the gift of experience. J. Comput.-Mediat. Comm. 12(2), 434–455 (2007)
31. Lampinen, A., Lehtinen, V., Cheshire, C.: Media Choice and Identity Work: A
Case Study of Information Communication Technology Use in a Peer Commu-
nity. Emerald Studies in Media and Communication. In: Robinson, L., Cotten,
S.R., Schulz, J. (eds.) Communication and Information Technologies Annual 2014:
Doing and Being Digital: Mediated Childhoods (2014)
32. Lave, J., Wenger, E.: Situated Learning: Legitimate Peripheral Participation.
Cambridge University Press, Cambridge (1991)
33. Lee, D., Kim, H.S., Kim, J.K.: The role of self-construal in consumers electronic
word of mouth (eWOM) in social networking sites: A social cognitive approach.
Comput. Hum. Behav. 28(3), 1054–1062 (2012)
34. Lingel, J., Naaman, M.: You should have been there, man: Live music, DIY content
and online communities. New Media Soc. 14(2), 332–349 (2012)
35. Matei, S.: From counterculture to cyberculture: Virtual community discourse and
the dilemma of modernity. J. Comput. Mediat. Comm. 10, 3 (2005)
36. Matzat, U., Rooks, G.: Comput. Hum. Behav. Styles of moderation in online
health and support communities: An experimental comparison of their acceptance
and eﬀectiveness. Comput. Hum. Behav. 36, 65–75 (2014)
37. McMillan, D., Chavis, D.: Sense of community: a deﬁnition and theory. J. Com-
munity Psychol. 14, 6–23 (1985)
38. Park, J., Gu, B., Leung, A., Konana, P.: An investigation of information shar-
ing and seeking behaviors in online investment communities. Comput. Hum. Be-
hav. 31, 1–12 (2014)
39. Peterson, N., Speer, P., McMillan, D.: Validation of a brief sense of community
scale: conﬁrmation of the principal theory of sense of community. J. Community
Psychol. 36(1), 61–73 (2008)

Mediated Community from an Intergroup Perspective
159
40. Pfeil, U., Zaphiris, P., Wilson, S.: The role of message-sequences in the sustain-
ability of an online support community for older people. J. Comput.-Mediat.
Comm. 15, 336–363 (2010)
41. Phillips, D.: Defending the Boundaries: Identifying and Countering Threats in a
Usenet Newsgroup. Inform Soc. 12(1), 39–62 (1996)
42. Postmes, T., Baym, N.: Intergroup dimensions of Internet. In: Harwood, J.,
Giles, H. (eds.) Intergroup Communication: Multiple Perspectives, pp. 213–238.
Peter Lang., New York (2005)
43. Procaci, T., Siqueira, S., Braz, M., de Andrade, L.: How to ﬁnd people who can
help to answer a question? Analyses of metrics and machine learning in online
communities. Comput. Hum. Behav. (in press)
44. Ridings, C.M., Gefen, D.: Virtual community attraction: Why people hang out
online. J. Comput. Mediat. Comm. 10, 1 (2004)
45. Schwammlein, E., Wodzicki, K.: What to Tell About Me? Self Presentation in
Online Communities. J. Comput. Mediat. Comm. 17(4), 387–407 (2012)
46. Scheepers, D., Spears, R., Doosje, B., Manstead, A.: The social functions of in-
group bias: Creating, conﬁrming, or changing social reality. Eur. Rev. Soc. Psy-
chol. 17, 359–396 (2006)
47. Tajfel, H., Turner, J.C.: The social identity theory of intergroup relations. In:
Worchel, S., Austin, W.G. (eds.) Psychology of Intergroup Relations, pp. 7–24.
Nelson-Hall, Chicago (1986)
48. Tatarchevskiy, T.: The popular culture of internet activism. New Media
Soc. 13(2), 297–313 (2011)
49. Tiidenberg, K.: Boundaries and conﬂict in a NSFW community on tumblr: The
meanings and uses of selﬁes. New Media Soc. (2015) (in press)
50. Turner, J., Hogg, M., Oakes, P., Reicher, S., Wetherell, M.: Rediscovering the
social group: A self-categorization theory. Basil Blackwell, Oxford (1987)
51. Uotinen, J.: Involvement in (the information) society - the Joensuu community
resource centre netcafe. New Media Soc. 5(3), 335–356 (2003)
52. Wei, C.: Formation of norms in a blog community. In: L. Gurak, S. Antonije-
vic, L. Johnson, C. Ratliﬀ, J. Reyman (Eds.), Into the Blogosphere. Rhetoric,
Community, and Culture of Weblogs (2004)
53. Wellman, B.: Physical Place and Cyberplace: The Rise of Personalized Network-
ing. Int. J. Urban Regional 25(2), 252–252 (2001)
54. Williams, D.: On and oﬀthe net: Scales for social capital in an online era. J.
Comput.-Mediat. Comm. 11(2) (2006)
55. Winston, E., Medlin, B., Romaniello, B.: An e-patients end-user community
(EUCY): The value added of social network applications. Comput. Hum. Be-
hav. 28(3), 951–957 (2012)
56. Wise, K., Hamman, B., Thorson, K.: Moderation, response rate, and message
interactivity: Features of online communities and their eﬀects on intent to partic-
ipate. J. Comput. Mediat. Comm. 12(1), 24–41 (2006)
57. Yardi, S., Boyd, D.: Dynamic debates: an analysis of group polarization over time
on Twitter. B. Sci. Technol. Soc. 30, 316–327 (2010)
58. Zha, X., Zhang, J., Yan, Y., Xiao, Z.: User perceptions of e-quality of and aﬃnity
with virtual communities: The eﬀect of individual diﬀerences. Comput. Hum.
Behav. 38, 185–195 (2014)

Author Index
Adolphs, Svenja
123
Akdag Salah, Alkim Almila
78
Alyousef, Ammar
133
Badran, Mona Farid
30
Bordea, Georgeta
63
Carter, Christopher James
123
de Meer, Hermann
133
Fallon, Rebecca
49
Harris, Lisa
15
Hooper, Clare J.
63
Koene, Ansgar
123
Lampinen, Airi
145
Lehtinen, Vilma
145
Loriette, Antoine
100
McAuley, Derek
123
McMillan, Donald
100
Morando, Federico
90
Neves, Bruna
63
O’Malley, Claire
123
Papaioannou, Thanasis G.
90
Peltonen, Peter
145
Perez, Elvira
123
Phethean, Christopher
15
Pierson, Jo
3
Raita, Eeva
145
Rodden, Tom
123
Scharnhorst, Andrea
78
Scheliga, Kaja
113
Statache, Ramona
123
Sui, Zhiyuan
133
Tiropanis, Thanassis
15, 90
Wahlstr¨om, Mikael
145
Wang, Xin
90
Wyatt, Sally
78

