
 Intimate 
Relationships 
 SEVENTH EDITION 
 Rowland S.  Miller 
 Sam Houston State University 

INTIMATE RELATIONSHIPS, SEVENTH EDITION
Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2015 by 
McGraw-Hill Education. All rights reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous 
editions © 2012, 2009, and 2007. No part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in 
any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written 
consent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other elec-
tronic storage or transmission, or broadcast for distance learning.
Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers 
outside the United States.
This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOC/DOC 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 4
ISBN 978-0-07-786180-3
MHID 0-07-786180-9
Senior Vice President, Products & Markets: 
Kurt L. Strand
Vice President, General Manager, Products & 
Markets: Mike Ryan
Vice President, Content Design & Delivery: 
Kimberly Meriwether David
Director: Krista Bettino
Brand Manager: Nancy Welcher
Director, Product Development: Penina Braffman
Marketing Manager: Alexandra Schultz
Director, Content Design & Delivery: Terri Schiesl
Full-Service Manager: Faye Schilling
Content Project Manager: Melissa M. Leick, Judi 
David, & Danielle Clement
Buyer: Debra Sylvester
Cover Designer: Studio Montage, St. Louis, MO
Cover Image: DEA Picture Library/Getty Images/RF
Compositor: Laserwords Private Limited
Typeface: 10/12 Palatino
Printer: R. R. Donnelley
All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the 
copyright page.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Miller, Rowland S.
  Intimate relationships / Rowland S. Miller, Sam Houston State University—Seventh edition.
   pages cm
  Includes bibliographical references and index.
  ISBN 978-0-07-786180-3 (alk. paper)
   1. Family life education. 2. Interpersonal relations. I. Title. 
 HQ10.B735 2015
 306.707—dc23
 
2014018983
The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion 
of a website does not indicate an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and 
McGraw-Hill Education does not guarantee the accuracy of the information presented at these 
sites.
www.mhhe.com 

iii
Contents
PREFACE  viii
ABOUT THE AUTHOR  x
 1. 
The Building Blocks of Relationships 
1
the nature and importance of intimacy 
2
the influence of culture 
6
the influence of experience 
14
the influence of individual differences 
19
the influence of human nature 
32
the influence of interaction 
36
the dark side of relationships 
37
for your consideration 
38
chapter summary 
38
 2. 
Research Methods 
41
the short history of relationship science 
42
developing a question 
46
obtaining participants 
47
choosing a design 
50
selecting a setting 
53
the nature of our data 
55
the ethics of such endeavors 
61
interpreting and integrating results 
63

iv 
Contents
a final note 
64
for your consideration 
65
chapter summary 
66
 3. 
Attraction 
68
the fundamental basis of attraction 
68
proximity: liking those near us 
69
physical attractiveness: 
 liking those who are lovely 
75
reciprocity: liking those who like us 
88
similarity: liking those who are like us 
91
barriers: liking those we cannot have 
100
so, what do men and women want? 
100
for your consideration 
102
chapter summary 
102
 4. 
Social Cognition 
105
first impressions (and beyond) 
106
the power of perceptions 
112
impression management 
127
so, just how well do we know our partners? 
133
for your consideration 
138
chapter summary 
138
 5. 
Communication 
141
nonverbal communication 
143
verbal communication 
156
dysfunctional communication 
 and what to do about it 
166
for your consideration 
173
chapter summary 
174

Contents v
 6. 
Interdependency 
176
social exchange 
176
the economies of relationships 
184
are we really this greedy? 
197
the nature of commitment 
205
for your consideration 
210
chapter summary 
210
 7. 
Friendship 
213
the nature of friendship 
214
friendship across the life cycle 
222
differences in friendship 
227
friendship difficulties 
232
for your consideration 
243
chapter summary 
244
 8. 
Love 
246
a brief history of love 
247
types of love 
248
individual and cultural differences 
 in love 
265
does love last? 
269
for your consideration 
274
chapter summary 
274
 9. 
Sexuality 
276
sexual attitudes 
276
sexual behavior 
281
sexual satisfaction 
298

vi 
Contents
sexual coercion 
304
for your consideration 
306
chapter summary 
306
 10. 
Stresses and Strains 
308
perceived relational value 
308
hurt feelings 
310
ostracism 
313
jealousy 
315
deception and lying 
326
betrayal 
331
forgiveness 
335
for your consideration 
337
chapter summary 
338
 11. 
Conflict 
340
the nature of conflict 
340
the course of conflict 
344
the outcomes of conflict 
359
for your consideration 
363
chapter summary 
364
 12. 
Power and Violence 
365
power and interdependence 
366
violence in relationships 
380
for your consideration 
391
chapter summary 
392

Contents vii
 13. 
The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 
394
the changing rate of divorce 
394
the predictors of divorce 
401
breaking up 
411
the aftermath of breakups 
415
for your consideration 
425
chapter summary 
426
 14. 
Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 
428
maintaining and enhancing relationships 
430
repairing relationships 
438
in conclusion 
447
for your consideration 
448
chapter summary 
448
REFERENCES  R
CREDITS  C-1
NAME INDEX  I-1
SUBJECT INDEX  I-12

viii
 Preface to the Seventh Edition 
Welcome to Intimate Relationships! I’m very pleased that you’re here. I’ve been 
deeply honored by the high regard this book has enjoyed, and am privileged to 
be able to provide you another very thorough update on the remarkable work 
being done in relationship science. The field is busier and broader than ever 
before, so this edition contains several hundreds of citations to brand-new work 
published in the last 3 years. You’ll find no other survey of relationship science 
that is as current, comprehensive, and complete.
I’m told that you won’t find another textbook that’s as much fun to read, 
either. I’m very glad. This is a scholarly work primarily intended to provide 
college audiences with broad coverage of an entire field of inquiry, but it’s 
written in a friendly, accessible style that gets students to read chapters they 
haven’t been assigned—and that’s a real mark of success! But really, that’s also 
not surprising because so much of relationship science is so fascinating. No 
other science strikes closer to home. For that reason, and given its welcoming, 
reader-friendly style, this book has proven to be of interest to the general pub-
lic, too. (As my father said, “Everybody should read this book.”)
So, here’s a new edition. It contains whole chapters on key topics that other 
books barely mention and cites hundreds more studies than other books do. 
It draws on social psychology, communication studies, family studies, sociol-
ogy, clinical psychology, neuroscience, and more. It’s much more current and 
comprehensive and more fun to read than any other overview of the modern 
science of close relationships. Welcome!
What’s New in This Edition
Each chapter now contains new pedagogical tools, thought-provoking Points 
to Ponder, that invite readers to think more deeply about intriguing phenom-
ena and to inspect their personal reactions to the text material. The Points 
will serve equally well as touchstones for class discussion, topics for indi-
vidual essays, and personal reflections regarding one’s own behavior in close 
relationships.

Preface to the Seventh Edition ix
In addition, this edition contains 727 new references that support new or 
substantially expanded discussion of topics that include:
Prayer 
Cues to deception
Revenge 
Social networking
Cheaters 
Perceived similarity
Churning 
Friends with benefits
Having fun 
Relationship turbulence
The color red 
Attachment mismatches
Gay marriage 
Smell and chemosignals
Online dating 
Compassionate love acts
Responsiveness 
Social contagion of divorce
Ovulatory shifts 
Long-distance relationships
Facebook Friends 
Facial width-to-height ratios
Sex on a first date 
Computer-mediated communication
I have produced new PowerPoint slides that outline the chapters, and they and 
a new Instructor’s Manual and Test Bank are available online at www.mhhe.
com/millerint7e.
What Hasn’t Changed
If you’re familiar with the sixth edition of this book, you’ll find things in the 
same places. Vital influences on intimate relationships are introduced in chap-
ter 1, and when they are mentioned in later chapters, footnotes remind readers 
where to find definitions that will refresh their memories.
The book’s singular style also remains intact. There’s someone here behind 
these pages; I occasionally break the third wall, speaking directly to the reader, 
both to be friendly and to make some key points, and because I can’t help myself. 
I’m always delighted, privileged, and honored to be granted the opportunity to 
introduce this dynamic, exciting science to the newcomer—and readers report 
that it shows.
Kudos and thanks go to Sharon Brehm, the original creator of this book, 
and to Dan Perlman, the co-author who enticed me into doing it in the first 
place. I’ve also been grateful for the wonderful support and assistance of edi-
torial and production professionals, Penina Braffman, Melanie Lewis, Melissa 
Leick, Erin Guendelsberger, Sheri Gilbert, and Kala Ramachandran. Thanks, 
y’all.
I’m glad you’re here, and I hope you enjoy the book. 

x
About the Author
Rowland S. Miller is a Professor of Psychology 
at Sam Houston State University in Huntsville, 
Texas. He has been teaching a course in Close 
Relationships for over 25 years, and he won the 
2008 Teaching Award from the International 
Association for Relationship Research ( primarily 
as a result of this book). He is a Fellow of the 
Association for Psychological Science, and a 
winner of the Edwin Newman Award for Excel-
lence in Research from Psi Chi and the American 
 Psychological Association. His parents were hap-
pily married for 73 years. He’s pictured here with 
his lovely wife, Carolyn, for two reasons: First, 
she’s the co-author of his most important inti-
mate relationship, and second, she was hugely helpful and supportive behind 
the scenes, talking the author out of (nearly all of) his bad ideas. 

About the Author xi
The 7th edition of Intimate Relationships is now available as a 
SmartBook™–the first and only adaptive reading experience designed 
to change the way students read and learn:
SmartBook creates a personalized reading experience by highlighting the most 
impactful concepts a student needs to learn at that moment in time.  As a stu-
dent engages with SmartBook, the reading experience continuously adapts by 
highlighting content based on what the student knows and doesn’t know. This 
ensures that the focus is on the content he or she needs to learn, while simulta-
neously promoting long-term retention of material. Use SmartBook’s real-time 
reports to quickly identify the concepts that require more attention from indi-
vidual students–or the entire class. The end result? Students are more engaged 
with course content, can better prioritize their time, and come to class ready to 
participate.
Key Student Benefits 
 • Engages the student in the reading process with a personalized reading 
experience that helps them study efficiently. 
 • SmartBook includes powerful reports that identify specific topics and 
learning objectives the student needs to study. 
 • Students can access SmartBook anytime via a computer and mobile devices.

xii 
About the Author
Key Instructor Benefits 
 • Students will come to class better prepared because SmartBook personal-
izes the reading experience, allowing instructors to focus their valuable 
class time on higher level topics. 
 • Provides instructors with a comprehensive set of reports to help them 
quickly see how individual students are performing, identify class trends, 
and provide personalized feedback to students. 
How does SmartBook work? 
 • Preview: Students start off by Previewing the content, where they are asked 
to browse the chapter content to get an idea of what concepts are covered. 
 • Read: Once they have Previewed the content, the student is prompted to 
Read. As he or she reads, SmartBook will introduce LearnSmart questions 
in order to identify what content the student knows and doesn’t know. 
 • Practice: As the student answers the questions, SmartBook tracks their 
progress in order to determine when they are ready to Practice. As the stu-
dents Practice in SmartBook, the program identifies what content they are 
most likely to forget and when. 
 • Recharge: That content is brought back for review during the Recharge pro-
cess to ensure retention of the material 

About the Author xiii
Speak to your McGraw-Hill Learning Technology Consultants 
today to find out more about adopting SmartBook for Intimate 
Relationships, 7th edition!


1
 C H A P T E R  1 
 The Building Blocks of 
Relationships 
 T he N ature and I mportance of I ntimacy  ◆  T he I nfluence of 
C ulture  ◆ T he I nfluence of E xperience  ◆ T he I nfluence of I ndividual  
D ifferences  ◆ T he I nfluence of H uman N ature  ◆ T he I nfluence 
of I nteraction  ◆ T he D ark S ide of R elationships  ◆ F or Y our  
C onsideration  ◆ C hapter S ummary  
 H ow’s this for a vacation? Imagine yourself in a nicely appointed suite with a 
pastoral view. You’ve got cable, video games, plenty of books and magazines, 
and all the supplies for your favorite hobby. Delightful food and drink are pro-
vided, and you have your favorite entertainments at hand. But there’s a catch: 
No one else is around, and you have no phone and no access to the Web. You’re 
completely alone. You have almost everything you want except for other peo-
ple. Texts, tweets, and Facebook are unavailable. No one else is even in sight, 
and you cannot interact with anyone else in any way. 
 How’s that for a vacation? A few of us would enjoy the solitude for a 
while, but most of us would quickly find it surprisingly stressful to be com-
pletely detached from other people (Schachter, 1959). Most of us need others 
even more than we realize, and there’s a reason prisons sometimes use  solitary 
confinement as a form of punishment: Human beings are a very social species. 
People suffer when they are deprived of close contact with others, and at the 
core of our social nature is our need for intimate relationships. 
 Our relationships with others are central aspects of our lives. They can 
bring us great joy when they go well, but cause great sorrow when they go 
poorly. Our relationships are indispensable and vital, so it’s useful to under-
stand how they start, how they operate, how they thrive, and how, sometimes, 
they end in a haze of anger and pain. 
 This book will promote your own understanding of close relationships. It 
draws on psychology, sociology, communication studies, family studies, and 
neuroscience, and it reports what behavioral scientists have learned about rela-
tionships through careful research. The book offers a different, more scientific 
view of relationships than you’ll find in magazines or the movies; it’s more rea-
soned, more cautious, and often less romantic. You’ll also find that this is not a 
how-to manual. There are many insights awaiting you in the pages ahead, and 

2 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
there’ll be plenty of news you can use, but you’ll need to bring your own val-
ues and personal experiences to bear on the information presented here. This 
book’s intent is to survey the scientific study of close relationships and to intro-
duce you to the diverse foci of relationship science. 
 To set the stage for the discoveries to come, we’ll first define our subject mat-
ter. What are intimate relationships? Why do they matter so much? Then, we’ll 
consider the fundamental building blocks of close relationships: the cultures we 
inhabit, the experiences we encounter, the personalities we possess, the human ori-
gins we all share, and the interactions we conduct. In order to understand relation-
ships, we must first consider who we are,  where we are, and how we got there.  
 THE NATURE AND IMPORTANCE OF INTIMACY 
 Relationships come in all shapes and sizes. We can have consequential contact 
with almost anyone—cashiers, classmates, colleagues, and kin—but we’ll focus 
here on our relationships with friends and lovers because they exemplify intimate 
 relationships. Our primary focus is on intimate relationships between adults.  
 The Nature of Intimacy 
 What, then, is intimacy? That’s actually a complex question because intimacy is 
a multifaceted concept with several different components (Prager et al., 2013). 
It’s generally held (Ben-Ari & Lavee, 2007) that intimate relationships differ from 
more casual associations in at least seven specific ways:  knowledge, interdepen-
dence, caring, trust, responsiveness, mutuality, and  commitment.  
 First, intimate partners have extensive personal, often confidential,  knowledge 
about each other. They share information about their histories, preferences, feel-
ings, and desires that they do not reveal to most of the other people they know. 
 The lives of intimate partners are also intertwined: What each partner does 
affects what the other partner wants to do and can do.  Interdependence between 
intimates—the extent to which they need and influence each other—is frequent 
(they often affect each other), strong (they have meaningful impacts on each 
other), diverse (they influence each other in many different ways), and endur-
ing (they influence each other over long periods of time). When relationships 
are interdependent, one’s behavior affects one’s partner as well as oneself 
( Berscheid et al., 2004). 
The qualities that make these close ties tolerable are caring, trust, and 
responsiveness. Intimate partners care about each other; they feel more affec-
tion for one another than they do for most others. They also trust one another, 
expecting to be treated fairly and honorably (Simpson, 2007). People expect 
that no undue harm will result from their intimate relationships, and if it does, 
they often become wary and reduce the openness and interdependence that 
characterize closeness (Jones et al., 1997). In contrast, intimacy increases when 
people believe that their partners understand, respect, and appreciate them, 
being attentively and effectively responsive to their needs and concerned for 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 3
their welfare (Reis, 2014). Responsiveness is powerfully rewarding, and the 
perception that our partners recognize, understand, and support our needs and 
wishes is a core ingredient of our very best relationships (Reis, 2013).
 As a result of these close ties, people who are intimate also consider them-
selves to be a couple instead of two entirely separate individuals. They exhibit a 
high degree of  mutuality, which means that they recognize their close connection 
and think of themselves as “us” instead of “me” and “her” (or “him”) (Fitzsimons 
& Kay, 2004). In fact, that change in outlook—from “I” to “us”—often signals the 
subtle but significant moment in a developing relationship when new partners 
first acknowledge their attachment to each other (Agnew et al., 1998). Indeed, 
researchers sometimes assess the amount of intimacy in a close relationship by 
simply asking partners to rate the extent to which they “overlap.” The Inclusion 
of Other in the Self Scale (see  Figure 1.1 ) is a straightforward measure of mutual-
ity that does a remarkably good job of distinguishing between intimate and more 
casual relationships (Aron et al., 2013). 
 Finally, intimate partners are ordinarily  committed to their relationships. 
That is, they expect their partnerships to continue indefinitely, and they invest 
the time, effort, and resources that are needed to realize that goal. Without such 
commitment, people who were once very close may find themselves less and 
less interdependent and knowledgeable about each other as time goes by. 
 None of these components is absolutely required for intimacy to occur, 
and each may exist when the others are absent. For instance, spouses in a 
stale, unhappy marriage may be very interdependent, closely coordinating 
the practical details of their daily lives but living in a psychological vacuum 
devoid of much affection or responsiveness. Such partners would certainly be 
more intimate than mere acquaintances are, but they would undoubtedly feel 
less close to one another than they used to (for instance, when they decided 
to marry), when more of the components were present. In general, our most 
satisfying and meaningful intimate relationships include all seven of these 
defining  characteristics (Fletcher et al., 2000). Still, intimacy can exist to a 
Please circle the picture below that best describes your current relationship with your partner.
Self
Other
Self
Other
Self
Other
Self
Other
Self
Other
Self
Other
Self
Other
FIGURE 1.1. The Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale.
How intimate is a relationship? Asking people to pick the picture that portrays a par-
ticular partnership does a remarkably good job of assessing the closeness they feel.
Source: Aron et al., 1992.

4 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
lesser degree when only some of them are in place. And as unhappy mar-
riages demonstrate, intimacy can also vary enormously over the course of a 
long relationship. 
 Thus, there is no one kind of intimate relationship. Indeed, a fundamental 
lesson about relationships is a very simple one: They come in all shapes and 
sizes. This variety is a source of great complexity, but it can also be a source of 
endless fascination. (And that’s why I wrote this book!) 
 The Need to Belong 
 Our focus on intimate relationships means that we will not consider the 
wide variety of the interactions that you have each day with casual friends 
and acquaintances. Should we be so particular? Is such a focus justified? The 
answers, of course, are yes. Although our casual interactions can be very 
influential (Fingerman, 2009), there’s something special about intimate rela-
tionships. In fact, a powerful and pervasive drive to establish intimacy with 
others may be a basic part of our human nature. According to theorists Roy 
Baumeister and Mark Leary (1995), we  need frequent, pleasant interactions with 
intimate partners in lasting, caring relationships if we’re to function normally. 
There is a human  need to belong in close relationships, and if the need is not 
met, a variety of problems follows. 
 Our need to belong is presumed to necessitate “regular social contact with 
those to whom one feels connected” (Baumeister & Leary, 1995, p. 501). In order 
to fulfill the need, we are driven to establish and maintain close relationships 
with other people; we require interaction and communion with those who 
know and care for us. We only need a few close relationships; when the need to 
belong is satiated, our drive to form additional relationships is reduced. (Thus, 
when it comes to relationships, quality is more important than quantity.) It also 
doesn’t matter much  who our partners are; as long as they provide us stable 
affection and acceptance, our need can be satisfied. Thus, when an important 
relationship ends, we are often able to find replacement partners who—though 
they may be quite different from our previous  partners—are nonetheless able 
to satisfy our need to belong (Spielmann et al., 2012). 
 Some of the support for this theory comes from the ease with which we 
form relationships with others and from the tenacity with which we then resist 
the dissolution of our existing social ties. Indeed, when a valued relationship 
is in peril, we may find it hard to think about anything else. The potency of the 
need to belong may also be why being entirely alone for a long period of time 
is so stressful (Schachter, 1959); anything that threatens our sense of connection 
to other people can be hard to take (Leary & Miller, 2012). 
 In fact, some of the strongest evidence supporting a need to belong comes 
from studies of the biological benefits we accrue from close ties to others. In gen-
eral, people live happier, healthier, longer lives when they’re closely connected 
to others than they do when they’re on their own (Kern et al., 2014). Holding a 
lover’s hand reduces the brain’s alarm in response to threatening situations 
(Coan et al., 2006), and pain seems less potent when one simply looks at a 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 5
photograph of a loving partner (Master et al., 2009). Wounds even heal faster 
when others accept and support us (Gouin et al., 2010). In contrast, people with 
insufficient intimacy in their lives are at risk for a wide variety of health prob-
lems (Hawkley & Cacioppo, 2013). When they’re lonely, young adults have 
weaker immune responses, leaving them more likely to catch a cold or flu 
(Pressman et al., 2005). Across the life span, people who have few friends or lov-
ers have much higher mortality rates than do those who are closely connected to 
caring partners; in one extensive study, people 
who lacked close ties to others were 2 to 3 times 
more likely to die over a 9-year span (Berkman & 
Glass, 2000). Married people in the United States 
are less likely to die from any of the 10 leading 
causes of cancer-related death than unmarried 
people are (Aizer et al., 2013). And losing one’s 
existing ties to others is damaging, too: Elderly 
widows and widowers are much more likely to die 
in the first few months after the loss of their spouses 
than they would have been had their marriages 
continued (Elwert & Christakis, 2008).  
 Our mental and physical health is also affected by the quality of our con-
nections to others (Robles et al., 2014) (see Figure 1.2). Day by day, people who 
have pleasant interactions with others who care for them are more satisfied with 
their lives than are those who lack such social contact (Nezlek et al., 2002), and 
this is true around the world (Galinha et al., 2013). In contrast, psychiatric prob-
lems, anxiety disorders, and substance abuse tend to afflict those with troubled 
ties to others (Whisman, 2013). On the surface (as I’ll explain in detail in chapter 
2), such patterns do not necessarily mean that shallow, superficial relationships 
 cause psychological problems; after all, people who are prone to such problems 
may find it difficult to form loving relationships in the first place. Nevertheless, 
it does appear that a lack of intimacy can both cause such problems and make 
them worse (Eberhart & Hammen, 2006). In general, whether we’re gay or 
straight (Wight et al., 2013), married or just cohabiting (Kohn & Averett, 2014), 
our well-being seems to depend on how well we satisfy the need to belong. 
 Why should we need intimacy so much? Why are we such a social species? 
One possibility is that the need to belong  evolved  over eons, gradually becoming a 
natural tendency in all human beings (Baumeister & Leary, 1995). That argument 
goes this way: Because early humans lived in small tribal groups surrounded by 
a difficult environment full of saber-toothed tigers, people who were loners were 
less likely than gregarious humans to have children who would grow to maturity 
and reproduce. In such a setting, a tendency to form stable, affectionate connec-
tions to others would have been evolutionarily  adaptive, making it more likely 
that one’s children would survive and thrive. As a result, our species slowly 
came to be characterized by people who cared deeply about what others thought 
of them and who sought acceptance and closeness from others. Admittedly, this 
view—which represents a provocative way of thinking about our modern behav-
ior (and about which I’ll have more to say later in this chapter)—is speculative. 
A Point to Ponder
Why are married people 
less likely to die from 
cancer than unmarried 
people are? Are unhealthy 
people simply less likely 
to get married, or is 
marriage advantageous 
to our health? How might 
marriage be beneficial?

6 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
Nevertheless, whether or not this evolutionary account is entirely correct, there is 
little doubt that almost all of us now care deeply about the quality of our attach-
ments to others. We are also at a loss, prone to illness and maladjustment, when 
we have insufficient intimacy in our lives. We know that food, water, and shelter 
are essential for life, but the need to belong suggests that intimacy with others is 
essential for a good, long life as well (Kenrick et al., 2010). 
 Now, let’s examine the major influences that will determine what sort of 
relationships we construct when we seek to satisfy the need to belong. We’ll 
start with a counterpoint to our innate need for intimacy: the changing cultures 
that provide the norms that govern our intimate relationships.  
 THE INFLUENCE OF CULTURE 
 I know it seems like ancient history—smart phones and Facebook and AIDS 
didn’t exist—but let’s look back at 1960, which may have been around the time 
that your grandparents were deciding to marry. If they were a typical couple, 
FIGURE 1.2. Satisfying intimacy and life and death.
Here’s a remarkable example of the manner in which satisfying intimacy is associated 
with better health. In this investigation, middle-aged patients with congestive heart 
failure were tracked for several years after their diseases were diagnosed. Forty-eight 
months later, most of the patients with less satisfying marriages had died whereas 
most of the people who were more happily married were still alive. This pattern 
occurred both when the initial illnesses were relatively mild and more severe, so it’s 
a powerful example of the link between happy intimacy and better health. In another 
study, patients who were satisfied with their marriages when they had heart surgery 
were over 3 times more likely to still be alive 15 years later than were those who were 
unhappily married (King & Reis, 2012). Evidently, fulfilling our needs to belong can be 
a matter of life or death.
1.0
.9
.8
.7
.6
Proportion of Patients Alive
.5
.4
.3
0
4
8
12
16
20
24
Months from Diagnosis
28
32
36
40
44
48
Better Marital
Quality
Poorer Marital
Quality
Source: Coyn e et al., 2001.

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 7
they would have married in their early twenties, before she was 21 and before 
he was 23. 1 They probably would not have lived together, or “c ohabited,” 
 without being married because almost no one did at that time. And it’s also 
unlikely that they would have had a baby without being married; 95 percent of 
the children born in the United States in 1960 had parents who were married 
to each other. Once they settled in, your grandmother probably did not work 
outside the home—most women didn’t—and when her kids were preschoolers, 
it’s quite likely that she stayed home with them all day; most women did. It’s 
also likely that their children—in particular, your mom or dad—grew up in a 
household in which both of their parents were present at the end of the day.
Now, however, things are very different. The last several decades have 
seen dramatic changes in the cultural context in which we conduct our close 
relationships. Indeed, you shouldn’t be surprised if your grandparents are 
astonished by the cultural landscape that  you face today. In the United States,
 • Fewer people are marrying than ever before. Back in 1960, almost everyone 
(94 percent) married at some point in their lives, but more people remain 
unmarried today. Demographers now predict that only 85 percent of 
young adults will ever marry (and that proportion is even lower in Europe 
[Cherlin, 2009]). Include everyone who is separated, divorced, widowed, or 
never married, and only about half (51 percent) of the adult population of 
the United States is presently married. That’s an all-time low.  
 • People are waiting longer to marry. On average, a woman is 26-and-a-half 
years old when she marries for the first time, and a man is 29, and these 
are the oldest such ages in American history. That’s much older than your 
grandparents probably were when they got married (see Figure 1.3). A 
great many Americans (46 percent) reach their mid-30s without marrying. 
Do you feel sorry for people who are 35 and single? Read the box on p. 9!2
  • People routinely live together even when they’re not married.  Cohabitation 
was very rare in 1960—only 5 percent of all adults ever did it—but it is now 
ordinary. Most young adults—about two-thirds of them—will at some 
time live with a lover before they ever marry (Manning, 2013). 
   • People often have babies even when they’re not married. This was an 
uncommon event in 1960; only 5 percent of the babies born in the United 
States that year had unmarried mothers. Some children were  conceived out 
of wedlock, but their parents usually got married before they were born. 
Not these days. In 2012, 41 percent of the babies born in the United States had 
unmarried mothers, and this was the highest rate ever recorded (Hamilton 
et al., 2013). On average, these days, an American mother has her first child 
(at age 25.3) before she gets married (at 26.6; Arroyo et al., 2013).  
1 These and the following statistics were obtained from the U.S. Census Bureau at www.census.gov, 
the U.S. National Center for Health Statistics at www.cdc.gov/nchs, and the Pew Research Center 
at pewsocialtrends.org.
2 Please try to overcome your usual temptation to skip past the boxes. Many of them will be worth 
your time. Trust me.

8 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
 • Almost one-half of all marriages end in divorce, a failure rate that’s 2 times 
higher than it was when your grandparents married. In recent years, the 
divorce rate has been slowly decreasing for couples with college degrees—
which is probably good news if you’re reading this book!—but it remains 
high and unchanged for people with less education (Cherlin, 2010). In 2011 
in the United States, there were more than half as many divorces as mar-
riages (Cruz, 2013). So because not all lasting marriages are happy ones, an 
American couple getting married this year is more likely to divorce some-
time down the road than to live happily ever after.3
 • Most preschool children have mothers who work outside the home. In 
1960, more than three-quarters of U.S. mothers stayed home all day when 
their children were too young to go to school, but only 40 percent of them 
do so now (Gibbs, 2013).
 These remarkable changes suggest that our shared assumptions about the role 
that marriage and parenthood will play in our lives have changed  substantially 
in recent years. Once upon a time, everybody got married within a few years of 
3 This is depressing, but your chances for a happy marriage (should you choose to marry) are likely 
to be better than those of most other people. You’re reading this book, and your interest in relation-
ship science is likely to improve your chances considerably.
FIGURE 1.3. Average age of first marriage in the United States.
American men and women are waiting  longer to get  married than ever before.
1960
Age
27
28
29
Year
0
26
25
24
23
22
21
20
1970
1980
1990
2005
2010
2013
2000
Men
Women

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 9
leaving high school and, happy or sad, they tended to stay with their original part-
ners. Pregnant people felt they  had to get married, and co habitation was known as 
“living in sin.” But not so anymore. Marriage is now a  choice, even if a baby is on 
the way (Yen, 2014), and increasing numbers of us are putting it off or not getting 
married at all. If we do marry, we’re less likely to consider it a solemn, life-long 
commitment (Cherlin, 2009). In general, recent years have seen enormous change 
in the cultural norms that used to encourage people to get, and stay, married. 
 Do these changes matter? Indeed, they do. Cultural standards provide a foun-
dation for our relationships (Hefner & Wilson, 2013); they shape our expectations 
and define the patterns we think to be normal. Let’s consider, in particular, the 
huge rise in the prevalence of cohabitation that has occurred in recent years. Most 
young adults now believe that it is desirable for a couple to live together before 
they get married so that they can spend more time together, share expenses, and 
test their compatibility (Huang et al., 2011). Such attitudes make cohabitation a 
reasonable choice—and indeed, most people now cohabit before they ever marry. 
However, when people do not already have firm plans to marry, cohabitation 
Are You Prejudiced Against Singles?
Here’s a term you probably haven’t seen 
before: singlism. It refers to prejudice and 
discrimination against those who choose 
to remain single and opt not to devote 
themselves to a primary romantic rela-
tionship. Many of us assume that normal 
people want to be a part of a romantic 
couple, so we find it odd when anyone 
chooses instead to stay single. The result 
is a culture that offers benefits to married 
couples and puts singles at a disadvan-
tage with regard to such things as Social 
Security benefits, insurance rates, and 
service in restaurants (DePaulo, 2011).
Intimacy is good for us, and mar-
ried people live longer than unmarried 
people do. A study of 67,000 adults in 
the United States found that, compared 
to married people of the same age and 
social class, divorced people were 
27  percent more likely to die over a 
9-year span, and those who had been 
widowed were 40 percent more likely—
but those who had never married were 
58 percent more likely to die (Kaplan 
&  Kronick, 2006). Results like these 
lead some researchers to straightfor-
wardly recommend a happy marriage 
as a desirable goal in life. And most 
single people do want to have romantic 
partners; only a few singles (4 percent) 
prefer being unattached to being in a 
steady romantic relationship (Poort-
man & Liefbroer, 2010), and a fear of 
being single can lead people to lower 
their standards and “settle for less” with 
lousy lovers (Spielmann et al., 2013b). 
Still, we make an obvious mistake if 
we casually assume that singles are 
unhealthy loners. Some singles have an 
active social life and close, supportive 
friendships that provide them all the 
intimacy they desire, and they remain 
uncoupled because they celebrate their 
freedom and self-suffi ciency. Not every-
one, they assert, wants or needs a con-
stant companion or soulmate (DePaulo, 
2011). So, what do you think? Is there 
something wrong or missing in people 
who are content to remain single? If 
you think there is, you may profi t by 
reading Bella DePaulo’s blog defending 
singles at www.psychologytoday.com/
blog/living single.

10 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
does not make it more likely that a subsequent marriage (if one occurs) will be 
successful; instead, such cohabitation increases a couple’s risk that they will later 
divorce (Jose et al., 2010). There are probably several reasons for this. First, on 
average, couples who choose to cohabit are less committed to each other than 
are those who marry—they are, after all, keeping their options open (Wiik et al., 
2012)—so they encounter more problems and uncertainties than married people 
do (Hsueh et al., 2009). They experience more conflict  (Stanley et al., 2010), jeal-
ousy (Gatzeva & Paik, 2011), infidelity (Thornton et al., 2007), and physical aggres-
sion (Urquia et al., 2013), so cohabitation is more  tumultuous and volatile than 
marriage usually is. As a result, the longer people cohabit, the less enthusiastic 
about marriage—and the more accepting of divorce—they become. Take a look at 
 Figure 1.4 : As time passes, cohabitating couples gradually become  less likely to 
ever marry but no less likely to split up; 5 years down the road, cohabitating cou-
ples are just as likely to break up as they were when they moved in together. (Mar-
riage is fundamentally different. The longer a couple is married, the less likely 
they are to ever divorce [Wolfinger, 2005]). Overall, then, casual cohabitation that 
is intended to test the partners’ compatibility seems to undermine the positive 
attitudes toward marriage, and the determination to make a marriage work, that 
support marital success (Rhoades et al., 2009). Couples who are engaged to marry 
when they move in together typically do not suffer the same ill effects (Man-
ning & Cohen, 2012), particularly when they agree that they’ll be married within 
0
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Months
35
40
45
50
55
60
.005
.01
.015
.02
.025
Transition rate
.03
.035
Marriage
Dissolution
FIGURE 1.4. The outcomes of cohabitation over time.
Here’s what became of 2,746 cohabiting couples in the United States over a span of 5 
years. As time passed, couples were less likely to marry, but no less likely to break up. 
After living together for 5 years, cohabiting couples were just as likely to break up as 
they were when they moved in together. (The transition rate describes the percentage 
of couples who either broke up or got married each month. The numbers seem low, but 
they reflect the proportion of couples who quit cohabiting each month, so the propor-
tions add up and become sizable as months go by.)
Source: Wolfinger, 2005.

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 11
1 year  (Willoughby et al., 2012). But casual cohabitation is corrosive, so wide-
spread acceptance of cohabitation as a “trial run” is one reason why, compared to 
1960, fewer people get married and fewer marriages last.4  
 Sources of Change 
 Thus, the norms that govern our intimate relationships differ from those expe-
rienced by prior generations, and there are several reasons for this. One set 
of infl uences involves economics. Societies tend to harbor more single people, 
tolerate more divorces, and support a later age of marriage the more indus-
trialized and affl uent they become (South et al., 2001), and levels of socioeco-
nomic development have increased around the world. Education and fi nancial 
resources allow people to be more independent, so that women in particular are 
less likely to marry than they used to be (Dooley, 2010). And in American mar-
riages, more than one of every three wives earns more than her husband (Pew 
Research Center, 2013a), so “the traditional male breadwinner model has given 
way to one where women routinely support households and outearn the men 
they are married to, and nobody cares or thinks it’s odd” (Mundy, 2012, p. 5).5
Over the years, the individualism—that is, the support of self-expression and 
the emphasis on personal fulfillment—that characterizes Western cultures has also 
become more pronounced (Greenfield, 2013). This isn’t good news, but most of us 
are more materialistic (Twenge & Kasser, 2013) and less concerned with others 
(Konrath et al., 2011) than our grandparents were. And arguably, this focus on our 
own happiness has led us to expect more personal gratification from our intimate 
p artnerships—more pleasure and delight, and fewer hassles and sacrifices—than 
our grandparents did. Unlike prior generations (who often stayed together for the 
“sake of the kids”), we feel justified in ending our partnerships to seek content-
ment elsewhere if we become dissatisfied (Cherlin, 2009). Eastern cultures pro-
mote a more collective sense of self in which people feel more closely tied to their 
families and social groups, and the divorce rates in such cultures (such as Japan) 
are much lower than they are in the United States (Cherlin, 2009).
 New  technology matters, too. Modern reproductive technologies allow sin-
gle women to bear children fathered by men picked from a catalog at a sperm 
bank whom the women have never met! Women can also control their fertil-
ity, having children only when they choose, and American women are hav-
ing fewer children than they used to. The number of American families with 
children at home is at an all-time low (U. S. Census Bureau, 2013), and almost one 
4 Most people don’t know this, so here’s an example of an important pattern we’ll encounter often: 
Popular opinion assumes one thing, but relationship science finds another. Instances such as these 
demonstrate the value of careful scientific studies of close relationships. Ignorance isn’t bliss. Inti-
mate partnerships are complex, and accurate information is especially beneficial when common 
sense and folk wisdom would lead us astray.
5 Well, actually, some men, particularly those with traditional views of what it means to be a man 
(Coughlin & Wade, 2012), are troubled when they earn less than their wives. Their self-esteem suf-
fers (Ratliff & Oishi, 2013), and they are more likely than other men to use drugs to treat erectile 
dysfunction (Pierce et al., 2013). Traditional masculinity can be costly in close relationships, a point 
to which we’ll return on p. 25.

12 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
in every four American women aged 20–24 has used emergency contraception—a 
“morning-after” pill—to help keep it that way (Daniels et al., 2013). 
Modern communication technologies are also transforming the ways in 
which we conduct our relationships. Your grandparents didn’t have mobile 
phones, so they didn’t expect to be able to reach each other anywhere at any 
time of day. They certainly didn’t do any sexting—that is, sending sexually 
explicit images of themselves to others with a cell phone—as about 20 percent 
of young adults now have (Strassberg et al., 2013). And they did not have to 
develop rules about how frequently they could text each other, how long they 
could take to respond, and whether or not they could read the messages and 
examine the call histories on the other’s phone; these days, couples are happier 
if they do (Miller-Ott et al., 2012).
In addition, most of the people you know are on Facebook (Duggan & 
Smith, 2014), connected to hundreds of “friends,”6 and that can complicate our 
6 Psychology students at Sam Houston State University (n = 298) have hundreds of Facebook 
“friends”—562 each, on average—but that number doesn’t mean much because most of them 
aren’t real friends; 45 percent of them are mere acquaintances, and others (7 percent) are strangers 
they have never met (Miller et al., 2014). We’ll return to this point in chapter 7, but for now, let me 
ask: How many people on your Facebook list are actually your friends?
Modern technology is transforming the ways we interact with our partners. But is that 
always a good thing?
© Tribune Content Agency, LLC. All Rights Reserved. Reprinted with permission.

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 13
more intimate partnerships. Facebook provides an entertaining and efficient 
way to (help to) satisfy our needs for social contact (Crosier et al., 2012), but it 
can also create problems for lovers, who have to decide when to change their 
status and announce that they’re now “in a relationship.” (They also have to 
decide what that means: Women tend to think that this change in status signals 
more intensity and commitment than men do [Fox & Warber, 2013]). Thereaf-
ter, a partner’s heavy use of Facebook (Clayton et al., 2013) and pictures of 
one’s partner partying with others (Muscanell et al., 2013) can incite both con-
flict and jealousy. And altogether, the amazing 
reach and ready availability of modern technolo-
gies may too often tempt us to “give precedence to 
people we are not with over people we are with” 
(Price, 2011, p. 27). In fact—and this is troubling—
simply having a stray mobile phone lying nearby 
reduced the quality of the conversation of two 
people who were just getting to know each other 
(Przybylski & Weinstein, 2013). Here’s a sugges-
tion: When you next go out to dinner with your 
lover, why don’t you leave your phone in the car?
 Finally, an important—but more subtle—influence on the norms that govern 
relationships is the relative numbers of young men and women in a given culture. 
Societies and regions of the world in which men are more numerous than women 
tend to have very different standards than those in which women outnumber 
men. I’m describing a culture’s  sex ratio, a simple count of the number of men for 
every 100 women in a specific population. When the sex ratio is high, there are 
more men than women; when it is low, there are fewer men than women. 
 The baby boom that followed World War II caused the U.S. sex ratio, which 
had been very high, to plummet to low levels at the end of the 1960s. For a 
time after the war, more babies were born each year than in the preceding year; 
this meant that when the “boomers” entered adulthood, there were fewer older 
men than younger women, and the sex ratio dropped. However, when birth-
rates began to slow and fewer children entered the demographic pipeline, each 
new flock of women was smaller than the preceding flock of men, and the U.S. 
sex ratio crept higher in the 1990s. Since then, reasonably stable birthrates have 
resulted in fairly equal numbers of marriageable men and women today.  
 These changes may have been more important than most people realize. 
Cultures with high sex ratios (in which there aren’t enough women) tend to sup-
port traditional, old-fashioned roles for men and women (Secord, 1983). After 
the men buy expensive engagement rings (Griskevicius et al., 2012), women stay 
home raising children while the men work outside the home. Such cultures also 
tend to be sexually conservative. The ideal newlywed is a virgin bride, unwed 
pregnancy is shameful, open cohabitation is rare, and divorce is discouraged. 
In contrast, cultures with low sex ratios (in which there are too few men) tend 
to be less traditional and more permissive. Women seek high-paying careers 
(Durante et al., 2012), and they are allowed (if not encouraged) to have sex-
ual relationships outside of marriage. If a pregnancy occurs, unmarried moth-
erhood is an option (Harknett, 2008). The specifics vary with each historical 
A Point to Ponder
Which of the remarkable 
changes in technology 
over the last 50 years has 
had the most profound 
effect on our relationships? 
Birth control pills? Mobile 
phones? Online dating 
sites? Something else?

14 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
period, but this general pattern has occurred throughout history (Guttentag & 
Secord, 1983). Ancient Rome, which was renowned for its sybaritic behavior? 
A low sex ratio. Victorian England, famous for its prim and proper ways? A 
high sex ratio. The Roaring Twenties, a footloose and playful decade? A low sex 
ratio. And in more recent memory, the “sexual revolution” and the advent of 
“women’s liberation” in the late 1960s? A very low sex ratio. 
 Thus, the remarkable changes in the norms for U.S. relationships since 1960 
may be due, in part, to dramatic fluctuations in U.S. sex ratios. Indeed, another 
test of this pattern is presently unfolding in China, where limitations on family 
size and a preference for male children have produced a dramatic scarcity of 
young women. Prospective grooms will outnumber prospective brides in China 
by more than 50 percent for the next 30 years (Guilmoto, 2012). What changes 
in China’s norms should we expect?   The rough but real link between a culture’s 
proportions of men and women and its relational norms serves as a compelling 
example of the manner in which culture can affect our relationships. To a sub-
stantial degree, what we expect and what we accept in our dealings with others 
can spring from the standards of the time and place in which we live.  
 THE INFLUENCE OF EXPERIENCE 
 Our relationships are also affected by the histories and experiences we bring 
to them, and there is no better example of this than the global orientations 
toward relationships known as  attachment styles. Years ago, developmental 
researchers (e.g., Bowlby, 1969) realized that infants displayed various patterns 
of attachment to their major caregivers (usually their mothers). The prevailing 
assumption was that whenever they were hungry, wet, or scared, some chil-
dren found responsive care and protection to be reliably available, and they 
learned that other people were trustworthy sources of security and kindness. 
As a result, such children developed a  secure style of attachment: They happily 
bonded with others and relied on them comfortably, and the children readily 
developed relationships characterized by relaxed trust. 
 Other children encountered different situations. For some, attentive care 
was unpredictable and inconsistent. Their caregivers were warm and interested 
on some occasions but distracted, anxious, or unavailable on others. These chil-
dren thus developed fretful, mixed feelings about others known as  anxious-
ambivalent attachments. Being uncertain of when (or if) a departing caregiver 
would return, such children became nervous and clingy, and were needy in 
their relationships with others. 
 Finally, for a third group of children, care was provided reluctantly by 
rejecting or hostile adults. Such children learned that little good came from 
depending on others, and they withdrew from others with an  avoidant style 
of attachment. Avoidant children were often suspicious of and angry at others, 
and they did not easily form trusting, close relationships. 
 The important point, then, is that researchers believed that early inter-
personal experiences shaped the course of one’s subsequent relationships. 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 15
Indeed, attachment processes became a popular topic of research because the 
different styles were so obvious in many children. When they faced a strange, 
intimidating environment, for instance, secure children ran to their mothers, 
calmed down, and then set out to bravely explore the unfamiliar new setting 
(Ainsworth et al., 1978). Anxious-ambivalent children cried and clung to their 
mothers, ignoring the parents’ reassurances that all was well. 
 These patterns were impressive, but relationship researchers really began to 
take notice of attachment styles when Cindy Hazan and Phillip Shaver (1987) 
demonstrated that similar orientations toward close relationships could also be 
observed among  adults. They surveyed people in Denver and found that most 
people said that they were relaxed and comfortable depending on others; that 
is, they sounded secure in their intimate relationships. However, a substantial 
minority (about 40 percent) said they were  in secure; they either found it difficult 
to trust and to depend on their partners, or they nervously worried that their 
relationships wouldn’t last. In addition, the respondents reported childhood 
memories and current attitudes that fit their styles of attachment. Secure people 
generally held positive images of themselves and others, and remembered their 
parents as loving and supportive. In contrast, insecure people viewed others with 
uncertainty or distrust, and remembered their parents as inconsistent or cold. 
 With provocative results like these, attachment research quickly became 
one of the hottest fields in relationship science (e.g., Mikulincer & Shaver, 2013). 
And researchers promptly realized that there seemed to be  four, rather than 
Children's relationships with their major caregivers teach them trust or fear that sets 
the stage for their subsequent relationships with others. How responsive, reliable, and 
effective was the care that you received?

16 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
three, patterns of attachment in adults. In particular, theorist Kim Bartholomew 
(1990) suggested that there were two different reasons why people might wish 
to avoid being too close to others. In one case, people could want relationships 
with others but be wary of them, fearing rejection and mistrusting them. In the 
other case, people could be independent and self-reliant, genuinely preferring 
autonomy and freedom rather than close attachments to others. 
 Thus, Bartholomew (1990) proposed four general categories of attachment 
style (see  Table 1.1 ). The first, a  secure style, remained the same as the secure 
style identified in children. The second, a  preoccupied style, was a new name 
for anxious ambivalence. Bartholomew renamed the category to reflect the fact 
that, because they nervously depended on others’ approval to feel good about 
themselves, such people worried about, and were preoccupied with, the status 
of their relationships.  
 The third and fourth styles reflected two different ways to be “avoidant.” 
 Fearful people avoided intimacy with others because of their fears of rejection. 
Although they wanted others to like them, they worried about the risks of rely-
ing on others. In contrast, people with a  dismissing style felt that intimacy with 
others just wasn’t worth the trouble. Dismissing people rejected interdepen-
dency with others because they felt self-sufficient, and they didn’t care much 
whether others liked them or not. 
 It’s also now generally accepted that two broad themes underlie and dis-
tinguish these four styles of attachment (Shaver & Mikulincer, 2013b). First, 
people differ in their  avoidance of intimacy,  which affects the ease and trust with 
which they accept interdependent intimacy with others. People who are com-
fortable and relaxed in close relationships are low in avoidance, whereas those 
who distrust others and keep their emotional distance are high in avoidance. 
TABLE 1.1.  Four Types of Attachment Style
Which of these paragraphs describes you best? 
Secure
It is easy for me to become emotionally close to others. I am com-
fortable depending on others and having others depend on me. I 
don’t worry about being alone or having others not accept me.
Preoccupied
I want to be completely emotionally intimate with others, but I 
often find that others are reluctant to get as close as I would like. I 
am uncomfortable being without close relationships, but I some-
times worry that others don’t value me as much as I value them.
Fearful
I am uncomfortable getting close to others. I want emotionally 
close relationships, but I find it difficult to trust others com-
pletely or to depend on them. I worry that I will be hurt if I allow 
myself to become too close to others.
Dismissing
I am comfortable without close emotional relationships. It is very 
important to me to feel independent and self-sufficient, and I 
prefer not to depend on others or have others depend on me.
Source: Bartholomew, 1990.

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 17
People also differ in their  anxiety about abandonment, the dread that others will 
find them unworthy and leave them. Secure people take great comfort in close-
ness with others and do not worry that others will mistreat them; as a result, 
they gladly seek intimate interdependency with others. In contrast, with all 
three of the other styles, people are burdened with anxiety or discomfort that 
leaves them less at ease in close relationships. Preoccupied people want close-
ness but  anxiously fear rejection. Dismissing people don’t worry about rejec-
tion but don’t like closeness. And fearful people get it from both sides, being 
uncomfortable with intimacy  and worrying it won’t last. (See  Figure 1.5 .) 
 Importantly, the two themes of avoidance of intimacy and anxiety about 
abandonment are  continuous dimensions that range from low to high. This 
means that, although it’s convenient to talk about attachment styles as if they 
were discrete, pure categories that do not overlap, it’s not really accurate to do 
so (Fraley & Waller, 1998). When they are simply asked to pick which one of the 
four paragraphs in  Table 1.1 fits them best, most people in the United States—
usually around 60 percent—describe themselves as being securely attached 
(Mickelson et al., 1997). 7 However, if someone has moderate anxiety about 
abandonment and middling avoidance of intimacy, which category fits him or 
her best? The use of any of the four categories is rather arbitrary in the middle 
ranges of anxiety and avoidance where the boundaries of the categories meet.
7 In many other countries, secure styles are more common than any of the other three styles but 
secure people are outnumbered by the other three groups combined. Thus, in most regions of the 
world, more people are insecure than secure (Schmitt, 2008).
Low Avoidance
of Intimacy
High Avoidance
of Intimacy
High Anxiety
about
Abandonment
Low Anxiety
about
Abandonment
SECURE
Comfortable with intimacy
and interdependence;
optimistic and sociable
DISMISSING
Self-reliant and uninterested
in intimacy;
indifferent and independent
FEARFUL
Fearful of rejection and
mistrustful of others;
suspicious and shy
PREOCCUPIED
Uneasy and vigilant toward
any threat to the relationship;
needy and jealous
FIGURE 1.5. The dimensions underlying attachment.

18 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
 So don’t treat the neat classifications in  Figure 1.5 too seriously. The more 
sophisticated way to think about attachment is that there seem to be two impor-
tant themes that shape people’s global orientations toward relationships with 
others. (Samples of the items that are used to measure anxiety and avoidance 
are provided on page 58 in chapter 2.) Both are important, and if you com-
pare high scorers on either dimension to low scorers on that dimension, you’re 
likely to see meaningful differences in the manner in which those people con-
duct their relationships. Indeed, recent studies of attachment (e.g., Arriaga et 
al., 2014) tend to describe people with regard to their relative standing on the 
two dimensions of anxiety and avoidance instead of labeling them as secure, 
preoccupied, fearful, or dismissing. 
 Nevertheless, the four labels are so concise that they are still widely used, 
so stay sharp. Before 1990, researchers spoke of only three attachment styles: 
secure, avoidant, and anxious-ambivalent. Now they routinely speak of four 
styles, but they treat them as convenient labels for sets of anxiety and avoid-
ance scores, not as distinctly different categories that have nothing in common. 
The biggest distinction is between people who are “secure” and those who are 
not (being those who have high anxiety about abandonment or high avoidance 
of intimacy, or both) (Overall & Simpson, 2013). And for now, the important 
point is that attachment styles appear to be orientations toward relationships 
that are largely  learned from our experiences with others. They are prime exam-
ples of the manner in which the proclivities and perspectives we bring to a new 
relationship emerge in part from our experiences in prior partnerships. 
 Let’s examine this idea more closely. Any relationship is shaped by many 
different influences—that’s the point of this chapter—and both babies and adults 
affect through their own behavior the treatment they receive from others. As 
any parent knows, for instance, babies are born with various temperaments and 
arousal levels. Some newborns have an easy, pleasant temperament, whereas 
others are fussy and excitable, and inborn differences in personality and emo-
tionality make some children easier to parent than others. Thus, the quality of 
parenting a baby receives can depend, in part, on the child’s own personality 
and behavior; in this way, people’s attachment styles are influenced by the traits 
with which they were born, and our genes shape our styles (Picardi et al., 2011). 
 However, our experiences play much larger roles in shaping the styles we 
bring to subsequent relationships (Fraley et al., 2013). The levels of acceptance 
or rejection we receive from our parents are huge influences early on (Rohner 
& Khaleque, 2010). Expectant mothers who are glad to be pregnant are more 
likely to have secure toddlers a year later than are mothers-to-be who are hesi-
tant and uncertain (Miller et al., 2009). Once their babies are born, mothers 
who enjoy intimacy and who are comfortable with closeness tend to be more 
attentive and sensitive caregivers (Selcuk et al., 2010), so secure moms tend to 
have secure children whereas insecure mothers tend to have insecure children 
(Holman et al., 2009). Indeed, when mothers with difficult, irritable babies 
are trained to be sensitive and responsive parents, their toddlers are much 
more likely to end up securely attached to them than they would have been in 
the absence of such training (van den Boom, 1994). And a mother’s  influence 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 19
on the attachment styles of her children does not end in preschool (Berant 
et al., 2008). The parenting adolescents receive as seventh graders predicts how 
they will behave in their own romances and friendships when they are young 
adults; teenagers who have parents who are happily married tend to be secure 
(Jarnecke & South, 2013), and those who have nurturing and supportive rela-
tionships with their parents have richer relationships with their lovers and friends 
years later (Cui et al., 2002). There’s no doubt that youngsters import the 
lessons they learn at home into their subsequent relationships with others 
(Simpson et al., 2014). 
 We’re not prisoners of our experiences as children, however, because our 
attachment styles continue to be shaped by the experiences we encounter as 
adults (Zhang, 2009). Being learned, attachment styles can be  un learned, and 
over time, attachment styles can change (Fraley et al., 2011). A bad breakup can 
make a formerly secure person insecure, and a good relationship can gradu-
ally make an avoidant person less wary of intimacy (Arriaga et al., 2014). As 
many as a third of us may encounter real change in our attachment styles over 
a 2-year period (Davila & Cobb, 2004). 
 Nevertheless, once they have been established, attachment styles can also 
be stable and long-lasting as they lead people to create new relationships that 
reinforce their existing tendencies (Hadden et al., 2014). By remaining aloof and 
avoiding interdependency, for instance, fearful people may never learn that 
some people can be trusted and closeness can be comforting—and that perpet-
uates their fearful style. In the absence of dramatic new experiences, people’s 
styles of attachment can persist for decades (Fraley, 2002). 
 Thus, our global beliefs about the nature and worth of close relationships 
appear to be shaped by our experiences within them. By good luck or bad, 
our earliest notions about our own interpersonal worth and the trustworthi-
ness of others emerge from our interactions with our major caregivers and start 
us down a path of either trust or fear. But that journey never stops, and later 
obstacles or aid from fellow travelers may divert us and change our routes. Our 
learned styles of attachment to others may either change with time or persist 
indefinitely, depending on our interpersonal experiences.  
 THE INFLUENCE OF INDIVIDUAL DIFFERENCES 
 Once they are formed, attachment styles also exemplify the idiosyncratic per-
sonal characteristics that people bring to their partnerships with others. We’re 
all individuals with singular combinations of experiences and traits, and the dif-
ferences among us can influence our relationships.   In this section of the chapter, 
we’ll consider four influential types of individual variation: sex differences, gen-
der differences, personalities, and self-esteem.  
 Sex Differences 
 At this moment, you’re doing something rare. You’re reading an academic text-
book about relationship science, and that’s something most people will never 

20 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
do. This is probably the  first serious text you’ve ever read about relationships, 
too, and that means that we need to confront—and hopefully correct—some of 
the stereotypes you may hold about the differences between men and women 
in intimate relationships. 
 This may not be easy. Many of us are used to thinking that men and women 
have very different approaches to intimacy—that, for instance, “men are from 
Mars, women are from Venus.” A well-known book with that title asserted that  
 men and women differ in all areas of their lives. Not only do men and women 
communicate differently but they think, feel, perceive, react, respond, love, 
need, and appreciate differently. They almost seem to be from different 
planets, speaking different languages and needing different nourishment. 
(Gray, 1992, p. 5)  
 Wow! Men and women sound like they’re members of different species. No 
wonder heterosexual relationships are sometimes problematic! 
 But the truth is more subtle. Human traits obviously vary across a wide 
range, and (in most cases) if we graph the number of people who possess a 
certain talent or ability, we’ll get a distinctive chart known as a  normal curve. 
Such curves describe the frequencies with which particular levels of some trait 
can be found in people, and they demonstrate that (a) most people have talents 
or abilities that are only slightly better or worse than average and (b) extreme 
levels of most traits, high or low, are very rare. Consider height, for example: 
A few people are very short or very tall, but the vast majority of us are only an 
inch or two shorter or taller than the average for our sex. 
 Why should we care about this? Because many lay stereotypes about 
men and women portray the sexes as having very different ranges of inter-
ests, styles, and abilities. As one example, men are often portrayed as being 
more interested in sex than women are (see the box on page 23), and the images 
of the sexes that people hold often seem to resemble the situation pictured in 
Figure 1.6.  The difference between the average man and the average woman is 
presumed to be large, and there is almost no overlap between the sexes at all. 
But, despite the “Mars” and “Venus” stereotypes, this is  not the way things 
really are. As we’ll see in chapter 9, men do tend to have higher sex drives, on 
Some Ability or Trait
The Other Sex
Number of People
One Sex
Less
More
FIGURE 1.6. An imaginary sex difference.
Popular stereotypes portray the sexes as being very different, with almost no overlap 
between the styles and preferences of the two sexes. This is not the way things really are.

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 21
average, than women do. Nevertheless,  actual sex differences take the form of 
the graphs shown in  Figure 1.7 , which depict ranges of interests and talents 
that  overlap to a substantial extent (Carothers & Reis, 2013). 
 The three graphs in  Figure 1.7 illustrate sex differences that are considered 
by researchers to be small, medium, and large, respectively. Formally, they dif-
fer with respect to a  d statistic that specifies the size of a difference between 
two groups.  8 In the realm of sexual attitudes and behavior, graph A depicts the 
different ages of men and women when they first have intercourse (men tend 
to be slightly younger), graph B illustrates the relative frequencies with which 
they masturbate (men masturbate more often), and graph C depicts a hypo-
thetical difference that is larger than any that is known to actually exist. That’s 
right. A sprawling analysis of recent studies of human sexuality involving 
1,419,807 participants from 87 different countries failed to find any difference in 
the sexual attitudes and behavior of men and women that was as large as that 
pictured in graph C (Petersen & Hyde, 2010). Obviously, the real-life examples 
that do exist look nothing like the silly stereotype pictured in  Figure 1.6 . More 
specifically, these examples make three vital points about psychological sex 
differences:
  • Some differences are real but quite small. (Don’t be confused by  researchers’ 
terminology; when they talk about a “significant” sex difference, they’re usu-
ally referring to a “ statistically  significant”—that is, numerically  reliable—
difference, and it may not be large at all.) Almost all of the  differences 
between men and women that you will encounter in this book fall in the 
small to medium range.  
 • The range of behavior and opinions among members of a given sex is 
always  huge compared to the average difference between the sexes. Men 
are more accepting of casual, uncommitted sex than women are (Petersen & 
8 To get a  d score in these cases, you compute the difference between the average man and the 
average woman, and divide it by the average variability of the scores  within each sex (which is the 
standard deviation of those scores). The resulting  d value tells you how large the sex difference is 
compared to the usual amount by which men and women differ among themselves.  
d = .5
(a medium sex difference)
Score
B
A 
d = .2
(a small sex difference)
Score
Number of People
Score
d = .8
(a large sex difference)
C
FIGURE 1.7 Actual sex differences take the form of overlapping normal curves.
The three graphs depict small, medium, and large sex differences, respectively. (To 
keep them simple, they portray the ranges of attitudes or behavior as being the same 
for both sexes. This isn’t always the case in real life.)

22 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
Hyde, 2010), but that certainly doesn’t mean that all men like casual sex. 
Some men like to have sex with strangers, but other men don’t like that 
at all, and the two groups of men resemble each other much less than the 
average man and the average woman do. Another way to put this is that 
despite this sex difference in sexual permissiveness, a highly permissive 
man has more in common with the average  woman on this trait than he 
does with a low-scoring  man. 
 • The overlap in behavior and opinions is so large that many members of 
one sex will always score higher than the average member of the other sex. 
With a sex difference of medium size (with men higher and a  d value of 
.5), one-third of all women will still score higher than the average man. 
What this means is that if you’re looking for folks who like casual sex, you 
shouldn’t just look for  men because you heard that “men are more accept-
ing of casual sex than women are”; you should look for permissive  people, 
many of whom will be women despite the difference between the sexes. 
 The bottom line is that men and women usually overlap so thoroughly that 
they are much more similar than different on most of the dimensions and top-
ics of interest to relationship science (Hyde, 2014). It’s completely misguided 
to suggest that men and women come from different planets and are distinctly 
different because it simply isn’t true (Reis & Carothers, 2014). “Research does 
 not support the view that men and women come from different cultures, let 
alone separate worlds” (Canary & Emmers-Sommer, 1997, p. vi). According to 
the careful science of relationships you’ll study in this book, it’s more accurate 
to say that “men are from North Dakota, and women are from South Dakota” 
(Dindia, 2006, p. 18). (Or, as a bumper sticker I saw one day suggests: “Men are 
from Earth. Women are from Earth. Deal with it.”) 
 Thus, sex differences in intimate relationships tend to be much less note-
worthy and influential than laypeople often think. Now that you’re reading a 
serious text on intimate relationships, you need to think more carefully about 
sex differences and interpret them more reasonably. There are interesting sex 
differences that are meaningful parts of the fabric of relationships, and we’ll 
encounter several of them in the chapters that follow. But they occur in the 
context of even broader similarities between the sexes, and the differences are 
always modest when they are compared to the full range of human variation. 
It’s more work, but also more sophisticated and accurate, to think of individual 
differences, not sex differences, as the more important influences on interper-
sonal interaction. People differ among themselves whether they are male or 
female (as in the case of attachment styles), and these variations are usually 
much more consequential than sex differences are.  
 Gender Differences 
 I need to complicate things further by distinguishing between sex differences and 
 gender differences in close relationships. When people use the terms c arefully, 
the term sex differences refers to biological distinctions between men and women 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 23
that spring naturally from their physical natures. In contrast, gender differences 
refer to social and psychological distinctions that are created by our cultures and 
upbringing (Muehlenhard & Peterson, 2011). For instance, when they are parents, 
women are mothers and men are fathers—that’s a sex difference—but the common 
belief that women are more loving, more nurturant parents than men reflects a 
gender difference. Many men are capable of just as much tenderness and com-
passion toward the young as any woman is, but if we expect and encourage women 
to be the primary caregivers of our children, we can create cultural gender differ-
ences in parenting styles that are not natural or inborn at all. 
 Distinguishing sex and gender differences is often tricky because the 
social expectations and training we apply to men and women are often con-
founded with their biological sex (Wood & Eagly, 2010). For instance, because 
women lactate and men do not, people often assume that predawn feedings 
of a newborn baby are the mother’s job—even when the baby is being fed 
formula from a bottle that was warmed in a microwave! It’s not always easy 
to disentangle the effects of biology and culture in shaping our interests and 
Combating Simplistic Stereotypes
Here’s a joke that showed up in my 
e-mail one day:
How to Impress a Woman:
Compliment her. Cuddle her. Kiss her.
Caress her. Love her. Comfort her. Pro-
tect her. Hug her. Hold her. Spend
money on her. Wine and dine her. Lis-
ten to her. Care for her. Stand by her.
Support her. Go to the ends of the earth 
for her.
How to Impress a Man:
Show up naked. Bring beer.
It’s a cute joke. But it may not be harm-
less. It reinforces the stereotypes that 
women seek warmth and tenderness in 
their relationships whereas men simply 
seek unemotional sex. In truth, men and 
women differ little in their desires in 
close relationships; they’re not “oppo-
site” sexes at all (Hyde, 2014). Although 
individuals of both sexes may differ 
substantially from each other, the differ-
ences between the average man and the 
average woman are rather small. Both 
women and men generally want their 
intimate partners to provide them with 
lots of affection and warmth (Tran et al., 
2008).
But so what? What are the conse-
quences of wrongly believing that men 
are all alike, having little in common 
with women? Pessimism and hopeless-
ness, for two (Metts & Cupach, 1990). 
People who really believe that the sexes 
are very different are less likely to try to 
repair their heterosexual relationships 
when confl icts occur (as they inevita-
bly do). Thinking of the other sex as a 
bunch of aliens from another world is 
not just inaccurate—it can also be dam-
aging, forestalling efforts to understand 
a partner’s point of view and prevent-
ing collaborative problem solving. For 
that reason, I’ll try to do my part to 
avoid perpetuating wrongful impres-
sions by comparing men and women to 
the other sex, not the opposite sex, for the 
remainder of this book. Words matter 
(Prewitt-Freilino, 2012), so I invite you 
to use similar language when you think 
and talk about the sexes.

24 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
abilities. Nevertheless, the distinction between sex and gender differences is 
meaningful because some influential differences between men and women in 
relationships—g ender differences—are largely  taught  to us as we grow up. 
 The best examples of this are our  gender roles, the patterns of behavior 
that are culturally expected of “normal” men and women. Men, of course, are 
supposed to be “masculine,” which means that they are expected to be asser-
tive, self-reliant, decisive, and competitive. Women are expected to be “femi-
nine,” or warm, sensitive, emotionally expressive, and kind. You and I aren’t 
so unsophisticated, but they’re the opposite sexes to most people, and to varying 
degrees men and women are expected to specialize in different kinds of social 
behavior all over the world (Kite et al., 2008). However, people inherit only 
about a quarter to a third of their tendencies to be assertive or kind; most of 
these behaviors are learned (Cleveland et al., 2001; Lippa & Hershberger, 1999). 
In thoroughgoing and  pervasive ways, cultural processes of socialization and 
modeling (rather than biological sex differences) lead us to expect that all men 
should be tough and all women should be tender (Reid et al., 2008). 
 Nevertheless, those stereotypes don’t describe real people as well as you 
might think; only  half of us have attributes that fit these gender role expecta-
tions cleanly (Bem, 1993). Instead of being just “masculine” or “feminine,” a 
sizable minority of people—about 35 percent—are both assertive  and warm, 
sensitive  and self-reliant. Such people possess both sets of the competencies 
that are stereotypically associated with being male and with being female, 
and are said to be  androgynous. If androgyny sounds odd to you, you’re 
probably just using a stereotyped vocabulary: On the surface, being “mascu-
line” sounds incompatible with also being “feminine.” In fact, because those 
terms can be confusing, relationship researchers often use alternatives, refer-
ring to the “masculine” task-oriented talents as  instrumental traits and to the 
“feminine” social and emotional skills as  expressive traits. And it’s not all that 
remarkable to find both sets of traits in the same individual. An androgynous 
person would be one who could effectively, emphatically stand up for him-
self or herself in a heated salary negotiation but who could then go home and 
sensitively, c ompassionately comfort a preschool child whose pet hamster had 
died. A lot of people, those who specialize in either instrumental  or expressive 
skills, would feel at home in one of those situations but not both. Androgynous 
people would be comfortable and capable in both domains (Cheng, 2005). 
 In fact, the best way to think of instrumentality and expressiveness is as 
two separate sets of skills that may range from low to high in either women 
or men (Choi et al., 2007). Take a look at Table 1.2. Traditional women are high 
in expressiveness but low in instrumentality; they’re warm and friendly but 
not assertive or dominant. Men who fulfill our traditional expectations are 
high in instrumentality but low in expressiveness and are stoic, “macho” men. 
Androgynous people are both instrumental and expressive. The rest of us—
about 15 percent—are either high in the skills typically associated with the 
other sex (and are said to be “cross-typed”) or low in both sets of skills (and are 
said to be “undifferentiated”). Equal proportions of men and women fall into 
the androgynous, cross-typed, and undifferentiated categories, so, as with sex 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 25
differences, it’s simplistic and inaccurate to think of men and women as wholly 
distinct groups of people with separate, different traits (Bem, 1993). 
 In any case, gender differences are of particular interest to relationship 
researchers because, instead of making men and women more compatible, they 
“may actually be responsible for much of the  incompatibility ” that causes rela-
tionships to fail (Ickes, 1985, p. 188). From the moment they meet, for instance, 
traditional men and women enjoy and like each other less than androgynous 
people do. In a classic experiment, Ickes and Barnes (1978) paired men and 
women in couples in which (a) both partners fit the traditional gender roles or 
(b) one or both partners were androgynous. The two people were introduced to 
each other and then simply left alone for 5 minutes sitting on a couch while the 
researchers covertly videotaped their interaction. The results were striking. The 
traditional couples talked less, looked at each other less, laughed and smiled 
less, and afterward reported that they liked each other less than did the other 
couples. (Should this surprise us? Think about it: Stylistically, what do a mas-
culine man and a feminine woman have in common?) When an androgynous 
man met a traditional woman, an androgynous woman met a traditional man, 
or two androgynous people got together, they got along much better than tradi-
tional men and women did. 
 More importantly, the disadvantage faced by traditional couples does not 
disappear as time goes by. Surveys of marital satisfaction demonstrate that 
such couples—who have marriages in which both spouses adhere to stereo-
typed gender roles—are generally  less happy with their marriages than nontra-
ditional couples are (Helms et al., 2006). With their different styles and different 
domains of expertise, masculine men and feminine women simply do not find 
as much pleasure in each other as less traditional, less stereotyped people do 
(Marshall, 2010). 
 Perhaps this should be no surprise. When human beings devote them-
selves to intimate partnerships, they want affection, warmth, and understand-
ing (Reis et al., 2000). People who are low in expressiveness—who are not very 
warm, tender, sensitive people—do not readily provide such warmth and ten-
derness; they are not very affectionate (Miller et al., 2003). As a result, men or 
women who have spouses who are low in expressiveness are chronically less 
satisfied than are those whose partners are more sensitive, understanding, and 
TABLE 1.2 Gender Roles
Instrumental Traits
Expressive Traits
Assertiveness
Warmth
Self-Reliance
Tenderness
Ambition
Compassion
Leadership
Kindness
Decisiveness
Sensitivity to Others
Our culture encourages men to be highly instrumental and women to be highly expres-
sive, but which of these talents do you not want in an intimate companion?

26 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
kind. Around the world (Lease et al., 2013), across different ethnicities (Stanik 
& Bryant, 2012), and in both straight and gay partnerships (Wade & Donis, 
2007), traditional men have romantic relationships of lower quality than more 
expressive men do. Thus, traditional gender roles do men a disservice, depriv-
ing them of skills that would make them more rewarding husbands. 
 On the other hand, people who are low in instrumentality—who are low 
in assertiveness and personal strength—tend to have low self-esteem and to 
be less well adjusted than those who have better task-oriented skills (Stake & 
Eisele, 2010). People feel better about themselves when they are competent and 
effective at “taking care of business” (Reis et al., 2000), so traditional gender 
roles also do women a disservice, depriving them of skills that would facilitate 
more accomplishments and achievements. Such roles also seem to cost women 
money; around the world, traditional women earn less on the job than their 
nontraditional co-workers do (Stickney & Konrad, 2007). 
 The upshot of all this is that both instrumentality and expressiveness are 
valuable traits, and the happiest, best-adjusted, most effective, mentally healthy 
people possess both sets of skills (Stake & Eisele, 2010). In particular, the most 
desirable spouses, those who are most likely to have contented, satisfied part-
ners, are people who are both instrumental and expressive (Marshall, 2010). 
And in fact, when they’re thinking about marriage, dating, or just a one-night 
stand, most people say that they’d prefer androgynous partners to those who 
are merely masculine or feminine (Green & Kenrick, 1994). 
 So, it’s ironic that we still tend to put pres-
sure on those who do not rigidly adhere to their 
“proper” gender roles. Women who display as 
much competitiveness and assertiveness as men 
risk being perceived as pushy, impolite, and 
uppity (Parks-Stamm et al., 2008). If anything, 
however, gender expectations are stricter for men 
than for women (Vandello & Bosson, 2013); girls 
can be tomboys and nobody frets too much, but if 
a boy is too feminine, people worry (Sandnabba & 
A Point to Ponder
If you saw a YouTube 
video of a new father 
crying when he holds his 
newborn baby for the first 
time, would you admire 
him or disrespect him? 
Why?
Instrumental, masculine people often feel ill at ease when they are asked to provide 
warm, sensitive support to others.
Sally Forth © 1995 King Features Syndicate, Inc. World rights reserved.

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 27
Ahlberg, 1999). U.S. gender roles are changing slowly but surely; in particu-
lar, U.S. women are becoming more instrumental with each new generation 
(Twenge, 2009), and young adults of both sexes are gradually becoming more 
egalitarian and less traditional in their views of men and women (Parker & 
Wang, 2013). Nonetheless, even if they limit our individual potentials and are 
right only half the time, gender stereotypes persist. We still expect and too often 
encourage men to be instrumental and women to be expressive (Heilman & 
Wallen, 2010), and such expectations are important complications for many of 
our close relationships.  
 Personality 
 Some consequential differences among people (such as attachment styles and 
gender differences) are affected by experience and may change over a few 
years’ time, but other individual differences are more stable and lasting. Per-
sonality traits influence people’s behavior in their relationships across their entire 
lifetimes (Kandler, 2012) with only gradual change over long periods of time 
(Soto et al., 2011). 
The Big Five Personality Traits
A small cluster of fundamental traits 
does a good job of describing the broad 
themes in behavior, thoughts, and 
emotions that distinguish one person 
from another (McCrae & Costa, 2010). 
These key characteristics are called the 
Big Five traits by personality research-
ers, and they differ in their influence 
on our intimate relationships. Which of 
these traits do you think matter most?
Openness to experience—the degree to 
which people are imaginative, curious, 
unconventional, and artistic versus con-
forming, uncreative, and stodgy.
Extraversion—the extent to which peo-
ple are outgoing, gregarious, assertive, 
and sociable versus cautious, reclusive, 
and shy.
Conscientiousness—the extent to which 
people are industrious, dependable, 
and orderly versus unreliable , disorga-
nized, and careless.
Agreeableness—the degree to which peo-
ple are compassionate, cooperative, and 
trusting versus suspicious, selfish, and 
hostile.
Neuroticism—the degree to which peo-
ple are prone to fluctuating moods and 
high levels of negative emotion such as 
worry, anxiety, and anger.
The fi ve traits are listed in order 
from the least important to the most 
infl uential (Malouff et al., 2010). People 
are happier when they have imagina-
tive, adventurous, sociable partners, but 
what you really want is a lover who is 
responsible and reliable, generous and 
thoughtful, and optimistic and emo-
tionally stable. And after you’ve been 
together for 30 years or so, you may fi nd 
that conscientiousness becomes particu-
larly important (Claxton et al., 2012); 
dependable partners who keep all their 
promises are satisfying companions.

28 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
 Personality researchers have identified a handful of central traits that 
characterize people all over the world (McCrae & Costa, 1997), and they all 
affect the quality of the relationships people have. On the positive side, extra-
verted, agreeable, and conscientious people who are open to new experiences 
have  happier relationships than do those who score lower on those traits 
(Malouff et al., 2010). Extraverted people are outgoing and agreeable people 
are friendly, so they tend to be likable. Conscientious people work hard and 
are organized, and they tend to follow the rules, so they weren’t very popular 
in high school (van der Linden et al., 2010)—but, once they grow up, they 
make dependable, trustworthy, desirable partners (Hill et al., 2014). “People 
who are less conscientious exceed their credit limit . . . cancel plans, curse, 
oversleep, and break promises” (J ackson et al., 2010, p. 507), so they tend to be 
unreliable companions. 
 One of the most influential Big Five traits, however, is the one that has a 
negative impact: neuroticism (Malouff et al., 2010). Neurotic people are prone 
to anger and anxiety, and those unhappy tendencies tend to result in touchy, 
pessimistic, and argumentative interactions with others (Suls & Martin, 2005). 
In fact, a remarkable study that tracked 300 couples over a span of 45 years 
found that a full 10 percent of the satisfaction and contentment spouses would 
experience in their marriages could be predicted from measures of their neu-
roticism when they were still engaged (Kelly & Conley, 1987). The less neurotic 
the partners were, the happier their marriages turned out to be. Everyone has 
good days and bad days, but some of us have  more bad days (and fewer good 
ones) than other people—and those unlucky folks are especially likely to have 
unhappy, disappointing relationships. (Do take note of this when you’re shop-
ping for a mate!) 
 Working alongside the global influences of the Big Five traits are other 
more specific personal characteristics that regulate our relationships, and I’ll 
mention several in later chapters. (Check out, for instance, whether or not we 
like casual sex [on page 288] and whether or not we can control ourselves [on 
page 433].) For now, let’s note that although our personalities clearly have a 
genetic basis (Kandler, 2012), our enduring traits can be shaped to a degree 
by our relationships (Lehnart et al., 2010). Dissatisfying and abusive relation-
ships can gradually make us more anxious and neurotic, and warm, reward-
ing partnerships may make us more agreeable over time. But these effects are 
subtle, and our relationships have much bigger effects on the last individual 
difference we will consider: the self-evaluations we bring to our transactions 
with others.  
 Self-Esteem 
 Most of us like ourselves, but some of us do not. Our evaluations of ourselves 
constitute our  self-esteem, and when we hold favorable judgments of our skills 
and traits, our self-esteem is high; when we doubt ourselves, self-esteem is low. 
Because people with high self-esteem are generally happier and more success-
ful than those with low self-regard (Orth et al., 2012), it’s widely assumed that 
it’s good to feel good about yourself (Swann & Bosson, 2010). 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 29
An Individual Difference That’s Not Much of a Difference: 
Sexual Orientation
I’ve only mentioned gays or lesbians once 
so far, and that’s because there hasn’t 
been much to say. Relatively few of us—
about 5  percent of men and 9 percent 
of women—have had genital sex with 
a member of the same sex, and smaller 
numbers of us—about 4 percent— 
consider ourselves to be gay, lesbian, 
or bisexual (GLB) (Chandra et al., 2011; 
 Mercer et al., 2013). Obviously, people 
who label themselves as “heterosexual” 
are far more numerous than GLBs. How-
ever, other than their relative numbers, 
heterosexuals and GLBs are resound-
ingly similar on most of the topics we 
encounter in this book. For instance, gays 
and lesbians exhibit the same attachment 
styles in the same proportions as hetero-
sexual men and women do (Roisman et 
al., 2008), and they, too, are happier with 
romantic partners of high (rather than 
low) expressivity (Wade & Donis, 2007).
There are some potentially impor-
tant differences between same-sex and 
other-sex relationships. Gay men tend 
to be more expressive than heterosexual 
men, on average, and lesbians tend to be 
more instrumental than other women, so 
gays and lesbians are less likely to adhere 
to traditional gender roles than hetero-
sexuals are (Lippa, 2005). Gays and les-
bians also tend to be better educated and 
to be more liberal (Herek et al., 2010). But 
the big difference between same-sex and 
other-sex relationships is that a gay cou-
ple is composed of two men and a lesbian 
couple of two women. To the extent that 
there are meaningful differences in the 
way men and women conduct their rela-
tionships, same-sex couples may behave 
differently than heterosexual couples do, 
not because of their sexual orientations 
but because of the sexes of the people 
involved. For instance, when their rela-
tionships are new, gay men have sex 
more often than heterosexual couples do, 
and lesbian couples have sex less often 
than heterosexual couples do (Blum-
stein & Schwartz, 1983). The more men 
there are in a partnership, the more often 
the couple has sex—but that’s probably 
because men have higher sex drives than 
women do, not because there’s anything 
special about gay men (Vohs et al., 2004).
Except for the sex and gender dif-
ferences that may exist, same-sex and 
other-sex partnerships operate in very 
similar manners (Joyner et al., 2013). 
Gays and lesbians fall in love the same 
way, for instance, and they feel the same 
passions, experience the same doubts, 
and feel the same commitments as het-
erosexuals do (Kurdek, 2006). Where 
differences in relationship functioning 
do exist, they tend to be small, but gays 
and lesbians are the clear winners. They 
have better relationships than heterosex-
uals do, on average (Kurdek, 2005). They 
divide up household chores more fairly, 
experience less confl ict, and feel more 
compatible, more intimate, and more 
satisfi ed with their lovers (Balsam et 
al., 2008). (Given the social disapproval 
same-sex couples still face in many 
places, their contentment is remarkable. 
But remember, there are no sex differ-
ences in same-sex relationships. How 
much do you think that contributes to 
the success of their relationships?)
Still, there’s no reason to write two 
different books on Intimate Relationships; 
intimacy operates the same way in both 
same-sex and other-sex partnerships. 
We’ll encounter sexual orientation several 
times in later chapters, but it won’t be a 
major theme because the processes of close 
relationships are very similar in same-
sex and heterosexual couples (Peplau & 
Fingerhut, 2007). Anyone who assumes 
otherwise is not very well-informed.

30 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
 But how do people come to like themselves? A provocative, leading theory 
argues that self-esteem is a subjective gauge, a  sociometer, that measures the 
quality of our relationships with others (Leary, 2012). When others like us, we 
like ourselves; when other people regard us positively and value their rela-
tionships with us, self-esteem is high. However, if we don’t interest others—if 
others seem not to care whether or not we are part of their lives—self-esteem is 
low (MacDonald & Leary, 2012). Self-esteem operates in this manner, according 
to sociometer theory, because it is an evolved mechanism that serves our need 
to belong. This argument s uggests that, because their reproductive success 
depended on s taying in the tribe and being accepted by others, early humans 
became sensitive to any signs of exclusion that might precede rejection by oth-
ers. Self-esteem became a psychological gauge that alerted people to declining 
acceptance by others, and dislike or disinterest from others gradually caused 
people to dislike themselves (Leary, 2012). 
 This perspective nicely fits most of what we know about the origins and oper-
ation of self-esteem. There’s no question, for instance, that people feel better about 
themselves when they think they’re attractive to the other sex (Bale & Archer, 
2013). And the regard we receive from others clearly affects our subsequent 
self- evaluations (Gorrese & Ruggieri, 2013). In particular, events that involve inter-
personal rejection damage our self-esteem in a way that other disappointments do 
not. Leary and his colleagues demonstrated this point in a clever study in which 
research participants were led to believe that they would be excluded from an 
attractive group either through bad luck—they had been randomly selected to 
be sent home—or because they had been voted out by the other members of the 
group (Leary et al., 1995). Even though the same desirable opportunity was lost 
in both situations, the people who had been personally rejected felt much worse 
about themselves than did those whose loss was impersonal. It’s also interesting 
to note that public events that others witness affect people’s self-esteem more than 
do private events that are otherwise identical but are known only to the individu-
als themselves. In this and several other respects, whether we realize it or not, our 
self-evaluations seem to be much affected by what we think others think of us 
(Koch & Shepperd, 2008), and this is true around the world (Denissen et al., 2008). 
 Here is further evidence, then, that we humans are a very social species: 
It’s very hard to like ourselves (and, indeed, it would be unrealistic to do so) if 
others don’t like us, too. In most cases, people with chronically low self-esteem 
have developed their negative self-evaluations through an unhappy history of 
failing to receive sufficient acceptance and appreciation from other people. 
 And sometimes, this is very unfair. Some people are victimized by abusive 
relationships through no fault of their own, and, despite being likable people 
with fine social skills, they develop low self-esteem as a result of mistreatment 
from others. What happens when those people enter new relationships with 
kinder, more appreciative partners? Does the new feedback they receive slowly 
improve their self-esteem? 
 Not necessarily. A compelling program of research by Sandra Murray, John 
Holmes, Joanne Wood, and Justin Cavallo has demonstrated that people with 
low self-esteem sometimes sabotage their relationships by underestimating 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 31
their partners’ love for them (Murray et al., 2001) and perceiving disregard 
when none exists (Murray et al., 2002). Take a look at Table 1.3. People with 
low self-regard find it hard to believe that they are well and truly loved by their 
partners (Murray et al., 1998) and, as a result, they tend not to be optimistic 
that their loves will last. “Even in their closest relationships,” people with low 
self-esteem “typically harbor serious (but unwarranted) insecurities about their 
partners’ feelings for them” (Holmes & Wood, 2009, p. 250). This leads them to 
overreact to their partners’ occasional bad moods (B ellavia & Murray, 2003); 
they feel more rejected, experience more hurt, and get more angry than do those 
with higher self-esteem. And these painful feelings make it harder for them to 
behave constructively in response to their imagined peril. Whereas people with 
high self-regard draw closer to their partners and seek to repair the relationship 
TABLE 1.3 How My Partner Sees Me
Sandra Murray and her colleagues use this scale in their studies of self-esteem in close 
relationships. People with high self-esteem believe that their partners hold them in 
high regard, but people with low self-esteem worry that their partners do not like or 
respect them as much. What do you think your partner thinks of you?
 In many ways, your partner may see you in roughly the same way you see yourself. 
Yet in other ways, your partner may see you differently than you see yourself. For 
example, you may feel quite shy at parties, but your partner might tell you that you 
really seem quite relaxed and outgoing on these occasions. On the other hand, you and 
your partner may both agree that you are quite intelligent and patient.
 For each trait or attribute that follows, please indicate how you think that your partner 
sees you. For example, if you think that your partner sees the attribute “self-assured” as 
moderately characteristic of you, you would choose “5.”
 Respond using the scale below. Please enter your response in the blank to the left of 
each trait or attribute listed.
1
Not at All 
Characteristic
2
3
Somewhat 
Characteristic
4
5
Moderately 
Characteristic
6
7
Very 
Characteristic
8
9
Completely 
Characteristic
My partner sees me as . . .
____ 
Kind and Affectionate
____ 
Tolerant and Accepting
____ 
Critical and Judgmental
____ 
Thoughtless
____ 
Self-Assured
____ 
Patient
____ 
Sociable/Extraverted
____ 
Rational
____ 
Intelligent
____ 
Understanding
____ 
Lazy
____ 
Distant
____ 
Open and Disclosing
____ 
Complaining
____ 
Controlling and Dominant
____ 
Responsive
____ 
Witty and Humorous
____ 
Immature
____ 
Moody
____ 
Warm

32 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
when frustrations arise, people with low self-esteem defensively distance 
themselves, stay surly, and behave badly  (Murray, B ellavia et al., 2003). They 
also feel even worse about themselves (Murray, Griffin et al., 2003). 
 All of this occurs, say Murray and her colleagues (Cavallo et al., 2014), 
because we take large risks when we come to depend on others. Close ties to an 
intimate partner allow us to enjoy rich rewards of support and care, but they 
also leave us vulnerable to devastating betrayal and rejection if our partners 
prove to be untrustworthy. Because they are confident about their partners’ 
love and regard for them, p eople with high self-esteem draw closer to their 
partners when difficulties arise. In contrast, people with low self-esteem have 
lasting doubts about their partners’ regard and reliability, so when times get 
tough, they withdraw from their partners in an effort to protect themselves. We 
all need to balance connectedness with self-protection, Murray’s team suggests, 
but people with low self-esteem put their fragile egos before their relationships, 
and that’s self-defeating when they have loving, devoted partners and there is 
nothing to fear (Murray et al., 2013). 
 As a result, the self-doubts and thin skins of people with low self-esteem lead 
them to make mountains out of molehills. They stay on alert for signs of rejection 
(H. Li et al., 2012), and they wrongly perceive small bumps in the road as worri-
some signs of declining commitment in their partners. Then, they respond with 
obnoxious, self-defeating hurt and anger that cut them off from the reassurance 
they crave. Even their Facebook updates tend to be pessimistic and self-critical, 
and they receive fewer “likes” and comments than others do (Forest & Wood, 
2012). By comparison, people with high self-esteem correctly shrug off the same 
small bumps and remain confident of their partners’ acceptance and positive 
regard. The unfortunate net result is that once it is formed, low self-esteem may be 
hard to overcome (Kuster & Orth, 2013); even after 10 years of marriage, people 
with low self-esteem still tend to believe that their spouses love and accept them 
less than those faithful spouses really do (Murray et al., 2000), and that regrettable 
state of affairs undermines their—and their spouse’s—satisfaction (Erol & Orth, 
2013). Relationships are more fulfilling for both partners when they both have 
high self-esteem (Robinson & Cameron, 2012).  
  Thus, our self-esteem appears to both result from and then subsequently 
steer our interpersonal relationships (MacDonald & Leary, 2012). What we 
think of ourselves seems to depend, at least in part, on the quality of our connec-
tions to others. And those self-evaluations affect our ensuing interactions with 
new partners, who provide us further evidence of our interpersonal worth. In 
fundamental ways, what we know of ourselves emerges from our partnerships 
with others and then matters thereafter (Orth et al., 2012).  
 THE INFLUENCE OF HUMAN NATURE 
 Now that we have surveyed some key characteristics that distinguish 
people from one another, we can address the possibility that our relation-
ships display some underlying themes that reflect the animal nature shared 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 33
by all humankind. Our concern here is with evolutionary influences that have 
shaped close relationships over countless generations, instilling in us certain 
tendencies that are found in everyone (Confer et al., 2010). 
 Evolutionary psychology starts with three fundamental assumptions. First, 
 sexual selection  has helped make us the species we are today. You’ve probably 
heard of  natural selection, which refers to the advantages conferred on animals 
that cope more effectively than others with predators and physical challenges 
such as food shortages. Sexual selection involves advantages that result in 
greater success at reproduction. And importantly:  
 Contrary to what many people have been taught, evolution has nothing to do 
with the survival of the fi ttest. It is not a question of whether you live or die. 
The key to evolution is reproduction. Whereas all organisms eventually die, 
not all organisms reproduce. Further, among those that do reproduce, some 
leave more descendants than others. (Ash & Gallup, 2008, p. 313)  
 This point of view holds that motives such as the need to belong have 
 presumably come to characterize human beings because they were  adaptive, 
conferring some sort of reproductive advantage to those who possessed them. 
As I suggested earlier, the early humans who sought cooperative closeness 
with others were probably more likely than asocial loners to have children who 
grew up to have children of their own. Over time, then, to the extent that the 
desire to affiliate with others is heritable (and it is; Tellegen et al., 1988), sexual 
selection would have made the need to belong more prevalent, with fewer and 
fewer people being born without it. In keeping with this example, evolutionary 
principles assert that any universal psychological mechanism exists in its pres-
ent form because it consistently solved some problem of survival or reproduc-
tion in the past (Confer et al., 2010). 
 Second, evolutionary psychology suggests that men and women should 
differ from one another only to the extent that they have historically faced dif-
ferent reproductive dilemmas (Geary, 2010). Thus, men and women should 
behave similarly in close relationships except in those instances in which dif-
ferent, specialized styles of behavior would allow better access to mates or 
promote superior survival of one’s offspring. Are there such situations? Let’s 
address that question by posing two hypothetical queries:  
 If, during one year, a man has sex with 100 different women, how many chil-
dren can he father? (The answer, of course, is “lots, perhaps as many as 100.”)
If, during one year, a woman has sex with 100 different men, how many chil-
dren can she have? (Probably just one.)  
 Obviously, there’s a big difference in the minimum time and effort that men 
and women have to invest in each child they produce. For a man, the min-
imum requirement is a single ejaculation; given access to receptive mates, a 
man might father hundreds of children during his lifetime. But a woman can 
have children only until her menopause, and each child she has requires an 
enormous investment of time and energy. These biological differences in men’s 

34 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
and women’s obligatory  parental investment in their children may have sup-
ported the evolution of different strategies for selecting mates (Geary, 2000). 
Conceivably, given their more limited reproductive potential, women in our 
ancestral past who chose their mates carefully reproduced more successfully 
(with more of their children surviving to have children of their own) than did 
women who were less thoughtful and deliberate in their choices of partners. In 
contrast, men who promiscuously pursued every available sexual opportunity 
may have reproduced more successfully. If they flitted from partner to partner, 
their children may have been less likely to survive, but what they didn’t offer 
in quality (of parenting) they could make up for in quantity (of children). Thus, 
today—as this evolutionary account predicts—women do choose their sexual 
partners more carefully than men do. They insist on smarter, friendlier, more 
prestigious, and more emotionally stable partners than men will accept, and 
they are less interested in casual,  uncommitted sex than men are (N. Li et al., 
2012). Perhaps this sex difference evolved over time. 
 Another reproductive difference between the sexes is that a woman always 
knows for sure whether or not a particular child is hers. By comparison, a man 
suffers  paternity uncertainty; unless he is completely confident that his mate 
has been faithful to him, he cannot be absolutely certain that her child is his 
(Buss & Schmitt, 1993). Perhaps because of that, even though women cheat less 
than men do (Tsapelas et al., 2011), men are more preoccupied with worries 
about their partners’ infidelity than women are (Schützwohl, 2006). This differ-
ence, too, may have evolved over time. 
 An evolutionary perspective also makes a distinction between  short-term 
and  long-term  mating strategies (Buss & Schmitt, 1993). Men and women both 
seem to pursue different sorts of attributes in the other sex when they’re having 
a brief fling than when they’re entering a longer, more committed relationship. 
In particular, men have a greater desire than women do for sexual liaisons of 
short duration; they are more interested in brief affairs with a variety of part-
ners, and when they enter new relationships, they’re ready to have sex sooner 
than women are (Schmitt, 2005). As a result, when they’re on the prowl, men are 
attracted to women who seem to be sexually available and “easy” (Schmitt et al., 
2001). However, if they think about settling down, the same men who consider 
promiscuous women to be desirable partners in casual relationships often prefer 
chaste women as prospective spouses (Buss, 2000). Men also tend to seek wives 
who are young and pretty. When they’re thinking long-term, men value physi-
cal attractiveness more than women do, and as men age, they marry women 
increasingly younger than themselves (Kenrick & Keefe, 1992). 
 Women exhibit different patterns. When women select short-term mates—
particularly when they have extramarital affairs (Greiling & Buss, 2000)—they 
seek sexy, charismatic, dominant men with lots of masculine appeal. But when 
they evaluate potential husbands, they look for good financial prospects; they 
seek men with incomes and resources who presumably can provide a safe 
environment for their children, even when those men aren’t the sexiest guys 
in the pack (Gangestad & Simpson, 2000). In general, women care more than 
men do about the financial prospects and status of their long-term partners 
(Buss, 2012). 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 35
The effort to delineate human nature by identifying patterns of behavior 
that are found in all of humanity is one of the compelling aspects of the evo-
lutionary perspective. In fact, the different preferences I just mentioned—with 
men valuing good looks and women valuing good incomes—have been found 
in dozens of cultures, everywhere they have been studied around the world 
(Buss, 2012). 9 However, an evolutionary perspective does not imply that culture 
is unimportant.
 Indeed, a third basic assumption of evolutionary psychology is that cultural 
influences determine whether evolved patterns of behavior are  adaptive—and 
cultural change occurs faster than evolution does (Kanazawa, 2010). Our ancient 
forebears were walking around on two legs millions of years ago,10 facing chal-
lenges we can only imagine. A best guess is that more than one in every four 
infants failed to survive their first year of life, and about half didn’t live long 
enough to reach puberty (Volk & Atkinson, 2013). Things are different now. 
Our species displays patterns of behavior that  were adaptive eons ago, but not 
all of those inherited tendencies may fit the modern environments we inhabit 
today. For instance, cavemen may have reproduced successfully if they tried 
to mate with every possible partner, but modern men may not: In just the last 
two generations, we have seen (a) the creation of reproductive technologies—
such as birth control pills—that allow women complete control of their fertility 
and (b) the spread of a lethal virus that is transmitted through sexual contact 
(the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS). These days, a desire for 
multiple partners is probably less adaptive for men than it was millions of years 
ago. Conceivably, modern men may reproduce more successfully if they dis-
play a capacity for commitment and monogamy that encourages their partners 
to allow a pregnancy to occur. But the human race is still evolving. Sexual selec-
tion will ultimately favor styles of behavior that fit our new environment, but it 
will take several thousand generations for such adaptations to occur. (And how 
will our cultures have changed by then?) 
 Thus, an evolutionary perspective provides a fascinating explanation for 
common patterns in modern relationships (Eastwick, 2009): Certain themes and 
some sex differences exist because they spring from evolved psychological mech-
anisms that were useful long ago. We are not robots who are mindlessly enacting 
genetic directives, and we are not all alike (Michalski & Shackelford, 2010), but 
9 Here’s a chance for you to rehearse what you learned earlier in this chapter about sex differences. 
On average, men and women differ in the importance they attach to physical attractiveness and 
income, but that does not mean that women don’t care about looks and men don’t care about 
money. And overall, as we’ll see in chapter 3, men and women mostly want the same things, such 
as warmth, emotional stability, and generous affection, from their romantic partners. Despite the 
sex differences I just described, people do not want looks or money at the expense of other valuable 
characteristics that men and women both want (Li, 2008). Finally, before I finish this footnote, do 
you see how differential parental investment may promote men’s interest in looks and women’s 
interest in money? Think about it, and we’ll return to this point in chapter 3.
10 I don’t know about you, but this blows my mind. The bones of Lucy, the famous female Aus-
tralopithecus afarensis, are estimated to be 3.2 million years old, a span of time I find to be incom-
prehensible. That’s how long our predecessors have been adjusting, adapting, and reproducing. Is 
it so unlikely that, in the midst of huge individual idiosyncrasy, some behavioral patterns became 
commonplace?

36 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
we do have inherited habits that are triggered by the situations we encounter. 
Moreover, our habits may fit our modern situations to varying degrees. Behav-
ior results from the interplay of both personal and situational influences, but 
some common reactions in people result from evolved human nature itself:  
 The pressures to which we have been exposed over millennia have left a men-
tal and emotional legacy. Some of these emotions and reactions, derived from 
the species who were our ancestors, are unnecessary in a modern age, but these 
vestiges of a former existence are indelibly printed in our make-up. (Winston, 
2002, p. 3) 
 This is a provocative point of view that has attracted both acclaim and criti-
cism. On the one hand, the evolutionary perspective has prompted intriguing 
new discoveries (Buss, 2012). On the other hand, assumptions about the primeval 
social environments from which human nature emerged are necessarily specula-
tive. And importantly, critics assert, an evolutionary model is not the only reason-
able explanation for many of the patterns at issue (Eagly & Wood, 2013a). Women 
may have to pick their mates more carefully than men do, for instance, not 
because of the pressures of parental investment but because cultures routinely 
allow women less control over financial resources (Wood & Eagly, 2007); argu-
ably, women have to be concerned about their spouses’ incomes when it’s hard 
for them to earn as much money themselves. If women routinely filled similar 
roles and had social status as high as men’s, women’s greater interest in a mate’s 
money might be much reduced (Zentner & Mitura, 2012).  
Thus, critics of an evolutionary perspective emphasize the role of culture 
in shaping male and female behavior (Wood & Eagly, 2012), and they contend 
that patterns of behavior that are presumed to be evolved tendencies are both 
less noticeable and more variable across cultures than an evolutionary model 
would suggest (Eagly & Wood, 2013b). Proponents respond that, of course, 
cultures are hugely influential—after all, they determine which behaviors are 
adaptive and which are not—but there are differences in the mating strategies 
and behavior of men and women that can’t be explained by social roles and 
processes (Buss, 2013; Schmitt, 2012). The contest between these camps isn’t fin-
ished (Pirlott & Schmitt, 2014), and we’ll encounter it again later on. For now, 
one thing is certain: Right or wrong, evolutionary models have generated fas-
cinating research that has been good for relationship science. And take note of 
the bottom line: Whether it evolved or was a social creation (or both), there may 
well be a human nature that shapes our intimate relationships.
 THE INFLUENCE OF INTERACTION 
 The final building block of relationships is the interaction that the two partners 
share. So far, we’ve focused on the idiosyncratic experiences and personalities that 
individuals bring to a relationship, but it’s time to acknowledge that relationships 
are much more than the sum of their parts. Relationships emerge from the  com-
bination of their participants’ histories and talents (Simpson & Howland, 2012), 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 37
and those amalgamations may be quite different from the simple sum of the indi-
viduals who create them. Chemists are used to thinking this way; when they mix 
two elements (such as hydrogen and oxygen), they often get a compound (such as 
water) that doesn’t resemble either of its constituent parts. In a similar fashion, the 
relationship two people create results from contributions from each of them but 
may only faintly resemble the relationships they share with other people. 
 Consider the levels of trust you feel toward others. Even if you’re a secure 
and trusting person, you undoubtedly trust some people more than others 
because trust is a two-way street that is influenced both by your dispositions 
and those of your partners (Simpson, 2007). Moreover, it emerges from the 
dynamic give-and-take you and your partners share each day; trust is a fluid 
 process rather than a static, changeless thing, and it ebbs and flows in all of your 
relationships. 
 Every intimate relationship is like this. Individually, two partners inevita-
bly encounter fluctuating moods and variable health and energy; then, when 
they interact, their mutual influence on one another may produce a constantly 
changing variety of outcomes (Totenhagen et al., 2012a). Over time, of course, 
unmistakable patterns of interaction will often distinguish one relationship 
from another (Zayas et al., 2002). Still, at any given moment, a relationship may 
be an inconstant entity, the product of shifting transactions of complex people. 
 Overall, then, relationships are constructed of diverse influences that 
may range from the fads and fashions of current culture to the basic nature of 
the human race. Working alongside those generic influences are various idio-
syncratic factors such as personality and experience, some of them learned 
and some of them inherited. And ultimately, two people who hail from the 
same planet—but who may otherwise be somewhat different in every other 
respect—begin to interact. The result may be frustrating or fulfilling, but 
the possibilities are always fascinating—and that’s what relationships are 
made of.  
 THE DARK SIDE OF RELATIONSHIPS 
 I began this chapter by asserting the value of intimacy to human beings, so, 
to be fair, I should finish it by admitting that intimacy has potential costs as 
well. We need intimacy—we suffer without it—but distress and displeasure 
sometimes result from our dealings with others. Indeed, relationships can be 
disappointing in so many ways that whole books can, and have been, writ-
ten about their drawbacks (Cupach & Spitzberg, 2011)! When they’re close to 
others, people may fear that their sensitive secrets will be revealed or turned 
against them. They may dread the loss of autonomy and personal control that 
comes with interdependency (Baxter, 2004), and they may worry about being 
abandoned by those on whom they rely. They recognize that there is dishonesty 
in relationships and that people sometimes confuse sex with love (Firestone 
& Catlett, 1999). And in fact, most of us (56 percent) have had a troublesome 
relationship in the last 5 years (Levitt et al., 1996), so these are not empty fears. 

38 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
 Some of us fear intimacy (Greenberg & Goldman, 2008). Indeed, some of 
us anxiously expect that others will reject us, and we live on edge waiting for 
the relational axe to fall (Romero-Canyas et al., 2009). But whether our fears 
are overstated or merely realistic, we’re all likely to experience unexpected, 
frustrating costs in our relationships on occasion (Miller, 1997b). And the del-
eterious consequences for our physical health of disappointment and distress 
in our close relationships can be substantial (Whisman et al., 2010). 
 So why take the risk? Because we are a social species. We need each other. 
We prematurely wither and die without close connections to other people. Rela-
tionships can be complex, but they are essential parts of our lives, so they are 
worth understanding as thoroughly as possible. I’m glad you’re reading this 
book, and I’ll try to facilitate your understanding in the chapters that follow.  
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 Mark and Wendy met during their junior years in college, and they instantly 
found a lot to like in each other. Wendy was pretty and very feminine and 
rather meek, and Mark liked the fact that he was able to entice her to have sex 
with him on their second date. Wendy was susceptible to his charms because 
she unjustly doubted her desirability, and she was excited that a dominant, 
charismatic man found her attractive. They started cohabitating during their 
senior years and married 6 months after graduation. They developed a tra-
ditional partnership, with Wendy staying home when their children were 
young and Mark applying himself to his career. He succeeded in his profes-
sion, winning several lucrative promotions, but Wendy began to feel that he 
was married more to his work than to her. She wanted him to talk to her 
more, and he began to wish that she was eating less and taking better care 
of herself. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for Mark and 
Wendy? How happy will they be with each other in another 10 years? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 The Nature and Importance of Intimacy 
 This book focuses on adult friendships and romantic relationships. 
 The Nature of Intimacy. Intimate relationships differ from more casual 
associations in at least seven specific ways:  knowledge, interdependence, caring, 
trust, responsiveness, mutuality, and  commitment. 
 The Need to Belong. Humans display a need to belong, a drive to maintain 
regular interaction with affectionate, intimate partners. Severe consequences 
may follow if the need remains unfulfilled over time. 

CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships 39
 The Influence of Culture 
 Cultural norms regarding relationships in the United States have changed 
dramatically over the last 50 years. Fewer people are marrying than ever before, 
and those who do marry wait longer. People routinely cohabit, and that often 
makes a future divorce more, not less, likely. 
 Sources of Change. Economic changes, increasing individualism, and 
new technology contribute to cultural change. So does the  sex ratio; cultures 
with high sex ratios are characterized by traditional roles for men and women, 
whereas low sex ratios are correlated with more permissive behavior. 
 The Influence of Experience 
 Children’s interactions with their caregivers produce different styles of 
attachment. Four styles— secure, preoccupied, fearful, and  dismissing —which dif-
fer in avoidance of intimacy and anxiety about abandonment, are now recognized. 
 These orientations are mostly learned. Thus, our beliefs about the nature 
and worth of close relationships are shaped by our experiences within them.  
 The Influence of Individual Differences 
 There’s wide variation in people’s abilities and preferences, but individual 
differences are usually gradual and subtle instead of abrupt. 
 Sex Differences. Despite lay beliefs that men and women are quite differ-
ent, most sex differences are quite small. The range of variation among mem-
bers of a given sex is always large compared to the average difference between 
the sexes, and the overlap of the sexes is so substantial that many members of 
one sex will always score higher than the average member of the other sex. 
Thus, the sexes are much more similar than different on most of the topics of 
interest to relationship science.  
 Gender Differences.  Gender differences refer to social and psychological 
distinctions that are taught to people by their cultures. Men are expected to be 
dominant and assertive, women to be warm and emotionally expressive—but 
a third of us are  androgynous and possess both  instrumental, task-oriented skills 
and  expressive, social and emotional talents.  Men and women who adhere to 
traditional gender roles do not like each other, either at fi rst meeting or later 
during a marriage, as much as less stereotyped, androgynous people do. 
 Personality. Personality traits are stable tendencies that characterize 
people’s thoughts, feelings, and behavior across their whole lives. Openness, 
extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness help produce pleasant rela-
tionships, but neuroticism undermines one’s contentment.  
 Self-Esteem. What we think of ourselves emerges from our interactions 
with others. The  sociometer  theory argues that if others regard us positively, 
self-esteem is high, but if others don’t want to associate with us, self-esteem is 

40 
CHAPTER 1: The Building Blocks of Relationships
low.  People who have low self-esteem undermine and sabotage their close rela-
tionships by underestimating their partners’ love for them and overreacting to 
imagined threats. 
 The Influence of Human Nature 
 An evolutionary perspective assumes that sexual selection shapes 
humankind, infl uenced, in part, by sex differences in  parental investment and 
 paternity uncertainty . The sexes pursue different mates when they’re interested 
in a long, committed relationship than they do when they’re interested in a 
short-term affair. The evolutionary perspective also assumes that cultural 
infl uences determine whether inherited habits are still adaptive—and some 
of them may not be.  
 The Influence of Interaction 
 Relationships result from the combinations of their participants’ histories 
and talents, and thus are often more than the sum of their parts. Relationships 
are fl uid processes rather than static entities. 
 The Dark Side of Relationships 
 There are potential costs, as well as rewards, to intimacy. So why take the 
risk? Because we are a social species, and we need each other. 

41
 C H A P T E R  2 
 Research Methods 
 T he  S hort  H istory of  R elationship  S cience     ◆  D eveloping a  Q uestion    
 ◆  O btaining P articipants   ◆  C hoosing a  D esign  ◆  S electing 
a S etting  ◆  T he  N ature of  O ur D ata  ◆  T he E thics of S uch 
E ndeavors   ◆  I nterpreting and  I ntegrating  R esults  ◆ A F inal N ote 
 ◆  F or Y our  C onsideration  ◆  C hapter  S ummary  
 I bet you dread a chapter on research methods. You probably regard it as a 
distraction to be endured before getting to “the good stuff.” Love, sex, and jeal-
ousy probably appeal to you, for instance, but research designs and procedures 
are not at the top of your list. 
 Nevertheless, for several reasons, some basic knowledge of the methods 
used by researchers is especially valuable for consumers of relationship science. 
For one thing, more charlatans and imposters compete for your attention in this 
field than in most others. Bookstores and websites are full of ideas offered by 
people who don’t really study relationships at all but who (a) base suggestions 
and advice on their own idiosyncratic experiences or (b) even worse, simply 
make them up (Honeycutt, 1996). Appreciating the difference between trust-
worthy, reliable information and simple gossip can save you money and dis-
appointment. Moreover, misinformation about relationships is more likely to 
cause people real inconvenience than are misunderstandings in other sciences. 
People who misunderstand the nature of the solar system, for instance, are 
much less likely to take action that will be disadvantageous to them than are 
people who are misinformed about the effects of divorce on children. Studies 
of relationships often have real human impact in everyday life (Johnson, 2012). 
 Indeed, this book speaks more directly to topics that affect you person-
ally than most other texts you’ll ever read. Because of this, you have a special 
responsibility to be an informed consumer who can distinguish flimsy whimsy 
from solid truths. 
 This isn’t always easy. As we’ll see in this chapter, there may be various 
ways to address a specific research question, and each may have its own par-
ticular advantages and disadvantages. Reputable scientists gather and evaluate 
information systematically and carefully, but no single technique may provide 
the indisputable answers they seek. A thoughtful understanding of relation-
ships often requires us to combine information from many studies, evaluating 
diverse facts with judicious discernment. This chapter provides the overview of 
the techniques of relationship science that you need to make such judgments. 

42 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
 Only basic principles are described here—this is one of the shortest chap-
ters in the book—but they should help you decide what evidence to accept and 
what to question. And trust me. There’s a lot here that’s worth thinking about 
even if you’ve read a Methods chapter before. Hopefully, when we’re finished 
you’ll be better equipped to distinguish useful research evidence from useless 
anecdotes or mere speculation. For even more information, don’t hesitate to 
consult other sources such as Mehl and Conner (2012) and Leary (2012).  
 THE SHORT HISTORY OF RELATIONSHIP SCIENCE 
 Isaac Newton identified some of the basic laws of physics more than 400 years 
ago (back in 1687). Biology and chemistry have been around for just as long. 
The systematic study of human relationships, on the other hand, is a recent 
invention that is so new and so recent that you can actually talk, if you want, 
with most of the scientists who have ever studied human intimacy! This is no 
small matter. Because relationship science has a short history, it is less well 
known than most other sciences, and for that reason, it is less well understood. 
Very few people outside of colleges and universities appreciate the extraordi-
nary strides this new discipline has made in the last 50 years. 
 Until the mid-twentieth century, relationships were pondered mainly by 
philosophers and poets. They had lots of opinions—doesn’t everybody?—but 
those views were only opinions, and many of them were wrong. So, the first 
efforts of behavioral scientists to conduct empirical observations of real rela-
tionships were momentous developments. Relationship science can be said 
to have begun in the 1930s with a trickle of historically important studies of 
children’s friendships (e.g., Moreno, 1934) and courtship and marriage (e.g., 
Waller, 1937). However, relatively few relationship studies were done before 
World War II. After the war, several important field studies, such as Whyte’s 
(1955)  Street Corner Society  and Festinger, Schachter, and Back’s (1950) study of 
student friendships in campus housing, attracted attention and respect. Still, as 
the 1950s drew to a close, a coherent science of relationships had yet to begin. 
The president of the American Psychological Association even complained that 
“psychologists, at least psychologists who write textbooks, not only show no 
interest in the origin and development of love and affection, but they seem to 
be unaware of its very existence” (Harlow, 1958, p. 673)!
That began to change, thank goodness, when an explosion of studies put 
the field on the scientific map in the 1960s and 1970s. Pioneering scientists 
Ellen Berscheid and Elaine Hatfield began systematic studies of attraction and 
love that were fueled by a new emphasis on laboratory experiments in social 
psychology (Reis et al., 2013). In a quest for precision that yielded unambigu-
ous results, researchers began studying specific influences on relationships 
that they were able to control and manipulate. For instance, in a prominent 
line of research on the role of attitude similarity in liking, Donn Byrne and 
his colleagues (e.g., Byrne & Nelson, 1965) asked people to inspect an atti-
tude survey that had supposedly been completed by a stranger in another 

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 43
room. Then, they asked the participants how much they liked the stranger. 
What the participants didn’t know was that the researchers had prepared the 
survey either to agree or disagree with the participants’ own attitudes (which 
had been assessed earlier). This manipulation of attitude similarity had clear 
effects: Apparent agreement caused people to like the stranger more than 
disagreement did. 
 The methodological rigor of procedures like these satisfied researchers’ 
desires for clarity and concision. They legitimized and popularized the study 
of interpersonal attraction, making it an indispensable part of psychology text-
books for the first time. In retrospect, however, these investigations often did a 
poor job of representing the natural complexity of real relationships. The par-
ticipants in many of Byrne’s experiments never actually met that other person 
or interacted with him or her in any way. Indeed, in the procedure I’ve been 
describing, a meeting couldn’t occur because the stranger didn’t actually exist! 
In this “phantom stranger” technique, people were merely reacting to check 
marks on a piece of paper and were the only real participants in the study. 
The researchers were measuring attraction to someone who wasn’t even there. 
Byrne and his colleagues chose this method, limiting their investigation to one 
carefully controlled aspect of relationship development, to study it conclusively. 
However, they also created a rather sterile situation that lacked the immediacy 
and drama of chatting with someone face-to-face on a first date. 
 But don’t underestimate the importance of studies like these. They dem-
onstrated that relationships could be studied scientifically and that such inves-
tigations had enormous promise, and they brought relationship science to the 
attention of fellow scholars for the first time (Reis, 2012). And in the decades 
since, through the combined efforts of family scholars, psychologists, sociolo-
gists, communication researchers, and neuroscientists, relationship science has 
grown and evolved to encompass new methods of considerable complexity 
and sophistication. Today, relationship science:
  • often uses diverse samples of people drawn from all walks of life and from 
around the world, 
  • examines varied types of family, friendship, and romantic relationships, 
  • frequently studies those relationships over long periods of time, 
  • studies both the pleasant and unpleasant aspects of relationships, 
  • often follows relationships in their natural settings, and 
 • uses sophisticated technology. 
 Here are some examples of how the field currently operates:
  • At Northwestern University, Eli Finkel and his colleagues (Tidwell et al., 
2013) conduct “speed-dating” studies in which singles rotate through 
short conversations with 10 different potential romantic partners. Partici-
pants spend 4 minutes chatting with someone, record their reactions to the 
 interaction, and then move on to someone new. The dating prospects are 
real; if both members of a couple indicate that they would like to see each 
other again, the researchers give them access to a website where they can 

44 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
exchange messages. But the researchers are also able to inspect the build-
ing blocks of real romantic chemistry as people pursue new mates. (Watch 
 http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4hOKtyQMZeE for further detail.) 
  • At the University of Texas at Arlington, William Ickes and his colleagues 
study spontaneous, unscripted interactions between people (who have 
sometimes just met) by leaving them alone on a comfortable couch for 
a few minutes while their conversation is covertly videotaped (Ickes & 
Hodges, 2013). The camera is actually hidden in another room across the 
hall and can’t be seen even if you’re looking directly at it, so there’s no clue 
that anyone is watching (see  Figure 2.1 ). Afterward, if the participants give 
their permission for their recordings to be used, they can review the tapes 
of their interaction in private cubicles where they are invited to report 
what they were thinking—and what they thought their partners were 
thinking—at each point in the interaction. The method thus provides an 
 objective  videotaped record of the interaction, and participants’ thoughts 
and  feelings and perceptions of one another can be obtained, too.  
FIGURE 2.1.  Schematic diagram of William Ickes’s lab at the University of Texas at 
Arlington.
Participants in a typical study will be left alone on a couch (1)—the only place to sit—in 
a spacious room. A microphone hidden under a coffee table (2) and a video camera 
completely out of sight in another room (3) record their conversation. Afterward, the 
participants may offer insights into what they were thinking during their interaction 
when they watch their videotape in individual viewing rooms (4 and 5).
5
3
2
1
4

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 45
  • At the University of Arizona, Matthias Mehl and his colleagues capture 
brief slices of social life by equipping people with small recorders that 
they carry with them during the day (Mehl & Robbins, 2012). The tiny 
devices record all the sounds in the immediate vicinity for 30-second inter-
vals about 70 times a day. The resulting soundtrack indicates how often 
people are alone, how frequently they interact with others, and whether 
their conversations are pleasant or argumentative. This technique allows 
researchers to listen in on real life as it naturally unfolds. (You can do some 
eavesdropping of your own at  http://dingo.sbs.arizona.edu/~mehl/
EAR.htm. )  
  • In Seattle ( http://www.gottman.com/research/family/ ), John Gottman 
and his colleagues invite married couples to a pleasant setting where 
they revisit the disagreement that caused their last argument. They 
know that they are being videotaped, but after a while they typically 
become so absorbed in the interaction that they forget the cameras. The 
researchers may also take physiological measurements such as heart 
rate and electrodermal responses from the participants. Painstaking 
second-by-second analysis of the biological, emotional, and behavioral 
reactions they observe allow the researchers to predict with 93 percent 
accuracy which of the couples will, and which will not, divorce years 
later (Gottman, 2011).  
 • At Stony Brook University, Art Aron and his colleagues (Acevedo et al., 
2012) ask people who have been married for more than 20 years to look 
at pictures of their beloved spouse or an old friend while the activity in 
their brains is monitored with functional magnetic resonance imaging 
(fMRI). The structures in the brain that regulate love, and the physical 
differences between love and friendship, are being mapped for the first 
time. (Watch http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lDazasy68aU to get a 
feel for this work.)
 • In Germany, as part of a Panel Analysis of Intimate Relationships and 
Family Dynamics (or “pairfam”), Bernhard Nauck and his colleagues are 
conducting extensive interviews each year with over 12,400 people, their 
lovers, their parents, and their children (if any). The project began in 2008 
and is designed to continue until at least 2023! (See for yourself at http://
www.pairfam.de/en.)
  • In the Early Years of Marriage Project run by Terri Orbuch and her col-
leagues (Orbuch et al., 2013), 199 white couples and 174 black couples 
from the area surrounding Detroit, Michigan, have been interviewed 
every few years since they were married in 1986. The project is taking 
specific note of the influences of social and economic conditions on mari-
tal satisfaction, and it allows comparisons of the outcomes encountered 
by white and black Americans. In 2002, 16 years after the project began, 
36 percent of the white couples and 55 percent of the black couples had 
already divorced (Birditt et al., 2012). Entire marriages are being tracked 
from start to finish as time goes by. (Visit the project at  http://projects.isr.
umich.edu/eym/. )   

46 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
 I hope that you’re impressed by the creativity and resourcefulness embod-
ied in these methods of research. (I am!) But as notable as they are, they barely 
scratch the surface in illustrating the current state of relationship science. It’s 
still young, but the field is now supported by hundreds of scholars around the 
world who hail from diverse scientific disciplines and whose work appears in 
several different professional journals devoted entirely to personal relation-
ships. If you’re a student, you probably have access to the  Journal of Marriage 
and Family,  the  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships,  and the journal sim-
ply entitled  Personal Relationships.   You can visit the International Association for 
Relationship Research, the world’s largest organization of relationship scientists, 
at  http://www.iarr.org, and if you’re enjoying this book, you have to check out the 
wonderful site, http://www.scienceofrelationships.com/.  
 DEVELOPING A QUESTION 
 How do these scholars study relationships? The first step in any scientific 
endeavor is to ask a question, and in a field like this one, some questions emerge 
from  personal experience.  Relationship researchers have an advantage over many 
other scientists because their own experiences in close relationships can alert 
them to important processes. Indeed, they may be hip deep in the very swamps 
they are trying to drain (Miller, 2008)! Broader  social problems  also suggest ques-
tions for careful study. For instance, the huge increase in the U.S. divorce rate 
from 1960 to 1980 resulted in a considerable amount of research on divorce as 
social scientists took note of the culture’s changes. 
 Questions also come from  previous research:  Studies that answer one ques-
tion may raise new ones. And still other questions are suggested by  theories  that 
strive to offer explanations for relational events. Useful theories both account 
for existing facts and make new predictions, and studies often seek to test 
those hypotheses. Relationship science involves questions that spring from all 
of these sources; scientists will put together their personal observations, their 
recognition of social problems, their knowledge of previous research, and their 
theoretical perspectives to create the questions they ask (Fiske, 2004). 
 The questions themselves are usually of two broad types. First, researchers 
may seek to  describe  events as they naturally occur, delineating the patterns they 
observe as fully and accurately as they can. Alternatively, researchers can seek 
to establish the  causal connections  between events to determine which events 
have meaningful effects on subsequent outcomes and which do not. This dis-
tinction is important: Different studies have different goals, and discerning 
consumers judge investigations with respect to their intended purposes. If an 
exploratory study seeks mainly to describe a newly noticed phenomenon, we 
shouldn’t criticize it for leaving us uncertain about the causes and the effects 
of that phenomenon; those are different questions to be addressed later, after 
we specify what we’re talking about. And more importantly, thoughtful con-
sumers resist the  temptation to draw causal connections from studies with 

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 47
descriptive goals. Only certain research designs allow any insight into the causal 
connections between events, and clever consumers do not jump to unwarranted 
conclusions that the research results do not support. This is a very key point, 
and I’ll return to it later on. 
 OBTAINING PARTICIPANTS 
 So, whose relationships are studied? Relationship researchers usually recruit 
participants in one of two ways. The first approach is to use anyone who is 
readily available and who consents to participate; this is a  convenience sample  
because it is (comparatively) convenient for the researcher to obtain. University 
professors often work with college students who are required to be research 
participants as part of their course work. Although some specific characteris-
tics must sometimes be met (so that a study may focus, for instance, only on 
dating partners who have known each other for less than 2 months), research-
ers who use convenience samples are usually glad to get the help of everyone 
they can. 
 In contrast, projects that use a  representative sample  strive to ensure that, 
collectively, their participants resemble the entire population of people who are 
of interest. A truly representative study of marriage, for example, would need 
to include married people of all sorts—all ages, all nationalities, and all socio-
economic levels. That’s a tall order because, if nothing else, the people who vol-
untarily consent to participate in a research study may be somewhat different 
from those who refuse to participate (see the box on page 50). Still, some stud-
ies have obtained samples that are representative of (volunteers in) the adult 
population of individual countries or other delimited groups. And studies that 
are straightforward enough to be conducted over the Internet can attract very 
large samples that are much more diverse than those found on any one campus 
or even in any one country (Gosling et al., 2010). 
 On the one hand, there is no question that if we seek general principles 
that apply to most people, representative samples are better than convenience 
samples. A convenience sample always allows the unhappy possibility that 
the results we obtain are idiosyncratic, applying only to people who are just 
like our participants—students at a certain university, or people from a par-
ticular area of the country. And although relationship science is now con-
ducted around the world, most of the studies we’ll encounter in this book 
have come from cultures that are Western, well-educated, industrialized, rela-
tively rich, and democratic—so their participants are a little weird. (Get it?) 
In fact, people from “weird” cultures do sometimes behave differently than 
those who live in less developed nations (Henrich et al., 2010). On the other 
hand, many processes studied by relationship researchers are basic enough 
that they don’t differ substantially across demographic groups; people all over 
the world, for instance, share similar standards about the nature of physi-
cal beauty (see chapter 3). To the extent that research examines fundamental 

48 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
aspects of the ways humans react to each other, convenience samples may not 
be disadvantageous. 
 Let’s consider a specific example. Back in 1978, Russell Clark sent men 
and women out across the campus of Florida State University to proposition 
members of the other sex. Individually, they approached unsuspecting people 
and randomly assigned them to one of three invitations (see  Table 2.1 ); some 
people were simply asked out on a date, whereas others were asked to have 
sex! The notable results were that no woman accepted the offer of sex from a 
stranger, but 75 percent of the men did—and that was more men than accepted 
the date! 
 This was a striking result, but so what? The study involved a small con-
venience sample on just one campus. Perhaps the results told us more about 
the men at FSU than they did about men and women in general. In fact, 
Clark had trouble getting the study published because of reviewers’ con-
cerns about the generality of the results. So, in 1982, he and Elaine Hatfield 
tried again; they repeated the study at FSU and got the same results (Clark 
& Hatfield, 1989).  
 Well, still so what? It was 4 years later, but the procedure had still been 
tried only in Tallahassee. If you give this example some thought, you’ll be able 
to generate several reasons why the results might apply only to one particular 
time and one particular place. 
 I’d like to suggest a different perspective. Let’s not fuss too much about 
the exact percentage of college men in Florida or elsewhere who would con-
sent to sex with a stranger. That’s the kind of specific attitude that you’d expect 
to vary some from one demographic group to another. Instead of endlessly 
criticizing—or, even worse, dismissing—the results of the Clark and Hatfield 
(1989)  studies, let’s recognize their limitations but not miss their point: Men 
were generally more accepting of casual sex than women were. When some-
body actually asked, men were much more likely to accept a sexual invitation 
from a stranger than women were. Stated generally, that’s exactly the conclu-
sion that has now been drawn from subsequent investigations involving more 
than 20,000 participants from every major region of the world (Schmitt & the 
In Clark and Hatfield’s (1989) studies, college students walking across campus encoun-
tered a stranger of the other sex who said, “Hi, I’ve noticed you around campus, and I 
find you very attractive,” and then offered one of the following three invitations. What 
percentage of the students accepted the various offers?
Invitations
Percentages Saying “Yes”
Men
Women
“Would you go out with me tonight?”
50
56
“Would you come over to my apartment tonight?”
69
6
“Would you go to bed with me tonight?”
75
0
TABLE 2.1. “Would You Go to Bed with Me Tonight?”

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 49
International Sexuality Description Project, 2003), and Clark and Hatfield were 
among the very first to document this sex difference. Their method was simple, 
and their sample was limited, but they were onto something, and their proce-
dure detected a basic pattern that really does seem to exist. 1
 So, it’s absolutely true that the Clark and Hatfield (1989) studies were not 
perfect. That’s a judgment with which Clark and Hatfield (2003) themselves 
agree! But as long as their results are considered thoughtfully and judiciously, 
even small studies using convenience samples like these can make important 
contributions to relationship science.  Our confidence in our collective under-
standing of relationships relies on knowledge obtained with diverse meth-
ods (Reis, 2002). Any single study may have some imperfections, but those 
weaknesses may be answered by another study’s strengths. With a series 
of investigations, each approaching a problem from a different angle, we 
gradually delineate the truth. To be a thoughtful consumer of relationship 
science, you should think the way the scientists do: No one study is perfect. Be 
1 For instance, in a study in May 2006 along the west coast of France, 57 percent of the men but 
only 3 percent of the women accepted invitations to have sex with an attractive stranger (Guéguen, 
2011). In June 2009, 38 percent of the men but only 2 percent of the women in urban areas of 
Denmark did so (Hald & Høgh-Olesen, 2010). (These glaring differences are smaller, however, 
when men and women are asked to imagine offers for sex from celebrities such as Jennifer Lopez 
and Brad Pitt [Conley, 2011]!).
The people in a representative sample reflect the demographic characteristics (sex, age, 
race, etc.) of the entire population of people that the researchers wish to study.

50 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
cautious. Various methods are valuable. Wisdom takes time. But the truth is out 
there, and we’re getting closer all the time. 
 CHOOSING A DESIGN 
 Okay, we’ve formulated a research question and obtained some participants. 
Now, we need to arrange our observations in a way that will answer our ques-
tion. How do we do that? 
 Correlational Designs 
Correlations describe patterns in which change in one event is accompanied to 
some degree by change in another. The patterns can be of two types. If the two 
events are positively correlated, they go up and down together—that is, as one 
goes up, so does the other, and as the other goes down, so does the first one. 
In speed-dating studies, for instance, the more two strangers think they have 
in common after a brief interaction, the more they tend to like each other 
The Challenge of Volunteer Bias in Relationship Research
Regardless of whether investigators 
use convenience or representative sam-
pling, they still face the problem of 
volunteer bias: Of the people invited 
to participate, those who do may dif-
fer from those who don’t. In one illus-
tration of this problem, Karney et al. 
(1995) simply asked 3,606 couples who 
had applied for marriage licenses in Los 
Angeles County whether they would 
participate in a longitudinal study of 
their relationships. Only 18 percent of 
the couples said that they would, and 
that’s a typical rate in procedures of 
this sort. But their marriage licenses, 
which were open to the public, pro-
vided several bits of information about 
them (e.g., their addresses, their ages, 
and their jobs). The volunteers differed 
from those who refused to participate 
in several ways; they were better edu-
cated, employed in higher-status jobs, 
and more likely to have cohabited. If 
the researchers had carried out a com-
plete study with these people, would 
these characteristics have affected their 
results?
The answer may depend on what 
questions are asked, but volunteer bias 
can color the images that emerge from 
relationship research. People who vol-
unteer for studies dealing with sex-
ual behavior, for instance, tend to be 
younger, more sexually experienced, 
and more liberal than nonvolunteers 
(Wiederman, 2004). Subtle bias can 
occur even when people are required to 
be research participants, as college stu-
dents often are. Conscientious students 
participate earlier in the semester than 
slackers do, and students who select 
face-to-face lab studies are more extra-
verted than those who stay home and 
participate online (Witt et al., 2011). Vol-
unteer biases such as these can limit the 
extent to which research results apply to 
those who did not participate in a par-
ticular study.

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 51
(Tidwell et al., 2013). Higher levels of perceived similarity are associated with 
greater liking.
In contrast, if two events are negatively correlated, they change in oppo-
site directions: as one goes up, the other goes down, and as one goes down, 
the other goes up. For example, people who have high neuroticism2 tend to 
be less satisfied with their marriages than others are; higher neuroticism is 
associated with lower marital satisfaction (Malouff et al., 2010). Positive and 
negative correlations are portrayed in Figure 2.2, which also includes an 
example of what we see when two events are uncorrelated: If events are unre-
lated, one of them doesn’t change in any predictable way when the other goes 
up or down.
Patterns like these are often intriguing, and they can be very important, 
but they are routinely misunderstood by unsophisticated consumers. Please, 
always remember that correlations tell us that two events change together in 
some recognizable way, but, all by themselves, they do not tell us why that 
occurs. Correlational designs typically study naturally occurring behavior 
without trying to influence or control the situations in which it unfolds—and 
the correlations that are observed  do not tell us about the causal connections 
between events. Be careful not to assume too much when you encounter a cor-
relation; many different plausible causal connections may all be possible when 
a correlation exists. Consider the fact that perceived similarity is positively 
related to liking; here are three straightforward possibilities:
2 Take a look back at page 27 if you’d like to refresh your memory of what neuroticism is.
FIGURE 2.2. Correlational patterns.
Liking for
Another
High
Low
Low
Perceived Similarity
of Other
A Strong Positive Correlation
High
Liking for
Another
High
Low
Low
Disagreements
with Other
A Strong Negative Correlation
High
Liking for
Another
High
Low
Low
Number of Letters in
Other’s Middle Name
No Correlation
High

52 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
 • one of these two may cause the other—perceived similarity might lead to 
greater liking. Or,
 • the other of these two could cause the one—so that liking others leads us to 
assume that we have a lot in common with them. Or,
 • something else, a third variable, may explain why similarity and liking 
are related. Similarity may not lead to liking, and liking may not lead to 
perceived similarity; instead, something else, like really good looks, may 
cause us to like others and to assume (or hope?) that we’re compatible 
with them.
 Any of these three, along with many other more complex chains of events, may 
be possible when two events  are correlated. If all we have is a correlation, all we 
know is that a predictable pattern exists. We don’t know what causal connec-
tions are involved. 3
 Experimental Designs 
 When it’s possible, the way to investigate causal connections is to use an 
experimental design.  Experiments provide straightforward information about 
causes and their effects because experimenters create and control the condi-
tions they study. In a true experiment, researchers intentionally manipulate one 
or more variables and randomly assign participants to the different conditions 
they have created to see how those changes affect people. Thus, instead of just 
asking “Do two things change together?” experimenters ask “If we change  one, 
what happens to the other ? ” 
3 I should note, however, that if we have lots of correlations involving a number of variables, or if 
we have taken our measurements on several occasions over a span of time, sophisticated statisti-
cal analyses can usually rule out some of the possible causal connections that make correlational 
findings ambiguous. We should be careful not to assume that simple correlations involve causal 
connections, but advanced statistical techniques often make it possible to draw some defensible 
conclusions about cause and effect within correlational designs.
There are often several possible, plausible reasons why two events are related. If all 
you’ve got is a correlation, don’t jump to conclusions!
DILBERT ©2012 Scott Adams. Used By permission of UNIVERSAL UCLICK. All rights reserved.

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 53
 Let’s illustrate the difference between an experiment and a correlational 
study by reconsidering Donn Byrne’s classic work on attitude similarity and 
attraction (e.g., Byrne & Nelson, 1965). Had Byrne simply measured partners’ 
perceptions of each other’s attitudes and their liking for each other, he would 
have obtained a positive correlation between perceived similarity and liking, 
but he would not have been sure why they were related. 
 What Byrne did instead was an experiment. Once his participants arrived 
at his lab, he flipped a coin to determine randomly who would encounter a 
similar stranger and who would encounter one who didn’t agree with them 
at all. He  controlled  that apparent agreement or disagreement, and it was the 
only difference between the two situations in which participants found them-
selves. With this procedure, when Byrne observed higher liking for the similar 
stranger, he could reasonably conclude that the greater agreement had  caused  
the higher liking. How? Because the participants were randomly assigned to 
the two situations, the different degrees of liking could not be due to differences 
in the people who encountered each situation; on average, the two groups of 
participants were identical. Moreover, they all had identical experiences in the 
experiment except for the apparent similarity of the stranger. The only reason-
able explanation for the different behavior Byrne observed was that similarity 
leads to liking. His experiment clearly showed that the manipulated cause, atti-
tude similarity, had a noticeable effect, higher liking. 
 Experiments provide clearer, more definitive tests of causal connections 
than other designs do. Done well, they clearly delineate cause and effect. Why, 
then, do researchers ever do anything else? The key is that experimenters have 
to be able to control and manipulate the events they wish to study. Byrne could 
control the information that his participants received about someone they had 
never met, but he couldn’t manipulate other important influences on intimate 
relationships. We still can’t. (How do you create full-fledged experiences of 
romantic love in a laboratory?) You can’t do experiments on events you cannot 
control. 
 So, correlational and experimental designs each have their own advan-
tages. With correlational designs, we can study compelling events in the real 
world—commitment to a relationship, passionate love, unsafe sex—and exam-
ine the links among them. But correlational designs are limited in what they can 
tell us about the causal relationships among events. With experimental designs, 
we can examine causal connections, but we are limited in what we can study. 
Hopefully, you can see why different researchers may study the same topic in 
different ways, with different research designs—and why that’s a good thing. 
 SELECTING A SETTING 
 We’re making progress. We’ve developed our research question, recruited our 
participants, and chosen our design. Now, we have to select a setting in which 
to conduct our investigation. The usual choices include (a) a laboratory or (b) 
a natural, everyday environment, such as a couple’s home. Either choice has 

54 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
High-Tech Role-Playing
An intriguing new tool in relationship 
science is the use of immersive virtual 
environments (or IVEs) to study human 
interaction (Blascovich & Bailenson, 
2011). In an IVE study, participants 
interact with three-dimensional com-
puter representations of other people; 
they wear headsets that control what 
they see, and as they move through 
space in an empty room, the visual 
feedback they receive responds to their 
actual movements. It’s like actually 
being inside an elaborate video game.
Of course, participants know that 
the things they see aren’t really hap-
pening. Nevertheless, an IVE can be 
an absorbing experience that gener-
ates behavior that resembles people’s 
actions in real life. People’s attachment 
styles, for instance, predict their behav-
ior in virtual reality as well as real life 
(Schönbrodt & Asendorpf, 2012). And 
the technique allows researchers precise 
control over the appearance, actions, 
and reactions of the virtual partners 
with whom the participants interact. 
Researchers can create exactly the same 
situation over and over, or they can 
vary the situation in subtle ways that 
would be hard to regulate with real-life 
actors and assistants. Verisimilitude 
versus control: Here’s another research 
tool with important advantages and 
disadvantages, and we’ll probably 
be hearing more about it in the years 
to come.
advantages and disadvantages. (You’re getting used to that now, aren’t you?) 
The lab offers the advantage of greater control over extraneous, unwanted influ-
ences, but it may elicit artificial behavior that differs from what people usually 
do (Callaghan et al., 2013). Natural settings offer the advantage of obtaining 
more typical behavior, but they can be full of distractions and hard to manage. 
 Wherever a study takes place, some behaviors are difficult to study because 
they are rare, or unpleasant, or very intimate (or all three). One way to over-
come these difficulties is to have subjects  role-play  the behavior we’re trying 
to understand—to act “as if” they were jealous, for instance, or were having an 
argument, or were trying to entice someone into bed. Role-play studies vary 
in how realistic they are. At one extreme, participants may be asked to read a 
story involving the relevant behavior and to imagine those events happening 
to them. Such  scenarios  are always less vivid than the real events would be, 
and they allow people to respond in a cool, collected fashion that may be quite 
different from the impulsive and emotional reactions they display when such 
events really take place. At the other extreme, studies known as  simulations  ask 
people to act out a particular role in a hypothetical situation. For example, an 
investigator might ask a couple to pretend that they are angry with each other 
and then observe how they behave. This strategy is more engrossing, but par-
ticipants still know that they are only pretending. Role-play studies are an ethi-
cally defensible way to study emotionally charged topics, but people may do 
what they think they  should do in these situations rather than what they really 
 would do if the events a ctually occurred. Once again, there are both advantages 
and disadvantages to consider. 

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 55
 THE NATURE OF OUR DATA 
 Now, just what type of information will we be actually collecting? Are we 
recording others’ judgments and perceptions of a relationship, or are we 
inspecting specific interactions ourselves? Two major types of research mea-
sures are described here: (a) people’s own reports about their thoughts, feel-
ings, and behaviors and (b) careful observations of others’ behavior. We’ll also 
examine some variations on these themes. No matter what data we use, our 
measures should have psychometric  validity  and  reliability.  That is, we should 
be accurately measuring the events we’re trying to measure (that’s validity), 
and, if those events aren’t changing, we should get the same scores time after 
time (that’s reliability). 
 Self-Reports 
The most common means of studying intimate relationships is to ask peo-
ple about their experiences. Such responses are  self-reports,  and they can be 
obtained in a variety of formats: through written questionnaires, verbal inter-
views, or even unstructured diaries in which participants write about whatever 
comes to mind. The common theme linking such techniques is that people are 
telling us about their experiences—we’re not watching them ourselves. 
 Self-report data have important benefits. For one thing, they allow us to 
“get inside people’s heads” and understand personal points of view that may 
not be apparent to outside observers.  Self-report data are also inexpensive and 
easy to obtain. Consider, for instance, the short self-report measure provided in 
 Table 2.2 : Those seven questions do a remarkably good job of assessing people’s 
satisfaction with their close relationships. For most purposes, there’s no reason 
to ask more elaborate questions or use other means to distinguish satisfied lov-
ers from those who are less content because this handful of straightforward 
questions works just fine (Renshaw et al., 2011). Self-report measures can be 
both very efficient and very informative. Still (and by now, this probably isn’t 
a surprise!), self-reports may also present potential problems. Here are three 
things to worry about. 
 Participants’ Interpretations of the Questions 
 Self-reports always occur in response to a researcher’s instructions or ques-
tions. If the participants misinterpret what the researcher means or intends, 
their subsequent self-reports can be misleading. For instance: “With how 
many people have you had sex?” When men answer that question, they tend 
to include partners with whom they have had oral sex but no intercourse, 
whereas women tend to count only those partners with whom they have had 
intercourse (Gute et al., 2008). This is one reason why men routinely report that 
they have had sex with more members of the other sex than women do. 4  In fact, 
 4 This provocative sex difference is explored in more detail in the box on page 287. (See, I told you 
the boxes would be worth your time.)

56 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
Circle the answer below each question that best describes your current romantic 
relationship.
 1. How well does your partner meet your needs?
1
2
3
4
5
not at all
somewhat
moderately well
very well
extremely well
 2. In general, how satisfied are you with your relationship?
1
2
3
4
5
not at all
somewhat
moderately
very
extremely
 3. How good is your relationship compared to most?
1
2
3
4
5
not at all
somewhat
moderately
very
extremely
 4. How often do you wish you hadn’t gotten into this relationship?
1
2
3
4
5
never
rarely
occasionally
often
very often
 5. To what extent has your relationship met your original expectations?
1
2
3
4
5
not at all
somewhat
moderately well
very well
extremely well
 6. How much do you love your partner?
1
2
3
4
5
not at all
somewhat
moderately
very much
extremely
 7. How many problems are there in your relationship?
1
2
3
4
5
none
a few
some
many
very many
Source: Hendrick et al., 1998.
To determine your score, reverse the ratings you provided on items 4 and 7. If you 
circled a 1, change it to a 5; if you answered 2, make it a 4; 4 becomes 2, and 5 becomes 
1. Then add up your answers. The higher your score, the more content you are with 
your relationship.
TABLE 2.2 The Relationship Assessment Scale
undetected problems with people’s comprehension of terms describing sexual 
behavior—including “orgasm” (Chabot et al., 2013)—may be a major problem 
in sexuality research (Wiederman, 2004).  
 Difficulties in Recall or Awareness 
 Even when people understand our questions, they may not be able to 
answer them correctly. For one thing, they may lack insight into their actions, 
so that what they think is going on isn’t entirely accurate. For instance, women 
say the physical attractiveness of a mate is less important to them than men do. 
However, when they encounter and evaluate several potential partners at once 
in speed-dating studies, looks do matter just as much to women as they do to 
men (Eastwick & Finkel, 2008), and looks are the most important influence on 

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 57
who likes whom for both sexes (Luo & Zhang, 2009). On occasion, what people 
can tell us about their preferences and behavior doesn’t accurately reflect what 
they actually say and do.
Faulty memories can also be a problem. Self-reports are most accurate 
when people describe specific, objective events that have occurred recently. 
They are more likely to be inaccurate when we ask them about things that 
happened long ago (Aicken et al., 2013). Specific details may be forgotten—
in one study (Mitchell, 2010), 50 percent of a large sample of divorced people 
did not correctly report in which month they were divorced—and past feel-
ings are especially likely to be misremembered. In particular, if a passionate 
romance ends in pain and discontent, the disappointed lovers are likely to have 
a very hard time remembering how happy and enthusiastic they felt months 
earlier when they had just fallen in love (Grote & Frieze, 1998). 
 Bias in Participants’ Reports 
 A final worry—a big one—involves the possibility of systematic bias or dis-
tortion in people’s reports. In particular, people may be reluctant to tell research-
ers anything that makes them look bad or that portrays them in an undesirable 
light. This can cause a  social desirability bias,  or distortion that results from 
people’s wishes to make good impressions on others. For instance, studies that 
simply ask people how often they’ve cheated on (Schick et al., 2014), or beaten 
(Follingstad & Rogers, 2013), their partners are likely to get answers that under-
estimate the prevalence of both events. In one case, 4 percent of those who had 
been divorced a few years earlier—the researchers knew this because they had 
seen the divorce decrees on file at county courthouses—claimed that they had 
never been divorced (Mitchell, 2010)! In another instance, women reported 
having more sex partners and losing their virginity at younger ages when they 
were hooked up to lie detectors than when they were not (Fisher, 2013). Proce-
dures that guarantee participants’ anonymity—such as allowing them to take 
surveys online instead of face-to-face (March et al., 2013)—help reduce social 
desirability problems such as these, but bias is always a concern when studies 
address sensitive issues.  
 Observations 
 Another way to collect information about relationships is to observe behavior 
directly. Scientific observations are rarely casual undertakings. Researchers either 
measure behavior with sophisticated tools or carefully train their colleagues 
to make observations that are accurate, reliable, and often quite detailed. 
 Some studies involve direct observations of ongoing behavior whereas 
others use recordings from which observations are made at a later time. 
 Event-sampling  is a method that uses intermittent, short periods of observation 
to capture samples of behavior that actually occur over longer periods of time; 
investigators may randomly sample short spans of time when a target behavior 
is likely to occur, scattering periods of observation through different times on 
different days. The work being done by Matthias Mehl (Mehl & Robbins, 2011) 

58 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
Assessing Attachment Styles
Studies of attachment have become a 
major theme in relationship science, and 
I’ll mention attachment in every chap-
ter to come. Where do all these findings 
come from? In most cases, research par-
ticipants have described their feelings 
about close relationships on a question-
naire. Now that we’ve considered some 
of the nuances of self-report data, let’s 
inspect the tool that’s most often used to 
assess attachment.
The 12 items presented here are 
drawn from a longer questionnaire 
created by Kelly Brennan and her col-
leagues (1998), and they obtain results 
that are very similar to those obtained 
with the longer scale (Wei et al., 2007). 
I’ve labeled the two dimensions of 
attachment to which the items pertain, 
but those labels do not appear on the 
actual survey, and the items are mixed 
together. Respondents are asked to rate 
the extent of their agreement or dis-
agreement with each item on a seven-
point scale r anging from 1  (disagree 
strongly) to 7 (agree strongly). Note that 
you’d report high levels of anxiety or 
avoidance by agreeing with some items 
and disagreeing with others; this is a 
common tactic that is used to encour-
age thoughtful answers and to help 
researchers detect careless responses.
Researchers typically derive two 
scores, an anxiety score and an avoidance 
score, and then determine how they 
predict different relational outcomes. 
People with a secure style of attach-
ment, as you may recall (from page 
17), would have low scores on both 
dimensions.
Items measuring 
Anxiety about Abandonment:
 1. I worry that romantic partners 
won’t care about me as much as 
I care about them.
 2. My desire to be close sometimes 
scares people away.
 3. I need a lot of reassurance that I 
am loved by my partner.
 4. I find that my partner(s) don’t 
want to get as close as I would like.
 5. I get frustrated when romantic 
partners are not available when 
I need them.
 6. I do not often worry about being 
abandoned.
Items measuring 
Avoidance of Intimacy:
 1. I want to get close to my partner, 
but I keep pulling back.
 2. I am nervous when partners get 
too close to me.
 3. I try to avoid getting too close to 
my partner.
 4. I usually discuss my problems and 
concerns with my partner.
 5. It helps to turn to my romantic 
partner in times of need.
 6. I turn to my partner for many 
things, including comfort and 
reassurance.
To get your own score on these items, 
reverse your score on the sixth Anxiety 
item and on numbers 4, 5, and 6 of the 
Avoidance items. A score of 1 becomes 
a 7, a 3 becomes a 5, a 6 becomes a 2, and 
so on. An average score on the Anxiety 
items is 22; a score below 15 is pretty 
low, and a score above 29 is pretty high. 

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 59
with small recorders that fit in a pocket is a fine example of this technique. The 
devices are called electronically activated recorders, or EARs. (Get it?) They 
switch on for brief periods at regular intervals during the day and capture the 
sounds of whatever interactions participants are having at the time. You won’t 
be surprised to learn that when EARs capture a lot of surly emotions such as 
anger and contempt in couples’ conversations, the partners are less content and 
their relationship is more fragile 6 months later (Slatcher & Ranson, 2011). 
 The observations that result from a procedure such as this can take several 
forms. Researchers sometimes make  ratings  that characterize the events they 
witness in relatively global terms. For example, an argument might be rated 
with regard to the extent to which it is ”constructive and problem solving” or 
”argumentative and hostile.” Alternatively, observers may employ  coding pro-
cedures  that focus on very specific behaviors such as the amount of time people 
speak during an interaction, the number of smiles they display, or the number 
of times they touch each other (Humbad et al., 2011). These perceptions are typ-
ically more objective than ratings are, and they can sometimes be mechanized 
to be even more impartial. For instance, James Pennebaker has developed soft-
ware that codes the words people use, and it allows an automatic analysis of 
the content of people’s conversations. (And it’s bad news when partners use the 
word “you” too frequently; such people tend to be less satisfied with their rela-
tionships than those who use “you” less often [Tausczik & Pennebaker, 2010].)  
 Other technologies provide additional measures of behavior. In an 
eye-tracking study, for instance, participants don headgear that focuses tiny 
video cameras on their eyes. Then, when they inspect various images, their eye 
movements indicate what they’re looking at, and for how long (Gervais et al., 
2013). We’d be able to tell, for instance, whether you prefer blondes or brunettes 
by presenting two images differing only in hair color side-by-side: You’d spend 
more time scrutinizing the image you find more alluring. 
 Observations such as these generally avoid the disadvantages of self-
reports. On the other hand, we need self-reports if we’re to understand people’s 
personal perceptions of their experiences. Observational studies can also be 
expensive, sometimes requiring costly equipment and consuming hours and 
hours of observers’ time. One remarkable study filmed every waking moment 
of the interactions of 32 different families over the course of 1 week, and the 
Average Avoidance is 15, with 9 being 
noticeably low and 21 being notably 
high (Wei et al., 2007).
Do the answers that people give 
to questions such as these really mat-
ter? Yes, they do. There are other means 
of assessing attachment that involve 
extensive interviews, but they are not 
often used because these items do such 
a fi ne job of identifying meaningful 
individual differences (Shaver & Miku-
lincer, 2013). Despite possible biases, 
vocabulary problems, and all the other 
potential problems with self-reports, 
these items delineate different global 
orientations to intimate relationships 
that are very infl uential, as we will see 
throughout this book.

60 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
1,540 hours of resulting video required thousands of hours of careful inspection 
to code and categorize (Carey, 2010). 
 Observational research can also suffer from the problem of  reactivity:  
People may change their behavior when they know they are being observed. 
(A camera in your living room would probably change some of your 
behavior—at least until you got used to it.) For that reason,  researchers are 
always glad to conduct observations that cannot possibly alter the behaviors 
they’re studying—and in one such investigation, relationship scientists moni-
tored the Facebook profiles of 1,640 people—almost the entire freshman class 
at a particular university—as their college years went by (Wimmer & Lewis, 
2010). They tracked the public information in the profiles to determine how the 
users’ tastes and values influenced the friendships they formed. The research-
ers had specific, serious aims—this was not informal browsing—and they 
couldn’t have unwanted influence on the behavior they were studying because 
the participants did not know that they were being watched! We will undoubt-
edly be seeing many more studies of social networking on the Web in the years 
to come. (Do you find this troubling? Why?) 
 Physiological Measures 
 We can also avoid any problems with reactivity if we observe behavior that 
people cannot consciously control, and physiological measures of people’s 
autonomic and biochemical reactions often do just that. Physiological measures 
assess such responses as heart rate, muscle tension, genital arousal, brain activ-
ity, and hormone levels to determine how our physical states are associated 
with our social behavior. 
 Some investigations examine the manner in which physiology shapes our 
interactions with others. For instance, the level of the neuropeptide oxytocin in 
your blood helps to determine how empathic and trusting you are (Campbell, 
2010); remarkably, if you’re given a dose of oxytocin, you’ll be temporarily less 
suspicious of others (MacDonald & MacDonald, 2010). There are also physi-
ological foundations to our attachment styles. Stronger autonomic reactions 
to social stressors, including the release of hormones such as adrenalin, are 
found in insecure people than in secure ones; social threats that create uneasy 
arousal in anxious and avoidant people often leave secure people cool and calm 
( Diamond & Fagundes, 2010).
Other studies seek to map the physiological foundations of social behavior. 
For example, fMRI has identified the structures in our brains that seem to regu-
late love and lust (Tomlinson & Aron, 2012). fMRI images show which parts of 
the brain are consuming more oxygen and are therefore more active than others 
when certain states occur—and as it turns out, warm romantic affection and 
yearning sexual desire appear to be controlled by different parts of our brains. 
(Are you surprised?) 
 Physiological measures are often expensive, but their use is increasing 
because they allow researchers to explore the physical foundations of our rela-
tionships. They are a good example of the manner in which relationship science 
is becoming more complex and sophisticated all the time. 

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 61
 Archival Materials 
 Historical  archives also avoid the problem of reactivity. Personal documents 
such as photographs and diaries, public media such as newspapers and maga-
zines, and governmental records such as marriage licenses and birth records 
can all be valuable sources of data about relationships, and when these are 
dated, they become “archival” information. In one study, researchers exam-
ined old university yearbook photos to determine if people’s expressions as 
young adults could predict their chances of a future divorce (Hertenstein et 
al., 2009). (What did they find? See chapter 5!)  Archival materials are “nonreac-
tive” because inspection of archival data does not change the behaviors being 
studied. They can be limited, however, because they may not contain all the 
information a researcher would really like to have.  
 THE ETHICS OF SUCH ENDEAVORS 
 Studies using archival materials often run no risk at all of embarrassing any-
one, but research on relationships does occasionally require investigators to ask 
questions about sensitive topics or to observe private behavior. Should we pry 
into people’s personal affairs? 
 This is not an issue I pose lightly. Although it’s enormously valuable and 
sorely needed, relationship science presents important ethical dilemmas. Just 
asking people to fill out questionnaires describing their relationships may have 
unintended effects on those partnerships. When we ask people to specify what 
they get out of a relationship or to rate their love for their partners, for instance, 
we focus their attention on delicate matters they may not have thought much 
about. We encourage them to evaluate their relationships, and stimulate their 
thinking. Moreover, we arouse their natural curiosity about what their partners 
may be saying in response to the same questions. Researchers’ innocent inqui-
ries may alert people to relationship problems or frustrations they didn’t know 
they had. 
 Simulations and other observational studies may have even more impact. 
Consider John Gottman’s (2011) method of asking spouses to revisit the issue 
that caused their last argument: He doesn’t encourage people to quarrel and 
bicker, but some of them do. Spouses that disagree sourly and bitterly are at 
much greater risk for divorce than are spouses who disagree with grace and 
humor, and Gottman’s work has illuminated the specific behaviors that fore-
cast trouble ahead. This work is extremely important. But does it do damage? 
Should we actually invite couples to return to a disagreement that may erode 
their satisfaction even further? 
 The answer to that question isn’t simple. Relationship scientists ordinarily 
are very careful to safeguard the welfare of their participants (Kimmel, 2004). 
Detailed information is provided to potential participants before a study begins 
so that they can make an informed decision about whether or not to participate. 
Their consent to participate is voluntary and can be withdrawn at any time. 
After the data are collected, the researchers provide prompt feedback that 

62 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
explains any experimental manipulations and describes the larger purposes of 
the investigation. Final reports regarding the outcomes of the study are often 
made available when the study is complete. In addition, when ticklish matters 
are being investigated, researchers may provide information about where par-
ticipants can obtain couples’ counseling should they wish to do so; psychologi-
cal services may even be offered for free. 
 As you can see, relationship science is based on compassionate concern 
for the well-being of its participants. People are 
treated with respect, thanked warmly for their 
efforts, and may even be paid for their time. They 
may also find their experiences to be interest-
ing and enlightening. People who participate in 
studies of sexual behavior (Kuyper et al., 2014) 
and dating violence (Shorey et al., 2011), for 
instance, routinely have positive reactions and are 
distressed very rarely. That’s reassuring. Still, 
should we be trying to study such private and inti-
mate matters? 
 The answer from here is absolutely yes. There’s another side to the issue 
of ethics I haven’t yet mentioned: science’s ethical imperative to gain knowl-
edge that can benefit humanity. Ignorance can be wasteful. For instance, the 
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services is currently spending a pile of 
money to fund a Healthy Marriage Initiative that is intended to teach African 
Americans skills that will help them sustain their marriages. Black Americans 
are targets of this marriage-enrichment program because, compared to whites, 
they are less likely to marry and more likely to divorce (Johnson, 2012). One 
of the assumptions underlying the Initiative is that the marriages of African 
Americans will be more stable if they come to value marriage more—so tax-
payers’ dollars are being spent on classes that try to convince blacks to respect 
and appreciate matrimony. The problem here—as is apparent to relationship 
scientists (Trail & Karney, 2012)—is that African Americans value marriage just 
as much as anyone else. They  want  to be married even more than whites do, but 
they don’t get married when they face bleak economic prospects. In particular, 
black women do not want to marry men who don’t have steady jobs (Barr & 
Simons, 2012). When they do marry, their marriages are less stable on aver-
age because they more often encounter financial difficulties (Hardie & Lucas, 
2010), and  any  couple that has to struggle with worries over money tends to 
be less content. Thus, the relative fragility of African American marriages 
seems to have more to with social class than with individual attitudes (Trail & 
Karney, 2012). 
 So it’s pretty silly to expect that values education will change anything. 
A government program that seeks to improve relationships would probably 
do better to fund effective training for better jobs or to increase the minimum 
wage than to try to teach people to respect marriage. And clearly, if we seek to 
promote human well-being, we need good information as well as good inten-
tions. In a culture that offers us bizarre examples of “love” on TV shows such as 
A Point to Ponder
Relationship science 
studies sensitive issues 
and private behavior such 
as infidelity and partner 
abuse. Should it? Do you 
support such studies? Are 
you willing to participate 
in them?

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 63
 The Bachelor and The Bachelorette—and in which real marriages are more likely 
to be failures than to be successes (Cherlin, 2009)—it would be unethical  not 
to try to understand how relationships work. Intimate relationships can be a 
source of the grandest, most glorious pleasure human beings experience, but 
they can also be a source of terrible suffering and appalling destructiveness. 
It is inherently ethical, relationship scientists assert, to try to learn how the joy 
might be increased and the misery reduced. 
 INTERPRETING AND INTEGRATING RESULTS 
 This isn’t a statistics text (and I know you’re pleased by that), but there are a few 
more aspects of the way relationship scientists do business that the thoughtful 
consumer of the field should understand. Most relationship studies subject the 
data they obtain to statistical analysis to determine whether their results are 
statistically “significant.” This is a calculation of how likely it is that the results 
(e.g., the observed correlations or the effects of the manipulated variables in 
an experiment) could have occurred by chance. If it’s quite unlikely that the 
results could be due to chance, we have a “significant” result. All of the research 
results reported in this book are significant results. You can also be confident 
that the studies that have obtained these results have passed critical inspec-
tion by other scientists. This does not mean, however, that every single specific 
result I may mention is unequivocally, absolutely, positively true: Some of them 
might have occurred by chance, reflecting the influence of odd samples of peo-
ple or unwanted mistakes of various sorts. Remember, too, that the results we’ll 
encounter always describe patterns that are evident in the behavior of groups 
of people—and because of differences among individuals (see chapter 1), those 
patterns will apply to particular individuals to varying degrees. Please do not 
be so naïve as to think that research results that do, in fact, apply to most people 
must be wrong because you know someone to whom those results do not seem 
to apply. I’ll need you to be more sophisticated and reasonable than that. 
 With those cautions in place, let’s note that the data obtained in relation-
ship studies can also present unique challenges and complexities. Here are two 
examples: 
 Paired, interdependent data.  Most statistical procedures assume that the 
scores of different participants are independent of each other—that is, one per-
son’s responses are not influenced by anyone else’s—but that’s not true when 
both members of a couple are involved. Wilma’s satisfaction with her relation-
ship with Fred is very likely to be influenced by whether or not Fred is happy 
too, so her satisfaction is  not independent of his. Responses  obtained from rela-
tionship partners are often interdependent, and special statistical procedures 
are advisable for analyzing such data (e.g., West, 2013). 
 Three sources of influence.  Furthermore, relationships emerge from the indi-
vidual contributions of the separate partners  and from the unique effects of how 
they combine as a pair. For example, imagine that Betty and Barney have a 
happy marriage. One reason for this may be the fact that Barney is an especially 

64 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
pleasant fellow who gets along well with everyone, including Betty. Alterna-
tively (or, perhaps, in addition), Betty may be the one who’s easy to live with. 
However, Betty and Barney may also have a better relationship with each other 
than they could have with anyone else because of the unique way their 
 individual traits combine; the whole may be more than the sum of its parts. 
Relationship researchers often encounter phenomena that result from the 
 combination of all three of these influences, the two individual partners and 
the idiosyncratic partnership they share. Sophisticated statistical analyses are 
required to study all of these components at once (Kenny & Ledermann, 2010), 
another indication of the complexity of relationship science. 
 So what’s my point here? I’ve noted that stud-
ies of close relationships tackle intricate matters 
and that statistical significance testing involves 
probabilities, not certainties. Should you take 
everything I say with a grain of salt, doubting 
me at every turn? Well, yes and no. I want you to 
be more thoughtful and less gullible, and I want 
you to appreciate the complexities underlying the 
things you’re about to learn. Remember to think 
like a scientist: No study is perfect, but the truth is 
out there. We put more faith in patterns of results 
that are obtained by different investigators working with different samples 
of participants. We are also more confident when results are replicated with 
diverse methods. 
 For these reasons, scientists now do frequent  meta-analyses,  which are 
studies that statistically combine the results from several prior studies (e.g., 
Robles et al., 2014). In a meta-analysis, an investigator compiles all existing 
studies of a particular phenomenon and combines their results to identify the 
themes they contain. If the prior studies all produce basically the same result, 
the meta-analysis makes that plain; if there are discrepancies, the meta-analysis 
may reveal why. 
 With tools like this at its disposal, relationship science has made enormous 
strides despite its short history and the complexity of its subject matter. And 
despite my earlier cautions, (nearly all of) the things I’ll share with you in this 
text are dependable facts, reliable results you can see for yourself if you do 
what the researchers did. Even more impressively, most of them are facts that 
had not been discovered when your parents were born. 
 A FINAL NOTE 
 In my desire to help you be more discerning, I’ve spent a lot of this chap-
ter noting various pros and cons of diverse procedures, usually conclud-
ing that no single option is the best one in all cases. I hoped to encourage 
you to be more thoughtful about the complexities of good research. But in 
A Point to Ponder
What’s your first thought 
when you encounter a fact 
in this book that you find 
surprising? Is it, “Wow, 
I didn’t know that,” or 
something more like, “This 
is wrong”? Where does 
your reaction come from?

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 65
closing, let me reassure you that relationship science is in better shape than 
all of these uncertainties may make it seem. When relationship science began, 
the typical study obtained self-reports from a convenience sample of college 
students (Cooper & Sheldon, 2002), and many studies are still of that sort. 
However, researchers are now routinely studying more diverse samples with 
sophisticated designs that employ more complex measures, and the variety of 
methods with which researchers now study relationships is a  strength, not a 
weakness (Ickes, 2000). Furthermore, the field’s judicious ability to differentiate 
what it does and does not yet know is a mark of its honesty and its developing 
maturity and wisdom. 
 People like easy answers. They like their information cut-and-dried. Many 
people actually prefer simple nonsense—such as the idea that men come from 
Mars and women come from Venus—to the scientific truth, if the truth is harder 
to grasp. However, as a new consumer of the science of relationships, you have 
an obligation to prefer facts to gossip, even if you have to work a little harder 
to make sense of their complexities. Don’t mistake scientific caution for a lack 
of quality. To the contrary, I want to leave you with the thought that it demon-
strates scientific respectability to be forthright about the strengths and weak-
nesses of one’s discipline. It’s more often the frauds and imposters who claim 
they are always correct than the cautious scientists, who are really trying to get 
it right.  
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 Chris and Kelsey had to participate in research studies if they wanted to pass 
the Introductory Psychology course they were taking together, so they signed 
up for a study of “Relationship Processes.” They had been dating for 2 months, 
and the study was seeking “premarital romantic couples,” and they liked the 
fact that they would be paid $5 if they both participated. So, they attended a 
session with a dozen other couples in which they were separated and seated 
on opposite sides of a large room. They read and signed a permission form that 
noted they could quit anytime they wanted and then started to work on a long 
questionnaire. 
 Some of the questions were provocative. They were asked how many dif-
ferent people they had had sex with in the last year and how many people they 
wanted to have sex with in the next 5 years. Then, they were asked to answer 
the same questions again, this time as they believed the other would. Chris had 
never pondered such questions before, and he realized, once he thought about 
it, that he actually knew very little about Kelsey’s sexual history and future 
intentions. That night, he was a little anxious, wondering and worrying about 
Kelsey’s answers to those questions. 
 Having read this chapter, do you think this research procedure was ethical? 
Why? 

66 
CHAPTER 2: Research Methods
 CHAPTER SUMMARY  
 The Short History of Relationship Science 
 The scientifi c study of relationships is a recent endeavor that has come of 
age only in the last 35 years. The fi eld has now grown to include the study of all 
types of relationships in their natural settings around the world. 
 Developing a Question 
 Research questions come from a number of sources, including personal 
experience, recognition of social problems, the results of prior research, and 
theoretical predictions. The questions usually seek either to describe events or 
to delineate causal connections among variables.  
 Obtaining Participants 
 Convenience samples  are composed of participants who are easily available. 
 Representative samples  are more costly, but they better reflect the population of 
interest. Both types of samples can suffer from volunteer bias. 
 Choosing a Design 
 Correlational Designs. A correlation describes the strength and direction of 
an association between two variables. Correlations are inherently ambiguous 
because events can be related for a variety of reasons.  
 Experimental Designs. Experiments control and manipulate situations to 
delineate cause and effect. Experiments are very informative, but some events 
cannot be studied experimentally for practical or ethical reasons. 
 Selecting a Setting 
 Research can be conducted in laboratories or in real-world settings such 
as a couple’s home. Control over extraneous variables is often reduced out-
side the lab.  Role-play  studies allow researchers to examine emotional events 
in an ethical manner but may not indicate what people really do in such 
situations.  
 The Nature of Our Data 
 Self-Reports. With self-reports, participants describe their own thoughts, 
feelings, and behavior, but they may misunderstand the researchers’ questions, 
have faulty memories, and be subject to   social desirability biases.  
 Observations.  In event-sampling , brief observations are made intermit-
tently. Observations avoid the problems of self-reports, but they are expensive 
to conduct, and reactivity can be a problem.  
 Physiological Measures. Measurements of people’s biological changes 
indicate how our physical states are associated with our social interactions.  

CHAPTER 2: Research Methods 67
 Archival Materials. Historical records are nonreactive and allow research-
ers to compare the present with the past.  
 The Ethics of Such Endeavors 
 Participation in relationship research may change people’s relationships by 
encouraging them to think carefully about the situations they face. As a result, 
researchers take pains to protect the welfare of their participants. 
 Interpreting and Integrating Results 
 Statistical analysis determines the likelihood that results could have 
occurred by chance. When this likelihood is very low, the results are said to 
be signifi cant. Some such results may still be due to chance, however, so the 
thoughtful consumer does not put undue faith in any one study.  Meta-analysis  
lends confi dence to conclusions by statistically combining results from several 
studies.  
 A Final Note 
 Scientifi c caution is appropriate, but it should not be mistaken for weak-
ness or imprecision. Relationship science is in great shape. 

68
 C H A P T E R  3 
 Attraction 
  T he  F undamental  B asis of  A ttraction     ◆ P roximity: L iking T hose 
N ear U s  ◆ P hysical A ttractiveness: L iking T hose W ho A re 
L ovely  ◆ R eciprocity: L iking T hose W ho L ike U s   ◆ S imilarity: 
L iking T hose W ho A re L ike U s  ◆ B arriers: L iking T hose W e 
C annot H ave  ◆ S o, W hat D o M en and W omen W ant?  ◆ F or Y our 
C onsideration  ◆ C hapter S ummary 
 You’re alone in a classroom, beginning to read this chapter, when the door 
opens and a stranger walks in. Is this someone who appeals to you? Might you 
have just  encountered a potential friend or lover? Remarkably, you probably 
developed a tenta tive answer to those questions more quickly than you were 
able to read this sentence (Willis & Todorov, 2006). What’s going on? Where 
did your judgment come from? This chapter considers these issues. Psycho-
logically, the first step toward a relationship is always the same: interpersonal 
 attraction,  the desire to approach someone. Feelings of attraction don’t guaran-
tee that a relationship will develop, but they do open the door to the possibility. 
I’ll examine several major influences that shape our attraction to others, start-
ing with a basic principle about how attraction works. 
 THE FUNDAMENTAL BASIS OF ATTRACTION 
 The most fundamental assumption about interpersonal attraction is that we are 
attracted to others whose presence is rewarding to us (Clore & Byrne, 1974). 
Two different types of rewards influence attraction: noticeable  direct rewards 
we obviously receive from our interaction with others, and more subtle  indirect 
benefits of which we’re not always aware and that are merely associated with 
someone else. Direct rewards refer to all the evident pleasures people provide 
us. When they shower us with interest and approval, we’re usually gratified by 
the attention and acceptance. When they are witty and beautiful, we enjoy their 
pleasing characteristics. And when they give us money or good advice, we are 
clearly better off. Most of the time, the more direct rewards that people provide 
us, the more attracted we are to them. 
 But attraction also results from a variety of subtle influences that are only 
indirectly related to the obvious kindness, good looks, or pleasing personali-
ties of those we meet. For instance, anything about new acquaintances that 

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 69
resembles us, however tangentially, may make them seem more likable. Con-
sider a fellow named Dennis who is fond of his name; because of the shared 
first letter, “it might not be too far-fetched [for] Dennis to gravitate toward cit-
ies such as Denver, careers such as dentistry, and romantic partners such as 
Denise” (Pelham et al., 2005, p. 106). In fact, that’s what happens: People are 
disproportionately likely to fall in love with someone who has a name that 
resembles their own (Jones et al., 2004). Rewards like these are indirect and 
mild, and we sometimes don’t even consciously notice them—but they do illus-
trate just how diverse and varied the rewards that attract us to others can be. 
 We may also gain indirect benefits from particular partners when, without 
deliberately doing so, we pursue partners who make it more likely that our 
 children will thrive and survive to have children of their own (Buss, 2012). As 
we’ll see, we’re often attracted to others who offer advantages that would be 
beneficial to our potential offspring, even when having children is the furthest 
thing from our minds. 
 Indeed, most of us simply think that we’re attracted to someone if he or she 
is an appealing person, but it’s really more complex than that. Attraction does 
involve the perceived characteristics of the person who appeals to us, but it also 
depends on our individual needs, preferences, and desires, and on the situation 
in which we find ourselves (Eastwick, 2013). Attraction is based on rewarding 
experiences with another person, but those rewards take a variety of forms, 
and we’re not necessarily always aware of all of the influences that shape our 
choices. So, let’s begin our survey of influences on attraction with one that’s 
usually more important than we think. 
 PROXIMITY: LIKING THOSE NEAR US 
 We might get to know someone online, but isn’t interaction more reward-
ing when we can hear others’ voices, see their smiles, and actually hold their 
hands? Most of the time, relationships are more rewarding when they involve 
people who are near one another (who are physically, as well as psychologi-
cally, close). Indeed, our physical  proximity to others often determines whether 
or not we ever meet them in the first place. More often than not, our friendships 
and romances grow out of interactions with those who are nearby. 
 In fact, there is a clear connection between physical proximity and inter-
personal attraction, and a few feet can make a big difference. Think about your 
Relationships classroom: Who have you gotten to know since the semester 
started? Who is a new friend? It’s likely that the people you know and like best 
sit near you in class. When they are assigned seats in a classroom, college stu-
dents are much more likely to become friends with those sitting near them than 
with those sitting across the room, even when the room is fairly small (Back 
et al., 2008a). 
 A similar phenomenon occurs in student housing complexes. In a classic 
study, Festinger, Schachter, and Back (1950) examined the friendships among 
students living in campus housing at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. 

70 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
Residents were randomly assigned to rooms in 17 different buildings that were 
all like the one in  Figure 3.1 . People who lived close to each other were much 
more likely to become friends than were those whose rooms were further apart. 
Indeed, the chances that residents would become friends were closely related to 
the distances between their rooms (see  Table 3.1 ). And the same result was also 
obtained from one building to the next: People were more likely to know and 
like residents of other buildings that were close to their own. Obviously, even 
small distances have a much larger influence on our relationships than most 
people realize. Whenever we choose the exact place where we will live or work 
or go to school, we also take a major step toward determining who the signifi-
cant others in our lives are likely to be. 
 Familiarity: Repeated Contact 
 Why does proximity have such influence? For one thing, it increases the chances 
that two people will cross paths often and become more familiar with each 
other. Folk wisdom suggests that “familiarity breeds contempt,” but research 
TABLE 3.1. Friendship Choices in Campus Housing at MIT
Two hundred seventy people living in buildings like that pictured in Figure 3.1 were 
asked to list their three closest companions. Among those living on the same floor of a 
given building, here’s how often the residents named someone living:
1 door away
41% of the time
2 doors away
22%
3 doors away
16%
4 doors away
10%
Only 88 feet separated residents living four doors apart, at opposite ends of the same 
floor, but they were only one-quarter as likely to become friends as were people living 
in adjacent rooms. Similar patterns were obtained from one floor to the next, and from 
building to building in the housing complex, so it was clear that small distances played 
a large part in determining who would and who would not be friends.
FIGURE 3.1. A student apartment building at MIT.
In the study by Festinger et al. (1950), residents were randomly assigned to rooms in 
buildings like these.
1
6
2
3
7
8
5
4
10
9
Source: Myers, 1993.

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 71
evidence disagrees. Instead of being irritating, repeated contact with—or  mere 
exposure to—someone usually increases our liking for him or her (Zajonc, 
2001). Even if we have never talked to them, we tend to like people whose faces 
we recognize more than those whose faces are unfamiliar to us. 
 Moreland and Beach (1992) provided an interesting example of the mere 
exposure effect when they had college women attend certain classes either 15 
times, 10 times, or 5 times during a semester. These women never talked to any-
one and simply sat there, but they were present in the room frequently, some-
times, or rarely. Then at the end of the semester, the real students were given 
pictures of the women and asked for their reactions. The results were very 
clear: The more familiar the women were, the more the students were attracted 
to them. And they were all liked better than women the students had never 
seen at all. (See Figure 3.2.) 
The proximity that occurs in college classrooms influences real relation-
ships, too. An intriguing analysis of a whole year’s worth of the millions 
of e-mail messages passed among the tens of thousands of students at a large 
university—back before texting became commonplace—demonstrated that, 
among students who did not already share an acquaintance, taking a class 
together made it 140 times more likely that they would message each other 
(Kossinets & Watts, 2006). And small distances matter; students who are 
assigned seats next to each other are much more likely to become friends than 
are those who are given seats a couple of rows apart (Segal, 1974).1
1 This effect is so striking, I keep thinking that I should insist that my own students change seats 
halfway through the semester and sit next to a whole new bunch of potential friends. They would 
probably leave the course knowing—and liking—more people. But, because they’d probably also 
be annoyed to move, I’ve never done it.
FIGURE 3.2. The mere exposure effect in college classrooms.
Even though they never interacted with anyone, other students liked the women more 
the more often they visited a class.
Liking for the Women
Number of Visits to Class
0
5
10
15
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
Source: Data from Moreland & Beach, 1992.

72 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
Of course, familiarity has it limits. As we gain information about others, we 
may find that they are obnoxious, disagreeable, or inept, and increasing expo-
sure to such people may lead us to like them less, not more (Norton et al., 2013). 
Indeed,  a study in a condominium complex in California (Ebbesen et al., 1976) 
found that although most of the residents’ friends lived nearby, most of their 
enemies did, too! Only rarely did people report that they really disliked some-
one who lived several buildings away from them. Instead, they despised fellow 
residents who were close enough to annoy them often—by playing music too 
loudly, letting their dogs bark, and so on.  
Proximity can also be disadvantageous when people who have come to 
know each other online—see the box on page 73—meet in person for the first 
time. People put their best foot (and face) forward when they’re writing per-
sonal profiles and posting pictures, so what you see on the Web is not necessar-
ily what you get when you finally meet someone face-to-face (Hall, Park, et al., 
2010). In particular, men often claim that they’re taller and richer, and women 
claim that they’re lighter and younger, than they really are (“Online Dating Sta-
tistics,” 2014). They’ve also typically been careful and selective in describing 
their attitudes and tastes, so there’s still a lot to learn about them. Thus, on 
average, when people who have met online get together in person for the first 
time, they’re mildly disappointed; the knowledge they have about each other 
goes up, but their perceived similarity to, and their liking for, each other goes 
down (Norton et al., 2007). When we find out who our online partners actually 
are—as opposed to who we thought they were—our attraction to them often 
declines (Ramirez & Zhang, 2007).
Proximity can also be surprisingly problematic when partners in long-
distance relationships are reunited after some time apart. When partners have 
to separate—for instance, when one of them is called to military service—“out 
of sight” does not inevitably lead to “out of mind.” A separation can destroy 
a relationship, particularly if the partners start dating other people who are 
close at hand (Sahlstein, 2006). But the more committed partners are to their 
relationship, the more they miss each other, and the more they miss each other, 
the harder they work to express their continued love and regard for each other 
across the miles (Le et al., 2011). Their conversations tend to be longer and more 
personal than those they would ordinarily have face-to-face, and they also tend 
to stay positive and steer clear of touchy topics (Rossetto, 2013). As a result, 
they’re likely to construct idealized images of their partnership that portray it 
as one that’s worth waiting for (Kelmer et al., 2013), and absence can indeed (at 
least temporarily) make the heart grow fonder (Jiang & Hancock, 2013). Unfor-
tunately, reunions are often more stressful than people expect. When soldiers 
return home, for instance, the reunited lovers lose some of their autonomy and 
have to relearn how to comfortably depend on one another; they have to rene-
gotiate their roles and rhythms, and confront the things (which they have often 
forgotten) that they didn’t like about each other (Karakurt et al., 2013). So per-
haps it isn’t surprising that one-third of the long-distance dating partners—and 
remember, commitment is a key influence on all of this—who get back together 
break up within 3 months of their reunion (Stafford et al., 2006).

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 73
Digital Distance
Where Almost Everybody Is Just a Click or Two Away
Proximity matters, but we also have 
astounding reach to others online, 
where we can encounter potential mates 
that we’d never meet any other way 
(Sprecher & Metts, 2013). It’s now com-
monplace for romances to begin online, 
with the partners first meeting on dat-
ing websites or on Facebook, in chat 
rooms, online communities, multiplayer 
games, or other online locales. Online 
encounters are now the second-most-
common way (after meeting through 
friends) that heterosexual couples get 
started, and they are the most frequent 
way gays and lesbians find each other; 
about one in every four (23 percent) 
heterosexual couples and most gay and 
lesbian couples (61 percent) now meet 
online (Rosenfeld & Thomas, 2012). In 
particular, most Americans (59 percent) 
think that dating websites are “a good 
way to meet people” (Smith & Duggan, 
2013), and there’s something for every-
one. Are you looking for a fellow farmer? 
Try FarmersOnly.com.* Another veg-
etarian? VeggieDate.org. A sugar daddy? 
SugarDaddie.com. A hookup? OnlineBoo-
tyCall.com, which features the “Booty 
Call® Commandment” “Thou shalt 
kiss anything except my mouth.” An 
extramarital affair? AshleyMadison.com 
in the United States, and IllicitEncoun-
ters.com in the United Kingdom. And 
to help you take advantage of physical 
proximity, smartphone apps can show 
you interested others who are in your 
vicinity as you travel through your day; 
Grindr.com, for instance, facilitates meet-
ings of gay men.
So, there’s amazing access to oth-
ers on the Web, and on dating sites it 
usually comes with a lot of introduc-
tory information about potential part-
ners. That sounds great, and users’ 
expectations are often high. But the 
outcomes people experience on dat-
ing sites can be disappointing, for sev-
eral reasons. For one thing, there are 
fewer partners out there than it may 
seem; in order to make their pages 
more impressive, dating websites are 
often slow to remove inactive profi les 
of ex- subscribers who have left the 
service. By one estimate in 2010, only 
7 percent of the profi les that were vis-
ible on Match.com belonged to people 
who were still seeking partners (Slater, 
2013). And the (apparent) abundance 
of choices isn’t necessarily conducive 
to relationship success. Overwhelmed 
by hundreds of profi les, people can 
become sloppy and less exacting in 
their choices, homing in, for instance, 
on particularly attractive people with 
whom they have absolutely nothing 
in common (Finkel et al., 2012). Dis-
tracted by their many options, they 
may also be less likely to commit to any 
one partner; most users (53  percent) 
have dated more than one person 
simultaneously (“Online Dating Sta-
tistics,” 2014). And fi nally, it’s unlikely 
that a dating site that offers to identify 
people who will be particularly per-
fect partners for their subscribers will 
be able to actually fulfi ll that promise; 
unique compatibility is so complex, it’s 
hard to predict before two people have 
actually met (Finkel et al., 2012).
Nevertheless, more than one-third 
of American marriages now result from 
meetings of the spouses that occurred 
online. (Only 45 percent of those meet-
ings occur on dating websites; most 
occur elsewhere.) And when lasting 
* I am not recommending any of these sites! Buyer 
beware. They’re mentioned here only to illustrate 
the remarkable reach of the Web. They’re just 
examples, and there are plenty more where they 
came from.

74 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
Convenience: Proximity Is Rewarding and Distance Is Costly
Now, don’t let these exceptions leave you with the impression that proxim-
ity is generally deleterious. It’s not. Another reason why proximity promotes 
most partnerships is that when others are nearby, it’s easy to enjoy whatever 
rewards they offer. Everything else being equal, a partner who is nearby has 
a big advantage over one who is far away: The expense and effort of getting 
to a distant partner—such as expensive airfares or hours on the road—make a 
distant relationship more costly overall than one that is closer to home. Distant 
relationships are less rewarding, too; an expression of love over a video feed is 
less delightful than an actual soft kiss on the lips.
The only notable thing about this is that anyone should find it sur-
prising. However, lovers who have to endure a period of separation may 
blithely believe, because their relationship has been so rewarding up to that 
point, that some time apart will not adversely affect their romance. If so, 
they may be surprised by the difference distance makes. When a relation-
ship that enjoys the convenience of proximity becomes inconvenient due 
to distance, it may suffer more than either partner expects. Lovers who are 
deeply committed to their relationship often survive a separation (Kelmer 
et al., 2013), but other partnerships may ultimately be doomed by distance 
(Sahlstein, 2006).
The Power of Proximity
The bottom line is that proximity makes it more likely that two people will 
meet and interact. What follows depends on the people involved, of course, but 
the good news is that most of the time, when two strangers begin chatting, they 
like each other more the more they chat (Reis et al., 2011). This does not occur 
with everyone we meet (Norton et al., 2013), and it is less likely to occur when 
we’re in an evaluative mindset and are judging them. Also, over time, constant 
contact with someone also carries the possibility that unrewarding monotony 
will set in (Finkel et al., 2014b). Nevertheless, when we come to know others and 
our goal is simply to get along and to have a good time (Maniaci & Reis, 2013), 
familiarity with them increases our attraction to them. And that’s the power of 
proximity.
partnerships do result, they’re actu-
ally a tad more satisfying and a little 
less likely to break up than are rela-
tionships that begin offl ine (Cacioppo 
et al., 2013). We saw in chapter 1 that 
technology 
infl uences 
relationships, 
and there’s no more dramatic example 
than the advent of online dating and 
mating. This isn’t the way Grandma 
and Grandpa got together, and in some 
respects, “the Internet may be alter-
ing the dynamics and outcomes of 
marriage itself” (Cacioppo et al., 2013, 
p. 10135).

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 75
TABLE 3.2. What Is Beautiful Is Good
Both male and female research participants judged that physically attractive people 
were more likely than unattractive people to have the following characteristics:
Kind
Interesting
Strong
Poised
Outgoing
Sociable
Nurturant
Exciting date
Sensitive
Good character
Sexually warm and responsive
These same judges also believed that, compared to those who were unattractive, 
physically attractive people would have futures that involved:
More prestige
Happier marriages
More social and professional success
More fulfilling lives
Source: Dion et al., 1972.
 PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS: LIKING THOSE 
WHO ARE LOVELY 
 After proximity brings people together, what’s the first thing we’re likely to 
notice about those we meet? Their looks, of course. And, although we all know 
that we shouldn’t “judge books by their covers,” looks count. Physical attractive-
ness greatly influences the first impressions that people form of one another. In 
general, right or wrong, we tend to assume that good-looking people are more 
likable, better people than those who are unattractive (Brewer & Archer, 2007).  
 Our Bias for Beauty: “What Is Beautiful Is Good” 
 Imagine that you’re given a photograph of a stranger’s face and, using only the 
photo, are asked to guess at the personality and prospects the person possesses. 
Studies of judgments such as these routinely find that physically attractive peo-
ple are presumed to be interesting, sociable people who are likely to encounter 
personal and professional success in life and love (see  Table 3.2 ). In general, we 
seem to think that what is beautiful is good; we assume that attractive people have 
desirable traits—such as agreeableness, extraversion, and conscientiousness—
that complement their desirable appearances (Segal-Caspi et al., 2012). And we 
seem to make these judgments automatically, without any conscious thought; 
a beautiful face triggers a positive evaluation the instant we see it (Olson & 
Marshuetz, 2005). 
 We don’t expect good-looking strangers to be wonderful in every respect; 
the more attractive they are, the more promiscuous we think them to be 
(Brewer & Archer, 2007). (Is this just wishful thinking? It may be. One reason 
that we like to think that pretty people are outgoing and kind is because we’re 
attracted to them, and we want them to like us in return [Lemay et al., 2010]. 
Hope springs eternal.) Still, there’s no question that attractive people make 
better overall impressions on us than less attractive people do, and this tends 

76 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
to be true all over the world. In Korea, for example, pretty people are presumed 
to be sociable, intelligent, and socially skilled, just as they are in the United 
States. However, in keeping with Korea’s collectivist culture (which empha-
sizes group harmony), attractive people are also presumed to be concerned 
with the well-being of others, a result that is not obtained in the West (Wheeler 
& Kim, 1997). What is beautiful is desirable around the world, but the spe-
cific advantages attributed to lovely people depend somewhat on the specific 
values of a culture. 
 The bias for beauty may also lead us to confuse beauty with talent. In the 
workplace, physically attractive people make more money and are promoted 
more often than are those with average looks. On average, good-looking 
folks earn $230,000 more during their lifetimes than less lovely people do 
(Hamermesh, 2013). On campus, attractive professors get better teaching eval-
uations from their students than unattractive instructors do (Hamermesh & 
Parker, 2005). The more attractive U.S. politicians are, the more competent they 
are judged to be (Olivola & Todorov, 2010a). Attractive people even make bet-
ter impressions in court; good-looking culprits convicted of misdemeanors in 
Texas get lower fines than they would have received had they been less attrac-
tive (Downs & Lyons, 1991). 
 But are the interactions and relationships of beautiful people really any 
different from those of people who are less pretty? I’ll address that question 
shortly. First, though, we need to assess whether we all tend to agree on who is 
pretty and who is not. 
 Who’s Pretty? 
 Consider this: On the first day of a college class, researchers invite you to join 
a circle that, including you, contains four men and four women. All of the 
others are strangers. Your task is to take a close look at each person and to rate 
(secretly!) his or her physical attractiveness while they all judge you in return. 
What would you expect? Would all four members of the other sex in your 
group agree about how attractive you are? Would you and the other three 
people of the same sex give each of the four others exactly the same rating? 
David Marcus and I did a study just like this to determine the extent to which 
beauty is in the “eye of the beholder” (Marcus & Miller, 2003). We did find 
some mild disagreement among the observers that presumably resulted from 
individual tastes. Judgments of beauty were somewhat idiosyncratic—but 
not much. The take-home story of our study was the overwhelming consen-
sus among people about the physical beauty of the strangers they encoun-
tered. Our participants clearly shared the same notions of who is and who 
isn’t pretty.
Moreover, this consensus exists across ethnic groups: Asians,  Hispanics, 
and black and white Americans all tend to agree with each other about the 
attractiveness of women from all four groups (Cunningham et al., 1995). Even 
more striking is the finding that newborn infants exhibit preferences for faces 
like those that adults find attractive, too (Slater et al., 2000); when they are 

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 77
much too young to be affected by social norms, babies spend more time gazing 
at attractive than unattractive faces. 
 What faces are those? There’s little doubt that women are more attractive if 
they have “baby-faced” features such as large eyes, a small nose, a small chin, 
and full lips (Jones, 1995). The point is not to look childish, however, but to 
appear feminine and youthful; beautiful women combine those baby-faced 
features with signs of maturity such as prominent cheekbones, narrow cheeks, 
and a broad smile (Cunningham et al., 2002). Women who present all these fea-
tures are thought to be attractive all over the world (Jones, 1995). 
 Male attractiveness is more complex. Men who have strong jaws and broad 
foreheads—who look strong and dominant—are usually thought to be hand-
some (Rhodes, 2006). (Envision George Clooney.) On the other hand, when 
average male faces are made slightly more feminine and baby-faced through 
computer imaging, the “feminized” faces—which look warm and friendly—
are attractive, too. (Envision Tobey Maguire.) Remarkably, which facial style is 
more attractive to women is influenced by their menstrual cycles; if they are not 
using hormonal contraception and are cycling naturally, they tend to find rug-
ged, manly features somewhat more appealing when they are fertile, just before 
they ovulate, but they’re more attracted to youthful boyishness the rest of the 
month (Little et al., 2002). 
   In any case, good-looking faces in both sexes have features that are nei-
ther too large nor too small. Indeed, they are quite average. If you use com-
puter  imaging software to create composite images that combine the features 
of individual faces, the  average faces that result are more attractive than nearly 
all of the faces that make up the composite (Rubenstein et al., 2002). This is 
Which of these two faces is more appealing to you? They are composite images of the  same 
face that have been altered to include feminine or masculine facial features, and if you’re a 
woman, your answer may depend on the current phase of your menstrual cycle. Women 
tend to find the more masculine face on the right to be more attractive when they are 
fertile, but they consider the more feminine face on the left to be more appealing during 
the rest of the month. This is a subtle effect—the differences in preference are not large 
(Gildersleeve, Haselton, & Fales, 2014)—but the fact that they exist at all is interesting. 
I’ll have more to say about this phenomenon a few pages from now. Picture A is a 50% 
feminized male composite; B is a 50% masculinized male composite.
B
A
 Source: Little et al., 2002; Anthony Little (www.alittlelab.com). 

78 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
true not only in the United States but also in China, Nigeria, India, and Japan 
(Rhodes et al., 2002). (For a delightful set of examples from Germany, go to 
www. beautycheck.de.) 
 However, this doesn’t mean that gorgeous people have bland, ordinary 
looks. The images that result from this averaging process are actually rather 
unusual. Their features are all proportional to one another; no nose is too big, 
and no eyes are too small, and there is nothing about such faces that is exag-
gerated, underdeveloped, or odd. Averaged faces are also  symmetrical with the 
two sides of the face being mirror images of one another; the eyes are the same 
size, the cheeks are the same width, and so on. Facial symmetry is attractive in 
its own right, whether or not a face is “average” (Fink et al., 2006). In fact, if you 
take a close look at identical twins, whose faces are very similar, you’ll  probably 
think that the twin with the more symmetric face is the more attractive of the 
two (Mealey et al., 1999). Both symmetry and “averageness” make their own 
contribution to facial beauty, so beautiful faces combine the best features of 
individual faces in a balanced, well-proportioned whole. 
 Of course, some bodies are more attractive than others, too. Men find wom-
en’s shapes most alluring when they are of normal weight, neither too heavy nor 
too thin, and their waists are noticeably narrower than their hips (Furnham et al., 
2005). The most attractive  waist-to-hip ratio, or WHR, is a curvy 0.7 in which the 
waist is 30 percent smaller than the hips (see  Figure 3.3 on the next page ); this 
“hourglass” shape appeals to men around the world (Singh et al., 2010).  2 In the 
Czech Republic, for instance, the slimmer a woman’s waist is, the more often she 
2 If you want to measure your own WHR, find the circumference of your waist at its narrowest 
point and divide that figure by the circumference of your hips at their broadest point, including 
your buttocks. Your butt is included in your “waist-to-hip“ ratio.
Look what happens when 2, 8, or 32 real faces are morphed together into composite 
images. When more faces are combined, the resulting image portrays a face that is not 
odd or idiosyncratic in any way and that has features and dimensions that are more 
and more typical of the human race. The result is a more attractive image. Averaged 
faces are attractive faces.
a. 2-Face Composite
b. 8-Face Composite
c. 32-Face Composite
 Source: Rubenstein et al., 2002. 

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 79
and her man have sex and the better his erectile function is (Brody & Weiss, 2013). 
This appears to be a fundamental preference, too; even men who have been blind 
from birth prefer a low WHR in women’s bodies when they assess their shapes 
by touch (Karremans et al., 2010). Women who are overweight are usually 
judged to be less attractive than slender and normal-weight women are (Faries & 
Bartholomew, 2012), and marriages are more satisfying to both spouses, on aver-
age, when wives are thinner than their husbands (Meltzer et al., 2011), but thin 
women are  not more attractive to men than women of normal weight (Swami 
et al., 2007). Men also like larger, as opposed to smaller, breasts, but their size is 
less important than their proportion to the rest of a woman’s body; a curvy 0.75 
waist-to-bust ratio is very appealing (Voracek & Fisher, 2006), and larger breasts 
don’t enhance a woman’s appeal if they are paired with a stocky body ( Furnham 
et al., 2006). In addition, a woman’s WHR has more influence on men’s judg-
ments of her attractiveness than her breast size does (Dixson et al., 2011).3
      Once again, male attractiveness is more complex. Men’s bodies are most 
attractive when their waists are only slightly narrower than their hips, with a 
WHR of 0.9. Broad shoulders and muscles are also attractive; men with higher 
shoulder-to-hip ratios (around 1.2) and bigger muscles have sex with more 
women and at earlier ages than do men who have narrower shoulders (Hughes 
& Gallup, 2003) or smaller muscles (Lassek & Gaulin, 2009)—and this, too, is 
true around the world (Frederick et al., 2011). However, a nice shape doesn’t 
attract a woman to a man unless he has other resources as well; a man’s WHR 
affects women’s evaluations of him only when he earns a healthy salary (Singh, 
1995). A man is not all that attractive to women if he is handsome but poor. 
3 I can also report that when men get 5 seconds to inspect full-body frontal images of naked women, 
the first things they look at are the breasts and waist (Dixson et al., 2011). The face comes later. (But 
if you’re a woman, you already  knew that.)
FIGURE 3.3.  Waist-to-hip ratios. 
These figures portray the range of different waist-to-hip ratios that are typically found 
in young women. When men study a variety of images that present all of the possible 
WHRs from 0.6 to 0.85, they find an average WHR of 0.7 to be most attractive.
 Source: Kos´cin´ski, 2014. 

80 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
 Judgments of physical attractiveness are evidently multifaceted, and 
several other characteristics also influence those perceptions. Both men and 
women tend to prefer heterosexual partnerships in which he is taller than she is 
(Stulp et al., 2013), so tall men get more responses from women to their online 
profiles than short men do. A guy who’s short—say, 5’ 4”—can get as many 
responses on a dating website as a fellow who’s much taller—say, 6’ 1”—but 
only if he earns more money. A lot more. In this particular case, the shorter 
man would have to earn $221,000 more each year to be as interesting to women 
(Hitsch et al., 2010).
 A potential partner’s smell matters more to women than to men (Herz & 
 Inzlicht, 2002). Nevertheless, men prefer the natural scents of pretty women 
to those of women who are less attractive (Thornhill et al., 2003). In a typi-
cal study of this sort, people shower using unscented soap before they go to 
bed and then sleep in the same T-shirt for several nights. Then, research par-
ticipants who have never met those people take a big whiff of those shirts and 
select the scents that are most appealing to them. Symmetrical, attractive peo-
ple evidently smell better than asymmetrical, less attractive people do, because 
strangers prefer the aromas of attractive people to the smells of those who are 
more plain (Thornhill et al., 2003). What’s more, heterosexual men don’t much 
like the smell of gay men, who have aromas that are more attractive to other 
gay guys than to straight men (Martins et al., 2005). I am not making this up, so 
there are evidently subtle influences at work here. 
 Women are also more attractive to men when they have longer rather 
than shorter hair. In studies of this sort, men evaluate a woman whose hair—
through the magic of computer imaging—varies in length from picture to 
picture. They’re more interested in dating women who (appear to) have long 
hair, in part because they think that the women are less likely to be engaged 
or married and more willing to have sex on a first date (Boynton, 2008). Long 
hair doesn’t work as well on a man’s chest or scalp; women prefer men with 
smoother, less hairy chests to those who are more hirsute (Dixson et al., 2010), 
and a man seems taller and more dominant with a shaved head than he does 
with a full head of hair (Mannes, 2013).
Women also like smart guys (which should be good news for most of the 
men reading this book). In one intriguing study, researchers gave men intel-
ligence tests and then filmed them throwing a Frisbee, reading news headlines 
aloud, and pondering the possibility of life on Mars. When women watched 
the videos, the smarter the men were, the more appealing they were (Prokosch 
et al., 2009). This may be one reason that, when they are trying to impress a 
woman, men use a more elaborate vocabulary—that is, bigger words—than 
they do in ordinary discourse (Rosenberg & Tunney, 2008).
Finally, there’s a particular power to the color red. Both men and women 
find strangers of the other (but not the same) sex to be more attractive and sexu-
ally appealing when they are pictured in red rather than green or blue shirts 
(Elliot et al., 2010)—and this effect is so universal, it is found even in Burkina 
Faso, an African nation in which the color actually carries negative connotations 
of bad luck and illness (Elliot, Tracy, et al., 2013). Red has this effect because a 

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 81
woman seems more sexually receptive to a man when she’s wearing red than 
when she’s not (Pazda et al., 2012). So, men are more likely to ask women for 
dates when they’re wearing red (Elliot & Niesta, 2008), and in turn, women 
choose to wear more red when they expect to meet attractive (but not unattract-
ive) men (Elliot, Greitemeyer, & Pazda, 2013). Valentines are red for a reason . 
 An Evolutionary Perspective on Physical Attractiveness 
 I’ve just mentioned a lot of details, so you may not have noticed, but people’s 
preferences for prettiness generally fit the assumptions of an evolutionary per-
spective. Consider these patterns:
 • Cultures differ in several respects, but people all over the world still tend to 
agree on who is and who is not attractive (Cunningham et al., 1995; Jones, 
1995). That’s one reason why the winners of international beauty pageants 
are usually gorgeous no matter where they’re from. 
 • Babies are born with preferences for the same faces that adults find attrac-
tive (Slater et al., 2000). Some reactions to good looks may be inherited. 
 • People with attractive symmetrical faces also tend to have symmetrical 
bodies and to enjoy better mental and physical health—and therefore make 
better mates—than do people with asymmetrical faces (Perilloux et al., 
2010). Symmetric women have higher levels of estradiol, which probably 
makes them more fertile (Jasien´    ska et al., 2006), and symmetric people of 
both sexes are smarter (Luxen & Buunk, 2006) and get sick less often (Van 
Dongen &  Gangestad, 2011) than do those whose faces and bodies have 
odd proportions.  
 • Hormones influence waist-to-hip ratios by affecting the distribution of fat 
on people’s bodies. With their particular mix of estradiol and progester-
one, women with WHRs near the attractive norm of 0.7 get pregnant more 
easily and tend to enjoy better physical health than do women with fewer 
curves (Jasien´ska et al., 2004). A man with an attractive WHR of 0.9 is likely 
to be in better health than another man with a plump belly (Payne, 2006). 
So, both sexes are most attracted to the physical shapes that signal the high-
est likelihood of good health in the other sex (Singh & Singh, 2011).  
 • Everybody likes good looks, but physical attractiveness matters most to 
people who live in equatorial regions of the world where there are many 
parasites and pathogens that can endanger good health (Gangestad & Buss, 
1993). In such areas, unblemished beauty may be an especially good sign 
that someone is in better health—and will make a better mate—than some-
one whose face is in some way imperfect. 
 • Ultimately, all things considered, attractive people in the United States 
reproduce more successfully—they have more children—than do those 
who are less attractive (Jokela, 2009). 
 • There are subtle but provocative changes in women’s preferences that 
accompany their monthly menstrual cycles. Women are only fertile for the 
few days that precede their ovulation each month (see  Figure 3.4 ), and 
during that period, women find some characteristics in men to be more 

82 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
appealing than they seem during the rest of the month. When they are fer-
tile, women prefer deeper voices, the scents of more symmetrical men, and 
bolder, more arrogant, more charismatic behavior than they do when they 
are infertile (Gildersleeve, Haselton, & Fales, 2014), and they are better able 
to judge whether a guy is gay or straight (Rule et al., 2011b). They also find 
the scents of men with high testosterone to be more pleasing (Thornhill 
et al., 2013). Thus, women are attracted to assertive, cocky men—that is, 
those who are “more likely to behave like cads than be good dads” (Perrett, 
2010, p. 104)—when they are most likely to conceive a child, but they prefer 
warmer, kinder, less pushy men the rest of the month (Aitken et al., 2013). 
These cyclic changes do not occur if women are taking birth control pills 
(and therefore are not ovulating) (Alvergne & Lummaa, 2010). 
A Point to Ponder
Are you intrigued or are 
you annoyed by the data 
that suggest that women’s 
behavior toward men 
changes when they’re 
fertile? Why?
 • Women’s behavior toward men also changes 
when they’re fertile. They wear more cosmetics 
(Guéguen, 2012), and dress more provoca-
tively, wearing sexier clothes that show more 
skin (Schwarz & Hassebrauck, 2008). They’re 
3 times more likely to wear red (Beall & Tracy, 
2013). They’re more flirtatious toward attrac-
tive (but not drab) men (Cantú et al., 2014), 
FIGURE 3.4. Women’s probability of conception during the menstrual cycle.
Women are fertile during the few days just before they ovulate at the end of the follicular 
phase of their menstrual cycles. During that period, they prefer the smells of symmetrical 
men and bolder, more cocky behavior from men than they do during the rest of the month.
1
3
5
7
9
11
13
15
17
19
21
23
25
27
29
Day in Cycle
Probability of Conception (x100)
50
40
30
20
10
0
Follicular Phase
Luteal Phase
Source: From Jöchle, 1973. Total  N 5 1800.

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 83
their  dancing is more enticing (Fink, Hugill, & Lange, 2012), and they’re 
more willing to accept an invitation to slow dance with a stranger (Gué-
guen, 2009). And they become more interested in sex with attractive men, 
even ones they do not know well (Gangestad et al., 2010). Evidently, when 
they’re fertile for a few days each month, women act more alluringly than 
they do when they’re infertile (Jones et al., 2012). See Figure 3.5.
 • All of this is not lost on men, who think women smell better when they’re 
about to ovulate than at other times of the month (Gildersleeve et al., 2012). 
Smelling the T-shirts of such women causes men to experience a surge of tes-
tosterone (Miller & Maner, 2010) and to start thinking sexy thoughts (Miller & 
Maner, 2011). When women are fertile, their voices (Puts et al., 2013) and faces 
(Bobst & Lobmaier, 2012) are both more attractive to men, too. All in all, it 
seems pretty clear that in subtle but real ways—and without necessarily being 
aware of it—men can tell there’s something slightly different and desirable 
about a woman when she’s about to ovulate (Haselton & Gildersleeve, 2011).4 
4 Once again, and as always, I am not making any of this up. More importantly, aren’t these findings 
remarkable? Keep in mind that if a woman is changing the normal ebb and flow of her hormones 
by taking birth control pills, none of this happens (Alvergne & Lummaa, 2010). But when women 
are cycling normally, these patterns support the possibility that estrous cycles exist in humans just 
as they do in other animals. The actual frequency with which heterosexual women have sex with 
their men does not fluctuate with ovulation (Brewis & Meyer, 2005), so such cycles are more subtle 
in humans, to be sure—but they may exist nonetheless (Gangestad, 2012).
FIGURE 3.5. “What are you wearing to that party tonight?” An ovulatory shift in 
women’s outfits.
These two outfits were both drawn by the same woman who was asked on two sepa-
rate occasions to illustrate the outfit she would wear if she were going to a party that 
night. Outfit A, on the left, fit her mood when she was infertile. She came up with 
 outfit B, on the right, when she was fertile, shortly before ovulation.
A
B
Source: Durante, Li, & Haselton (2008).

84 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
 These patterns convince some theorists that our standards of physical beauty 
have an evolutionary basis (Eastwick & Tidwell, 2013). Presumably, early 
humans who successfully sought fertile, robust, and healthy mates were more 
likely to reproduce successfully than were those who simply mated at random. 
As a result, the common preferences of modern men for symmetrical, low-
WHR partners and of modern (fertile) women for symmetrical, masculine, and 
dynamic men may be evolved inclinations that are rooted more in their human 
natures than in their particular cultural heritage.  
 Culture Counts, Too 
 On the other hand, evolutionary theorizing doesn’t sit well with everyone. 
Some of the findings I recounted above regarding an ovulatory shift in women’s 
preferences and behavior have been questioned by other researchers who argue 
either that these patterns are very subtle and hard to replicate (Harris, 2013) or 
that they are the result of a mishmash of procedures that make them hard to 
interpret (Harris et al., 2013). No, say the folks with an evolutionary perspec-
tive, these results are not quirks and these patterns truly exist (Gildersleeve 
et al., 2013), and meta-analyses say so (Gildersleeve et al., 2014).
Still, as the contest between these camps continues, there’s  no doubt 
that standards of attractiveness are also affected by changing economic and 
cultural conditions. Have you seen those Renaissance paintings of women 
who look fat by modern standards? During hard times, when a culture’s 
food supply is unreliable and people are hungry, slender women are actu-
ally  less desirable than heavy women are (Nelson & Morrison, 2005). Around 
the world, only during times of plenty are slender women considered to be 
attractive (Swami et al., 2010). Indeed, as economic prosperity spread through 
the United States during the twentieth century, women were expected to 
be slimmer and slimmer so that  Playboy Playmates and Miss America con-
testants are now skinnier, on average, than they were when you were born 
(Pettijohn & Jungeberg, 2004). In fact, the average Playmate is now so slender 
she meets the weight criterion for having an eating disorder (Owen & Laurel-
Seller, 2000). 
 Norms can differ across ethnic groups as well (influenced in part, perhaps, 
by different patterns of economic well-being). Black and Latina women in the 
United States are more accepting of some extra weight than white women are, 
and indeed, black and Latino men like heavier women than white men do 
(Glasser et al., 2009). (But watch out: They still prefer the same curvaceous 0.7 
WHR that is universally appealing to men [Singh & Luis, 1995]. In fact, even 
those Renaissance paintings depicted women with 0.7 WHRs.) 
 Collectively, these findings suggest that human nature and environmen-
tal conditions work together to shape our judgments of who is and who isn’t 
pretty (Eastwick, 2013). We’re usually attracted to people who appear to be 
good mates, but what looks good depends somewhat on the conditions we 
inhabit. Still, beauty is not just in the eye of the beholder. There is remarkable 
agreement about who’s gorgeous and who’s ugly around the world.  

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 85
 Looks Matter 
 When a stranger walks into the room, you’ll know with a glance how attractive 
he or she is (Willis & Todorov, 2006). Does that matter? Indeed, it does. Let’s 
consider what happens when people on the prowl meet potential new mates. 
Researchers have examined the behavior of more than 10,000 customers of 
 HurryDate, a dating service that stages speed-dating events in which partici-
pants have brief conversations with up to 25 different potential partners. (After 
each conversation, participants record a “yes” or a “no” with regard to their inter-
est in seeing more of the person they’ve just met; if two people say “yes” about 
each other, HurryDate grants each of them access to the other’s profile online. 
The two of them take it from there.)5 People get a chance to quickly exchange 
any information they want. And what seems to drive their selections? For both 
sexes, it’s outward appearance. “ HurryDate participants are given 3 minutes in 
5  This is not a recommendation for HurryDate, but you can see how the service advertises itself at 
www.hurrydate.com.
How quickly can you decide whether or not someone interests you? When people 
make fast decisions in speed-dating studies, women take note of a man’s likely income 
(Li et al., 2013), and nobody much likes people who are shy or high in anxiety about 
abandonment (McClure & Lydon, 2014). But for both sexes, the most important influ-
ence is physical attractiveness (Eastwick et al., 2010). (FYI, a study in Germany kept 
up for 1 year with 382 people who had met 22 potential partners, on average, during 
a speed-dating event. They achieved only 1.3 matches, on average, and relationships 
resulted from only 4% of those connections. Overall, then, the average participant 
would need to attend 25 speed-dating sessions to come away with one lasting relation-
ship [Asendorpf et al., 2011].)
Bizarro © 2010 Dan Piraro, Dist. by King Features.

86 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
which to make their judgments, but they could mostly be made in 3 seconds.” 
( Kurzban & Weeden, 2005, p. 240). Men are attracted to women who are slen-
der, young, and physically attractive, and women are attracted to men who are 
tall, young, and physically attractive.   Of all the things people could learn about 
each other in a few minutes of conversation, the one that matters most is physical 
attractiveness. This is a routine finding in speed-dating studies (e.g., Li et al., 2013).
Another investigation assessed participants’ Big 5 personality traits, attach-
ment styles, political attitudes, and other values and interests and also found 
that the best predictor of interest in a new partner after a brief first meeting was 
the person’s physical attractiveness. As you’d expect, friendly, outgoing people 
tended to be well liked, but nothing else about someone was as important after 
a brief meeting as his or her looks (Luo & Zhang, 2009).
Of course, speed-dating events can be a bit hectic—have you ever intro-
duced yourself to 25 different potential partners in a busy hour and a half?—
and people may shop for partners more thoughtfully when they’re able to take 
their time (Lenton & Francesconi, 2010). In particular, when they ponder the 
question, men all over the world report higher interest in having a physically 
attractive romantic partner than women do (see 
Figure 3.6). This is true of gays and lesbians, too 
(Ha et al., 2012). And indeed, 4 years into a mar-
riage, a man’s satisfaction is correlated with his 
spouse’s attractiveness, but a woman’s content-
ment is unrelated to her partner’s looks (Meltzer 
et al., 2014). Both sexes even spend more time 
inspecting the profile photos of women on Face-
book than they do examining the pictures posted 
by men (Seidman & Miller, 2013). Women know 
that men are judging them by their looks, which 
A Point to Ponder
Modern culture is full of 
images of tall, slender, 
shapely women and tall, 
muscular, handsome men. 
How are these idealized 
images of the two sexes 
subtly influencing your 
real-life relationships?
FIGURE 3.6. Desire for physical attractiveness in a romantic partner.
Around the world, according to their self-reports, men care about a partner’s looks 
more than women do.
.5
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Indispensable
Men
Unimportant
Bulgaria
Nigeria
Indonesia
West
Germany
USA
Women
Source: Data from Buss & Schmitt, 1993. Copyright © 1993 by the American 
Psychological Association. Adapted with permission.

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 87
may be why 91 percent of the cosmetic surgery performed in the United States 
in 2012 was done on women (American Society of Plastic Surgeons, 2013).
But remember, despite the different emphasis men and women (say they) 
put on good looks, there’s no sex difference in how much physical attractive-
ness affects our liking for someone we’ve actually just met (Eastwick et al., 
2011). When people get together, looks matter. Physical attractiveness is the 
most potent influence on how much the two sexes will initially like each other. 
 The Interactive Costs and Benefits of Beauty 
 So, what effects do our looks have on our interactions with others? As you 
might expect, beautiful women get more dates than plain women do (Reis et al., 
1980). Moreover, people tend to enjoy their interactions with attractive women; 
they talk more and are more involved, and they feel that the interactions are of 
higher quality. They also give lovely waitresses better tips (Lynn, 2009). Hand-
some men fare well, too, receiving more smiles, talk, and positive feelings from 
others than unattractive men do (Ickes, 2009). 
 However, men’s attractiveness may play an even larger part in influencing 
their access to the other sex than women’s looks do (Reis et al., 1982). There is 
actually no correlation overall between a woman’s beauty and the amount of 
time she spends interacting with men. Attractive women do get more dates, 
but plain women spend plenty of time interacting with men in group settings 
where others are present. In contrast, men’s looks  are correlated with the num-
ber and length of the interactions they have with women. Unattractive men 
have fewer interactions of any sort with fewer women than good-looking guys 
do. In this sense, then, physical attractiveness has a bigger effect on the social 
lives of men than it does on women. 
 Being more popular, attractive people tend to be less lonely, more socially 
skilled, and a little happier than the rest of us (Feingold, 1992), and they’re 
able to have sex with a wider variety of people if they want (Weeden & Sabini, 
2007). Physical attractiveness may even account for as much as 10 percent of the 
variability in people’s adjustment and well-being over their lifetimes (Burns & 
Farina, 1992). But being attractive has disadvantages, too. For one thing, oth-
ers lie to pretty people more often. People are more willing to misrepresent 
their interests, personalities, and incomes to get a date with an attractive person 
than they are to fabricate an image for a plain partner (Rowatt et al., 1999). As 
a result, realizing that others are often “brown-nosing,” or trying to ingratiate 
themselves, gorgeous people may cautiously begin mistrusting or discounting 
some of the praise they receive from others. 
 Consider this clever study: Attractive or unattractive people receive a writ-
ten evaluation of their work from a person of the other sex who either does 
or does not know what they look like (Major et al., 1984). In every case, each 
participant receives a flattering, complimentary evaluation. (Indeed, every-
one gets exactly the same praise.) How did the recipients react to this good 
news? Attractive men and women trusted the praise more and assumed that 
it was more sincere when it came from someone who  didn’t know they were 

88 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
good-looking. They were evidently used to getting insincere compliments from 
people who were impressed by their looks. On the other hand, unattractive 
people found the praise more compelling when the evaluator  did know they 
were plain; sadly, they probably weren’t used to compliments from people 
who were aware of their unappealing appearances. 
 So, gorgeous people are used to pleasant interactions with others, but they 
tend not to trust other people as much as less attractive people do (Reis et al., 
1982). In particular, others’ praise may be ambiguous. If you’re very attractive, 
you may never be sure whether people are complimenting you because they 
respect your abilities or because they like your looks. 
 Matching in Physical Attractiveness 
 I’ve spent several pages discussing physical attractiveness—which is an indi-
cation of its importance—but there is one last point to make about its influ-
ence at the beginning of a relationship. We all may want gorgeous partners, but 
we’re likely to end up paired off with others who are only about as attractive 
as we are (Hitsch et al., 2010). Partners in established romantic relationships 
tend to have similar levels of physical attractiveness; that is, their looks are well 
matched, and this pattern is known as  matching. 
 The more serious and committed a relationship becomes, the more obvi-
ous matching usually is. People may pursue others who are better-looking than 
they, but they are unlikely to go steady with, or become engaged to, someone 
who is “out of their league” (Taylor et al., 2011). What this means is that, even if 
everybody wants a physically attractive partner, only those who are also good-
looking are likely to get them. None of the really good-looking people want 
to pair off with us folks of average looks, and we, in turn, don’t want partners 
who are “beneath us,” either (Lee et al., 2008). 
 Thus, it’s not very romantic, but similarity in physical attractiveness may 
operate as a screening device. If people generally value good looks, matching 
will occur as they settle for the best-looking partner who will have them in 
return (Montoya, 2008). As a result, husbands and wives tend to be noticeably 
similar in physical attractiveness (Little et al., 2006), and a close relationship may 
not even get started if two people don't look a lot alike (van Straaten et al., 2009).    
 RECIPROCITY: LIKING THOSE WHO LIKE US 
 The matching phenomenon suggests that, to enjoy the most success in the 
relationship marketplace, we should pursue partners who are likely to return 
our interest. In fact, most people do just that. When we ponder possible part-
ners, most of us rate our realistic interest in others—and the likelihood that we 
will approach them and try to start a relationship—using a formula like this 
(Shanteau & Nagy, 1979): 
A Potential                             His/Her                      His/Her Probability
Partner’s Desirability   5   Physical Attractiveness 3   of Accepting You

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 89
 Everything else being equal, the better-looking people are, the more desir-
able they are. However, this formula suggests that people’s physical attractive-
ness is multiplied by our judgments of how likely it is that they will like us 
in return to determine their overall appeal. Do the math. If someone likes us 
a lot but is rather ugly, that person probably won’t be our first choice for a 
date. If someone else is gorgeous but doesn’t like us back, we won’t waste our 
time. The most appealing potential partner is often someone who is moderately 
attractive and who seems to offer a reasonably good chance of accepting us 
(perhaps  because he or she isn’t gorgeous) (Montoya & Horton, 2014). 
 Our expectations regarding the probability of others’ acceptance have 
much to do with our  mate value, or overall attractiveness as a reproductive 
partner. People with high mate values are highly sought by others, and as a 
result, they’re able to insist on partners of high quality. And they do (Edlund & 
Sagarin, 2010). For instance, women who are very good-looking have very high 
standards in men; they don’t just want a kind man who would be a good father, 
or a sexy man who has good economic prospects; they want  all of those desir-
able characteristics in their partners (Buss & Shackelford, 2008). If their mate 
values are high enough, they might be able to attract such perfect partners—but 
if they’re overestimating their desirability and overreaching, continual rejection 
will likely lead them to adjust their perceptions of their mate values and change 
the perceived probability of their acceptance by others (Greitemeyer, 2010). 
 Indeed, our histories of acceptance and rejection from others have taught 
us what to expect when we approach new potential partners (Kavanagh et al., 
2010). Compared to the rest of us, people who are shy (Wenzel & Emerson, 
2009) or who have low self-esteem (Bale & Archer, 2013) nervously expect more 
rejection from others, and so they pursue less desirable partners. But most of 
us are reluctant to risk rejection when we are unsure of others’ acceptance. A 
clever demonstration of this point emerged from a study in which college men 
had to choose where to sit to watch a movie (Bernstein et al., 1983). They had 
two choices: squeeze into a small cubicle next to a very attractive woman, or 
sit in an adjacent cubicle—alone—where there was plenty of room. The key 
point is that some of the men believed that the  same movie was playing on 
both monitors, whereas other men believed that  different movies were show-
ing on the two screens. Let’s consider the guys’ dilemma. Presumably, most 
of them wanted to become acquainted with the beautiful woman. However, 
when only one movie was available, squeezing in next to her entailed some 
risk of rejection; their intentions would be obvious, and there was some chance 
that the woman would tell them to “back off.” However, when two different 
movies were available, they were on safer ground. Sitting next to the woman 
could mean that they just wanted to see that particular movie, and a rebuff 
from her would be rude. In fact, only 25 percent of the men dared to sit next to 
the woman when the same movie was on both monitors, but 75 percent did so 
when two movies were available and their intentions were more ambiguous. 
Moreover, we can be sure that the men were taking advantage of the uncertain 
situation to move in on the woman—instead of really wanting to see that par-
ticular movie—because the experimenters kept changing which movie played 

90 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
on which screen. Three-fourths of the men squeezed in with the gorgeous 
woman no matter which movie was playing there! 
 In general, then, people seem to take heed of the likelihood that they will 
be accepted and liked by others, and they are more likely to approach those 
who offer acceptance than rejection. The  best  acceptance, however, comes from 
potential partners who are selective and choosy and who don’t offer acceptance 
to everyone. In speed-dating situations, for example, people who are eager 
to go out with everyone they meet are liked less by others—and make fewer 
matches—than those who are more discriminating; people who say “yes” to 
everybody get few “yesses” in return, whereas those who record interest in only 
a select few are more enticing to those they pick (Eastwick et al., 2007). These 
results jive nicely, by the way, with classic studies of what happens when people 
play “hard to get.” Because people like to be liked, pretending to be aloof and 
only mildly interested in someone is a dumb way to try to attract him or her. 
What’s a Good Opening Line?
You’re shopping for groceries, and you 
keep crossing paths with an attractive 
person who smiles at you warmly when 
your eyes meet. You’d like to meet him 
or her. What should you say? You need 
to do more than just say, “Hi,” and wait 
for a response, don’t you? Perhaps some 
clever food-related witticism is the way 
to go: “Is your dad a baker? You’ve sure 
got a nice set of buns.”
Common sense suggests that such 
attempts at humor are good opening 
lines. Indeed, the Web is full of sites 
with lists of funny pickup lines that are 
supposed to increase your chances of 
getting a date. Be careful , though; seri-
ous research has compared the effec-
tiveness of various types of opening 
lines, and a cute or fl ippant remark may 
be among the worst things to say.
Let’s distinguish cute lines from 
“innocuous” openers (such as just say-
ing, “Hi” or “How’re you doing?”) and 
“direct” lines that honestly communicate 
your interest (such as “Hi, I’d like to get 
to know you”). When women e valuate 
lines like these by watching tapes of 
men who use them, they like the cute 
lines much less than the other two types 
(Kleinke & Dean, 1990). More impor-
tantly, when a guy actually uses one of 
these lines on a woman in a singles bar, 
the innocuous and direct openers get a 
favorable response 70 percent of the time 
compared to a success rate of only 24 
percent for the cute lines (Cunningham, 
1989). A line that is sexually forward 
(such as “I may not be Fred Flintstone, 
but I bet I can make your bed rock”) 
usually does even worse (Cooper et al., 
2007). There’s no comparison: Simply 
saying hello is a much smarter strategy 
than trying to be cute or forward.
Why, then, do people create long 
lists of fl ippant pickup lines? Because 
they’re men. When a woman uses a cute 
line on a man in a singles bar, it usually 
works—but that’s because any opening 
line from a woman works well with a 
man; in Cunningham’s (1989) study, say-
ing “Hi” succeeded every time. Men like 
women to make the fi rst move (Enke, 
2011), and they don’t seem to care what 
opening lines women use—and this 
may lead them to overestimate women’s 
liking for cute openers in return.

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 91
Playing hard to get doesn’t work. What does work is being  selectively hard to 
get—that is, being a difficult catch for everyone  but the person you’re trying to 
attract (Walster et al., 1973). Those who can afford to say “no” to most people but 
who are happy to say “yes” to us are the most alluring potential partners of all. 
 Still, everything else being equal, it’s hard  not to like those who like us 
(Curtis & Miller, 1986). Imagine that the first thing you hear about a new trans-
fer student is that he or she has noticed you and really likes you; don’t you feel 
positively toward him or her in return? 
 This tendency to like those who like us is obviously consistent with the 
reward model of attraction. It also fits another perspective known as  balance 
theory that suggests that people desire consistency among their thoughts, feel-
ings, and social relationships (Heider, 1958). When two people like each other, 
their feelings fit together well and can be said to be “balanced.” This is also true 
when two people dislike each other, but not when a person likes someone else 
but is disliked in return. What happens when there are three people involved? 
In one study that addressed this question, college students encountered an 
experimenter who was either pleasant or rude to them (Aronson & Cope, 1968). 
After that, the experimenter’s supervisor walked in and was either pleasant 
or rude to the experimenter! How did the students react to all this? They were 
more congenial to the supervisor when he or she had been either nice to the 
pleasant experimenter or mean to the unpleasant experimenter—that is, when 
the two interactions seemed balanced. This study and the rest of the research 
evidence generally support the notion that we prefer balance among our rela-
tionships. For that reason, then, we tend to like someone when we learn that he 
or she shares our dislike for someone else (Bosson et al., 2006); before we ever 
meet them, we often expect that our enemies’ enemies will be our friends.  
 SIMILARITY: LIKING THOSE WHO ARE LIKE US 
 It’s rewarding to meet people who like us. It’s also enjoyable to find others 
who are  just like us and who share the same background, interests, and tastes. 
Indeed, when it comes to our attitudes, age, race (and, to some degree, our 
personalities), the old cliché that “birds of a feather flock together” is absolutely 
correct (Montoya & Horton, 2013; Watson et al., 2014). Like attracts like. Con-
sider these examples:
 • At the University of Michigan, previously unacquainted men were given 
free rooms in a boardinghouse in exchange for their participation in a study 
of developing friendships (Newcomb, 1961). At the end of the semester, 
the men’s closest friendships were with those housemates with whom they 
had the most in common. 
 • At the University of Texas, researchers intentionally created blind dates 
between men and women who held either similar social and political atti-
tudes or dissimilar views (Byrne et al., 1970). Each couple spent 30 minutes 
at the student union getting to know each other over soft drinks. After the 
“dates,” similar couples liked each other more than dissimilar couples did.  

92 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
 • At Kansas State University, 13 men spent 10 days jammed together in a 
simulated fallout shelter, and their feelings about each other were assessed 
along the way (Griffitt & Veitch, 1974). The men got along fine with those 
with whom they had a lot in common, but would have thrown out of the 
shelter, if they could, those who were the least similar to themselves.  
As these examples suggest, similarity is attractive.  
 What Kind of Similarity? 
 But what kinds of similarities are we talking about? Well, lots. Whether they 
are lovers or friends, happy relationship partners resemble each other more 
than random strangers do in several ways, both in heterosexual (Gonzaga et 
al., 2010) and same-sex (Gonzaga et al., 2012) partnerships. First, there’s  demo-
graphic similarity in age, sex, race, education, religion, and social class (Hitsch 
et al., 2010). Most of your best friends in high school were probably of the same 
age, sex, and race. People are even more likely than you’d expect to marry 
someone whose last name begins with the same last letter as their own (Jones 
et al., 2004)! 
 Then there’s similarity in  attitudes and values. There is a straightforward link 
between the proportion of the attitudes two people share and their attraction 
to each other: the more agreement, the more liking. Take note of the pattern in 
Figure 3.7. When people were told that they agreed on a lot of issues, attrac-
tion didn’t level off after a certain amount of similarity was reached, and there 
was no danger in having “too much in common.” Instead, where attitudes are 
concerned, the more similar two people are, the more they like each other. For 
whom did you vote in the last election? It’s likely you and your best friend cast 
similar ballots. 
 Finally, to a lesser degree, partners may have similar  personalities —but this 
pattern is a bit complex. When it comes to me being happy with you, it’s not 
important that you and I have similar personalities; what matters is that you 
are agreeable, conscientious, and emotionally stable, and so are easy and pleas-
ant to live with (Watson et al., 2014). My contentment will have more to do with 
your desirable qualities than with how similar we are (Becker, 2013). Of course, 
if I have a congenial, dependable personality, too, then you’re also happy, and 
our personalities are fairly similar—but it’s not our similarity per se that’s pro-
moting our satisfaction. The key here is that the 
link between similarity and attraction is stronger 
for attitudes than for personalities (Watson et al., 
2004), and it actually varies some from country to 
country (Gebauer et al., 2012). In China, a country 
that values group harmony, for instance, the per-
sonalities of husbands and wives are typically 
more similar than those of spouses in the United 
States, a country that celebrates individualism 
(Chen et al., 2009). (And that sounds like a point to 
ponder.)
A Point to Ponder
Husbands and wives in 
China typically have per-
sonalities that are more 
similar to one another 
than spouses in the United 
States do. When it comes 
to marital satisfaction, is 
that a good or a bad thing?

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 93
In any case, people with similar styles and traits  usually get along well when 
they encounter each other; for instance, the first meetings of two gregarious peo-
ple or two shy people are typically more enjoyable than the first conversation of 
a gregarious person and a shy person is (Cuperman & Ickes, 2009). Then, as time 
goes by, people with similar personalities—in one study, more than 800 U.S. 
Air Force recruits who got to know dozens of others well during basic training 
( Tenney et al., 2009)—often like each other more than dissimilar people do.  
 Do Opposites Attract? 
 So, in general, the more two people have in common, the more they like each 
other. Why, then, do some of us believe that “opposites attract”? Are people 
really more attracted to each other when they are less alike? The simple answer 
is no. There are some nuances at work, but people are not routinely more con-
tent with dissimilar, rather than similar, partners. However, there  are several 
important subtleties in the way similarity operates that may mislead people 
into thinking that opposites do sometimes attract. 
How Much Do We Think We Have in Common? 
Perceived Similarity Matters
The first subtlety is that our perceptions of how much we have in common 
affect our attraction to each more than our actual similarity does. For instance, 
4 minutes after people have met in a speed-dating study, their interest in each 
Attraction is influenced by similarity. 
People who are similar in background 
characteristics, physical attractiveness, 
and attitudes are more likely to be 
attracted to each other than are those 
who are dissimilar.
FIGURE 3.7. The relationship between 
attraction and perceived similarity in 
attitudes.
People expected to like a stranger when 
they were led to believe that the stranger 
shared their attitudes.
6.00
Attraction
12.00
Proportion of Similar Attitudes
1.00
.00 .10 .20 .30 .40 .50 .60 .70 .80.90
11.00
10.00
9.00
8.00
7.00
Source: Adapted from Byrne & Nelson, 1965.

94 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
other has little to do with how much they really have in common; instead, to 
the extent their liking for each other is influenced by their personalities and 
interests, it depends on how similar they think they are (Tidwell et al., 2013). 
And perceived similarity remains important even if a relationship develops 
and the partners come to know each other better. After years of friendship—or 
marriage!—partners still routinely think that they have more in common with 
each other than they really do (Goel et al., 2010). They overestimate the similari-
ties they share (de Jong & Reis, 2014)—and discovering how wrong they are (if 
they ever do) can take some time. Meanwhile, interested onlookers—friends, 
family, co-workers—may correctly observe that the partners are two very dif-
ferent people and infer, therefore, that opposites must attract. No, the partners 
aren’t together because their differences are desirable, they’re together because 
they think they’re not very different, and they’re wrong.
Discovering Dissimilarities Can Take Time
If we like others when we meet them (perhaps simply because they’re 
good-looking), we tend to expect (or is it hope?) that they have attitudes and 
values that are similar to our own (Morry et al., 2011)—and of course, some-
times we’re mistaken. If we get to know them better, the interests and attitudes 
we actually share are likely to become influential (Luo, 2009), but it may take a 
while for us to figure that out.
 A process like this was evident in Newcomb’s (1961) study of developing 
friendships among men sharing a boardinghouse. Soon after they met, the men 
Interethnic Relationships
Most of our intimate relationships are 
likely to be with others of the same 
race. Nevertheless, marriages between 
spouses from different ethnic groups are 
occurring at a record pace in the United 
States, comprising over 15 percent of 
new marriages (“Intermarriage,” 2013). 
Those couples raise an interesting ques-
tion: If similarity attracts, what’s going 
on? The answer is actually straightfor-
ward: nothing special. If you ignore 
the fact of their dissimilar ethnicity, 
interethnic couples appear to be influ-
enced by the same motives that guide 
everyone else. The partners tend to be 
similar in age, education, and attrac-
tiveness, and their relationships, like 
most, are based on common  interests 
and personal compatibility (Shibazaki 
& Brennan, 1998). A few things distin-
guish people who date partners from 
other cultural groups: Compared to 
their peers, they’ve had closer contact 
with other ethnicities (Perry, 2013), and, 
if they’re white, they tend not to hold 
conservative political attitudes (East-
wick et al., 2009). In general, however, 
inter ethnic partners are just as satisfied 
as other couples (Troy et al., 2006) and 
they have the same chances for marital 
success as their peers (Zhang & Van 
Hook, 2009). Their relationships oper-
ate the same way: Two people who are 
more alike than different decide to stay 
together because they’re happy and 
they fall in love.

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 95
liked best the housemates who they thought were most like them; thus, at first, 
their friendships were influenced mostly by  perceived similarity. As the semes-
ter progressed, however, the actual similarities the men shared with each other 
played a larger and larger role in their friendships. When they got to know each 
other better, the men clearly preferred those who really were similar to them, 
although this was not always the case at first. 
 Even when we really do know our partners well, there may be surprises 
ahead. According to Bernard Murstein’s (1987)  stimulus-value-role  theory, we 
gain three different broad types of information about our partners as a new 
relationship develops. When we first meet, our attraction to each other is pri-
marily based on “stimulus” information involving obvious attributes such as 
age, sex, and, of course, looks. Thereafter, during the “value” stage, attraction 
depends on similarity in attitudes and beliefs as we learn whether we like the 
same kinds of pizzas, movies, and vacations (see  Figure 3.8 ). Only later does 
“role” compatibility become important, when we finally find out if we agree 
on the basics of parenting, careers, and housecleaning, among other life tasks. 
The point is that partners can be perfectly content with each other’s tastes in 
politics and entertainment without ever realizing that they disagree fundamen-
tally about where they’d like to live and how many kids—if any!—they want to 
have. Important dissimilarities  sometimes become apparent only after couples 
have married; such spouses may stay together despite their differences, but it’s 
not because opposites attract. 
 The influence of time and experience is also apparent in  fatal attractions 
(Felmlee, 2001). These occur when a quality that initially attracts one person to 
another gradually becomes one of the most obnoxious, irritating things about 
that partner. For instance, partners who initially seem spontaneous and fun 
may later seem irresponsible and foolish, and those who appear strong may 
FIGURE 3.8. Three different phases of relationship development.
Murstein’s (1987) stimulus-value-role theory suggests that developing relationships are 
influenced by three different types of information that differ in importance and influ-
ence as time goes by and the partners learn more about each other.
Importance of Information
Increasing Intimacy
Role
Value
Stimulus
Source: Data from Murstein, 1987.

96 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
later seem domineering. Those who initially welcome a partner’s high level of 
attention and devotion may come to resent such behavior when it later seems 
too possessive. In such cases, the annoying trait is no secret, but people fail to 
appreciate how their judgments of it will change with time. Importantly, such 
fatal qualities are often different from one’s own; they may seem admirable 
and desirable at first—so that a spendthrift who’s always broke may initially 
admire a tightwad who counts every penny—but over time people realize that 
such opposites aren’t attractive (Rick et al., 2011). 
 You May Be the Person I Want to Become 
 Along those lines, people also admire those who possess skills and talents 
they wish they had. Another nuance in the operation of similarity lies in our 
attraction to others who are similar to our  ideal selves, that is, who exhibit desir-
able qualities that we want to, but do not yet, possess (Strauss et al., 2012). This 
tendency is complex because it’s threatening and unpleasant when people sur-
pass us and make us look bad by comparison (Herbst et al., 2003). However, if 
others are only a little better than us—so that they offer us implicit encourage-
ment instead of humiliation—we may be attracted to those who are actually a 
little different from us (for now) (Klohnen & Luo, 2003). Let’s not overstate this 
subtlety. The most appealing partners of all are those who are similar to us in 
most dimensions but who fit our attainable ideals in others (Figueredo et al., 
2006). Such people are hardly our “opposites.” But as long as the differences 
are not too great, we may prefer a partner who is someone we’d like to become 
to one who more closely resembles who we really are now. 
 Dissimilarity May Decrease over Time 
 Moreover, relationships can change people (Hafen et al., 2011). Their per-
sonalities don’t change much (Rammstedt et al., 2013), but as time goes by, the 
members of a couple often come to share more similar attitudes (Gonzaga et al., 
2010). Some of this decrease in dissimilarity probably occurs automatically as a 
couple shares compelling experiences, but some of it also occurs as the partners 
consciously seek compatibility and contentment (Becker & Lois, 2010). Thus, 
opposites don’t attract, but some opposites may gradually fade if a couple stays 
together for some other reason. 
 Some Types of Similarity Are More Important than Others 
 A further nuance is that some similarities may be quite influential whereas 
other similarities—or opposites—may be rather innocuous. In particular, it’s espe-
cially rewarding to have someone agree with us on issues that are very important 
to us (Montoya & Horton, 2013). Religion is often one such issue; shared beliefs 
are quite satisfying to a couple when they are highly religious, but they have 
little effect—and even disagreement is immaterial—when neither of the partners 
actively observes a faith (Lutz-Zois et al., 2006). Thus, opposites don’t attract, but 
they also may not matter if no one attaches much importance to them. 
 Housework and gender roles appear to be among the similarities that  do 
routinely matter. Cohabiting couples who disagree with each other about the 

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 97
division of household labor are more likely to break up than are those who 
share similar views (Hohmann-Marriott, 2006), and spouses who share such 
work are more satisfied than those who divide it unequally (Amato et al., 2007). 
And husbands and wives who are more similar in their gender roles—not less, 
as a traditional outlook would lead us to expect—are more happily married 
than those who differ from one another in their styles and skills (Gaunt, 2006). 
In particular, compared to spouses who are more alike, macho husbands and 
feminine wives (who clearly have different gender roles) feel less understood, 
share less companionship, and experience less love and contentment in their 
marriages as time goes by (Helms et al., 2006). 
 Matching Is a Broad Process 
 Another source of confusion arises when people pair off with others who 
are obviously very different but who nevertheless have a similar mate value—
as may be the case when an old rich guy marries a lovely young woman. 
In such cases, the partners are clearly dissimilar, and “opposites” may seem 
to attract. That’s a rather unsophisticated view, however, because such part-
ners are really just matching in a broader sense, trading looks for money and 
vice versa. They may have different assets, but such partners are still seeking 
good matches with others who have similar standing overall in the interper-
sonal marketplace. People usually end up with others of similar mate value 
(Brase & Guy, 2004), but the specific rewards they offer each other may be 
quite different. 
 This sort of thing goes on all the time. A study of 6,485 users of an online 
dating service found that very homely—okay, ugly—men (those in the bot-
tom 10 percent of attractiveness among men) needed $186,000 more in annual 
income in order to attract as much attention from women as fine-looking fel-
lows (i.e., those in the top 10 percent); nevertheless, if they did make that much 
more money, ugly guys received just as many inquiries as handsome men did 
(Hitsch et al., 2010). 
 Indeed, it’s not very romantic, but fame, wealth, health, talent, and looks 
all appear to be commodities that people use to attract more desirable partners 
than they might otherwise entice. If we think of matching as a broad process 
that involves both physical attractiveness and various other assets and traits, 
it’s evident that people usually pair off with others of similar status, and like 
attracts like. 
 In fact, trade-offs like these are central ideas in evolutionary psychology. 
Because men are more likely to reproduce successfully when they mate with 
healthy, fertile women, sexual selection has presumably promoted men’s inter-
est in youthful and beautiful partners (Buss, 2012). Youth is important because 
women are no longer fertile after they reach menopause in middle age. Beauty 
is meaningful because, as we’ve already seen, it is roughly correlated with 
some aspects of good health (Van Dongen & Gangestad, 2011). Thus, men espe-
cially value good looks in women (see  Figure 3.6 ), and, as they age, around the 
world, they seek wives who are increasingly younger than they are (Dunn et al., 
2010): Men who marry in their twenties pair off with women who are 2 years 

98 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
younger than they are, on average, but if a man marries in his fifties, he’s likely 
to seek a wife 15 years younger than he. 
 Women don’t need to be as concerned about their partners’ youth because 
men normally retain their capacity for reproduction as long as they live. 
Instead, given their vastly greater parental investment in their offspring,6 
women should seek mates who can shelter and protect them during the long 
period of pregnancy and nursing; they should prefer powerful, high-status 
men with resources who can provide for the well-being of mother and child. In 
fact, as  Figure 3.9 illustrates, women  do care more about their partners’ finan-
cial prospects than men do, and men who flash their cash attract more sexual 
partners than stingy men do (Sundie et al., 2011). When he asks a woman who 
is walking by, for instance, a guy climbing out of a luxury car (an Audi A5) is 
more likely to get her phone number than he would be if he had a cheap car (a 
Renault Mégane) (Guéguen & Lamy, 2012). Furthermore, women’s preferences 
for the age of their mates do not change much as they age; women don’t start 
seeking younger men as mates until they (the women) are around 75 years old 
(Alterovitz & Mendelsohn, 2011). 
   Thus, matching based on the exchange of feminine youth and beauty for 
masculine status and resources is commonplace (Mathes & Kozak, 2008). Still, 
is it the result of evolutionary pressures? Advocates of a cultural perspective 
argue that women pursue desirable resources through their partners because 
they are so often denied direct access to political and economic power on their 
own (Wood & Eagly, 2007). Indeed, in the United States—a culture in which 
smart women have access to career opportunities of their own—the more intel-
ligent a woman is, the lower her desire is for wealth and status in a romantic 
partner (Stanik & Ellsworth, 2010). And around the world, the extent to which 
women care more about a mate’s money is reduced in countries that support 
and promote female equality. Still, even in such countries (such as Finland, 
6 If a reminder regarding parental investment will be welcome, look back at pages 33–34.
FIGURE 3.9.  Desire for good financial prospects in a romantic partner. 
Around the world, women care more about a partner’s financial prospects than men do.
.5
0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Indispensable
Men
Unimportant
Japan
Zambia
Yugoslavia Australia
USA
Women
 Source: Data from Buss & Schmitt, 1993. Copyright © 1993 by the American 
 Psychological Association. Adapted with permission. 

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 99
Germany, and the United States), women care a lot more about a mate’s finan-
cial prospects, on average, than men do (Zentner & Mitura, 2012). 
 So, the origins of the feminine-beauty-for-masculine-money trade-off 
remain uncertain. But in any case, the bottom line here is that matching is a 
broad process that involves multiple resources and traits. When “opposites” 
seem to attract, people may be trading one asset for another in order to obtain 
partners of similar social status, and it’s their similar mate values, not any 
desired differences, that make them attractive to each other.  
 One Way “Opposites” May Attract: Complementarity 
 Finally, there are times when different types of behavior can fit together 
well. We like responses from others that help us reach our goals. When two 
partners have different skills, each is usually happy to allow the other to take 
the lead on those tasks at which the other is more talented (Beach et al., 2001). 
Such behavior is said to  complement our own, and  complementarity —reactions 
that provide a good fit to our own—can be attractive. Most complementary 
behaviors are actually similar actions; people who are warm and agreeable, 
for instance, are happiest when they are met with warmth and good humor 
in return.
However, some profitable forms of complementarity involve different 
behaviors from two partners. Consider a couple’s sexual interactions; if one 
of them enjoys receiving oral sex, their satisfaction is likely to be higher when 
the other enjoys giving it (de Jong & Reis, 2014). Divisions of labor that suit our 
talents in pursuit of shared goals are often advantageous: If I’m a dreamer who 
comes up with great ideas and you’re a details person who’s a careful planner, 
we can enjoy some terrific vacations if we like to go to the same places (Bohns 
et al., 2013). And when we really want something, it’s nice when our partners 
let us have our way. When we feel very sure of ourselves, we want our partners 
to heed our advice; on other occasions, when we need help and advice, we 
want our partners to give it (Markey et al., 2010).
Do these examples of rewarding complementarity sound like “opposites 
attract” to you? I hope not. In general, patterns of behavior in others that are 
genuinely opposite to our own—such as cool aloofness instead of our warmth, 
or submissive passivity instead of our assertion and self-confidence—are 
annoying and frustrating (Hopwood et al., 2011). It’s true that dominant people 
like to get their way, but they like other assertive folks more than they like those 
who are chronically servile (Markey & Markey, 2007). The bottom line appears 
to be that we like partners who entertain and support us but we don’t like part-
ners who frustrate or impede us, and a partnership is fulfilling when we desire 
the same goals and are able to work together to successfully achieve them. So, 
the blend of similarities and differences that form an optimal mix may vary 
from couple to couple (Baxter & West, 2003). Personal growth and novel activi-
ties are also rewarding, so we like people with interests that are different from 
(but not incompatible with) our own when they introduce us to things we’ll 
both like (Aron et al., 2006). The important thing to remember is that similar 
partners probably supply us what we want more often than anyone else can.

100 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
Add it all up, and opposites may sometimes seem to attract, but birds of a 
feather are more likely to flock together. Similarity is usually rewarding; oppo-
sition is not.
  BARRIERS: LIKING THOSE WE CANNOT HAVE 
 A final influence on attraction involves the common tendency for people to 
struggle to overcome barriers that keep them from what they want. The theory 
of psychological  reactance states that when people lose their freedom of action 
or choice, they strive to regain that freedom (Brehm & Brehm, 1981). As a result, 
we may want something more if we are threatened with losing it. 
 This principle can apparently affect our feelings about our partners in rela-
tionships. Among unmarried adolescents, researchers sometimes observe an 
interesting pattern called the  Romeo and Juliet effect: The more their parents 
interfere with their romances, the more love the teens feel for their partners 
(Driscoll et al., 1972). This pattern doesn’t occur all the time (Leslie et al., 1986), 
but it does suggest that parents should think twice before they forbid their 
teenagers to see certain partners. If they create a state of reactance, the parents 
may unintentionally make the forbidden partners seem more attractive. The 
best course of action in such cases may be for the parents to express their dis-
pleasure mildly and not meddle further. 
 Another kind of barrier occurs every night when bars close and every-
body has to go home. If you’re looking for a date, you may find that the 
potential partners in a bar seem more and more attractive as closing time 
approaches and you face the prospect of leaving alone. In fact, when time is 
running out, unattached bar patrons consider the available members of the 
other sex to be better-looking than they seemed to be earlier in the evening 
(Pennebaker et al., 1979). This phenomenon doesn’t involve “beer goggles,” 
or intoxication; it occurs even if people haven’t been drinking (Gladue & 
Delaney, 1990). However, it occurs only among those who are seeking com-
pany they don’t yet have; those who are already committed to close relation-
ships don’t exhibit this pattern (Madey et al., 1996). Thus, the “closing-time 
effect” appears to be another case of desired-but-forbidden fruit seeming 
especially sweet.  
 SO, WHAT DO MEN AND WOMEN WANT? 
 We are nearly at the end of our survey of major influences on attraction, but one 
important point remains. As we’ve seen, men and women differ in the value 
they place on a partner’s physical attractiveness and income (Li et al., 2013). 
I don’t want those results to leave you with the wrong impression, however, 
because despite those differences, men and women generally seek the same 
qualities in their relational partners (Li et al., 2011). Let’s look more closely at 
what men and women want. 

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 101
 Around the world, there are three themes in the criteria with which people 
evaluate potential mates (Tran et al., 2008). If we had our way, almost all of us 
would have partners who offered
 •  warmth and loyalty, being trustworthy, kind, supportive, and understanding; 
 •  attractiveness and vitality, being good-looking, sexy, and outgoing; and 
 •  status and resources, being financially secure and living well. 
All of these characteristics are desirable, but they’re not of equal importance, 
and their prominence depends on whether we’re seeking a relatively casual, 
short-term fling or a more committed long-term romance. 
 Men and women have the same (relatively low) standards when they’re 
pursuing short-term flings (Eastwick et al., 2014). They both want a casual lover 
to be good-looking (Li et al., 2013), and both sexes are less picky when they’re 
evaluating partners for short-term liaisons than for lasting unions (Fletcher 
et al., 2004). For instance, both sexes will accept lower intelligence, warmth, 
and earning potential in a lover with whom they have a casual fling than they 
would require in a spouse (Buunk et al., 2002). In particular, when they are 
contemplating short-term affairs, women will accept men who aren’t especially 
kind, dependable, or understanding as long as their lovers are muscular, sexy, 
and “hot” (Frederick & Haselton, 2007). 
 But women clearly recognize that attractive, dominant, masculine men 
who might make compelling lovers often make unreliable long-term mates 
(Boothroyd et al., 2007). When they are picking husbands, women consider a 
man’s good character to be more important than his good looks. They attach 
more importance to the criteria of warmth and loyalty and status and resources 
than to the criterion of attractiveness and vitality when they are thinking long 
term (Fletcher et al., 2004). Prestige and accomplishments become more impor-
tant than dominance and daring (Kruger & Fitzgerald, 2011). When she finds 
she can’t have it all, the average woman prefers a man who is kind, under-
standing, and well to do—but not particularly handsome—to a good-looking 
but poor one, or a rich and good-looking but cold and disloyal one (Li, 2008). 
 Men have different priorities. Like women, they value warmth and loyalty, 
but unlike women, they attach more importance to attractiveness and vitality 
in a long-term partner than to status and resources (Fletcher et al., 2004). The 
 average guy prefers a kind, beautiful woman without any money to wealthy 
women who are gorgeous grouches or women who are sweet but ugly (Li, 2008). 
 Of course, we typically have to accept some trade-offs like these when we’re 
seeking intimate partners. Fulfilling all of our diverse desires by finding (and 
winning!) the perfect mate is hard to do. If we insist that our partners be kind 
and understanding  and gorgeous  and rich, we’re likely to stay frustrated for a 
long time. So, when they’re evaluating potential mates, men typically check 
first to make sure that a woman has at least average looks, and then they seek as 
much warmth, kindness, honesty, openness, stability, humor, and intelligence 
as they can get (Li et al., 2002). Great beauty is desirable to men, but it’s not as 
important as high levels of warmth and loyalty are (with status and resources 
coming in a distant third). Women usually check first to make sure that a man 

102 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
has at least some money or prospects, and then they, too, seek as much warmth, 
kindness, honesty, openness, stability, humor, and intelligence as they can get 
(Li et al., 2002). Wealth is desirable to women, but it’s not as important as high 
levels of warmth and loyalty, and looks are in third place. 
 Gays and lesbians behave similarly, wanting the same things that hetero-
sexual men and women do (Felmlee et al., 2010). And although most of the 
research results described in this chapter were obtained in the United States, 
people all over the world concur; a global sample of 218,000 Internet users 
ranked intelligence, humor, kindness, and dependability as the top four traits 
they sought in a relationship partner (Lippa, 2007), and studies in Brazil ( Castro 
& de Araújo Lopes, 2010), Russia (Pearce et al., 2010), and Singapore (Li et al., 
2011) have all yielded similar results. 
 So, add all this up, and attraction isn’t so mysterious after all. Men attend 
to looks and women attend to resources, but everybody seems to want partners 
who are amiable, agreeable, loving, and kind. Men and women do not differ 
in this regard and their preference for warmth and kindness in a mate grows 
stronger as they get older (and wiser?) (Brumbaugh & Wood, 2013). As long 
as she’s moderately pretty and he has some money, both sexes want as much 
warmth and loyalty as they can get. To the extent there is any surprise here, it’s 
in the news that women don’t simply want strong, dominant men; they want 
their fellows to be warm and kind and capable of commitment, too (Jensen-
Campbell et al., 1995). If you’re an unemotional, stoic, macho male, take note: 
Women will be more impressed if you develop some affectionate warmth to go 
with your strength and power. 
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 Rasheed introduced himself to Rebecca because she was really hot, and he 
was mildly disappointed when she turned out to be a little suspicious, self-
centered, and vain. On the other hand, she was really hot, so he asked her out 
anyway. Because she was impressed with his designer clothes and bold style, 
Rebecca was intrigued by Rasheed, but after a few minutes she thought him a 
little pushy and arrogant. Still, he had tickets to an expensive concert, so she 
accepted his invitation to go out on a date. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the date—and the future—
hold for Rebecca and Rasheed? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 The Fundamental Basis of Attraction 
 We are attracted to people whose presence is rewarding to us. 
 Proximity: Liking Those Near Us 
 We select our friends, and our enemies, from those around us. 

CHAPTER 3: Attraction 103
 Familiarity: Repeated Contact.  In general, familiarity breeds attraction. 
Even brief,  mere exposure to others usually increases our liking for them. 
 Convenience: Proximity Is Rewarding, Distance Is Costly. Relationships 
with distant partners are ordinarily less satisfying than they would be if the 
partners were nearby. 
 The Power of Proximity. Close proximity makes it more likely that two 
people will meet and interact, for better or for worse. 
 Physical Attractiveness: Liking Those Who Are Lovely 
 Our Bias for Beauty: “What Is Beautiful Is Good.” We assume that attrac-
tive people have other desirable personal characteristics.  
 Who’s Pretty? Symmetrical faces with average features are especially 
beautiful.  Waist-to-hip ratios of 0.7 are very appealing in women whereas a 
WHR of 0.9 is attractive in a man if he has money. 
 An Evolutionary Perspective on Physical Attractiveness. Cross-cultural 
agreement about beauty, cyclical variations in women’s preferences and behav-
ior, and the link between attractiveness and good health are all consistent with 
the assumptions of evolutionary psychology. 
 Culture Counts, Too. Standards of beauty also fluctuate with changing 
economic and cultural conditions.  
 Looks Matter.  When people first meet, nothing else affects attraction as 
much as their looks do. 
 The Interactive Costs and Benefits of Beauty. Physical attractiveness has 
a larger influence on men’s social lives than on women’s. Attractive people 
doubt the praise they receive from others, but they’re still happier than unat-
tractive people are.  
 Matching in Physical Attractiveness. People tend to pair off with others 
of similar levels of beauty. 
 Reciprocity: Liking Those Who Like Us 
 People are reluctant to risk rejection. Most people calculate others’ overall 
desirability by multiplying their physical attractiveness by their probability of 
reciprocal liking. This is consistent with balance theory, which holds that people 
desire consistency among their thoughts, feelings, and relationships. 
 Similarity: Liking Those Who Are Like Us 
 Birds of a feather fl ock together. People like those who share their  attitudes. 

104 
CHAPTER 3: Attraction
 What Kind of Similarity? Happy relationship partners resemble each 
other in demographic origin, attitudes, and, to a lesser degree, in personalities.  
 Do Opposites Attract? Opposites do not attract, but they may seem to for 
several reasons. First, we are attracted to those who we think are like us, and 
we can be wrong. Then, it takes time for perceived similarity to be replaced by 
more accurate understanding of the attributes we share with others. People 
may be attracted to those who are mildly different from themselves but similar 
to their ideal selves. People also tend to become more similar over time, and 
some types of similarity are more important than others. Matching is also a 
broad process; fame, wealth, talent, and looks can all be used to attract others. 
Finally, we may appreciate behavior from a partner that differs from our own 
but that complements our actions and helps us to reach our goals.  
 Barriers: Liking the Ones We Cannot Have 
 The theory of psychological  reactance suggests that people strive to restore 
lost freedom. The theory explains the  Romeo and Juliet effect as well as the ten-
dency for potential partners to seem more attractive at bars’ closing time.  
 So, What Do Men and Women Want? 
 People evaluate potential partners with regard to (a) warmth and loyalty, 
(b) attractiveness and vitality, and (c) status and resources. For lasting romances, 
women want men who are warm and kind and who are not poor, and men want 
women who are warm and kind and who are not unattractive. Thus, everybody 
wants intimate partners who are amiable, agreeable, and loving.  

105
 C H A P T E R  4  
 Social Cognition 
 F irst I mpressions ( and B eyond )   ◆ The P ower of  
P erceptions  ◆ I mpression M anagement  
  ◆ S o, J ust H ow W ell D o W e K now O ur P artners?  
  ◆ F or Y our C onsideration  ◆ C hapter S ummary  
 I magine that you’re home in bed, sick with a killer flu, and your lover 
doesn’t call you during the day to see how you’re doing. You’re disap-
pointed. Why didn’t your partner call? Does he or she not love you enough? 
Is this just another frustrating example of his or her self-centered lack of 
compassion? Or is it more likely that your loving, considerate partner didn’t 
want to risk waking you from a nap? There are several possible explana-
tions, and you can choose a forgiving rationale, a blaming one, or something 
in between. And importantly, the choice may really be up to you; the facts 
of the case may allow several different interpretations. But whatever you 
decide, your judgments are likely to be consequential. At the end of the day, 
your perceptions will have either sustained or undermined the happiness of 
your relationship. 
 We’ll focus on judgments like these in this chapter on  social cognition, a 
term that refers generally to the processes of perception and judgment with 
which we make sense of our social worlds (Fiske & Taylor, 2013). Our primary 
concern will be with the way we  think about our relationships. We’ll explore 
how our judgments of our partners and their behavior set the stage for the 
events that follow. We’ll consider our own efforts to influence and control what 
our partners think of us. And we’ll ponder just how well two people are likely 
to know each other, even in an intimate relationship. Throughout the chapter, 
we’ll find that our perceptions and interpretations of our partnerships are of 
enormous importance: What we think helps to determine what we  feel, and 
then how we  act. This wouldn’t be a problem if our judgments were always 
accurate. However, there are usually a variety of reasonable ways to interpret 
an event (as my opening example suggests), and we can make mistakes even 
when we’re confident that we have arrived at the truth. Indeed, some of those 
mistakes may begin the moment we meet someone, as studies of first impres-
sions reveal. 

106 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
 FIRST IMPRESSIONS (AND BEYOND) 
 First impressions matter. The judgments we form of others after a brief first 
meeting often have enormous staying power, with our initial perceptions con-
tinuing to be influential months later (Uleman & Saribay, 2012). This fact may 
be obvious if we dislike someone so much after an initial interaction that we 
avoid any further contact with him or her (Denrell, 2005); in such cases, our first 
impressions are the only impressions we ever get. However, first impressions 
continue to be influential even when we do see more of a new acquaintance. 
When researchers formally arranged get-acquainted conversations between 
new classmates, the initial impressions the students formed continued to influ-
ence their feelings about each other 10 weeks later (Human et al., 2013). 
 Conceivably, some first impressions last because they are discerning and 
correct. Sometimes it doesn’t take us long to accurately decide who’s nice and 
who’s not, and if we’re right, there’s no need to revise our initial perceptions. 
On the other hand, first impressions can be remarkably persistent even when 
they’re erroneous (Harris & Garris, 2008). Right or wrong, first impressions lin-
ger, and that’s why they matter so much. Let’s consider how they operate. 
 We start judging people from the moment we meet them. And by 
“moment,” I mean the first twenty-fifth of a second. That’s all it takes—only 
39 milliseconds  1 —for us to determine whether a stranger’s face looks angry 
(Bar et al., 2006). After more patient deliberation lasting one-tenth of a second, 2 
we have formed judgments of a stranger’s attractiveness, likeability, and 
 trustworthiness that are the same as those we hold after a minute’s careful 
inspection of the person’s face (Willis & Todorov, 2006). Then, after  watching 
the stranger chat with someone of the other sex for only 5 seconds, we’ve 
already decided how extraverted, conscientious, and intelligent he or she is 
(Carney et al., 2007). We jump to conclusions very, very quickly. 
 Our snap judgments are influenced by the fact that everyone we meet fits 
some category of people about whom we already hold stereotyped first impres-
sions. This may sound like a daring assertion, but it really isn’t. Think about 
it: Everyone is either male or female, and (as we saw in chapter 1), we expect 
different behavior from men and women. Furthermore, at a glance, we can 
tell whether someone is beautiful or plain, and (as we saw in chapter 3), we 
assume that pretty people are likable people. Dozens of other distinctions may 
come into play: young/old, black/white, pierced/unpierced, rural/urban, and 
many more. The specifics of these stereotypes may vary from one perceiver 
to the next, but they operate similarly in anyone: Stereotypes supply us with 
preconceptions about what people are like. The judgments that result are often 
quite incorrect (Olivola & Todorov, 2010), but they’re hard to avoid: Stereo-
types influence us automatically, even when we are unaware of using them 
(Nestler & Back, 2013). So, some initial feelings about others may spring up 
unbidden even when we want to be impartial and open minded. 
1 A millisecond is a thousandth of a second. So, after 39 milliseconds have passed, there’s still 
96.1 percent of a second yet to come before one full second has passed. 
2 I’m not kidding, but I am being playful.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 107
Then, if we take a close look at others before we say hello, there may be a 
surprising amount of specific information about them that is available from 
afar. Examine their shoes: Students at the University of Kansas gained some 
insight into others’ age, gender, income, and even anxiety about abandonment 
from nothing more than a picture of their shoes (Gillath et al., 2012). Study their 
faces: We tend to assume that men with high facial width-to-height ratios—
whose faces are wide and short—are more likely to be prejudiced than those 
whose faces are narrower and taller. And we’re right. They are (Hehman et al., 
2013). With a quick glance at a politician’s face, we’re also fairly good at judg-
ing whether he is conservative or liberal (Wänke et al., 2012).
 If we do interact with someone, we continue jumping to conclusions. Please 
take a moment—seriously, take your time and read the next line slowly—and 
consider someone who is  
 envious, stubborn, critical, impulsive, industrious, and intelligent. 
 Would you want this person as a co-worker? Probably not much. Now, please 
take another moment to size up someone else who is 
 intelligent, industrious, impulsive, critical, stubborn, and envious. 
 More impressive, yes? This person isn’t perfect, but he or she seems competent 
and ambitious. The point, of course, is that the two descriptions offer the same 
What is your first impression of these two people? The man on the left has a lower 
facial width-to-height ratio (fWHR), so his face is narrower and taller than the face of 
the man on the right. The white rectangles indicate the measurements that are used to 
calculate fWHR, across the face at the top of the jaw and vertically from the top of the 
upper lip to the middle of the eyebrows. To a modest degree, men with higher fWHRs 
are more likely than other men to report prejudicial attitudes (possibly because they're 
more likely to tell the truth, no matter what anyone thinks).
Source: Hehman et al., 2013.

108 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
information in a different  order, and that’s enough to engender two different 
impressions (Asch, 1946). Our judgments of others are influenced by a  primacy 
effect, a tendency for the first information we receive about others to carry spe-
cial weight, along with our instant impressions and our stereotypes, in shaping 
our overall impressions of them. 
 Primacy effects provide one important indication of why first impressions 
matter so much: Right or wrong, our quick first judgments of others influence our 
interpretations of the later information we encounter. Once a judgment forms, it 
affects how we use the data that follow—often in subtle ways that are difficult to 
detect. John Darley and Paget Gross (1983) demonstrated this when they showed 
Princeton students a video that established the social class of a young girl named 
“Hannah.” Two different videos were prepared, and some people learned that 
Hannah was rather poor, whereas others found that she was pretty rich; she either 
played in a deteriorating, paved schoolyard and returned home to a dingy, small 
duplex or played on expansive, grassy fields and went home to a large, lovely 
house. The good news is that when Darley and Gross asked the participants to 
guess how well Hannah was doing in school, they did not assume the rich kid 
was smarter than the poor kid; the two groups both assumed she was getting 
average grades (see  Figure 4.1 ). After that, however, the researchers showed the 
participants a video of Hannah taking an aptitude test and doing an inconsistent 
job, answering some difficult questions correctly but blowing some easy ones. 
Everyone saw the same video, but—and here’s the bad news—they interpreted 
it very differently depending on their impressions of her social class. People who 
thought that Hannah was poor cited her mistakes and judged her as performing 
 below average whereas those who thought she was rich noted her successes and 
Perceived Ability
(grade level)
Background
Information
Achievement
Test Information
5
4
3
Higher
Social Class
Lower
Social Class
FIGURE 4.1. Our preconceptions control our interpretations of information about others.
People equipped with different expectations about the social class of a fourth-grade 
girl drew very different conclusions about her performance on an achievement test, 
although they all witnessed the very same performance. Those who thought they were 
watching a rich kid judged her to be performing an entire grade better than did those 
who thought they were watching a girl from a more modest background.
Data from Darley & Gross, 1983.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 109
rated her as considerably  better  than average. Perceivers equipped with differ-
ent preconceptions about Hannah’s social class interpreted the  same sample of 
her behavior in very different ways and came to very different conclusions. And 
note how subtle this process was: They didn’t leap to biased assumptions about 
Hannah simply by knowing her social class, making an obvious mistake that 
might easily be noticed. Instead, their knowledge of her social class lingered in 
their minds and contaminated their interpretations of her later actions. And they 
probably made their biased judgments with confidence, feeling fair and impar-
tial. Both groups could point to a portion of her test performance—the part that 
fit their preconceptions—and feel perfectly justified in making the  judgments 
they did, never realizing that people with other first impressions were watching 
the same videotape and reaching contradictory conclusions. 
 Thus, first impressions affect our interpretations of the subsequent informa-
tion we encounter about others. They also affect our choices of the new informa-
tion we seek. When we want to test a first impression about someone, we’re more 
likely to pursue information that will confirm that belief than to inquire after 
data that could prove it wrong. That is, people ordinarily display a  confirmation 
bias: They seek information that will prove them right more often than they 
look for examples that would prove them wrong (Snyder, 1981). For instance, 
imagine that you’re instructed to interview a fellow student to find out if he or 
she is a sociable extravert, and you’re handed a list of possible  questions to ask. 
Some of the questions are neutral (e.g., “What are the good and bad points of 
acting friendly and open?”) but others are slanted toward eliciting introverted 
responses (“What do you dislike about loud parties?”) while still others are likely 
to get extraverted answers (“What do you do when you want to liven things up 
When we meet others for the first time, stereotypes and primacy effects influence our 
interpretations of the behavior we observe. Confirmation biases and overconfidence 
may follow.

110 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
at a party?”). How would you conduct the interview? If you’re like most people, 
you’d select questions that probe for evidence that your expectation is correct. 
 That’s just what happened when researchers asked some people to find 
out if a stranger was extraverted, but asked others to find out if the person was 
introverted (Snyder & Swann, 1978b). The two groups of interviewers adopted 
two very different lines of investigation, asking questions that made it likely 
that they’d get examples of the behaviors they expected to find. In fact, the inter-
views were so biased that audiences eavesdropping on them actually believed 
that the strangers really were rather extraverted or introverted, depending on 
the interviewers’ preconceptions. 
 Indeed, the problem with confirmatory biases is that they elicit one-sided 
information about others that fits our preconceptions—and as a result, we too 
rarely confront evidence that shows that our first impressions are wrong. Thus, 
not only may we cling to snap judgments that are incorrect, but we’re also 
often  overconfident , making more mistakes than we realize (Ames et al., 2010). 
Here’s an example. After you begin dating a new romantic partner, you’re 
likely to become confident that you understand his or her sexual history as time 
goes by. You’ll probably feel increasingly  certain, for instance, that you know 
whether or not he or she has a sexually transmitted infection. Unfortunately, 
you’re not likely to be as well-informed as you think. Studies at the University 
of Texas at Austin found that people could not estimate the risk that a new 
acquaintance was HIV-positive as well as they thought they could (Swann 
et al., 1995). They were overconfident when a new relationship began, and as 
the relationship developed, they only got  worse (Swann & Gill, 1997). With 
greater familiarity, they became more certain that they understood their new 
partners well, but their accuracy did not change (see  Figure 4.2 ). 
100
Confidence
50
Length of Relationship
0
Actual Accuracy
Actual and Expected Accuracy
(% correct beliefs)
39%
62%
90%
FIGURE 4.2. Accuracy and (over) confidence in developing relationships.
At the beginning of their relationships, people felt that they knew more about the 
sexual histories of their new partners than they really did. Then, as time went by, they 
became quite certain that they were familiar with all the facts, when in truth, their 
actual accuracy did not improve.
Data from Swann & Gill, 1997.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 111
 So, first impressions matter. We rarely process information about others in 
an unbiased, evenhanded manner. Instead, our existing notions, whether they’re 
simple stereotypes or quick first impressions, affect how we access and what we 
make of the new data we encounter. We are usually unaware of how readily 
we overlook evidence that we could be wrong. We’re not tentative. Armed with 
only some of the facts—those that tend to support our case—we put misplaced 
faith in our judgments of others, being wrong more often than we realize. 
 Now, of course, we come to know our partners better with time and expe-
rience, and first impressions certainly change as people gain familiarity with 
each other (Kammrath et al., 2007). However—and this is the fundamental 
point I wish to make— existing beliefs are influential at every stage of a relation-
ship, and when it comes to our friends and lovers, we may see what we want to 
see and hold confident judgments that aren’t always right. 
 For instance, who are the better judges of how long your current romantic 
relationship will last, you or your parents? Remarkably, when university 
students, their roommates, and their parents were all asked to forecast the future 
of the students’ dating relationships, the parents made better predictions than 
the students did, and the roommates did better still (MacDonald & Ross, 1999). 
You’d think that people would be the best judges of their own relationships, 
but the students focused on the strengths of their partnerships and ignored the 
weaknesses, and as a result, they confidently and optimistically predicted that 
the relationships would last longer than they usually did. Parents and room-
mates were more dispassionate and evenhanded, and although they were less 
We Don’t Always Know Why We Think What We Do
Consider this: When you show up for a 
psychology study, the researcher asks 
you to hold her cup of hot coffee for 
about 20 seconds while she records your 
name on a clipboard. Then, you’re asked 
to form an impression of a stranger who 
is described in a brief vignette. Would 
your warm hands lead you to intuit 
that the stranger is a warm and gener-
ous person? Would you have liked the 
stranger less if you had been holding a 
cup of iced coffee instead? Remarkably, 
the answer to both of those questions is 
yes. Warm hands led research partici-
pants to think warmer thoughts about a 
stranger than cool hands did (Williams 
& Bargh, 2008).
How about this? Would sitting 
at a wobbly table on a wobbly chair 
increase your desire for stability (such 
as trustworthiness and reliability) in a 
mate? The answer is yes, again (Kille 
et al., 2013), and there are two aspects 
of these phenomena that are intriguing. 
First, our impressions of others can be 
shaped by a variety of infl uences, and 
some of them have nothing to do with 
the person who’s being judged. Sec-
ond, the people in these studies were 
completely unaware that current con-
ditions such as the temporary tempera-
ture of their hands were swaying their 
judgments. We don’t always know 
why we hold the opinions we do, and 
on occasion, our impressions of others 
are unwarranted. Both points are valu-
able lessons for a discerning student of 
social cognition.

112 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
confident in their predictions, they were more accurate in predicting what the 
future would hold. In fact, the most accurate predictions of all regarding the 
future of a heterosexual relationship often come from the friends of the woman 
involved (Loving, 2006). If her friends approve of a partnership, it’s likely 
to continue, but if they think the relationship is doomed, it probably is 
(Etcheverry & Agnew, 2004). 
 Thus, the same overconfidence, confirmatory biases, and preconceptions 
that complicate our perceptions of new acquaintances operate in established 
relationships as well. Obviously, we’re not clueless about our relationships, and 
when we’re deliberate and cautious, we make more accurate predictions about 
their futures than we do when we’re in a romantic mood. But it’s hard to be dis-
passionate when we’re devoted to a relationship and want it to continue; in such 
cases we are particularly prone to confirmation biases that support our optimistic 
misperceptions of our partners (Gagné & Lydon, 2004). 
 So, our perceptions of our relationships are often less detached and entirely 
correct than we think they are. And, for better or for worse, they have consider-
able impact on our subsequent feelings and behavior, as we’ll see next.  
 THE POWER OF PERCEPTIONS 
 Our judgments of our relationships and our partners seem to come to us natu-
rally, as if there were only one reasonable way to view them. Little do we real-
ize that we’re often  choosing to adopt the perspectives we use, and we facilitate 
or inhibit our satisfaction with our partners by the choices we make. 
 Idealizing Our Partners 
 What are you looking for in an ideal romantic relationship? As we saw in 
 chapter 3, most of us want a partner who is warm and trustworthy, loyal and 
passionate, and attractive and rich, and our satisfaction depends on how well 
our lovers approach those ideals (Tran et al., 2008). What we usually get, how-
ever, is something less. How, then, do we ever stay happy with the real people 
we attract? 
 One way is to construct charitable, generous perceptions of our partners 
that emphasize their virtues and minimize their faults. People often judge their 
lovers with  positive illusions  that portray their partners in the best possible 
light (Holmes, 2004). Such “illusions” are a mix of realistic knowledge about 
our partners and idealized perceptions of them. They do not ignore a partner’s 
faults; they just consider them to be circumscribed, specific drawbacks that are 
less important and influential than their many assets and advantages are (Neff 
& Karney, 2003). They have all the facts, but they interpret them differently 
than everyone else (Gagné & Lydon, 2003)—so they judge their partners more 
positively than other people do, and even more positively than the partners 
judge themselves (Conley et al., 2009). 
 Isn’t it a little dangerous to hold a lover in such high esteem? Won’t peo-
ple inevitably be disappointed when their partners fail to fulfill such positive 

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 113
perceptions? The answers may depend on just how unrealistic our positive 
illusions are (Neff & Karney, 2005). If we’re genuinely fooling ourselves, imag-
ining desirable qualities in a partner that he or she does not possess, we may be 
dooming ourselves to disillusionment (Tomlinson et al., 2010). It’s not so great 
for our partners, either, when we put them on a pedestal and expect them to be 
perfect (Tomlinson et al., 2014). On the other hand, if we’re aware of all the facts 
but are merely interpreting them in a kind, benevolent fashion, such “illusions” 
can be very beneficial. When we idealize our partners, we’re predisposed to 
judge their behavior in positive ways, and we are more willing to commit our-
selves to maintaining the relationship (Luo et al., 2010). And we can slowly 
convince our partners that they actually are the wonderful people we believe 
them to be because our high regard improves their self-esteem (Murray et al., 
1996). Add it all up, and idealized images of romantic partners are associated 
with greater satisfaction as time goes by (Murray et al., 2011). 
 In addition, there’s a clever way in which we protect ourselves from dis-
illusionment: Over time, as we come to know our partners well, we tend to 
revise our opinions of what we want in an ideal partner so that our standards 
fit the partners we’ve got (Fletcher & Kerr, 2013). To a degree, we conveniently 
decide that the qualities our partners have are the ones we want. 
 Thus, by choosing to look on the bright side—perceiving our partners as 
the best they can be—and by editing our ideals and hopes so that they fit the 
realities we face, we can increase the chances that we’ll be happy with our pres-
ent partners. Indeed, our partners generally know that we’re idolizing them, 
and they usually want us to, within reason (Boyes & Fletcher, 2007)—and if we 
receive such positive, charitable perceptions in return, everybody wins.  
 Attributional Processes 
 Our delight or distress is also affected by the manner in which we choose to 
explain our partners’ behavior. The explanations we generate for why things 
happen—and in particular why a person did or did not do something—are 
called  attributions. An attribution identifies the causes of an event, emphasiz-
ing the impact of some influences and minimizing the role of others. Studies of 
such judgments are important because there are usually several possible expla-
nations for most events in our lives, and they can differ in meaningful ways. 
We can emphasize influences that are either  internal to someone, such as the 
person’s personality, ability, or effort, or  external, implicating the situation or 
circumstances the person faced. For instance (as you’ve probably noticed), stu-
dents who do well on exams typically attribute their success to internal causes 
(such as their preparation and talent) whereas those who do poorly blame 
external factors (such as a tricky test) (Forsyth & Schlenker, 1977). The causes 
of events may also be rather  stable and lasting, as our abilities are, or  unstable 
and transient, such as moods that come and go. Finally, causes can be said to 
be controllable, so that we can manage them, or uncontrollable, so that there’s 
nothing we can do about them. With all of these distinctions in play, diverse 
explanations for a given event may be plausible. And in a close relationship 

114 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
in which interdependent partners may  both be partly responsible for much of 
what occurs, judgments of cause and effect can be especially complicated. 
 Nevertheless, three broad patterns routinely emerge from studies of attri-
butions in relationships. First, despite their intimate knowledge of each other, 
partners are affected by robust  actor/observer effects:  They generate different 
explanations for their own behavior than they do for the similar things they 
see their partners do (Malle, 2006). People are often acutely aware of the exter-
nal pressures that have shaped their own behavior, but they overlook how the 
same circumstances affect others; as a result, they acknowledge external pres-
sures when they explain their own actions, but they make internal attributions 
(for instance, to others’ personalities) when other people behave exactly the 
same way. What makes this phenomenon provocative in close relationships 
is that it leads the partners to overlook how  they  often personally provoke the 
behavior they observe in each other. During an argument, if one partner thinks, 
“she infuriates me so when she does that,” the other is likely to be thinking, 
“he’s so temperamental. He needs to learn to control himself.” This bias is so 
pervasive that two people in almost any interaction are reasonably likely to 
agree about what each of them did but to disagree about why each of them did 
it (Robins et al., 2004). And to complicate things further, the two partners are 
unlikely to be aware of the discrepancies in their attributions; each is likely to 
believe that the other sees things his or her way. When partners make a con-
scious effort to try to understand the other’s point of view, the actor/observer 
discrepancy gets smaller (Arriaga & Rusbult, 1998), but it rarely vanishes com-
pletely (Malle, 2006). The safest strategy is to assume that even your closest 
partners seldom comprehend all your reasons for doing what you do. 
 Second, despite genuine affection for each other, partners are also likely to 
display  self-serving biases in which they readily take credit for their successes 
but try to avoid the blame for their failures. People like to feel responsible for the 
good things that happen to them, but they prefer external excuses when things 
go wrong. Thus, although they won’t tell their partners (Miller & Schlenker, 
1985), they usually think that they personally deserve much of the credit when 
their relationships are going well, but they’re not much to blame if a partnership 
is doing poorly (Thompson & Kelley, 1981). One quality that makes this phenom-
enon interesting is that people expect others to be self-serving, but they don’t 
feel that they are themselves (Kruger & Gilovich, 1999). Most of us readily recog-
nize overreaching ownership of success and flimsy excuses for failure when they 
come from other people, but we think that our own similar, self-serving percep-
tions are sensible and accurate (Pronin et al., 2002). This occurs in part because 
we are aware of—and we give ourselves credit for—our own good intentions, 
even when we fail to follow through on them, but we judge other people only by 
what they do, not what they may have intended to do (Kruger & Gilovich, 2004). 
 This is a provocative phenomenon, so let’s consider how it works. Imagine 
that Fred goes to sleep thinking, “I bet Wilma would like breakfast in bed in the 
morning.” He intends to do something special for her, and he proudly gives 
himself credit for being a thoughtful partner. But when he oversleeps and has 
to dash off to work without actually having done anything generous, he’s likely 

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 115
to continue feeling good about himself: After all, he had kind intentions. In 
contrast, Wilma can only judge Fred by his actions; she’s not a party to what he 
was thinking, and she has no evidence in this instance that he was thoughtful 
at all. Their different sources of information may lead Fred to consider himself 
a better, more considerate partner than Wilma (or anyone else) perceives him 
to be. (Remember those thank-you notes you were intending to write but never 
did? You probably give yourself some credit for wanting to get around to them, 
but all your disappointed grandmother knows is that you never thanked her, 
and you’re behaving like an impolite ingrate!) 
 Subtle processes like these make self-serving explanations of events routine 
in social life. It’s true that loving partners are less self-serving toward each 
other than they are with other people (Sedikides et al., 1998). Nevertheless, self-
serving biases exist even in contented relationships. In particular, when they 
fight with each other, spouses tend to believe that the argument is mostly their 
partner’s fault (Schütz, 1999). And if they have extramarital affairs, people usu-
ally consider their own affairs to be innocuous dalliances, but they consider 
their spouse’s affairs to be grievous betrayals (Buunk, 1987). 
 Thus, partners’ idiosyncratic perspectives allow them to feel that they have 
better excuses for their mistakes than their friends and lovers do. They also 
tend to believe that their partners are the source of most disagreements and 
conflict. Most of us feel that  we’re pretty easy to live with, but  they’re hard to 
put up with sometimes. Such perceptions are 
undoubtedly influential, and, indeed, a third 
important pattern is that the general pattern of a 
couple’s attributions helps determine how satis-
fied they will be with their relationship (Oster-
hout et al., 2011). Happy people make attributions 
for their partners’ behavior that are  relationship 
enhancing. Positive actions by the partner are 
judged to be intentional, habitual, and indicative 
of the partner’s fine character; that is, happy couples make controllable, stable, 
and internal attributions for each other’s positive behavior. They also tend to 
discount one another’s transgressions, seeing them as accidental, unusual, and 
circumstantial; thus, negative behavior is excused with attributions to external, 
unstable, and uncontrollable causes. 
 Through such attributions, satisfied partners magnify their partner’s kind-
nesses and minimize their cruelties, and, as long as a partner’s misbehavior 
really  is just an occasional misstep, these benevolent explanations keep the 
partners happy (McNulty, 2010). But dissatisfied partners do just the oppo-
site, exaggerating the bad and minimizing the good (Fincham, 2001). Unhappy 
people make  distress-maintaining attributions that regard a partner’s negative 
actions as deliberate and routine and positive behavior as unintended and acci-
dental. (See  Figure 4.3 .) Thus, whereas satisfied partners judge each other in 
generous ways that are likely to keep them happy, distressed couples perceive 
each other in an unforgiving fashion that can keep them dissatisfied no matter 
how each behaves. When distressed partners  are nice to one another, each is 
A Point to Ponder
To what extent are you 
able to comprehend your 
partner’s perceptions of 
the role you played in esca-
lating your last argument 
with him or her?

116 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
likely to write off the other’s thoughtfulness as a temporary, uncharacteristic 
lull in the negative routine. When kindnesses seem accidental and hurts seem 
deliberate, satisfaction is hard to come by. 
 Where does such a self-defeating pattern come from? Attachment 
styles are influential. People with secure styles tend to tolerantly employ 
 relationship-enhancing attributions, but insecure people are more  pessimistic 
(Pearce & Halford, 2008). And disappointments of various sorts may cause 
anyone to gradually adopt a pessimistic perspective (Karney & Bradbury, 
2000). But one thing is clear: Maladaptive attributions can lead to cantanker-
ous behavior and ineffective problem solving (Hrapczynski et al., 2011), and 
they can cause dissatisfaction that would not have occurred otherwise (Sillars 
et al., 2010). With various points of view at their disposal, people can choose 
to explain a partner’s behavior in ways that are endearing and forgiving, or 
 pessimistic and pejorative—and the success of their relationship may ulti-
mately hang in the balance. 
 Memories 
 Our perceptions of the current events in our relationships are obviously influ-
ential. So are our memories of the things that have happened in the past. 
Unhappy
Distress 
maintaining
Positive
Negative
External
Unstable
Uncontrollable
Internal
Stable
Controllable
Happy
Relationship
enhancing
Positive
Negative
Internal
Stable
Controllable
Attributions
Made
Attributional
Pattern
State of the
Couple’s
Relationship
Partner’s
Behavior
External
Unstable
Uncontrollable
FIGURE 4.3. Attributions made by happy and unhappy couples.
Relationship-enhancing attributions give partners credit for thoughtful, generous 
actions and excuse undesirable behavior as a temporary aberration. Distress-
maintaining attributions do just the opposite; they blame partners for undesirable 
conduct but give them no credit for the nice things they do.
Data from Brehm &  Kassin ©1990.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 117
 We usually assume that our memories are faithful representations of past 
events. In particular, we’re likely to trust vivid memories because they seem 
so certain and detailed. But years of research (see Della Sala, 2010) have clearly 
demonstrated that we edit and update our memories—even seemingly vivid 
ones—as new events unfold, so that what we remember about the past is always 
a mix of what h appened then and what we know now. Psychologists use the 
term  reconstructive memory to describe the manner in which our memories are 
continually revised and rewritten as new information is obtained. 
 Reconstructive memory influences our relationships. For one thing, part-
ners’ current feelings about each other influence what they remember about 
their shared past (Luchies et al., 2013). If they’re presently happy, people tend 
to forget past disappointments; but if they’re unhappy and their relationship is 
failing, they underestimate how happy and loving they used to be. These tricks 
of memory help us adjust to the situations we encounter, but they often leave 
us feeling that our relationships have always been more stable and predictable 
than they really were—and that can promote damaging overconfidence. 
 The good news is that by misremembering their past, partners can remain 
optimistic about their future (Lemay & Neal, 2013). At any given point in time, 
contented lovers are likely to recall that they have had some problems in the 
past but that things have recently gotten better, so 
they are happier now than they used to be (Karney 
& Frye, 2002). What’s notable about this pattern 
is that, if you follow couples over time, they’ll tell 
you this over and over even when their satisfac-
tion with each other is gradually eroding instead 
of increasing (Frye & Karney, 2004). Evidently, by 
remembering recent improvement in their partner-
ships that has not occurred, people remain happier than they might otherwise 
be. Like other perceptions, our memories influence our subsequent behavior 
and emotions in our intimate relationships (Simpson et al., 2010).  
 Relationship Beliefs 
 People also enter their partnerships with established beliefs about how rela-
tionships work. One common set of beliefs is  romanticism, the view that love 
should be the most important basis for choosing a mate (Weaver & Ganong, 
2004). People who are high in romanticism believe that (a) each of us has only 
one perfect, “true” love; (b) true love will find a way to overcome any obsta-
cle; and (c) love is possible at first sight. These beliefs apparently provide a 
rosy glow to a new relationship—romantic people experience more love, 
satisfaction, and commitment in the first few months of their romantic part-
nerships than unromantic people do—but these beliefs tend to erode as time 
goes by (Sprecher & Metts, 1999). Real relationships rarely meet such lofty 
expectations.       
 At least romantic beliefs appear to be fairly benign.  The same cannot be 
said for some other beliefs that are clearly disadvantageous. Certain beliefs that 
A Point to Ponder
When a relationship ends 
badly, how accurately are 
you able to remember how 
wonderful it seemed back 
when it was going well?

118 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
people have about relationships are  dysfunctional; that is, they appear to have 
adverse effects on the quality of relationships, making it less likely that the 
partners will be satisfied (Goodwin & Gaines, 2004). What ideas could people 
have that could have such deleterious effects? Here are six:
  •  Disagreements are destructive . Disagreements mean that my partner doesn’t 
love me enough. If we loved each other sufficiently, we would never disagree. 
  •  “Mindreading” is essential . People who really care about each other ought to 
be able to intuit each other’s needs and preferences without having to be 
told what they are. My partner doesn’t love me enough if I have to tell him 
or her what I want or need. 
  •  Partners cannot change . Once things go wrong, they’ll stay that way. If a 
lover has faults, he or she won’t improve. 
  •  Sex should be perfect every time . Sex should always be wonderful and fulfill-
ing if our love is pure. We should always want, and be ready for, sex.  
  •  Men and women are different . The personalities and needs of men and women 
are so dissimilar, you really can’t understand someone of the other sex. 
  •  Great relationships just happen . You don’t need to work at maintaining a 
good relationship. People are either compatible with each other and des-
tined to be happy together or they’re not. 
 Most of these beliefs were identified by Roy Eidelson and Norman Epstein 
(1982) years ago, and since then, studies have shown that they put people at 
© Barbara Smaller/The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank.
The belief that all you have to do to live happily ever after is to find the right, perfect 
partner is not advantageous.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 119
risk for distress and dissatisfaction in close relationships (Knee & Petty, 2013). 
They’re unrealistic. When disagreements do occur—as they always do—they 
seem momentous to people who hold these views. Any dispute implies that 
their love is imperfect. Worse, people with these perspectives do not behave 
constructively when problems arise. Believing that people can’t change and 
that true love just happens, such people don’t try to solve problems but just 
avoid them (Franiuk et al., 2002), and they report more interest in ending the 
relationship than in working to repair it (Knee et al., 2003). 
 In their work on relationship beliefs, Chip Knee and his colleagues refer 
to perspectives like these as  destiny beliefs because they assume that two 
people are either well suited for each other and destined to live happily ever 
after, or they’re not (Knee & Petty, 2013). Destiny beliefs take an inflexible view 
of intimate partnerships (see Table 4.1). They suggest that if two people are 
meant to be happy, they’ll know it as soon as they meet; they’ll not encounter 
early doubts or difficulties, and once two soulmates find each other, a happy 
future is ensured.  This is the manner in which Hollywood often portrays love 
in romantic comedies—and people who watch such movies do tend to believe 
that true loves are meant to be (Hefner & Wilson, 2013).
TABLE 4.1. Destiny and Growth Beliefs
Chip Knee (1998) measured destiny and growth beliefs with these items. Respondents 
were asked to rate their agreement or disagreement with each item using this scale:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
strongly disagree
strongly agree
 1. Potential relationship partners are either compatible or they are not.
 2. The ideal relationship develops gradually over time.
 3. A successful relationship is mostly a matter of finding a compatible partner right 
from the start.
 4. Challenges and obstacles in a relationship can make love even stronger.
 5. Potential relationship partners are either destined to get along or they are not.
 6. A successful relationship is mostly a matter of learning to resolve conflicts with a 
partner.
 7. Relationships that do not start off well inevitably fail.
 8. A successful relationship evolves through hard work and resolution of 
incompatibilities.
Source: Knee, 1998.
As you undoubtedly surmised, the odd-numbered items assess a destiny orientation 
and the even-numbered items assess a growth orientation. A scale with these items and 
14 more is now used in destiny and growth research (Knee & Petty, 2013), but these 
classic items are still excellent examples of the two sets of beliefs. Do you agree with 
one set of ideas more than the other?

120 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
Different views, which you rarely see at the movies, assume that happy rela-
tionships are the result of hard work (Knee & Petty, 2013). According to growth 
beliefs, good relationships are believed to develop gradually as the partners 
work at surmounting challenges and overcoming obstacles, and a basic pre-
sumption is that with enough effort, almost any relationship can succeed.
 As you might expect, these different views of relationships generate 
 different outcomes when difficulties arise (and as it turns out, Hollywood 
isn’t doing us any favors). When couples argue or a partner misbehaves, peo-
ple who hold growth beliefs remain more committed to the relationship and 
more optimistic that any damage can be repaired than do those who do not 
hold such views. And those who hold growth beliefs can discuss their lovers’ 
imperfections with equanimity; in contrast, people who hold destiny beliefs 
become hostile when they are asked to confront their partners’ faults (Knee & 
Petty, 2013). 
 Thus, some relationship beliefs are more adaptive than others (Cobb 
et al., 2013). Left to themselves, these perspectives tend to be stable and 
lasting (Franiuk et al., 2002), but they can change with education and insight 
Attachment Styles and Perceptions of Partners
Relationship beliefs can vary a lot from 
person to person, and another individual 
difference that’s closely tied to the way 
people think about their partnerships is 
attachment style (Mikulincer & Shaver, 
2013). People with different styles are 
thought to have  different “mental mod-
els” of relationships; they hold different 
beliefs about what relationships are like, 
expect different behavior from their 
partners, and form different judgments 
of what their partners do. I’ve already 
noted that secure people are more 
likely than those with insecure styles to 
employ  relationship-enhancing attribu-
tions (Pearce &  Halford, 2008); they’re 
also less likely to hold maladaptive 
relationship beliefs (Stackert & Bursik, 
2003). Secure people trust their part-
ners more (Mikulincer, 1998), believe 
that their partners are more support-
ive (Collins & Feeney, 2004), and have 
more positive expectations about what 
the future holds (Birnie et al., 2009). 
They’re also more likely than insecure 
people to remember positive things 
that have happened in the past (Miller 
& Noirot, 1999). Even their dreams are 
different; compared to those who are 
insecure, secure people portray others 
in their dreams as being more available 
and supportive and as offering greater 
comfort (Mikulincer et al., 2011). In gen-
eral, then, people with secure styles are 
more generous, optimistic, and kindly 
in their judgments of others than inse-
cure people are.
Attachment styles can change, 
as we saw in chapter 1, but no mat-
ter what style people have, they tend 
to remember the past as being consis-
tent with what they’re thinking now 
(Feeney & Cassidy, 2003). Happily, if 
positive experiences in a rewarding 
relationship help us gradually develop 
a more relaxed and trusting outlook on 
intimacy with others, we may slowly 
forget that we ever felt any other way.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 121
(Sharp & Ganong, 2000). Indeed, if you recognize any of your own views among 
the dysfunctional beliefs three pages back, I hope that these findings are enlight-
ening. Unrealistic assumptions can be so idealistic and starry-eyed that no rela-
tionship measures up to them, and distress and disappointment are certain 
to follow.  
 Expectations 
 When relationship beliefs are wrong, they stay wrong. In contrast, people can 
also have more specific expectations about the behavior of others that are ini-
tially false but that become true (Rosenthal, 2006). I’m referring here to  self-
fulfilling prophecies, which are false predictions that become true because 
they lead people to behave in ways that make the erroneous expectations come 
true. Self-fulfilling prophecies are extraordinary examples of the power of per-
ceptions because the events that result from them occur only because people 
expect them to, and then act as if they will. 
 Let’s examine  Figure 4.4 together to detail how this process works. As a 
first step in a self-fulfilling prophecy, a person whom we’ll call the  perceiver 
forms an expectancy  about someone else—the  target —that predicts how the tar-
get will behave. Various information about the target, such as his or her age, 
sex, race, physical attractiveness, or social class may affect the perceiver’s judg-
ments in ways of which the perceiver is unaware. 
P interprets the
target’s response.
Ignoring his or her
role in producing
it; support for the
expectancy is likely
to be perceived.
P forms an expectancy
about the target.
Based on stereotype,
casual knowledge,
or prior contact.
T interprets the
perceiver’s behavior.
T responds.
Usually in a reciprocal
fashion, meeting kind-
ness with kindness,
hostility with hostility.
P acts.
Subtly communicating
his or her expectancy
to the target.
FIGURE 4.4. A self-fulfilling prophecy.
Originally false expectations held by a perceiver (P) can seem to come true when he or 
she interacts with someone else, his or her target (T).

122 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
 Then, in an important second step, the  perceiver acts, usually in a fashion 
that is in accord with his or her expectations. Indeed, it may be hard for the 
perceiver to avoid subtly communicating what he or she really thinks about 
the target. People with favorable expectations, for instance, interact longer and 
more often with their targets, sharing more eye contact, sitting closer, smiling 
more, asking more questions, and encouraging more responses than do per-
ceivers who have less positive expectations (Rosenthal, 2006). 
 The recipient of the perceiver’s behavior is likely to notice all of this, and 
the  target’s interpretation will influence his or her response (Stukas & Snyder, 
2002). In most cases, however, when the  target responds in the fourth step, it 
will be in a manner that is similar to the perceiver’s behavior toward him or 
her. Enthusiasm is usually met with interest (Snyder et al., 1977), hostility with 
counterattacks (Snyder & Swann, 1978a), and flirtatiousness with allurement 
(Ridge & Reber, 2002). Thus, the perceiver usually elicits from the target the 
behavior he or she expected, and that may be nothing like the way the target 
would have behaved if the perceiver hadn’t expected it. 
 But such is the nature of a self-fulfilling prophecy that, as the  perceiver 
 interprets the target’s response, the perceiver is unlikely to recognize the role that 
he or she played in producing it (McNulty & Karney, 2002). The actor/observer 
effect will lead the perceiver to attribute the target’s behavior to the target’s 
personality or mood. And after all, the perceiver found in the target the behav-
ior he or she expected; what better evidence is there that the perceiver’s expec-
tations were correct? (This is another reason that we tend to be overconfident in 
our judgments of others; when we make our false expectations come true, we 
never realize that we were ever wrong!) 
 Here, then, is another fundamental reason that our perceptions of others 
are so influential. They not only influence our interpretations of the informa-
tion we gain, they also guide our behavior toward others. We often get what 
we expect from others, and that is sometimes behavior that would not have 
occurred without our prompting—but we’re rarely aware of how our expecta-
tions have created their own realities. 
 Mark Snyder and his colleagues (1977) provided an elegant example of 
this when they led men at the University of Minnesota to believe that they 
were chatting on the phone with women who were either very attractive or 
quite unattractive. The experimenters gave each man a fake photograph of the 
woman with whom he’d be getting acquainted and then recorded the ensuing 
conversations to see what happened. Men who thought they’d be talking to 
gorgeous women had higher expectations than those who anticipated a con-
versation with a plain partner, and they were much more eager and interested 
when the interactions began; listeners rated them as more sociable, warm, out-
going, and bold. The men’s (often erroneous) judgments of the women were 
clearly reflected in their behavior toward them. How did the women respond 
to such treatment? They had no knowledge of having been labeled as gorgeous 
or homely, but they did know that they were talking to a man who sounded 
either enthusiastic or aloof. As a result, the men got what they expected: The 
women who were presumed to be attractive really did sound more alluring, 

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 123
reacting to their obviously interested partners with warmth and appeal of their 
own. By comparison, the women who talked with relatively detached men 
who thought they were unattractive sounded pretty drab. In both cases, the 
men elicited from the women the behavior they expected whether or not their 
expectations were accurate. 
 Because they guide our actions toward others, our expectations are not 
inert. Another fascinating example of this was obtained when researchers 
sent people to chat with strangers after leading them to expect that the strang-
ers would probably either like or dislike them (Curtis & Miller, 1986). Par-
ticipants in the study were told that, to study different types of interactions, 
the researchers had given a stranger bogus advance information about them, 
and they could anticipate either a friendly or an unfriendly reaction from the 
stranger when they met. In truth, however, none of the strangers had been told 
anything at all about the participants, and the false expectations that the inter-
action would go well or poorly existed only in the minds of the participants 
themselves. (Imagine yourself in this intriguing position: You  think someone 
you’re about to meet already likes or dislikes you, but the other person really 
doesn’t know anything about you at all.) What happened? People got what 
they expected. Expecting to be liked, people greeted others in an engaging, 
open, positive way—they behaved in a likable manner—and really  were liked 
by the strangers they met. However, those who expected to be disliked were 
cautious and defensive and were much less forthcoming, and they actually got 
their partners to dislike them. Once again, false expectations created their own 
behavioral reality—and positive expectations were beneficial and advanta-
geous, but negative expectations were not. 
 Indeed, over time, people who chronically hold different sorts of 
expectations about others may create different sorts of social worlds for 
themselves (Stinson et al., 2009). For instance, Geraldine Downey and her 
colleagues have demonstrated that people who tend to worry about rejec-
tion from others often behave in ways that make such rejection more likely 
(Romero-Canyas et al., 2009). People who are high in  rejection sensitivity tend 
to anxiously perceive snubs from others when none are intended. Then they 
overreact, fearfully displaying more hostility and defensiveness than others 
would (Romero-Canyas et al., 2010). Their behavior is obnoxious, and as a 
result, both they and their partners tend to be dissatisfied with their close 
relationships. 
 The flip side of rejection sensitivity may be  optimism, the tendency to expect 
good things to happen. People who are chronically optimistic enjoy more sat-
isfying close relationships than do those who are less hopeful because their 
positive expectations have beneficial effects on their partnerships (Carver & 
Scheier, 2009). They perceive their partners to be more supportive than pes-
simists do (Srivastava et al., 2006), and they report that they’re able to solve 
problems with their partners cooperatively and creatively and well (Assad 
et al., 2007). Their expectations that they can resolve their difficulties evidently 
lead them to address any problems with hopeful confidence and energy that 
actually do make the problems more manageable. 

124 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
Nonconscious Social Cognition
If you stop and think, you’ll probably 
recognize most of the elements of social 
cognition we’ve discussed so far. Some 
attributions, beliefs, and expectations 
may be habitual, operating almost auto-
matically without any deliberation or 
contemplation. But they are still con-
scious processes; if we turn our atten-
tion to them, we can identify them, and 
we know they’re at work.
Our close relationships can have 
some effects on us, however, of which 
we are completely unaware. We can 
learn lessons from our intimate connec-
tions to others that infl uence our actions 
later on in ways that we never notice 
(Chen et al., 2013).
For instance, particular relation-
ships with others are sometimes charac-
terized by recurring themes. Your father, 
for example, may have constantly urged 
you to get good grades in school. Now, 
if something subtly reminds you of 
your father—and you like him—you 
may persevere longer at a diffi cult task 
than you would have had you not been 
reminded of him (Fitzsimons & Finkel, 
2010). You may act as if your father were 
standing behind you, urging you on. On 
the other hand, if you didn’t like your 
father and you’re reminded of him, 
you may do something that he would 
not have wanted you to do (Chartrand 
et al., 2007). What makes these patterns 
provocative is that the “reminder” can 
be his name fl ashed in front of your eyes 
so quickly that you cannot be sure what 
you saw (Shah, 2003). In such a case, 
you may have no conscious thought 
of your Dad and may not realize that 
you’ve been subliminally reminded of 
him, but your past experiences with 
him may nevertheless guide your pres-
ent behavior.
In addition, we unwittingly but 
routinely import old experiences into 
our new relationships. If new acquain-
tances resemble others who treated us 
badly in the past, we may unintention-
ally behave more coolly toward the 
newcomers without realizing it. Those 
actions may elicit less friendly reactions 
from them, and we may begin to cre-
ate new unpleasant relationships that 
resemble our unhappy past experiences 
without our past partners ever com-
ing consciously to mind (Berenson & 
Andersen, 2006).
Happily, nonconscious infl uences 
can work for us, too. If a new acquain-
tance resembles someone with whom 
you shared good times, your interac-
tions may get off to an especially good 
start. Although you may not consciously 
be reminded of your prior partner, you 
may, without meaning to, be particularly 
warm and sociable (Chen et al., 2013).
Thus, we’re not aware of all the 
ways that the baggage we bring to new 
partnerships can infl uence our out-
comes. Some encounters with others 
can trigger nonconscious tendencies 
learned in past relationships that we do 
not even r ealize exist.
 Altogether, then, our perceptions of our partners, the attributions we 
make, and the beliefs and expectations we bring to our relationships can exert a 
p owerful influence on the events that follow. Our judgments of each other mat-
ter. And those of us who expect others to be trustworthy, generous, and loving 
may find that others actually  are good to us more often than those with more 
pessimistic perspectives find others being kind to them.  

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 125
 Self-Perceptions 
  A last example of the power of our perceptions lies in the judgments we 
form of  ourselves.  Our discussion of self-esteem in chapter 1 noted that our 
self-evaluations are potent influences on our interactions.   But self-esteem is 
just one part of our broader  self-concepts, which encompass all of the beliefs 
and feelings we have about ourselves. Our self-concepts include a wide array 
of self-knowledge along with our self-esteem, and all the components of the 
self-concept are intimately tied to our relationships with others. 
 During social interaction, our self-concepts try to fulfill two different func-
tions (Swann & Buhrmester, 2012). On the one hand, people seek feedback from 
others that will  enhance their self-concepts and allow them to think of them-
selves as desirable, attractive, competent people. We like to hear good things 
about ourselves, and we try to associate with others who will help us support 
positive self-images. 
 On the other hand, because it’s unsettling to encounter information that 
contradicts our beliefs, we also want feedback that sustains our existing 
self-concepts. For better or worse, our self-concepts play vital roles in orga-
nizing our views of the world; they make life predictable and support coher-
ent expectations about what each day will bring. Without a stable, steady 
self-concept, social life would be a confusing, chaotic jumble, and being 
constantly confronted with information that contradicts our self-images 
would be unnerving. For that reason, people are also comforted by feedback 
from others that is consistent with what they already think about themselves 
and that  verifies  their existing self-concepts (Ayduk et al., 2013), and this is 
true around the world (Seih et al., 2013). 
 These two motives,  self-enhancement —the desire for positive, compli-
mentary feedback—and  self-verification —the desire for feedback that is con-
sistent with one’s existing self-concept—go hand-in-hand for people who like 
themselves and who have positive self-concepts. When such people associate 
with others who compliment and praise them, they receive feedback that is 
simultaneously self-enhancing and self-verifying. But life is more complex 
for people who genuinely consider themselves to be unskilled and unlovable. 
Positive evaluations from others make them feel good but threaten their nega-
tive self-images; negative feedback and criticism affirm their self-concepts but 
feel bad. 
 How do both motives coexist in people with negative self-concepts? One 
answer is that people with poor self-concepts like global praise that suggests 
that their partners are happy with them, but they prefer self-verifying feed-
back about their specific faults (Neff & Karney, 2005). Partners who accurately 
 recognize your deficiencies but who like you anyway appear to satisfy both 
motives (Lackenbauer et al., 2010). Self-enhancement also appears to be a 
more automatic, relatively nonconscious response that is primarily emotional 
whereas self-verification emerges from deliberate and conscious cognition. 
What this means is that people with poor self-concepts  like praise and compli-
ments from others, but once they get a chance to  think about them, they don’t 
believe or trust such feedback (Swann et al., 1990). 

126 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
 Okay, so what? The relevance of these phenomena to the study of rela-
tionships lies in the fact that if people are choosing relationship partners care-
fully, they’ll seek intimate partners who  support their existing self-concepts, good 
or bad (Swann & Buhrmester, 2012). Here’s an example: Imagine that after a 
semester of sharing a double room in a college dorm, you’re asked if you want 
to change roommates. You have a positive self-concept, and your roommate 
likes you and tells you so. Do you want to leave? Probably not. But if your 
roommate  dis liked you and constantly disparaged you, you’d probably want 
out. You’d not want to live with someone who disagreed with you about who 
you are because it would be wearying and unpleasant to have to face such a 
contrary point of view all the time. 
 Now imagine that you have a lousy self-concept and you’re paired with 
a roommate who constantly tells you that there’s no reason to doubt yourself. 
Such encouragement feels great, and you want more, right? Wrong. The motive 
to protect and maintain our existing self-concepts is so strong that people with 
negative self-concepts want to  escape roommates who perceive them positively; 
they’d rather have roommates who dislike them (Swann & Pelham, 2002). Such 
disapproval is unpleasant, but at least it reassures the recipients that the world 
is a predictable place. 
 Things get more complicated in romantic relationships. When people 
choose dating partners, self-enhancement is preeminent; everybody seeks 
partners who like and accept them. Thus, even people with poor self-concepts 
pursue casual partners who provide positive feedback. However, in more inter-
dependent, committed relationships such as marriages, self-verification rises to 
the fore—a phenomenon called the  marriage shift —and people want feedback 
that supports their self-concepts (Swann et al., 1994). (See  Figure 4.5 .) If people 
with negative self-images find themselves married to spouses who praise and 
appreciate them, they’ll gradually find ways to avoid their spouses as much 
as possible: 
 
  Imagine a man who receives what he construes to be undeserved praise 
from his wife. Although such praise may make him feel optimistic and 
happy at first, the positive glow will recede if he concludes that his wife 
could not possibly believe what she said. . . . [or] he may decide that she is a 
fool. In either case, overly favorable evaluations from someone who knows 
one well may foster a sense of uneasiness, inauthenticity, and distrust of 
the person who delivered them. ( Swann, 1996, p. 118 ) 
 On the other hand, if their spouses belittle them, people with negative self-
concepts will stay close at hand. (And of course, it’s the other way around for 
those who have positive self-concepts.) 
 Overall, then, our self-concepts help direct our choices of intimate part-
ners. Approval and acceptance from others is always pleasant, but in meaning-
ful relationships over the long haul, people prefer reactions from others that 
confirm what they think of themselves. And that means that although most 
of us will be most content with spouses who uplift us, people with negative 

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 127
60
Married
10
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
20
30
40
Our Commitment  to Partner
Partner’s Appraisal of Us
Better
Worse
50
60
Dating
10
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
20
30
40
Our  Commitment  to Partner
Partner’s Appraisal of Us
Better
Worse
50
Positive self-concept
Negative self-concept
FIGURE 4.5. The marriage shift in self-verification.
Self-enhancement is obvious in dating partnerships: We feel closer to dating partners 
who approve of us than to those who think we’re flawed. But once people marry, self-
verification rises to the fore. People with negative self-concepts actually feel closer to 
spouses who don’t approve of them than to those who do. Beware of the marriage shift 
if your current romantic partner has low self-esteem.
Source: Swann et al., 1994.
self-concepts will not; they feel better understood by, and closer to, partners 
who verify their low opinions of themselves (Letzring & Noftle, 2010).  3   
 IMPRESSION MANAGEMENT 
 Others’ impressions of us are obviously very important. And because they are, we 
often try to control the information that others receive about us. We sometimes try 
to make deliberate impressions on others, choosing our actions, our words, our 
apparel, our settings, and even our associates carefully to pre sent a certain pub-
lic image. On other occasions, when we’re not consciously pursuing a particular 
impression, we often fall into habitual patterns of behavior that portray us in ways 
that have elicited desirable responses from others in the past (Schlenker, 2012). 
3  Of course, self-concepts can change, and the ease with which they do depends on the certainty 
with which they are held. The good news is that if you suspect you’re a nincompoop but aren’t 
really sure, positive feedback from an adoring lover may change your self-image as you enjoy, and 
come to believe, what your partner says (Stinson et al., 2010). The bad news is that if you’re quite 
sure you’re unworthy, you’ll feel more at home around those who know you well enough to take 
you as you are—that is, those who  agree that you’re unworthy. 

128 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
So, whether or not we’re thinking about it, we’re often engaging in   impression 
 management, trying to influence the impressions of us that others form. 
 This is a significant idea for at least two reasons. First, nearly anything we 
do in the presence of others may be strategically regulated in the service of 
impression management. Women eat less on a date with an attractive man than 
they would have eaten had they been out with their girlfriends ( Robillard & 
Jarry, 2007). Men take greater risks (and incur more sensational crashes) on 
their skateboards (Ronay & von Hippel, 2010), pretend to be unaffected by hor-
ror films (Dosmukhambetova & Manstead, 2012), and display flashier  luxury 
goods4 (Sundie et al., 2011) when they want to impress women. Both sexes 
drink more when the other sex is present (O’Grady et al., 2012). During sex, 
women cry out in exaggerated pleasure (Brewer & Hendrie, 2011), and both 
sexes will occasionally fake orgasms (about one-fourth of the men and two-
thirds of the women in a Kansas sample had done so) (Muehlenhard &  Shippee, 
2010). Indeed, any public behavior may communicate meaningful information 
about us to others. The e-mail addresses we select (Back et al., 2008b), the 
4 One does not buy a $450,000 Porsche Carrera GT with only two seats, a tiny trunk, and lousy gas 
mileage for transportation alone.
Narcissism and Relationships
A negative self-concept can evidently 
have an adverse impact on one’s 
relationships, but an overly positive 
self-concept can be problematic, too. 
Narcissists possess highly inflated, 
unrealistic perceptions of their talents, 
desirability, and self-worth. Their self-
perceptions are grandiose (Foster & 
Twenge, 2011), and they’re prone to 
strong self-serving biases (Stucke, 2003); 
if things go well, they want all the credit, 
but if things go wrong, they will accept 
none of the blame. They’re touchy, too; 
their excessive pride leads them to over-
react to imagined slights from others, 
and they’re always alert for any hint 
of disrespect (McCullough et al., 2003). 
Being full of themselves, they feel cru-
elly wronged when they judge that peo-
ple are disrespectful or uncaring, so they 
react more angrily and aggressively 
than others would (Brunell et al., 2011).
When they enter close relation-
ships, narcissists are chronically less 
committed to their romantic partners 
than others are. Their arrogant sense of 
entitlement leads them to stay on the 
prowl, looking for more desirable part-
ners than the ones they have (Campbell 
& Foster, 2002). They work less hard to 
please their current partners and con-
stantly think they deserve “better.”
Narcissists obviously make rather 
poor partners, but it is sometimes sur-
prisingly hard for all the rest of us to 
see that at fi rst (Back et al., 2010). They 
dress really well (Holtzman & Strube, 
2013), and early on, their self-assurance 
can be appealing (Dufner et al., 2013), 
and it often takes time to realize how 
selfi sh and exploitative and touchy they 
really are. Thus, narcissism often takes 
the form of a “fatal attraction”; it may 
be attractive at fi rst but deadly in the 
long run (Foster & Twenge, 2011), and it 
presents a challenge to us to be as astute 
in our judgments of potential partners 
as we can possibly be.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 129
Second Life avatars we build (Bélisle et al., 2008), and, of course, the Facebook 
profiles we construct (check out the box on the next page) all allow strangers to 
gauge some of our personality traits surprisingly well. 
 A second reason that impression management matters is that it is a perva-
sive influence on social life. Others’ evaluations of us are eventful, and when 
we are in the presence of others, we are rarely unconcerned about what they 
may be thinking of us (Miller, 1996). By provid-
ing a means with which we can influence others’ 
judgments, impression management increases our 
chances of accomplishing our interpersonal objec-
tives. And there’s rarely anything dishonest going 
on; impression management is seldom deceitful or 
duplicitous. Yes, people fake orgasms, and women 
misrepresent their weight, and men their height, in 
their online profiles (Hitsch et al., 2010), but most 
impression management involves revealing, per-
haps in a selective fashion, one’s real attributes to 
others ( Schlenker, 2012). By announcing some of their attitudes but not men-
tioning others, for example, people may appear to have something in common 
with almost anyone they meet; this simple tactic of impression management 
facilitates graceful and rewarding social interaction and does not involve 
u ntruthfulness at all. Because others reject frauds and cheats, people seldom 
pretend to be things they are not.  
 Strategies of Impression Management 
 Nevertheless, because most of us have diverse interests and talents, we can 
honestly attempt to create many distinct impressions, and we may seek differ-
ent images in different situations. Indeed, people routinely use four different 
broad strategies of impression management (Jones & Pittman, 1982). We use 
 ingratiation when we seek acceptance and liking from others; we do favors, 
pay compliments, mention areas of agreement, describe ourselves in desir-
able ways, and are generally charming to get others to like us. Ingratiation is 
a common form of impression management with romantic partners (Nezlek 
et al., 2007), and as long as such efforts are not transparently manipulative or 
obviously insincere (Tenney & Spellman, 2011), they usually do elicit favorable 
reactions from others (Proost et al., 2010). 
 On other occasions, when we wish our abilities to be recognized and 
respected by others, we may engage in  self-promotion, recounting our accom-
plishments or strategically arranging public demonstrations of our skills. Self-
promotion is a frequent strategy of impression management in a workplace 
(Nezlek et al., 2007), but even in professional settings, vigorous self-promotion 
can be risky for women because it risks seeming “unladylike” (Moss-Racusin 
& Rudman, 2010). Nevertheless, during a job interview, self-promotion makes 
a better impression than ingratiation does—and a combination of the two does 
even better (Proost et al., 2010). 
A Point to Ponder
You realize that a friend 
has posted pictures on 
a dating site that are 
2 years old, when she was 
10 pounds lighter. Is her 
choice of images disrepu-
table duplicity or a savvy 
strategy?

130 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
 Both ingratiation and self-promotion create socially desirable impres-
sions, but other strategies create  un desirable images. Through  intimidation, 
people portray themselves as ruthless, dangerous, and menacing so that 
 others will do their bidding. Such behavior is obnoxious and tends to drive 
others away, but if it’s used only occasionally—or if the recipients are chil-
dren or impoverished spouses with no place else to go—intimidation may 
get people what they want. Finally, using the strategy of  supplication, peo-
ple sometimes pre sent themselves as inept or infirm to avoid obligations and 
to elicit help and support from others. People who claim that they’re “just too 
tired” to do the dishes after a “hard day at work” are engaging in supplica-
tion. If ingratiation and self- promotion work for them, most people avoid 
So, What Are You Showing the World on Facebook?
When we put profiles and post pictures on Facebook, we’re engaging in impression 
management, selecting the information we make available to our social networks. 
You can limit what others see with your privacy settings, of course, but you may be 
surprised at just how much strangers can learn about you if they inspect your page.
Let’s start with the basics. Let’s assume that others don’t get to read your profi le 
or see any pictures—they just look at your “likes” (which are public, after all, unless 
you go to some trouble to hide them). An analysis of the endorsements made by 
58,466 American volunteers found that the patterns of their likes made it easy to 
discern whether they were male or female and white or black. Sexual orientation was 
also pretty obvious, and whether or not one’s parents were divorced, one was pres-
ently in a relationship, and one was using drugs were all surprisingly plain (Kosinski 
et al., 2013). Here’s the scorecard:
Add in your profi le, your pictures, 
and your posts, and you make some of 
those characteristics known for certain. 
More interestingly, strangers gain use-
ful insight into how extraverted, agree-
able, and conscientious you are; those 
personality traits are visible in your 
behavior on Facebook (Tskhay & Rule, 
2014). We can also all get some sense of 
how your romantic relationship is far-
ing: People who post a profi le picture 
of themselves with their partners are 
more satisfi ed with their relationships, 
Personal 
Characteristic
Researchers’ 
Accuracy
Sex
93%
Race
95%
Sexual orientation (men)
88%
Sexual orientation 
(women)
75%
Single/in a relationship
67%
Using drugs
65%
Divorced parents
60%
on average, than others are. They also share more information about their relation-
ships on days when things are going well (Saslow et al., 2013).
We know, of course, that anything we post on Facebook can be seen by anyone 
who can access our page. What’s notable from these recent studies is how much 
others may learn about you that you didn’t intend to tell.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 131
using intimidation and supplication because most of us prefer to be liked and 
respected rather than feared or pitied. But almost everyone uses intimida-
tion and supplication occasionally. If you’ve ever made a point of showing 
a partner that you were angry about something or sad about something else 
to get your way, you were using intimidation and supplication, respectively 
(Clark et al., 1996).  
 Impression Management in Close Relationships 
Two specific features of impression management with intimate partners are 
worthy of mention. First, the motivation with which people manage their 
impressions differs, and these differences are consequential (Nezlek & Leary, 
2002). People who are high in the trait of self-monitoring readily adjust their 
behavior to fit the varying norms of different situations. They’re alert to social 
cues that suggest what they should do, and they are ready, willing, and able 
to tailor their behavior to fit in. By comparison, low self-monitors are both 
less attentive to social norms and less flexible; they have smaller repertoires of 
skills, so they behave more consistently from one situation to the next, making 
the same stable impressions even when they don’t fit in. High self-monitors, 
then, are more changeable and energetic impression managers (Parks-Leduc 
et al., 2014).
 These different styles lead to different networks of friends. Because they 
more often switch images from one audience to the next, high self-monitors 
tend to have more friends than low self-monitors do, but they have less 
in common with each of them. 5 High self-monitors often surround them-
selves with “activity specialists,” partners who are great companions for 
some particular pleasure—such as a “tennis buddy” or “ballet friend”—but 
with whom they are not compatible in other respects (Leone & Hawkins, 
2006). High self-monitors strive to steer clear of any topics that would cause 
dispute, and the specialist friends allow them to really enjoy those particu-
lar activities—but if they threw a party and invited all those friends, very 
different people who have little in common with each other would show 
up. By comparison, low self-monitors must search harder for partners with 
whom they are more similar across the board. If low self-monitors had all 
their friends over, relatively few people would come, but they’d all be a 
lot alike. 
 These differences in style appear to be consequential as time goes by. 
When they first meet others, high self-monitors enjoy interactions of higher 
intimacy than low self-monitors do; they work to find common ground for 
5 I should note that this and the following distinctions between high and low self-monitors are 
based on comparisons of the  highest self-monitors, the 25 percent of us with the very highest scores, 
to the  lowest self-monitors, the 25 percent of us with the lowest scores. Researchers sometimes do 
this to study the possible effects of a personality trait as plainly as possible, but you should recog-
nize that half of us, those with scores ranging from somewhat below average to somewhat above, 
fall between the examples being described here. 

132 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
a conversation and are good at small talk (Fuglestad & Snyder, 2009). Being 
active impression managers seems to help them interact comfortably with a 
wide variety of people. On the other hand, they invest less of their time in each 
of their friends, so that they tend to have shorter, somewhat less committed 
relationships than low self-monitors do (Leone & Howkins, 2006). The interac-
tive advantage enjoyed by high self-monitors when a relationship is just begin-
ning may become a liability once the relationship is well established (Wright 
et al., 2007). 
 Thus, the greater attentiveness to social images evinced by high self- 
monitors influences the relationships they form. Would you rather be high 
or low on this trait? You can determine your own self-monitoring score using 
the scale in  Table 4.2 . Just remember that only very high and very low scorers 
closely fit the portraits I’ve drawn here. 
TABLE 4.2. The Self-Monitoring Scale
Is each of the following statements true or false?
 1. I find it hard to imitate the behavior of other people.
 2. At parties or social gatherings, I do not attempt to say or do things that others will 
like.
 3. I can only argue for ideas that I already believe.
 4. I can make impromptu speeches even on topics about which I have almost no 
information.
 5. I guess I put on a show to impress or entertain others.
 6. I would probably make a good actor.
 7. In a group I am rarely the center of attention.
 8. In different situations and with different people, I often act like very different 
persons.
 9. I am not particularly good at making other people like me.
 10. I’m not always the person I appear to be.
 11. I would not change my opinions (or the way I do things) in order to please someone.
 12. I have considered being an entertainer.
 13. I have never been good at games like charades or improvisational acting.
 14. I have trouble changing my behavior to suit different people and different situations.
 15. At a party I let others keep the jokes and stories going.
 16. I feel a bit awkward in public and do not show up quite as well as I should.
 17. I can look anyone in the eye and tell a lie (if for a right end).
 18. I may deceive people by being friendly when I really dislike them.
Source: Snyder & Gangestad, 1986.
Give yourself a point for each of these statements that were true of you: 4, 5, 6, 8, 10, 12, 17, 18.
Then give yourself a point for each of these statements that were false: 1, 2, 3, 7, 9, 11, 13, 14, 15, 16.
What’s your total score? If it’s 13 or higher, you’re a relatively high self-monitor. If it’s 7 or lower, you’re a 
r elatively low self-monitor (Snyder, 1987). Scores between 7 and 13 are average.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 133
 The second intriguing aspect of impression management in close relation-
ships is that—although the impressions we make on our friends and  lovers 
are much more influential than the images we create for acquaintances or 
 strangers—we usually go to  less trouble to maintain favorable images for 
our intimate partners than we do for others. We worry less about how we’re 
coming across and try less hard to appear likable and competent all the time 
(Leary et al., 1994). The longer people have known their partners, for instance, 
the less time they spend grooming themselves in the restroom during a din-
ner date (Daly et al., 1983). We pay less heed to the images we present to 
intimate partners than to the impressions we make on others, and there may 
be several reasons why (Leary & Miller, 2000). For one thing, we know our 
friends and lovers like us, so there’s less motivation to be charming to win 
their approval. If you have a satisfied spouse someday, for example, you’re 
likely to put on more weight than you would have if you were working 
harder to impress your spouse (Meltzer et al., 2014). Also, because they know 
us well, there’s less we can do to have much effect on what they think. How-
ever, it’s also likely that people simply get lazy. Being on one’s best behavior 
requires concentration and effort. Polite behavior usually involves some form 
of self-restraint. We can relax around those who already know and love us, 
but that means that people are often much cruder with intimate partners than 
they are with anyone else they know (Miller, 1997b). People who are very 
decorous early in a relationship—who would never show up for breakfast 
without being showered and dressed—often become spouses who sit at the 
table in their underwear, unwashed, scratching and picking, and pilfering the 
last doughnut. This is ironic. Having behaved beautifully to win the love of 
a romantic partner, some of us never work at being so charming to that lover 
ever again. (And this may be a big problem in many relationships, as we’ll see 
in chapter 6.)  
 SO, JUST HOW WELL DO WE KNOW OUR PARTNERS? 
 Let’s add up the elements of social cognition we’ve encountered in this chapter. 
In a close relationship, partners often hold idealized but overconfident percep-
tions of each other, and when they act in accord with those judgments, they 
may elicit behavior from each other that fits their expectations but would not 
have otherwise occurred. Moreover, right or wrong, they are likely to interpret 
one another’s actions in ways that fit their existing preconceptions. And both of 
them are trying to make the impressions on each other that they want to make. 
Evidently, various processes are at work in intimate partnerships that cause us 
to see in our partners those attributes and motives that we expect or want (or 
that  they want us) to see. How accurate, then, are our perceptions of our part-
ners? How well do we know them? 
 The simple answer is, “not as well as we think we do.” Of course, we 
have extensive knowledge about our partners (Gill & Swann, 2004). But as 
we saw in chapter 3, we routinely perceive them to be more like us than they 

134 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
really are. We believe that they agree with us more often than they really 
do, and we overestimate how similar their personality traits are to our own 
(Luo & Snider, 2009). As a result, we feel that we understand them, and they 
understand us, more than is actually the case. Such misperceptions are not 
disadvantageous. Indeed, the more similarity and understanding we perceive 
in our partners, the more satisfying our relationships with them tend to be 
(Pollmann & Finkenauer, 2009). Still, we misunderstand our partners more 
than we realize. To a degree, our perceptions of our partners are fictions that 
portray our partners as people they are not. 
 Several factors determine just how accurate or inaccurate our judgments 
are. Interpersonal perception depends both on the people involved and on the 
situation they face (Funder, 2012). 
 Knowledge 
 The conclusion that we don’t know our partners as well as we think we do isn’t 
inconsistent with the fact that intimate partners know a great deal about each 
other. As their relationship develops and they spend more time together, two 
people do come to understand each other better. Married people perceive each 
other more accurately than dating couples or friends do, and acquaintances 
judge each other more accurately than strangers do (Letzring et al., 2006). 
Intimate partners interact often and care about each other—and, as we saw in 
chapter 3, they usually do have a lot in common—and all of these influences 
can contribute to accuracy (Connelly & Ones, 2010). 
 Motivation 
 However, our perceptions of others don’t necessarily become more accu-
rate as time goes by (Kenny et al., 2007). In fact, spouses who have been 
married for  shorter  lengths of time do better at inferring what their partners 
are thinking than spouses married longer do (Kilpatrick et al., 2002). The 
interest and motivation with which we try to figure each other out help to 
determine how insightful and accurate we will be (J. Smith et al., 2011), and 
people who have recently moved in with each other may understand each 
other as well as they ever will. Longer periods of very close contact, such as 
marriage, seem to gradually result in less, not more, accuracy as time goes 
by (Ickes, 2003). 
 In general, women are   better judges of others than men are, but some of 
that has to do with men simply not trying as hard to understand others as 
women do (Hall & Mast, 2008). Whether they’re male or female, people who 
are high in avoidance of intimacy don’t read others very well, both because 
they don’t pay close attention to others and because they just don’t care 
(Izhaki-Costi & Schul, 2011). But we all tend to understand beautiful people 
more than we do those who are plain, and that’s because they are beautiful, 
and we’re trying harder (Lorenzo et al., 2010). We know people better when 
we are motivated to do so.   

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 135
 Partner Legibility 
 Some of the traits people have are more visible than others—that is, they impel 
behavior that is observable and obvious—and the more evident a trait is, the 
more accurately it will be perceived. People who are sociable and extraverted, 
for instance, are likely to be accurately perceived as gregarious and affable, but 
high neuroticism is harder to detect (Vazire, 2010). Moreover, some people are 
generally easier to judge correctly than others are (Human & Biesanz, 2013). One 
intriguing example of this was obtained when research participants watched 
videos of people on speed dates (Place et al., 2009). The observers could usually 
tell when men were interested in the women they had met, but women’s inter-
est was a little harder to judge (perhaps because more of the women were play-
ing it cool). Nevertheless, some members of both sexes were quite transparent 
and easy to read, whereas others (about 20 percent of the group) consistently 
misled those who were watching. When people were hard to read, the observ-
ers routinely had no clue of what they were thinking. 
 Perceiver Ability 
 Some people may be hard to judge, but some judges are better than others. Peo-
ple who have good social skills tend to be adept at judging others (Hall et al., 
2009), often because they’re high in  emotional intelligence, a set of abilities 
that describes a person’s talents in  perceiving, using, understanding, and  managing 
emotions (Mayer et al., 2008). When people have emotional intelligence, they’re 
able to read others’ feelings sensitively, and they enjoy more satisfying and 
more intimate interactions with others as a result (Schröder-Abé & Schütz, 
2011). Women tend to have higher emotional intelligence than men do (Brackett 
et al., 2005), and that’s another reason they tend to be good at judging others. 
 Unsettling consequences may result from being a poor judge of others. 
When William Schweinle and his colleagues asked married men to watch vid-
eotapes of women discussing their divorces, they found (as you might expect) 
that some men read the women’s thoughts and feelings better than others. The 
videos were highly charged and full of emotion, and the men had never met 
the women they were watching, but those who could accurately tell when the 
women were really angry or bitter tended to be satisfied with their own mar-
riages. In contrast, other men considered the women to be more hostile than 
they really were; these men perceived criticism and rejection in the women’s 
remarks that was not apparent to other perceivers. And creepily, those men 
were more likely to be wife beaters who abused their own wives (Schweinle 
et al., 2002). A thin-skinned tendency to perceive antagonism from female strang-
ers that did not exist was correlated with mistreatment of one’s own spouse. 
 Happily, training and practice can improve people’s abilities to under-
stand their partners. In one study, participants in a 10-hour empathy training 
program were able to understand their partners’ thoughts and feelings more 
accurately 6 months later. Their partners were also more satisfied with their 
relationship (Long et al., 1999). 

136 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
 Threatening Perceptions 
 Intimate partners typically understand each other much better than they 
understand mere acquaintances, but they may not want to on those occa-
sions when a partner’s feelings or behavior is distressing or ominous. When 
accurate perceptions would be worrisome, intimate partners may actually 
be motivated to be  in accurate in order to fend off doubts about their rela-
tionship (Ickes & Hodges, 2013). And that’s a good thing because relation-
ships suffer when people correctly perceive unwanted, threatening feelings 
in their partners (Simpson et al., 2012). Imagine this situation: You and your 
romantic partner are asked to examine and discuss several pictures of very 
attractive people your partner may be meeting later. Afterward, while watch-
ing a videotape of the two of you discussing the pictures, you try to discern 
exactly what your partner was thinking when he was inspecting the pictures 
of gorgeous women (or she was inspecting the pictures of handsome men) 
that could be potential rivals for you. How astute would you be? Would you 
really want to know that your partner found one of the pictures to be espe-
cially compelling and was really looking forward to meeting that person? Not 
if you’re like most people. The more attractive (and thereby threatening) the 
Do You Really Know What Others Think of You?
Okay, you know more about yourself 
than anyone else does. No one else, of 
course, is with you as much as you are. 
But other people are still likely to know 
some things about you that you don’t 
know, for two reasons. First, they have 
a different point of view. They can see 
what you’re doing, and they’re some-
times aware of behavior that escapes 
your notice (Vazire &  Carlson, 2011). 
Have you ever been surprised by how 
you looked on a video? That’s the per-
spective of you that others have all the 
time. Second, they’re more objective. 
Whereas you and I are prone to self-
serving biases, others evaluate us with 
more dispassion; they know better, for 
instance, how physically attractive we 
are (Epley & Whitchurch, 2008).
You can more fully  comprehend 
what others think of you if you  recognize 
that they are generally unaware of your 
unspoken fears, good intentions, and 
other private experiences; they can 
judge only what you say and do. As 
a result—and here comes some good 
news—others see us as less neurotic, 
more assertive, and more conscientious 
than we judge ourselves to be (Allik 
et al., 2010). They are less aware of our 
worries, occasional timidity, and unful-
fi lled plans than we are, so they don’t 
hold our private moments of weak-
ness against us the way we do. And in 
general, we are reasonably well aware 
of the different impressions we make 
on different audiences such as parents, 
friends, and co-workers (Carlson & 
Furr, 2013). Still, there usually are some 
things that almost everybody thinks of 
us of which we are unaware (Gallrein 
et al., 2013). To really understand what 
others think of you, you may actually 
have to ask.

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 137
photos were and the closer their relationship was, the  less accurately dating 
partners perceived each other’s thoughts and feelings in this situation (Simp-
son et al., 1995). Most people understood a partner’s reactions to unattractive 
photos reasonably well, but they somehow remained relatively clueless about 
a partner’s reactions to attractive pictures. They were inattentive to news they 
did not want to hear. 
 But not everyone successfully managed threatening perceptions in this 
manner. People with a preoccupied attachment style were actually  more 
a ccurate in judging their partners when the partners inspected the attractive 
photos (Simpson et al., 1999). They were unsettled by their perceptions, how-
ever, and they evaluated their relationships less favorably as a result. Preoc-
cupied people were like moths drawn to a flame; they were especially good 
at intuiting their partners’ feelings in just those situations in which accuracy 
was disconcerting and costly. Such sensitivity may be one reason that such 
people are chronically anxious about their relationships. People with dismiss-
ing styles  6 do better when they’re confronted with distressing information 
because they divert their attention and simply ignore it. This protects their 
feelings, but it does leave them rather clueless about what’s going on (Simpson 
et al., 2011a).  
 Perceiver Influence 
 Finally, we should remember that people are not passive judges of others. 
In a close relationship, they are engaged in continual interaction with their 
partners, behaving in accord with their expectations and reacting to the per-
ceptions they construct. If they come to realize that their partners are not 
the people they wish they were, they may try to  change  their partners by 
encouraging some behaviors and discouraging others. In a sense, people 
are sometimes like sculptors who try to construct the partners they want 
from the raw material a real partner provides (Rusbult et al., 2009). If our 
partners seem dispirited, we may try to cheer them up. Or if they’re too 
pompous and pretentious, we may try to bring them back to Earth (De La 
Ronde & Swann, 1998). Because intimate partners are continually shaping 
and molding each other’s behavior, perceptions that are initially inaccurate 
may become more correct as we induce our partners to become the people 
we want them to be.  
 Summary 
 With all these influences at work, our perceptions of our partners can range 
from outright fantasy to precise correctness. We certainly know our partners 
better as a relationship develops, but motivation and attentiveness can come 
6  Are you recognizing the terms preoccupied and dismissing? If not, go back to page 16 to refresh your 
memory.  

138 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
and go, and some people are easier to read than others. Some of us are more 
astute perceivers than others, too. In addition, even if you know your part-
ner well, there may be occasions when  in attention is profitable, helping you 
avoid doubt and distress. And partners influence each other, so perceptions 
can become either more or less accurate as time goes by. In general, then, we 
usually understand our partners less well than we think we do. 
 My important closing point is that our perceptions of our partners are 
clearly influential. Right or wrong, our judgments of our lovers and friends 
can either support or undermine our contentment in our relationships. Some 
of us look on the bright side, thinking well of our partners, using relationship-
enhancing attributions, and expecting kindness and generosity—and that’s 
what we get. Others of us, however, doubt our partners and expect the worst—
and thereby make it more likely that our relationships will fail.  
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 Martha looked forward to meeting Gale because those who knew her said that 
she was friendly, outgoing, and bright. But their paths happened to cross when 
Gale was suffering from a bad case of poison ivy; she was uncomfortable from 
the endless itching and drowsy from the allergy medicine, and altogether, she 
was having a really bad day. So, things did not go well when Martha said hello 
and introduced herself. Martha came away from their brief interaction thinking 
that Gale was really rather cold and unsociable. 
 After Gale recovered and was back in her usual spirits, she encountered 
Martha again and greeted her warmly and was surprised when Martha seemed 
distant and wary. Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds 
for Martha and Gale? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 Social cognition includes all of the processes of perception and thought with 
which we make sense of our social worlds. 
 First Impressions (and Beyond) 
 When we first meet others, we jump to conclusions because of stereo-
types and  primacy effects .  Confirmation biases then affect our selection of sub-
sequent data, and  overconfidence leads us to put unwarranted faith in our 
judgments.  
 The Power of Perceptions 
 Partners’ perceptions can be very consequential. 

CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition 139
 Idealizing Our Partners. Happy partners construct  positive illusions that 
emphasize their partners’ virtues and minimize their faults.  
 Attributional Processes. The explanations we generate for why things 
happen are called  attributions. Partners are affected by  actor/observer effects 
and  self-serving biases, and they tend to employ either  relationship- enhancing or 
distress-maintaining patterns of attribution.  
 Memories. We edit and update our memories as time goes by. This p rocess 
of  reconstructive memory helps couples stay optimistic about their futures. 
 Relationship Beliefs.  Dysfunctional relationship beliefs such as  destiny 
beliefs are clearly disadvantageous.  Growth beliefs are more realistic and 
profi table.  
 Expectations. Our expectations about others can become  self-fulfi lling 
prophecies, false predictions that make themselves come true.  
 Self-Perceptions. We seek reactions from others that are self-enhancing 
and complimentary  and that are consistent with what we already think of 
 ourselves—with  self-verifi cation leading people to seek intimate partners who 
support their existing self-concepts.  
 Impression Management 
 We try to influence the impressions of us that others form. 
 Strategies of Impression Management. Four different strategies of 
impression 
management— ingratiation, 
self-promotion, 
intimidation, 
and 
supplication —are commonplace. 
 Impression Management in Close Relationships. High self-monitors are 
less committed to their romantic partners, but all of us work less hard to pre-
sent favorable images to our intimate partners than to others.   
 So, Just How Well Do We Know Our Partners? 
 We generally don’t understand our partners as well as we think we do. 
 Knowledge. As a relationship develops and partners spend more time 
together, they typically do understand each other better.  
 Motivation. The interest and motivation with which people try to fi gure 
each other out help to determine how insightful and accurate they will be.  
 Partner Legibility. Some personality traits, such as extraversion, are more 
visible than others.  

140 
CHAPTER 4: Social Cognition
 Perceiver Ability. Some judges are better than others, too.  Emotional intel-
ligence is important in this regard. 
 Threatening Perceptions. However, when accurate perceptions would be 
worrisome, intimate partners may actually be motivated to be inaccurate. 
 Perceiver Influence. Perceptions that are initially inaccurate may become 
more correct as we induce our partners to become the people we want them 
to be. 
 Summary. Right or wrong, our judgments matter. 

141
 C H A P T E R  5  
 Communication 
 N onverbal C ommunication 
 ◆ V erbal C ommunication  ◆ D ysfunctional 
C ommunication and W hat to D o A bout I t 
 ◆ F or Y our C onsideration  ◆ C hapter S ummary 
 I magine that you and your romantic partner are seated alone in a comfort-
able room, revisiting the topic of your last disagreement. Your conversation is 
more structured than most because before you say anything to your  partner, 
you record a quick rating of what you intend to say next. You rate the intended 
impact of your message by pushing one of five buttons with labels ranging 
from  super negative through  neutral  to  super positive.  Then, after you speak, 
your partner quickly rates his or her perception of your message in the same 
way before replying to you. This process continues as you take turns voicing 
your views and listening to what your partner says in return. You’re engag-
ing in a procedure called the  talk table that allows researchers to get a record 
of both your private thoughts and your public actions. The notable point is 
that if you’re currently unhappy with your relationship, you may not  intend 
to annoy or belittle your lover, but you’re likely to do so, anyway. Unhappy 
couples don’t differ on average from happy, contented couples in what 
they are trying to say to each other, but the impact of their messages—what 
their partners think they hear—is more critical and disrespectful nonetheless 
(Gottman et al., 1976). And this is consequential because this single afternoon 
at the talk table predicts how happy the two of you will be later on; spouses 
whose communications are frustrating will be less happily married 5 years 
later (Markman, 1981). 
 Communication is incredibly important in intimate relationships. And 
it’s more complex than we usually realize. Let’s consider the simple model of 
communication shown in  Figure 5.1 . Communication begins with the sender’s 
intentions, the message that the sender wishes to convey. The problem is that 
the sender’s intentions are private and known only to him or her; for them to be 
communicated to the listener, they must be encoded into verbal and nonverbal 
actions that are public and observable. A variety of factors, such as the send-
er’s mood or social skill, or noisy distractions in the surrounding environment, 
can influence or interfere with this process. Then, the receiver must decode the 

142 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
speaker’s actions, and interference can occur here as well (Albright et al., 2004). 
The final result is an effect on the receiver that is again private and known only 
to him or her. 
 The point here is that getting from one person’s intentions to the impact of 
that person’s message on a listener involves several steps at which error and 
misunderstanding may occur (Puccinelli, 2010). We usually assume that our 
messages have the impact that we intended, but we rarely  know that they do. 
More often than we realize (Keysar & Henly, 2002), we face an  interpersonal 
gap in which the sender’s intentions differ from the effect on the receiver. 
Indeed, such gaps are actually more likely to occur in close relationships than 
they are among strangers (Savitsky et al., 2011). We don’t expect our partners to 
misunderstand us, so we don’t work as hard as we do with strangers to check 
that we’re on the same page. 
 Interpersonal gaps are frustrating. And not only are they related to dissat-
isfaction, they can even prevent rewarding relationships from ever beginning! 
Consider what happens when a shy man has a chance to make his interest in 
dating someone known to her. Chatting after class, he may make a timid, inno-
cent inquiry—“What are you doing this weekend?”—thinking that his romantic 
intentions are transparent and hoping for an enthusiastic reply. Unfortunately, 
he probably thinks that his amorous aims are more obvious to his potential 
partner than they really are (Cameron & Vorauer, 2008). If she fails to notice 
that he’s hinting about a date and makes a bland, noncommittal response, he 
may perceive an explicit rejection of a clear-cut invitation that she never actu-
ally received. Wounded, he may then keep his distance, and she may never 
realize what has transpired. 
Sender’s
Intentions
(private and
known only
by the sender)
Sender’s
Actions
(public and 
observable
by anyone)
Effect on
Listener
(private and
known only
by the listener)
Sender’s
Style of
Encoding
Noise and
Interference
Listener’s
Style of
Decoding
Noise and
Interference
FIGURE 5.1. A simple model of interpersonal communication. 
There is often a discrepancy—an interpersonal gap—between what the sender intends to 
say and what the listener thinks he or she hears.
Adapted from Gottman et al., 1976.

CHAPTER 5: Communication 143
 This sort of thing actually happens (Vorauer et al., 2003). I don’t want it to 
happen to you, however, so I’ll do what I can in this chapter to help you close 
your own interpersonal gaps. But we’ll start our survey of communication 
in relationships not with what people say in interaction but with what they 
do. Accompanying spoken words in communication is a remarkable range of 
nonverbal actions that also carry many messages, whether you intend them 
or not.  
 NONVERBAL COMMUNICATION 
 Imagine that as part of a research study, you put on a cap that identifies you 
as a member of either a group that people like and admire or one that they 
loathe, and you walk around town with it on, shopping, eating lunch, and 
applying for some jobs. You’ve put on the cap without looking at it, and you 
 don’t know what you’re wearing. Would you be able to tell what sort of cap 
you have on by watching others’ reactions to you? You might (Hebl et al., 
2002). If you’re wearing an obnoxious cap, your waitress may not be as warm 
and cheerful as usual. People you pass at the mall may glance at you and dis-
play a quick expression of distaste or disgust. Even if no one mentions your 
cap, others’ behavior may clearly indicate that they don’t like what they see. 
In fact, because you’d be curious and alert to how others responded, their 
sentiments might be unmistakably plain. 
 In such a situation, you’d probably notice the remarkable amount of infor-
mation carried by nonverbal behavior, which includes all of the things people 
do in their interactions except for their spoken words and syntax. Indeed, non-
verbal behavior can serve several functions in our transactions with others. 
 Table 5.1 lists five such functions, and I’ll emphasize three of them. 
 First, nonverbal behavior  provides information about people’s moods or 
meaning. If you playfully tease someone, for instance, your facial expression 
and the sound of your voice may be the only way listeners can tell that you 
don’t intend to be antagonistic. This function is so important that we have had 
to invent emoticons, the imitation facial expressions people put in text mes-
sages, to sometimes show what we mean. 
 Nonverbal behavior also plays a vital part in  regulating interaction. Non-
verbal displays of interest often determine whether or not interaction ever 
begins, and, thereafter, subtle nonverbal cues allow people to take turns in a 
conversation seamlessly and gracefully. 
 Finally, by expressing intimacy and carrying signals of power and status, 
nonverbal behavior helps to  define the relationships we share with others. 
People who are intimate with each other act differently toward one another 
than acquaintances do, and dominant, high-status people act differently than 
subordinates do. Without a word being spoken, observers may be able to tell 
who likes whom and who’s the boss. 
 How are these functions carried out? The answer involves all of the diverse 
components of nonverbal communication, so we’ll survey them next. 

144 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
 Components of Nonverbal Communication 
 One clue to the enormous power of nonverbal communication is the number 
of different channels through which information can be transmitted. I’ll 
describe seven. 
 Facial Expression 
 People’s facial expressions signal their moods and emotions in a manner 
you’ll recognize anywhere you go (Matsumoto & Hwang, 2013d). Even if you 
don’t speak the language in a foreign country, for example, you’ll be able to 
tell if others are happy: If they are, the muscles in their cheeks will pull up 
the corners of their mouths, and the skin alongside their eyes will crinkle into 
folds. Obviously, they’re  smiling, and happiness, like several other emotions— 
sadness, fear, anger, disgust, surprise, and contempt—engenders a unique 
facial expression that’s the same all over the world. In fact, the universality 
of these expressions suggests that they are hardwired into our species. People 
don’t  learn to smile when they’re happy—they’re born to do it. People who 
have been blind all their lives, for instance, display the same facial expressions 
all the rest of us do (Matsumoto & Hwang, 2013d).
Compelling information is often available in facial expressions. Are you dis-
playing a big smile in your Facebook profile photo, or do you look like a s ourpuss? 
TABLE 5.1. Functions of Nonverbal Behavior in Relationships
Category
Description
Example
Providing 
information
A person’s behavior allows 
others to make inferences 
about his or her intentions, 
feelings, traits, and meaning
A husband’s facial expression leads 
his wife to judge that he is upset
Regulating 
interaction
Nonverbal behavior provides 
cues that regulate the efficient 
give-and-take of smooth 
conversations and other 
interactions
A woman looks at her partner 
 continuously as the tone of her 
voice drops on her last word, and 
he starts speaking because he 
knows she’s finished
Defining the 
nature of the 
relationship
The type of partnership two 
people share may be evident 
in their nonverbal behavior
Lovers stand closer to each other, 
touch more, and look at each other 
more than less intimate partners do
Interpersonal 
influence
Goal-oriented behavior 
designed to influence 
someone else
As a person requests a favor from 
his friend, he leans forward, touches 
him on the arm, and gazes intently
Impression 
management
Nonverbal behavior that is 
managed by a person or a 
couple to create or enhance a 
particular image
A couple may quarrel on the way 
to a party but then hold hands and 
pretend to be happy with each 
other once they arrive
Source: Data from Patterson, 2011.

CHAPTER 5: Communication 145
The bigger the smiles college students posted during their first semester at school, 
the more satisfied they were with their social lives and their college careers when 
they were seniors 4 years later (Seder & Oishi, 2012). In fact, the smiles people 
display in their college yearbooks predict their chances of being divorced later in 
life; compared to those with the biggest smiles, those who smile least are about 
5 times more likely to divorce someday (Hertenstein et al., 2009). And even more 
impressively, the fuller and more genuine the smiles major league baseball play-
ers exhibited in their team photos in 1952, the longer their lives have been (Abel 
& Kruger, 2010)! Happy expressions are clearly correlated with success in life, 
and in some respects, a forecast of your future may be available to everyone you 
meet. We do a little better identifying emotions that are expressed by others from 
our own cultural groups than we do in recognizing the expressions of people 
from elsewhere in the world (Elfenbein, 2013). Nevertheless, accurate recognition 
of others’ emotions from their facial expressions is almost an automatic process; 
American college students can recognize happiness, sadness, anger, disgust, and 
surprise in three-quarters of a second or less (Tracy & Robins, 2008). 
 So, the universal meanings of facial expressions make them extremely 
informative—when they’re authentic. Unfortunately, because facial expres-
sions do figure so prominently in nonverbal communication, people sometimes 
try to deliberately manage them to disguise their true emotions. On occasion, 
this occurs due to  display rules, cultural norms that dictate what emotions are 
appropriate in particular situations (Matsumoto & Hwang, 2013b). There are 
at least four ways we may try to modify our expressions of emotion to fol-
low these rules. First, we may  intensify our expressions, exaggerating them so 
that we appear to be experiencing stronger feelings than we really are. Even if 
you’re underwhelmed by a gift you’ve just opened, for example, you should 
try to look pleased if the giver is present. Second, we sometimes  minimize our 
expressions, trying to seem less emotional than we really are. Because Western 
culture assumes that “big boys don’t cry,” a man may stoically try not to seem 
too affected by a sad movie. Third, we may  neutralize our expressions, trying 
to withhold our true feelings altogether. Good poker players try to do this so 
that they give no hint of what their cards may be. Finally, we can  mask our real 
These are examples of the basic facial expressions of sadness, happiness, fear, and 
surprise (but not in that order!). You’ve never seen this woman before, but can you tell 
which emotion each photo depicts? I bet you can.
© Paul Ekman.

146 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
feelings by replacing them with an entirely different apparent emotion. A first 
runner-up in a beauty pageant who looks so thrilled when another contestant is 
named the winner is almost certainly masking her true feelings. 
 However, even when people try to control their expressions, the truth may 
leak out. First, feigned expressions usually differ from authentic expressions. 
Genuine smiles contract the muscles around our eyes, causing them to crinkle, 
but only about a quarter of us activate those muscles when we’re faking a smile 
(Gunnery et al., 2013)—and even if we do, there are subtle differences in timing 
and movement between real and fake smiles that are often apparent to attentive 
viewers (Ambadar et al., 2009). Second, despite our efforts, authentic flashes of real 
emotion, or  microexpressions, can be visible during momentary lapses of control. 
Even when you’re consciously trying to control your expression, you may look 
disgusted for half a second when you first see something gross (Yan et al., 2013). 
Gazing Behavior
 Obviously, facial expressions provide meaningful information about a part-
ner’s feelings. Gazing, the direction and amount of a person’s looking behavior, is 
also influential (Wirth et al., 2010). For one thing, looking at someone communi-
cates interest, and people with friendly expressions who catch our eye and keep 
looking seem more likable and attractive than those who glance at us and then 
look away (Mason et al., 2005). If you find someone looking your way in a singles 
bar and you don’t want to talk to him or her, look away and don’t look back. 
 Gazing also helps define the relationship two people share once interaction 
begins. Lovers really do spend more time looking at each other than friends 
do, and friends look more than acquaintances do (Kleinke, 1986). Moreover, 
when strangers spend time gazing into each other’s eyes, they end up liking 
each other more than they would have if they’d spent the time together looking 
someplace else (Kellerman et al., 1989). A lot of looking can evidently commu-
nicate affection as well as simple interest. 
 But it can communicate dominance, too. In ordinary interaction, people 
usually look at their conversational partners more when they’re listening (gaz-
ing at the speaker about 60 percent of the time, on average) than when they’re 
speaking (looking at the listener about 40 percent of the time). However, pow-
erful, high-status people tend to depart from these norms—they look more 
while speaking but less while listening than the average person does (Koch et 
al., 2010). Researchers summarize these patterns in a  visual dominance ratio 
(VDR) that compares “look-speak” (the percentage of time a speaker gazes at 
a listener) to “look-listen.” A high-power pattern of gazing turns the typical 
ratio of 40/60 on its head, producing a high VDR of 60/40 (Ellyson et al., 1992). 
Dominant partners in an interaction can insist, “Look at me when I’m talking to 
you!” but they often do not offer as much visual attention in return. 
 Body Movement 
 So far, I’ve been describing nonverbal communication only from the neck 
up, but the rest of the body is involved, too. Body movements routinely accom-
pany and support our verbal communication, making it easier for us to convey 

CHAPTER 5: Communication 147
what we mean—try describing the size of a fish you caught without using your 
hands (Hostetter, 2011)—but they can also replace spoken words entirely in the 
form of gestures that are widely understood. (A good example in North  America, 
for better or worse, is a gesture in which one holds up one’s hand with one’s 
middle finger extended. The recipient of the gesture will probably know what it 
means.) The problem with gestures is that, unlike facial expressions, they vary 
widely from culture to culture (Matsumoto & Hwang, 2013c). For instance, in 
the United States, touching your thumb to your index finger and extending the 
other fingers is a gesture that means “okay,” or “good.” However, in France it 
means “zero,” in Japan it means “money,” and in the Middle East it’s an obscene 
insult (just like the American middle finger). The 
language of the face needs no interpreter, but that’s 
not true of the language of gestures. 
 Less specific but still useful information can 
be conveyed by the posture or motion of the body 
(Koppensteiner, 2013). For instance, how well do 
you dance? Using 3D motion-capture technology, 
Bernhard Fink and his colleagues (2012) can pro-
duce an avatar that moves the way you do when 
A Point to Ponder
How does a woman’s 
walking motion change 
when she’s wearing high 
heels? How do those 
changes affect our percep-
tions of her attractiveness?
FIGURE 5.2 How well do you dance?
Let’s create an avatar that moves as you do. After we place 39 reflective markers all 
over your body, 12 cameras capture the motion of each marker as you dance to a beat 
(in the image on the left). The movement data is applied to a virtual character, and 
when the rendering is complete, an avatar displays your dance moves (in the image on 
the right). Body movement, and nothing else, is then the basis for the judgments of oth-
ers who watch your avatar.
Source: Fink, Weege, et al., 2012.

148 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
you’re dancing, and if others watch the figure for 15 seconds, they’ll get a sense 
of your style. (See Figure 5.2.) What’s interesting is that men who are judged to 
be good dancers by women tend to be more agreeable, conscientious, and extra-
verted than guys who dance badly. Their movements make them seem more 
attractive, too (Weege et al., 2012). So, in short, they’re more desirable mates! 
 Body postures can also signal status. High-status people tend to adopt 
open, asymmetric postures in which the two halves of the body assume dif-
ferent positions (Park et al., 2013). They take up a lot of space. In contrast, low-
status people use closed, symmetric postures that are relatively compact. If a 
powerful boss is talking with a subordinate seated across from him or her, you 
can usually tell who’s who just by watching them (Bente et al., 2010).  
 Touch 
 Physical contact with another person can also have various meanings. In 
many cultures, people may touch each other by shaking hands when they first 
Nonverbal Behavior and Sexual Orientation
Or, “Don’t Ask, Don’t Tell”? Who Has To Ask?
For 17 years, from 1994 to 2011, the U.S. 
Armed Forces maintained a “don’t ask, 
don’t tell” policy toward the sexual 
orientation of their personnel. Fear-
ing that open same-sex sexuality would 
undermine the cohesion of its troops— 
something that, as it turns out, hasn’t 
happened (Belkin et al., 2013)—the mili-
tary asked its gays and lesbians not to 
advertise their orientations. Of course, 
the policy assumed that someone’s sexual 
orientation wasn’t already obvious—but 
often it is. “Gaydar” exists: Nonverbal 
channels of information allow attentive 
observers to assess the orientations of 
others very quickly with reasonable accu-
racy. A 10-second video of a person’s 
body movements is all observers need 
to make correct judgments 72 percent of 
the time (Ambady et al., 1999), and this is 
true in the Czech Republic as well as the 
United States (Valentova et al., 2011).
What’s visible in the videos? The 
patterns of a person’s gestures and 
movement are key. Heterosexual men 
tend to swagger, swinging their shoul-
ders when they walk, and heterosexual 
women tend to sway, moving their hips. 
People whose behavior includes the 
motions that are typical of the other sex 
are likely to be judged to be homosex-
ual, and those perceptions are often cor-
rect (Johnson et al., 2007). Differences in 
posture and gazing are evident when 
people are just sitting and chatting, too 
(Knöfl er & Imhof, 2007).
But the most remarkable result of 
these studies is the fi nding that people 
who get a glimpse of men’s faces that 
lasts for only half a second can accurately 
judge whether they are gay or straight 
about 60 percent of the time, and they 
do almost as well when the faces are 
turned upside down (Tabak & Zayas, 
2012)! We don’t yet know exactly what 
it is about men’s faces that informs such 
judgments, but one thing is clear: An 
attentive observer often has some idea 
of whether someone shares his or her 
sexual orientation before a single word 
is said, and this is true around the world 
(Rule et al., 2011a).

CHAPTER 5: Communication 149
meet, and—just as common sense suggests—there is useful information to be 
gained from the strength and vigor and fullness of grip with which someone 
shakes your hand. People with firm, full, long handshakes tend to be more 
extraverted and open to experience, and less neurotic, than people with wimpy 
handshakes are (Chaplin et al., 2000). 
 So, touch may be informative from the moment two people meet. There-
after, different types of touches have distinctly different meanings. Positive, 
supportive feelings such as love (which, for instance, might lead you to stroke 
someone’s arm) and sympathy (with you patting it) engender touches that 
are quite different from those that communicate disgust (pushing) or anger 
 (hitting). The emotions communicated by touch are often so distinct, both the 
recipient of the touch and bystanders watching it can tell what feelings are at 
work (Hertenstein, 2011). 
 Two people also tend to touch each other more when their relationship 
is more intimate (Debrot et al., 2013), and that’s a good thing.  Loving touches 
are actually good for our health: Kissing your partner more often can reduce 
your cholesterol (Floyd et al., 2009), and affectionate touch from your partner 
reduces your production of stress hormones (Burleson et al., 2013). Touch 
can clearly convey closeness and affection, and it can have healing proper-
ties, too.  
 Interpersonal Distance 
 One aspect of touching that makes it momentous is that people have to 
be near each other for touching to occur. That means that the two partners are 
 typically in a region of  interpersonal distance —the physical space that separates 
two people—that is usually reserved for relatively intimate interactions. The 
 intimate zone  of interpersonal distance extends out from the front of our chests 
about a foot-and-a-half (Hall, 1966). (See Figure 5.3.) If two people are standing 
face-to-face to each other, their interaction is probably either quite loving or 
quite hostile. More interactions occur at greater distances in a  personal zone 
that ranges from 1½ to 4 feet away from us. Within this range, friends are likely 
to interact at smaller distances and acquaintances at larger ones, so distancing 
behavior helps to define the relationships people share. Even further away, in a 
 social zone (4 to 12 feet), interactions tend to be more businesslike. When you 
sit across a desk from an interviewer or a professor, you’re in the social zone, 
and the distance seems appropriate; however, it would seem quite odd to stand 
5 feet away from a good friend to hold a personal conversation. Beyond 12 feet, 
interactions tend to be quite formal. This is the  public zone,  which is used for 
structured interaction like that between an instructor and his or her students in 
a lecture class. 
 These distances describe the general patterns of interactions among North 
Americans, but they tend to be larger than those used by many other peoples 
of the world (Matsumoto & Hwang, 2013a). French, Latin, and Arabic cul-
tures prefer distances smaller than these. A person’s sex and status also affect 
distancing behavior (Holland et al., 2004). Men tend to use somewhat larger 
distances than women do, and people usually stand further away from others 

150 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
of high status than from those of lower power and prestige. Whatever one’s 
preferences, however, spacing behavior is a subtle way to calibrate the desired 
intimacy of an interaction, and it may even be an indirect measure of the qual-
ity of a relationship: Spouses who are unhappy keep larger distances between 
each other than do spouses who are currently content (Crane et al., 1987). 
Smell
If you’re near enough to others, you can smell them, too, and you’ll likely 
be gaining more information than you realize. Different emotions cause people 
to emit different chemicals, or chemosignals, from their bodies—and people who 
are scared, for instance, have a different aroma than do those who are disgusted 
(de Groot et al., 2012). Moreover, we’re usually better able to identify emotion 
in the sweat of our intimate partners than in the sweat of strangers—even while 
we remain unable to tell whose sweat is whose (Zhou & Chen, 2011). Our brains 
respond differently to sexual sweat than to normal sweat, too (Zhou & Chen, 
2008). Smells carry information, so perhaps it should be no surprise that people 
who were born without a sense of smell are at an interpersonal disadvantage; 
such men, for example, have only one-fifth as many sexual relationships during 
their lives as normal men do (Croy et al., 2013).
Intimate
Distance
0” to 18”
Personal Distance
1½’ to 4’
Social Distance
4’ to 12’
Public Distance
12’ and Up
FIGURE 5.3. Zones of interpersonal distance.
There are four discrete regions of space in which different kinds of social interaction 
are likely to occur.

CHAPTER 5: Communication 151
 Paralanguage 
 The final component of nonverbal communication isn’t silent like the oth-
ers can be.  Paralanguage includes all the variations in a person’s voice other 
than the actual words he or she uses, such as rhythm, pitch, loudness, and rate. 
Thus, paralanguage doesn’t involve  what people say, but  how they say it (Frank 
et al., 2013). Good examples of distinctive paralanguage are the sounds we 
make—without using any words at all—that can tell people what we’re feeling. 
If you wanted to show someone with just a brief sound that you were scared, or 
angry, or sad, could you do it? How about relieved, amused, or awed? Research 
participants are indeed able to reliably communicate these emotions and sev-
eral more to listeners without using words (Simon-Thomas et al., 2009). 
 Paralanguage helps define relationships because lovers tend to talk to each 
other differently than friends do. When they start a phone call by saying “how 
are you?,” men use a lower pitch with their lovers than with their friends, but 
women use a higher pitch—and strangers listening in can usually tell whether 
a friend or lover is on the other end of the call (Farley et al., 2013).
Some voices are routinely more beguiling than others. Women like their 
men to have deep, low-pitched voices (even while thinking that such men 
tend to be less faithful than men with higher-pitched voices are) (O’Connor 
et al., 2014). And voices are a cue to a partner’s mate value because people 
with appealing voices tend to have alluring faces and bodies, too (Saxton et 
al., 2009).  Even more intriguingly, if you listen to tapes of a variety of women 
counting from 1 to 10 at various times during their menstrual cycles, you’ll 
hear that a woman’s voice becomes more attractive just before she ovulates 
each month (Pipitone & Gallup, 2008). This is probably due to the effects of her 
changing hormones on her larynx, and it doesn’t happen in women who are on 
the pill—but when nature is allowed to run its course, this is a fine example of 
the subtlety with which nonverbal channels communicate important informa-
tion from one person to another. 
 Combining the Components 
 I’ve introduced the components of nonverbal communication as if they 
are independent, discrete sources of information, and, in one sense, they are: 
Each of them can have its own effects on interaction. Usually, however, they 
reinforce each other, working together to convey consistent information about 
a person’s sentiments and intentions. When you’re face-to-face with someone, 
all of these components are in play, and together, they’ll tell you what people 
really mean by what they say. Consider sarcasm, for instance, when people say 
one thing but mean another: Their true intent is conveyed not in their words 
but in their actions and paralanguage. Most of the time, our nonverbal behav-
ior communicates the same message as our words, and we like people better 
when that’s the case (Weisbuch et al., 2010). But when there  is  a discrepancy 
between people’s words and actions, the truth behind their words usually lies 
in their nonverbal, not their verbal, communication (Vrij, 2006). 
 Furthermore, all the channels may be involved in the nonconscious behav-
ioral  mimicry that occurs during a conversation when the participants adopt 

152 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
similar postures and mannerisms, display comparable expressions, and use 
similar paralanguage. If they’re enjoying their interaction, people tend to syn-
chronize their nonverbal behavior automatically without thinking about it; 
if one of them scratches his or her nose, the other is more likely to do so as 
well. When this occurs, the conversation tends to flow smoothly, and, more 
 importantly, they tend to like each other even when they don’t notice the 
mutual imitation taking place (Chartrand & Lakin, 2013). Indeed, it seems to 
be rewarding to be met with nonverbal behavior from others that resembles 
our own. In one demonstration of this effect, participants watched a persuasive 
argument from an avatar in an IVE 1 that either used the recorded movements of 
a real person or simply mimicked the participant’s own actions with a 4-second 
delay. People were not consciously aware of the mimicry, but they attributed 
1 What’s an “IVE”? Look back at the box on p. 54. I told you that chapter 2 would come in handy! 
Our facial expressions and our 
paralanguage usually combine to 
make our feelings and meanings plain 
to attentive audiences.
Zits © 2008 Zits Partnership, Dist by King Features.

CHAPTER 5: Communication 153
more positive traits to the avatar and were more convinced by its argument 
when it duplicated their own actions than when it behaved like someone else 
(Bailenson & Yee, 2005). (Is this the future of high-tech advertising?) We are 
evidently charmed and more at ease when nonverbal mimicry takes place, and 
it can be surprisingly stressful to interact with someone who does not imitate 
us at all (Kouzakova et al., 2010). 
 The various components of nonverbal behavior also allow us to fine-tune 
the intimacy of our interactions to establish a comfortable level of closeness 
(Patterson, 2011). Imagine that you’re seated next to an acquaintance on a two-
person couch when the conversation takes a serious turn and your acquain-
tance mentions an intimate personal problem. If this development makes you 
uncomfortable—you’ve just received too much information—you can adjust 
the perceived intimacy of your interaction by nonverbally “backing off.” You 
can turn away and lean back to get more distance. You can avert your gaze. 
And you can signal your discomfort through less animated paralanguage and 
a less pleasant facial expression, all without saying a word (Andersen et al., 
2006). Nonverbal communication serves several important functions in interac-
tion and is the source of useful subtlety in social life. 
 Nonverbal Sensitivity 
 Given all this, you might expect that it’s advantageous for couples to do well 
at nonverbal communication, and you’d be right. The sensitivity and accuracy 
with which couples communicate nonverbally predict how happy their relation-
ship will be. Husbands and wives who do poorly at nonverbal communication 
tend to be dissatisfied with their  marriages, and, moreover, when such problems 
occur, it’s usually the husband’s fault (Noller, 2006). 
 What? How can research arrive at such a conclusion? Well, when non-
verbal exchanges fail, there may be errors in encoding or decoding, or both 
(Puccinelli, 2010): The sender may enact a confusing message that is difficult 
to read (that’s poor encoding), or the receiver may fail to correctly interpret a 
message that is clear to everyone else (and that’s poor decoding). Women typi-
cally start with an advantage at both tasks because, if no deception is involved, 
women are both better encoders and more astute decoders than men are on 
average (Brody & Hall, 2010). (Men and women don’t differ in their abilities to 
detect deception, as we’ll see in chapter 10.) Thus, stereotypes about “women’s 
intuition” (Gigerenzer et al., 2014) actually have a basis in fact; more than men, 
women tend to attentively use subtle but real nonverbal cues to discern what’s 
going on. Do women possess more skill at nonverbal communication, or are 
they just working harder at it? That’s a good question, and I’ll answer it shortly. 
 Researchers can assess the quality of husbands’ and wives’ encoding and 
decoding by asking them to send specific nonverbal messages that are then 
decoded by the other spouse. The messages are statements that can have sev-
eral different meanings, depending on how they are nonverbally enacted; 
for instance, the phrase, “I’m cold, aren’t you?” could be either an affectionate 
invitation (“Come snuggle with me, you cute thing”) or a spiteful complaint 

154 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
(“Turn up the damn heat, you cheapskate!”). In research on nonverbal sensitiv-
ity, a spouse is assigned a particular meaning to convey and is filmed sending 
the message. Then, impartial strangers are shown the film. If they can’t fig-
ure out what the spouse is trying to communicate, the spouse’s encoding is 
assumed to be faulty. On the other hand, if they  can read the message but the 
other spouse  can’t, the partner’s decoding is implicated. 
 In the first ingenious study of this sort, Patricia Noller (1980) found that 
husbands in unhappy marriages sent more confusing messages and made 
more decoding errors than happy husbands did. There were no such differ-
ences among the wives, so the poorer communication that Noller observed in 
Flirting
A 
great 
example 
of 
nonverbal 
c ommunication—and the misunder-
standings that can result from it—is 
the way people behave when they inten-
tionally want to attract attention and to 
communicate their interest in others. If a 
woman wishes to be approached in a col-
lege bar, she’s likely to look around the 
room, move to the music, and run her 
fingers through her hair (Cunningham 
& Barbee, 2008). But women don’t like 
to be approached by men who haven’t 
already caught their eye, so men need 
to get women to notice them. Taking 
up a lot of space, having an open pos-
ture, and touching other men (but not 
being touched in return) are all signs of 
high status that make a man stand out 
in a group. And men who behave this 
way—and who are frequently glancing 
around to see who’s looking their way—
are more likely to share a moment of eye 
contact with a woman that leads to some 
conversation (Renninger et al., 2004).
Then, if they begin to fl irt, both men 
and women tend to smile more, move 
closer, gaze longer, and touch their 
partners more often than they do when 
they are less eager to stimulate others’ 
interest (Moore, 2010). Their speech is 
more animated, involving more laugh-
ter and fewer silences, and their voices 
sound warmer. And coupled with these 
signals of interest and immediacy may 
be particular expressions such as a head 
cant, pouting mouth, and coy look that 
are fairly unique (Canterberry et al., 
2011). Together, these enticing actions 
clearly signal one’s desire for continued 
interaction with a new partner.
Behavior that is merely fl irtatious 
differs from behavior that is straight-
forwardly seductive. Actions that are 
intended to convey sexual interest 
involve even more eye contact, smiling, 
and touching, more intimate paralan-
guage, and smaller interpersonal dis-
tances than friendly fl irtatiousness does 
(Koeppel et al., 1993). But the distinction 
is often lost on men, who tend to mis-
read women’s signals more often than 
women misunderstand men’s mean-
ings. Men often see sexual overtones in 
the friendly behavior they receive from 
women, and women who intend their 
actions to be fun, frivolous, and festive 
(but nothing more) run a constant risk 
of being misunderstood. On the other 
hand, women who are sending sexual 
signals may be misunderstood, too, 
being thought to be merely friendly. 
Guys make both kinds of mistakes (Far-
ris et al., 2008) because they’re just not 
as good at reading others, on average, 
as women are (Brody & Hall, 2010). 
C’est la vie. 

CHAPTER 5: Communication 155
the distressed marriages appeared to be the husbands’ fault. Men in troubled 
marriages were misinterpreting communications from their wives that were 
clearly legible to total strangers. Even worse, such husbands were completely 
clueless about their mistakes; they assumed that they were doing a fine job 
communicating with their wives, and they were confident that they under-
stood their wives and that their wives understood them (Noller & Venardos, 
1986). The men were doing a poor job communicating and didn’t know it, and 
that’s why they seemed to be at fault. 
 On the other hand, to be fair, nonverbal marital miscommunication is not 
entirely due to husbands’ shortcomings. In another study, Noller (1981) com-
pared spouses’ accuracy in decoding the other’s messages to their accuracy in 
decoding communications from strangers. In unhappy marriages,  both the hus-
bands and wives understood strangers better than they understood each other. 
When they were dissatisfied, everyone was communicating poorly, despite 
being capable of adequate nonverbal communication with others. 
 This is a key point because, now that you’re becoming a more sophisti-
cated consumer of relationship science, you’ve probably already realized that a 
 correlation between nonverbal miscommunication and relationship dissatisfac-
tion is consistent with several possibilities. On the one hand, the partners’ non-
verbal skills may determine how satisfying their relationships are; poor skills 
may result in poor relationships, but good skills may promote pleasurable 
partnerships. On the other hand, the partners’ satisfaction may determine how 
hard they work to communicate well; poor relationships may engender lazy 
(mis)communication, and good relationships may foster good communication. 
 Actually, both of these propositions are correct. Nonverbal insensitivity 
makes someone a less rewarding partner than he or she otherwise would be 
(Määttä & Uusiautti, 2013). But once partners grow dissatisfied for any reason, 
they tend to start tuning each other out, and that causes them to communicate 
less adeptly than they could if they really tried (Noller, 2006). In this fashion, 
nonverbal insensitivity and dissatisfaction can become a vicious cycle, with 
each exacerbating the other. 
 In any case, people’s problems with communication may stem from either 
skill deficits or performance deficits, and the distinction is an important one. 
 Some people simply aren’t very talented at nonverbal communication, and 
their deficits are provocative (and a little eerie). For instance, men who beat 
their wives have more trouble than nonviolent men figuring out what their 
wives are feeling (Marshall & Holtzworth-Munroe, 2010). And abusive moth-
ers have trouble identifying signs of distress in infants; they tend not to know 
when their babies are scared and unhappy (Kropp & Haynes, 1987). It’s pos-
sible, then, that skill deficits give some people blind spots that make them less 
likely to realize just how much harm they are doing to others. 
 So, why is it that women do better at nonverbal communication than 
men do? Skill and motivation both seem to be involved: Men’s performance 
improves when they’re motivated to pay close attention and to judge others 
correctly, but they never do better than women (Hall & Mast, 2008), who natu-
rally seem to judge others’ emotions more quickly and accurately than men do 

156 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
(Hampson et al., 2006). Given the frustrating impact of nonverbal miscommu-
nication, men’s poorer performances can be a nuisance, so here’s a tip: Watch 
someone’s eyes. Women spend more time watching others’ eyes than men do, 
and that appears to be one reason why they read others’ expressions more 
accurately (Hall et al., 2010). And as this tip suggests, training and practice 
can improve one’s skills (Blanch-Hartigan et al., 2012). The good news is that 
both men and women do better at nonverbal  communication when they look 
and listen and put their minds to it, and we’re usually more adept at reading 
our intimate partners’ nonverbal cues than those of acquaintances or strang-
ers (Zhang & Parmley, 2011). The bad news is that lazy inattention from either 
partner is likely to lead to more misunderstanding and less happiness and sat-
isfaction than a couple would otherwise enjoy (Määttä & Uusiautti, 2013). 
 VERBAL COMMUNICATION 
 If nonverbal communication is so important, what about the things we actu-
ally say to each other? They are probably even more consequential, of course 
(Solomon & Theiss, 2013). Verbal communication is a vital part of close rela-
tionships, and it is extensively involved in the development of intimacy in the 
first place. 
 Self-Disclosure 
 Imagine that as part of a psychology experiment, you meet a stranger and 
answer questions that lead you to gradually reveal more and more personal 
information about yourself. For instance, you describe your relationship with 
your mother, an embarrassing moment, or a deep regret. The stranger does the 
same thing, and 45 minutes later, you know a lot of personal details about each 
other. What would happen? Would you like the stranger more than you would 
have if the two of you had just shared small talk for the same amount of time? 
In most cases, the answer is definitely “yes.” Experiences such as these usually 
generate immediate closeness between the participants. People who open up to 
each other, even when they’re just following researchers’ instructions, like each 
other more than do couples who do not reveal as much (Slatcher, 2010). 
 The process of revealing personal information to someone else is called 
 self-disclosure. It is one of the defining characteristics of intimacy: Two people 
cannot be said to be intimate with each other if they do not share some personal, 
relatively confidential information with one another (Laurenceau et al., 2004). 
 How Self-Disclosure Develops 
 Of course, in real life, meaningful self-disclosure takes longer than 45 minutes. 
Most relationships begin with the exchange of superficial information—“small 
talk”—and only gradually move to more meaningful revelations. The manner 
in which this occurs is the subject of  social penetration theory, which holds that 
relationships develop through systematic changes in communication (Altman & 

CHAPTER 5: Communication 157
Taylor, 1973). People who have just met may feel free to talk with each other 
about only a few relatively impersonal topics: “Where are you from?” “What’s 
your major?” But if this superficial conversation is rewarding, they’re likely to 
move closer to each other by increasing two aspects of their communication:
 1. Its  breadth: the variety of topics they discuss, and 
 2. Its  depth: the personal significance of the topics they discuss. 
 According to the theory, if we diagram all the things there are to know 
about someone, self-disclosure at the beginning of a new relationship is likely 
to take the form of a wedge that’s both narrow (only a few different topics are 
being discussed) and shallow (only impersonal information is being revealed). 
(See  Figure 5.4. ) As the relationship develops, however, the wedge should 
become broader (with more topics being discussed) and deeper (with more 
topics of personal significance being revealed). 
 In general, that is what happens (Derlega et al., 2008). In addition, early 
encounters between acquaintances usually involve obvious  reciprocity in self-
disclosure. New partners tend to match each other’s level of openness, dis-
closing more as the other person does, and disclosing less if the other person’s 
self-disclosure declines. Just how much people reveal about themselves, then, 
tends to depend on the specific partner and may vary considerably from rela-
tionship to relationship (Dindia, 2002). This also tends to be a gradual process, 
with new partners moving toward deeper topics by stages rather than all at 
once. Saying too much too soon can be risky; it violates others’ expectations 
and often makes a poor impression (Buck & Plant, 2011). The best strategy is 
usually to be patient and to allow measured reciprocity to gradually increase 
the intimacy of your interactions (Sprecher et al., 2013b). 
N
u
m
b
e
r 
of
 
T
o
pi
c
s 
S
u
p
e
r
fi
c
i
a
l 
L
e
v
e
l 
I
n
t
i
m
a
t
e
 
L
e
v
e
l
 
Early in a Relationship
Very
Intimate
Level
As the Relationship Develops
FIGURE 5.4. Altman and Taylor’s wedge of social penetration.
If information about someone exists in several layers, self-disclosure increases in both 
breadth and depth as a relationship develops.

158 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
 However, an interpersonal process model of intimacy proposed by Harry 
Reis and Phillip Shaver (1988) argues that genuine intimacy is likely to develop 
between two people only when certain conditions have been met. When we 
open up to others, we want our disclosures to be received with apparent inter-
est, sympathy, and respect. That is, we want responsiveness from others that indi-
cates that they understand us and care about us. If they are suitably responsive, 
trust builds, disclosures deepen, and intimacy increases; alternatively, if they 
seem disinterested or uncaring, we back off and our disclosures decrease. So, 
for two people to become close, three things have to happen. First, they have to 
engage in meaningful self-disclosure. Authentic openness and honesty are gen-
erally good for relationships (Brunell et al., 2010). Then, they have to respond 
Are You a High “Opener”?
Some people are especially good at elic-
iting self-disclosure from others. Lynn 
Miller, John Berg, and Rick Archer (1983) 
developed the Opener Scale to assess this 
ability, and people who get high scores 
really do draw out more intimate infor-
mation from others than do people who 
receive low scores on the scale. They 
do this through both verbal and non-
verbal channels: High openers appear 
more attentive during conversation—
gazing and nodding more, and looking 
interested—and they verbally express 
more interest in what others are saying 
(Purvis et al., 1984). They seem to be 
absorbed by what others have to say, so 
they tend to be very good interviewers 
(Shaffer et al., 1990).
Women tend to be better openers 
than men (Miller et al., 1983). The aver-
age score for women on the Opener 
Scale is 31, whereas 28 is typical for 
men. If your own score is 5 points 
higher than average, you’re a fairly 
high opener, but if it’s 5 points lower, 
your score is rather low. You can fi g-
ure your score by rating yourself on 
each item using this scale:
The Opener Scale
 1. People frequently tell me about themselves.
 2. I’ve been told that I’m a very good listener.
 3. I’m very accepting of others.
 4. People trust me with their secrets.
 5. I easily get people to “open up.”
 6. People feel relaxed around me.
 7. I enjoy listening to people.
 8. I’m sympathetic to people’s problems.
 9. I encourage people to tell me how they are feeling.
 10. I can keep people talking about themselves.
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4
Strongly  
Disagree 
Neither agree 
Agree 
Strongly
disagree 
 
nor disagree 
 
agree

CHAPTER 5: Communication 159
to each other’s personal information with interest and empathy—and in het-
erosexual relationships, it’s particularly valuable when men do this (Mitchell 
et al., 2008). Finally—and this is important—they each have to recognize that 
the other is being responsive. The judgment that one’s  partner is understand-
ing and caring, which is known as perceived partner responsiveness, is a key part 
of the ongoing process by which intimacy develops (Laurenceau et al., 2005). 
If we don’t perceive our partners to be caring, understanding, and respectful, 
we’ll not tell them our secrets.
Secrets and Other Things We Don’t Want to Talk About
Even when a relationship becomes quite intimate, we’ll probably keep 
some things to ourselves. Social penetration is almost never total, and it prob-
ably shouldn’t be because partners like and need some privacy, too (Petronio & 
Durham, 2008). No relationship is likely to be able to sustain total openness and 
intimacy over long periods of time (Derlega et al., 2008), and it may be a mis-
take to even try: Both intimate self-disclosure  and selective secrecy contribute 
to marital satisfaction (Finkenauer et al., 2009). Some privacy is desirable even 
in a close, intimate relationship. (I’m reminded of a cover story in  Cosmopolitan 
magazine that asked, if you’ve had an affair, “Should You Ever Tell?” Their 
answer, after much discussion, was “probably not.”) 
 Of course, it’s not always easy to keep a secret, especially in an intimate 
relationship. Doing so often requires hard work (Uysal et al., 2010), and it’s 
risky, too: Relationships are undermined when people learn that their partners 
are concealing something (Uysal et al., 2012). Why go to the trouble? There are 
several possible reasons. When they intentionally withhold information from 
others, “people generally long to protect themselves, protect their relation-
ships, or protect others” (Afifi et al., 2007, p. 79). It’s pretty straightforward, 
really: When people believe that keeping a secret is more trouble than it’s 
worth, they usually reveal it to others after a while (Caughlin & Vangelisti, 
2009). On the other hand, if they worry that they or others may be harmed by 
an unwanted truth, they may strive to conceal it forever (Afifi et al., 2005).  
 There are also important issues that both partners may simply not want to 
talk about. Explicitly or implicitly, partners may agree to steer clear of  taboo 
topics, sensitive matters that, in the opinion of the partners, may threaten the 
quality of their relationship. Curiously, the most common taboo topic is the state 
of the relationship itself; in one survey, 68 percent of the respondents acknowl-
edged that the current or future state of their romantic relationships was a sub-
ject that was better off not being mentioned (Baxter & Wilmot, 1985).   (Other 
common taboos involved current relationships with  other partners, avoided by 
31 percent of the respondents, and past relationships [25 percent]. Discussion 
of past sexual experiences is also routinely avoided [Anderson et al., 2011].) 
People are often keenly interested in the likely future of their partnerships and 
are eager to learn their partners’ expectations and intentions, but they don’t ask 
(Knobloch et al., 2013). Instead, romantic partners may create  secret tests of their 
lovers’ fidelity and devotion (Baxter & Wilmot, 1984). They watch closely to 
see how their lovers respond to other attractive people (that’s a “triangle test”); 

160 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
they contrive difficulties that the lover must overcome in order to demonstrate 
his or her devotion (an “endurance test”); and they find reasons to be apart to 
see how enthusiastically their lovers welcome their return (a “separation test”). 
This all seems like a lot of trouble when they could simply ask the partner what 
he or she is thinking—and they  do often ask the partner’s  friends —but in many 
relationships, such matters seem too delicate to be discussed openly. But watch 
out: The more taboo topics there are in a relationship, the less satisfied the part-
ners are unless they feel that they’re avoiding touchy topics to promote and 
Cautious Communication: Coming Out
You probably know someone who’s 
openly gay or lesbian. LGBs (lesbians, 
gays, and bisexuals) are much more 
likely to announce their sexual identi-
ties to friends and family, and to do 
so at earlier ages, than was the case a 
generation ago (Hunter, 2007). Public 
acknowledgments of their identities are 
still important milestones for most LGBs, 
however, and it’s an action they usually 
take thoughtfully and cautiously (if they 
do so at all).
On average, LGBs fi rst become 
aware of their attraction to the same sex 
years before they engage in sexual activ-
ity, when they’re only 12 (Lopez, 2013). In 
most cases, they know for sure that they 
are gay, lesbian, or bisexual around the 
age of 16; they have their fi rst same-sex 
experience a year later, and they come 
out to someone for the fi rst time just 
before they turn 18 (Floyd & Bakeman, 
2006). These fi rst disclosures usually go 
well, resulting in supportive, positive 
reactions because the confi dant is typi-
cally a trusted friend (Savin-Williams, 
2005). It’s a year later on average, just 
before they turn 19, when they fi rst tell 
a parent, usually their mothers (Floyd & 
Bakeman, 2006). This is often diffi cult, 
requiring no small amount of courage, 
and LGBs with a history of secure attach-
ment to their parents are more likely to 
come out to them than insecure people 
are (Elizur & Mintzer, 2001).
A second, less common trajectory 
for coming out is notably different. In this 
pattern, same-sex attraction is noticed 
later (at the age of 16, on average), and 
the person has heterosexual experiences 
(at 19) before the fi rst same-sex sexual 
experience (at 23). Self-identifi cation as 
gay, lesbian, or bisexual follows in the 
mid-20s with disclosure to a friend, and 
then a parent—if a parent is told at all—
following shortly thereafter (Floyd & 
Bakeman, 2006).
Thus, older LGBs take longer to 
realize who they are, so they are often 
independent adults (almost 26, on aver-
age) when they come out. By compari-
son, LGB teens usually live with a big 
secret for a couple of years before tell-
ing anyone, and it takes them 3 years 
to come out to a parent. Why so long? 
It’s usually because they correctly rec-
ognize that their disclosure will be a 
turning point in their relationships with 
their families. And they rarely wish to 
injure anyone; instead, they seek to be 
honest and authentic rather than secre-
tive and distant (Hunter, 2007). They 
disclose the truth to be closer to the 
ones they love, and the good news is 
that they usually succeed: They usually 
receive support from their friends, and 
over time most parents come to accept 
their same-sex orientation with either 
equanimity or encouragement (Legate 
et al., 2012).

CHAPTER 5: Communication 161
protect their relationship (Dillow et al., 2009). Ducking discussions because of 
cowardice or incompetency erodes partners’ satisfaction, but politely working 
together to maintain the partnership rarely has ill effects.  
 Self-Disclosure and Relationship Satisfaction 
 The bottom line is that the more self-disclosure romantic couples share, 
the happier they tend to be (Sprecher & Hendrick, 2004). Self-disclosure that 
fits the situation breeds liking and contentment in close relationships, and that 
occurs  for several reasons (Collins & Miller, 1994). First, we tend to reveal more 
personal information to those we like. If we’re attracted to others, we tend to be 
more open with them. However, we also tend to like others  because we have self-
disclosed to them. Everything else being equal, opening up to others causes us 
to like them more. Finally, and perhaps most importantly, it’s rewarding to be 
entrusted with self-disclosures from others. People who engage in intimate dis-
closures are liked more by others than are those who say less about themselves 
(Sprecher et al., 2013a). So, it feels good to give and to receive self-disclosures, 
and this aspect of verbal communication is an essential building block of close 
relationships. Try it yourself for 45 minutes, and you’ll probably make a new 
friend (Slatcher, 2010).
Finally, self-disclosure is not only good for our relationships, it’s good for us. 
Compared to those who engage in more superficial small talk, people who have 
substantive, deep conversations and who make themselves known to others 
enjoy better health (Sloan, 2010) and more satisfaction with life (Mehl et al., 2010). 
And there’s a particular sort of self-disclosure that you should absolutely, posi-
tively engage in more often: Tell those you love that you love them. Your honest 
Attachment Styles and Communication
Attachment styles are evident in com-
municative behavior. Compared to those 
who are high in avoidance of intimacy, 
those with secure styles generally exhibit 
warmer, more expressive nonverbal 
behavior involving more laughter, smil-
ing, gazing, and touching; their greater 
comfort with closeness is apparent in 
their actions (Tucker & Anders, 1998). 
Secure people also engage in more 
self-disclosure (Bradford et al., 2002), 
keep fewer secrets (Vrij et al., 2003), and 
express their emotions more honestly 
(Kafetsios, 2004) than avoidant people 
do. Secure people are thus more open 
with their intimate partners than avoid-
ant people are, and that’s one reason 
why their partnerships are more satisfy-
ing as the years go by (Tan et al., 2012).
Anxiety about abandonment is 
less problematic. If anything, in their 
nervous quest for intimacy and accep-
tance, people who are high in attach-
ment anxiety routinely self-disclose too 
much, too soon (Mikulincer & Shaver, 
2013). They’re typically eager to talk 
about their relationships, however, and 
that’s not such a bad thing (Tan et al., 
2012). Add it all up, though, and the 
most relaxed and responsive communi-
cators are secure people who are low in 
both avoidance and anxiety; they’re the 
most desirable confi dants (Mikulincer & 
Shaver, 2013).

162 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
expressions of fondness, regard, affection, and care are powerful rewards for 
those who want to be close to you (Floyd & Pauley, 2011), and it’s not enough just 
to have such feelings; you have to communicate them in a way that makes them 
plain (Burleson et al., 2013). But here’s the real point of this paragraph: Affec-
tionate communication is not just affirming and pleasing to your partner; it also 
can be remarkably beneficial to you. In lab studies, people who get randomly 
assigned to write love letters that express their affection for their partners expe-
rience improved neuroendocrine responses to stress (Floyd et al., 2007b) and, 
over time, lower cholesterol levels, heart rates, and blood pressures (Floyd et al., 
2007a). Tell your partners of your affection for them. It’ll be good for both of you.2 
 Gender Differences in Verbal Communication 
 People have made a lot of money writing books that describe men and women 
as different species that come from different planets and speak different lan-
guages. I’m trying to combat that simple-minded way of thinking through-
out this book because the sexes really are more similar than they are different. 
However, there are some gender differences in verbal communication that can 
influence our interactions. Men and women don’t speak different languages, 
but they sometimes talk about different things. 
 Topics of Conversation 
 If you read a transcript of a conversation between two friends, would you 
be able to tell if the participants were men or women? You might. Among them-
selves, women are more likely than men to discuss their feelings about their 
close relationships and other personal aspects of their lives. Feelings and peo-
ple figure prominently in both the conversations and text messages of women 
(Fox et al., 2007). In contrast, men tend to stick to more impersonal matters, dis-
cussing objects and actions such as cars and sports, gossiping about celebrities 
and politicians instead of friends, and seeking a few laughs instead of support 
and counsel (McHugh & Hambaugh, 2010). As a result, the  conversations men 
have with each other tend to be less intimate and personal than the conversa-
tions women share (Reis, 1998). 
However, when men and women interact with each other, these differ-
ences are less apparent than you might think. When young adults chatted with 
strangers online using written messages, they were generally unable to correctly 
guess the sex of the person they were chatting with if the researchers didn’t tell 
them. The sorts of things that distinguish men’s and women’s conversations 
(such as the latest sports results) rarely came up, so there was usually no way to 
determine with whom one was chatting (Williams & Mendelsohn, 2008). What 
differences there are in men’s and women’s discourse are clearly rather subtle.3
2 There’s no need to tell them I put you up to it.
3 And seriously, isn’t it a little ridiculous to suggest that men and women come from different plan-
ets and speak different languages when, if we don’t already know who they are, we can’t even tell 
them apart?

CHAPTER 5: Communication 163
Texts, Tweets, and Status Updates: 
Modern (Mis?)Communication
We send a lot of text and e-mail mes-
sages these days, and they offer us 
great convenience, global reach, and the 
opportunity for even more confusion in 
our communication with others. Texts, 
tweets, and other forms of computer-
mediated communication (or CMC) 
differ in important ways from actually 
talking to someone. For one thing, the 
pace is slower, and we can take our 
time to consider what we want to say 
if we wish. Also, no “leaky” nonverbal 
behavior is involved, so we have more 
control over the messages we send. 
These qualities make CMC seem safer 
and more manageable to some people 
than actual conversation is, so that, for 
instance, shy people are more comfort-
able chatting online than they are face-
to-face (Van Zalk et al., 2011).
Text is a more pallid form of com-
munication than talking, however, so 
we often go to some trouble to specify 
how a statement is meant to be read. 
Most of our e-mails contain at least one 
phrase that should not be taken literally 
(Whalen et al., 2009), so we offer instruc-
tions such as emoticons that clarify our 
meaning. Hi, out there in textbook land, 
by the way: {*_*} The problem is that we 
usually think that we’ve resolved any 
doubt and that our messages are more 
exact and unambiguous than they really 
are. Because we know what we mean, 
we typically fail to appreciate how eas-
ily others can take our words differently 
(Kruger et al., 2005). Interpersonal gaps 
abound online.
Still, despite frequent misunder-
standings, there’s an amazing amount 
of information about people avail-
able in CMC. For instance, strangers 
get some insight into our  personalities 
from the Twitter handles and e-mail 
addresses we choose (Back et al., 2008b), 
and if we use lots of exclamation points 
in our messages, they’ll probably think 
we’re female (McAndrew & De Jonge, 
2011). We also seem extraverted when 
we expand instead of abbreviate words 
and use a lot more characters than 
we need (as in “bitchhhhhhhhhhhh”) 
( Holtgraves, 2011). But those  stylistic 
nuances pale by comparison to the 
wealth of personal details that many of us 
intentionally self-disclose on social net-
working sites. Almost everybody posts 
their birthdays, and most people post 
their  hometowns—key bits of info that 
are hugely valuable to identity thieves—
and of course, that just scratches the sur-
face of the personal data people put out 
there. People aren’t entirely heedless of 
their privacy on Facebook, but they man-
age it less attentively online than they do 
in face-to-face communication.
Overall, though, the most impor-
tant aspect of CMC for our rela-
tionships is the manner in which it 
provides us access to others. Web-based 
services have become so important in 
fi nding romantic partners that adults 
with Internet access at home are much 
more likely than others of the same 
sex, age, and education to even have 
a partner at all (Rosenfeld & Thomas, 
2012). Texting also provides a private, 
rather continuous way to be in contact 
even when partners are apart, doing 
other things, and that connection is 
often very comforting (Chen, 2011). 
Texting is a familiar means of showing 
that one cares, and friends who share 
more texts generally grow closer over 
time (Valkenburg & Peter, 2009).1
1 But don’t text in class. They may not men-
tion it, but your professors hate it.

164 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
 Styles of Conversation 
 Women speak somewhat less forcefully than men do, being more indirect 
and seeming less certain (Leaper & Robnett, 2011). It’s a style of conversation in 
which one uses hedges to soften assertions and asks questions instead of making 
straightforward statements, as in this wry example: “Women are sort of more 
tentative than men, aren’t they?” (Palomares, 2009, p. 539). It’s not clear, how-
ever, that this tentativeness stems from a lack of assertion; it may just reflect 
greater concern for others’ feelings in women than in men (Leaper & Robnett, 
2011). Supporting that possibility, women are also less profane (McHugh & 
Hambaugh, 2010).  
There are also hackneyed stereotypes that suggest that women are more 
talkative than men, but that is not the case. Portable recordings of their interac-
tions demonstrate that college women speak 16,215 words a day, on average, 
whereas men speak 15,559. It’s a trivial difference (Mehl et al., 2007). What’s 
more striking is that men speak up and say something less often than women do, 
but when they do get started, they talk longer, brooking no interruption (Leaper 
& Ayres, 2007). Women speak more often but produce fewer monologues.
So, despite some stereotypes to the contrary, there aren’t sizable global 
differences in the way men and women talk. However, there are meaningful 
 differences in language use from one person to the next, and the words we use 
are so informative that strangers can get accurate impressions of us by overhear-
ing a few minutes of our conversation (Holleran et al., 2009). Our personalities 
are apparent in the words we use. For example, a careful analysis of the writ-
ings of almost 700 bloggers found that words such as awful, worse, horrible, and 
annoying were used more often by people who were high in neuroticism than by 
those who were less prone to fretfulness and worry. Drinks and dancing charac-
terized extraverts, and visiting, together, hug, and other such friendly terms were 
related to agreeableness (Yarkoni, 2010).4 Our vocabulary really does tell others 
who we are, and, notably, two people are likely to be more attracted to each 
other on a speed date if they use language the same way (Ireland et al., 2011).
4 If you don’t quite recall what these traits are, take a look back at page 27.
Still, CMC doesn’t provide the 
same rewards we often gain from talk-
ing to people in person. Our connection 
with, and focus on, others is shallower 
when we’re typing out a message 
(Lipinski-Harten & Tafarodi, 2012). 
So, when we’re troubled, we get more 
comfort from talking to others than 
from texting them (Iacovelli &  Johnson, 
2012), in part because the familiar 
sound of a partner’s voice reduces the 
stress hormones in our blood (Seltzer 
et al., 2012).
So, CMC certainly isn’t perfect, and 
it can be disadvantageous if it begins to 
interfere with rich face-to-face interac-
tion with others (Przybylski & Wein-
stein, 2013). But most of us are clearly 
at home with our keypads, and CMC 
is here to stay. And that’s the end of 
this box. Thanks for reading it. TTFN. 
LUMTP.

CHAPTER 5: Communication 165
 Self-Disclosure 
 So far, we haven’t encountered big differences in men’s and women’s ver-
bal communication. But here’s a difference that matters: In established rela-
tionships, women are more self-disclosing than men are, and in keeping with 
their higher scores on the “Opener” scale (on page 158), they elicit more self-
disclosure, too (Dindia, 2002). Indeed, men tend to offer their female p artners 
more intimate self-disclosures than they provide their male partners (such as 
their best friends)—and the result is that interactions that include a woman 
tend to be more intimate and meaningful than are interactions that involve 
only men (Reis, 1998). Men open up to women, and women are open among 
themselves, but men disclose less to other men. 
 An important consequence of all this is that men often depend more on 
women for emotional warmth and intimacy than women do on them in return 
(Wheeler et al., 1983): Whereas women may have intimate, open, supportive 
connections with partners of both sexes, heterosexual men are likely to share 
their most meaningful intimacy only with women. Consequently, a man may 
need a woman in his life to keep him from being lonely, but women don’t usu-
ally need men in this way.  
 Instrumentality versus Expressivity 
 Importantly, however, this difference between men and women in self-
disclosure is a  gender difference that is more closely associated with people’s 
gender roles than with their biological sex. Women engage in intimate verbal 
communication with trusted partners because they tend to be high in expressiv-
ity5 and are comfortable talking about their feelings. This also comes n aturally 
to men who are high in expressivity, as androgynous men are, and such men 
tend to have meaningful, intimate interactions with both sexes just as women 
do (Aubé et al., 1995). So, to refine the point I just made, it’s really just tradi-
tional, macho men who have superficial conversations with their best friends 
and who need relationships with women to keep from being lonely. More than 
other men, macho guys have superficial conversations with their male friends 
(Shaffer et al., 1996) and tend to be sad and lonely when they do not have a 
female romantic partner (Wheeler et al., 1983). In contrast, androgynous men 
(who are both assertive  and  warm) self-disclose readily to both sexes and enjoy 
meaningful interactions with all their friends; as a result, they tend not to be 
lonely, and, as a bonus, they spend more time interacting with women than less 
expressive, traditional men do (Reis, 1986). 
 Given this, it’s silly to think that men and women speak different languages 
and come from different planets. Many men  are more taciturn than the average 
woman, but there are also men who are more open and self-disclosing than 
most women are. The typical intimacy of a person’s interactions is tied to his or 
her level of expressivity, and once you take that into account, it doesn’t matter 
whether the person is a man or woman. Moreover, expressivity is a trait that 
ranges from low to high in both women and men, so it makes more sense to 
5 Expressivity, instrumentality, and androgyny? See pages 24–25.

166 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
take note of individual differences in communicative style than to lump all men 
together and treat them as a group distinct from women. 
 Indeed, people also vary in how loquacious and effusive they are. Some 
of us put our thoughts and feelings into words quickly—we blurt out what-
ever we’re thinking and thereby engage in animated, rapid-fire c onversation—
whereas others of us are slower, more deliberate, and more hesitant in 
verbalizing our feelings. The word is a bit goofy, but these differences in ver-
bal style are said to be individual differences in  blirtatiousness (Swann & 
Rentfrow, 2001). A talkative, highly blirtatious woman and a taciturn, close-
mouthed man may get along fine when they meet (Swann et al., 2006)—he 
doesn’t have to say much because she’s happy to do all the talking—but they 
make a precarious match if they settle down together (Swann et al., 2003). She’s 
likely to dominate the discussion of the conflicts that arise (as they always do; 
see chapter 11), and that pattern violates traditional expectations that make 
men the heads of their households. This doesn’t bother progressive, androgy-
nous men, but it does frustrate traditional guys, who tend to be dissatisfied in 
the long run when they are paired with assertive, talkative women (Angulo 
et al., 2011). Gender role stereotypes obviously influence what we take for 
granted in heterosexual interaction. 
 Indeed, men value instrumental communication skills such as the ability 
to give clear instructions and directions more than women do. And women 
value expressive communication skills such as expressing affection and feel-
ings more than men do. Still, both men and women consider expressive skills to 
be more important in close relationships than instrumental skills are (Burleson 
et al., 1996). They are sometimes caricatured as speaking different languages, 
but men and women agree that the ability to adequately communicate one’s 
love, respect, and regard for one’s partner is indispensable in close relation-
ships (Floyd, 2006). 
 DYSFUNCTIONAL COMMUNICATION 
AND WHAT TO DO ABOUT IT 
 As we’ve seen, the more self-disclosing partners are, the more satisfied they 
tend to be (Sprecher & Hendrick, 2004). But not all our efforts to speak our 
minds and communicate with our partners have positive results. More often 
than we realize, an interpersonal gap causes misunderstanding in those who 
hear what we have to say. And the nature and consequences of miscommuni-
cation are very apparent in relationships in which the partners are distressed 
and dissatisfied. The verbal communications of unhappy partners often just 
perpetuate their discontent and make things worse instead of better. 
 Miscommunication 
 Indeed, we can gain valuable insights into what we shouldn’t do when we talk 
with others by carefully comparing the communicative behaviors of happy lovers 

CHAPTER 5: Communication 167
to those of unhappy partners. John Gottman and his colleagues at the University 
of Washington did this for over 30 years, and they observed several important 
patterns. First, unhappy people do a poor job of  saying what they mean (Gottman, 
1994b). When they have a complaint, they are rarely precise; instead, they’re 
prone to  kitchen-sinking,  in which they tend to address several topics at once 
(so that everything but the “kitchen sink” gets dragged into the conversation). 
This usually causes their primary concern to get lost in the barrage of frustrations 
that are announced at the same time. If they’re annoyed by overdrawn fees on a 
debit card, for instance, they may say, “It’s not just your carelessness; it’s about 
your drinking and your lousy attitude about helping out around the house.” As 
a result, their conversations frequently drift  off-beam, wandering from topic to 
topic so that the conversation never stays on one problem long enough to resolve 
it: “You never do what I ask. You’re just as hard-headed as your mother, and you 
always take her side.” Flitting from problem to problem on a long list of concerns 
makes it almost certain that none of them will get fixed. 
 Second, unhappy partners do a poor job of  hearing each other. They rarely 
try to patiently double-check their understanding of their partners’ messages. 
Instead, they jump to conclusions (often assuming the worst) and head off on 
tangents based on what they presume their partners really mean. One aspect of 
this is  mindreading, which occurs when people assume that they understand 
their partners’ thoughts, feelings, and opinions without asking. All intimate 
couples mindread to some extent, but distressed couples do so in critical and 
hostile ways; they tend to perceive unpleasant motives where neutral or posi-
tive ones actually exist: “You just said that to make me mad, to get back at me 
for yesterday.” Unhappy partners also  interrupt each other in negative ways 
more than contented couples do. Not all interruptions are obnoxious. People 
who interrupt their partners to express agreement or ask for clarification may 
actually be communicating happily and well. But people who interrupt to 
express disagreement or to change the topic are likely to leave their partners 
feeling disregarded and unappreciated (Daigen & Holmes, 2000). 
 Distressed couples also listen poorly by finding something wrong or un-
workable with anything their partners say. This is  yes-butting, and it com-
municates constant criticism of the others’ points of view: “Yeah, we could try 
that, but it won’t work because. . . .” Unhappy partners also engage in  cross-
complaining that fails to acknowledge others’ concerns; instead of expressing 
interest in what their partners have to say, they just respond to a complaint 
with one of their own: 
 “I hate the way you let the dishes pile up in the sink.” 
 “Well, I hate the way you  leave your clothes lying around on the floor.” 
 Finally, unhappy partners too often display  negative affect when they talk 
with each other (Gottman & Levenson, 1992). They too often react to their 
partner’s complaints with sarcastic disregard that is demeaning and scornful, 
and instead of mending their problems, they often make them worse. Damag-
ing interactions like these typically begin with clumsy  criticism that attacks a 

168 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
partner’s personality or character instead of identifying a specific behavior that 
is causing concern. For instance, instead of delineating a particular frustration 
(“I get annoyed when you leave your wet towel on the floor”), a critic may 
inflame the interaction by making a global accusation of a character flaw (“You 
are such a slob!”).  Contempt in the form of insults, mockery, or hostile humor 
is often involved as well. The partners’ common response to such attacks is 
 defensiveness; instead of treating the clumsy complaint as legitimate and rea-
sonable, the partners seek to protect themselves from the unreasonable attack 
by making excuses or by cross-complaining, hurling counterattacks of their 
own.  Stonewalling may follow as a partner “clams up” and reacts to the messy 
situation by withdrawing into a stony silence (Eldridge & Baucom, 2012). 
People may believe they’re helping the situation by refusing to argue further, 
but their lack of responsiveness can be infuriating (Williams, 2007). Instead of 
demonstrating appropriate acknowledgment and concern for a partner’s com-
plaints, stonewalling typically communicates “disapproval, icy distance, and 
smugness” (Gottman, 1994b, p. 94). Ultimately, destructive  belligerence may 
occur with one partner aggressively rejecting the other altogether (“So what? 
What are you gonna do about it?”). 
 When communication routinely degenerates into these contentious pat-
terns, the outlook for the relationship is grim (Lannin et al., 2013). Surly, churl-
ish communication between spouses predicts discontent and distress down the 
road (Markman et al., 2010). In fact, videotapes of just the first 3  minutes of a 
marital conflict enable researchers to predict with 83 percent accuracy who will 
be divorced 6 years later (Carrère & Gottman, 1999). Couples whose marriages 
are doomed display noticeably more contempt, defensiveness, and belligerence 
than do those who will stay together. And among those who stay together, 
spouses who communicate well are happier and more content than those who 
suffer frequent misunderstanding (Gottman, 2011). 
 The challenge, of course, is that it’s not always easy to avoid these prob-
lems. When we’re angry, resentful, or anxious, we may find ourselves cross-
complaining, kitchen-sinking, and all the rest. How can we avoid these traps? 
Depending on the situation, we may need to send clearer, less inflamma-
tory messages, listen better, or stay polite and calm, and often we need to do 
all three. 
 Saying What We Mean 
 Complaints that criticize a partner’s personality or character disparage the 
partner and often make mountains out of molehills, portraying problems as 
huge, intractable dilemmas that cannot be easily solved. (Given some of the 
broad complaints we throw at our partners, it’s no wonder that they sometimes 
get defensive.) It’s much more sensible—and accurate—to identify as plainly 
and concretely as possible a specific behavior that annoyed us. This is  behavior 
description, and it not only tells our partners what’s on our minds but also 
focuses the conversation on discrete, manageable behaviors that, unlike per-
sonalities, can often be readily changed. A good behavior description specifies 

CHAPTER 5: Communication 169
a particular event and does not involve generalities; thus, words such as  always 
or  never should never be used. This is  not a good behavior description: “You’re 
always interrupting me! You never let me finish!” 
 We should also use  I-statements that specify our feelings. I-statements 
start with “I” and then describe a distinct emotional reaction. They force us to 
identify our feelings, which can be useful both to us and to our partners. They 
help us to “own” our feelings and to acknowledge them instead of keeping the 
entire focus on the partner. Thus, instead of saying, “You really piss me off,” 
one should say, “I feel pretty angry right now.” 
 A handy way to use both behavior descriptions and I-statements to com-
municate more clearly and accurately is to integrate them into  XYZ statements. 
Such statements follow the form of “When you do  X in situation  Y ” (that’s a 
Communicating Sympathy and Concern
Few of us know what to say when we 
encounter bereaved others who are suf-
fering from the loss of a loved one. We 
want to express sympathy and support, 
but our words often seem inadequate 
to the task. However, grief, and  others’ 
reactions to it, have been studied by 
relationship researchers (Wortman & 
Boerner, 2007), and I can offer some 
advice about this important kind of 
communication. First, you should men-
tion the person’s loss (Toller, 2011). The 
death of a beloved is a huge loss, some-
thing that the person will never forget 
(Carnelley et al., 2006). Assuming that 
the person’s pain has ended or is no lon-
ger salient to him or her, even months 
later, is simply insensitive. Talking 
about the lost partner acknowledges 
the person’s distress and communicates 
caring and concern. It may not be easy 
for you to do (Lewis & Manusov, 2009), 
but it’s kind.
What should you say? Something 
simple. Try “I’m so sorry,” or “I feel so 
sad for you” and then stop. Do not men-
tion any of your own tales of woe. Do 
not imply that the loss is not the most 
tragic, awful thing that has ever hap-
pened. Do not try to comfort the person 
with optimistic projections about the 
future. And do not offer advice about 
how the person can put his or her life 
back together. Such efforts may spring 
from good intentions, but each of them 
ultimately demeans the person’s current 
suffering. Offer heartfelt sympathy and 
nothing more. Just nod your head and be 
a good listener and be nonjudgmental.
Thus, offering welcome  comfort to 
others is more straightforward than you 
may have thought, as long as you avoid 
the pitfalls of saying too much. With 
this in mind, can you see what’s wrong 
with the following dumb remarks? Each 
is a quote from someone who was prob-
ably trying—and f ailing—to be helpful 
(Wortman & Boerner, 2007):
“The sooner you let go, the better.”
“Crying won’t bring him back.”
“He should have been wearing a 
seat belt.”
“God needed her more than you 
did.”
“You’re young, you can have other 
children.”
“You have many good years left.”

170 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
good behavior description), “I feel  Z ” (an I-statement). Listen to yourself next 
time you complain to your partner. Are you saying something like this: 
 “You’re so inconsiderate! You never let me finish what I’m saying!” 
Or, are you being precise and accurate and saying what you mean: 
 “When you interrupted me just now, I felt annoyed.” 
There’s a big difference. One of those statements is likely to get a thoughtful, 
apologetic response from a loving partner, but the other probably won’t. 
 Active Listening 
 We have two vital tasks when we’re on the receiving end of others’ messages. 
The first is to accurately understand what our partners are trying to say, and the 
second is to communicate that attention and comprehension to our partners so 
that they know we care about what they’ve said. Both tasks can be accomplished 
by  paraphrasing a message, repeating it in our own words and giving the sender 
a chance to agree that that’s what he or she actually meant. When people use 
paraphrasing, they don’t assume that they understood their partners and issue 
an immediate reply. Instead, they take a moment to check their comprehension 
by rephrasing the message and repeating it back. This sounds awkward, but it is 
a terrific way to avoid arguments and conflict that would otherwise result from 
misunderstanding and mistakes. Whenever a conversation begins to get heated, 
paraphrasing can keep it from getting out of hand. Look what’s wrong here:  
 W ilma:  (sighing) I’m so glad your mother decided not to come visit us next week.
 Fred:  (irate) What’s wrong with my mother? You’ve always been on her 
case, and I think you’re an ungrateful witch! 
 Perhaps before Fred flew off the handle, some paraphrasing would have been 
helpful: 
This interaction would be going better if Mom had used a reasonable behavior descrip-
tion and Jeremy wasn’t cross-complaining defensively. Do you see how both of them 
are communicating poorly?
Zits © 2007 Zits Partnership, Dist. by King Features.

CHAPTER 5: Communication 171
 W ilma:      (sighing) I’m so glad your mother decided not to come visit us next 
week.
 Fred: (irate) Are you saying you don’t like her to be here? 
 W ilma:  (surprised) No, she’s always welcome. I just have my paper due in my 
relationships class and I won’t have much time then. 
  F red: (mollified) Oh. 
 Another valuable listening skill is  perception checking, which is the oppo-
site of mindreading. In perception checking, people assess the accuracy of their 
inferences about a partner’s feelings by asking the partner for clarification. 
This communicates one’s attentiveness and interest, and it encourages the 
partner to be more open: “You seem pretty upset by what I said, is that right?” 
 Listeners who paraphrase and check their perceptions make an  active effort 
to understand their partners, and that care and consideration is usually much 
appreciated. In terms of the interpersonal process model of intimacy, they are 
being responsive, and that’s a good thing. Active 
listening like this is likely to help smooth the 
inevitable rough spots any relationship encoun-
ters. Indeed, people who practice these techniques 
typically report happier marriages than do those 
who simply assume that they understand what 
their partners mean by what they say (Markman 
et al., 1994).  
 Being Polite and Staying Cool 
 Still, even the most accurate sending and receiving may not do much good if 
our conversations are too often crabby and antagonistic. It’s hard to remain 
mild and relaxed when we encounter contempt and belligerence from others, 
and people who deride or disdain their partners often get irascible, ir ritated 
reactions in return. Indeed, dissatisfied spouses spend more time than con-
tented lovers do locked into patterns of  negative affect reciprocity in which 
they’re contemptuous of each other, with each being scornful of what the other 
has to say (Levenson et al., 1994). Happy couples behave this way, too—there 
are probably periods of acrimonious disregard in most relationships—but they 
break out of these ugly cycles more quickly than unhappy partners do (Bloch 
et al., 2014). 
 In fact, defusing cycles of increasing cantankerousness when they begin is 
very beneficial, but it may not be easy. Although XYZ statements and active 
listening skills can help prevent surly interactions altogether, Gottman and his 
colleagues argue that people rarely have the presence of mind to use them once 
they get angry (Gottman et al., 2000). It can be difficult or even “impossible to 
make ‘I-statements’ when you are in the ‘hating-my- partner, wanting revenge, 
feeling-stung-and-needing-to-sting-back’ state of mind” (Wile, 1995, p. 2). 
 Thus, being able to stay cool when you’re provoked by a partner and being 
able to calm down when you begin to get angry are very valuable skills. (And 
given that, you may want to skip ahead to page 348). Anger results from the 
A Point to Ponder
When was the last time 
you asked your partner if 
your perception of his or 
her feelings was accurate? 
Have you ever done that?

172 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
perception that others are causing us  illegitimate, unfair, avoidable grief. Use a 
different point of view to reduce or prevent anger altogether (Tice & Baumeis-
ter, 1993). Instead of thinking, “S/he has no right to say that to me!,” it’s more 
adaptive to think, “Hmm. Contrary statements from someone who loves me. 
I wonder why?” 
 Of course, it can be hard to maintain such a placid stream of thought 
when we’re provoked. So, it’s also a good idea to (try to) reduce the number 
of provocations you encounter by agreeing in advance to be polite to each 
other when you disagree (Gottman, 1994b). You may wish to schedule regu-
lar meetings at which you and your partner (politely) air your grievances; 
knowing that a problem will be addressed makes it easier to be pleasant to 
your partner the rest of the week (Markman et al., 1994). And under no cir-
cumstances should the two of you continue an interaction in which you’re 
just hurling insults and sarcasm back and forth at each other. If you find 
yourself in such a pattern of negative affect reciprocity, take a temporary  time 
out  to stop the cycle. Ask for a short break—“Honey, I’m too angry to think 
straight. Let me take 10 minutes to calm down”—and then return to the issue 
when you’re less aroused. Go off by yourself and take no more than six long, 
slow, deep breaths per minute, and you will calm down, faster than you think 
(Tavris, 1989).  
Unhappy partners often have difficulty saying what they mean, hearing each other, 
and staying polite and calm when disagreements arise.

CHAPTER 5: Communication 173
 The Power of Respect and Validation 
 The key ingredients in all of these components of good communication—our 
conscious efforts to send clear, straightforward messages, to listen carefully and 
well, and to be polite and nonaggressive even when disagreements occur—are 
the indications we provide that we care about and respect our partners’ points 
of view. We expect such concern and regard from our intimate partners, and 
distress and resentment build when we think we’re disrespected. Thus,  vali-
dation of our partners that acknowledges the legitimacy of their opinions and 
communicates respect for their positions is always a desirable goal in intimate 
interaction (Kellas et al., 2013). 
 Validation does not require you to agree with someone. You can com-
municate appropriate respect and recognition of a partner’s point of view 
without agreeing with it. Consider the following three responses to Barney’s 
complaint:  
Barney: I hate it when you act that way.
Cross-complaining
 Betty: And I hate it when you get drunk with Fred.
Agreement 
 Betty: Yeah, you’re right. I’ll stop.
Validation
 Bet ty:  Yeah, I can see how you’d feel that way. 
You’ve got a point. But I’d like you to try to 
 understand what I’m feeling, too.
  Only the last response, which concedes the legitimacy of Barney’s point of 
view but allows Betty her own feelings, invites an open, honest dialogue. We 
need not be inauthentic or nonassertive to respect our partners’ opinions, even 
when we disagree with them. 
 Indeed, validating our partners will often make disagreement much 
more tolerable. All of the skills I have mentioned here support an atmosphere 
of responsive care and concern that can reduce the intensity and impact of 
d isputes with our partners (Verhofstadt et al., 2005). You may even be able to 
set a troubled relationship on a more promising path by rehearsing these skills 
and pledging to be polite and respectful to one another when difficulties arise 
(Stanley et al., 2000). 
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 James loved deer hunting season. He liked to sit shivering in a deer blind in the 
chill before dawn, sipping coffee, and waiting for what the day would bring. 
But his wife, Judy, always dreaded that time of year. James would be gone for 
several weekends in a row, and each time he returned he’d either be grumpy 
because he was empty-handed or he would have lots of venison––and extra 
work––for her to handle. The costs of his gas, permit, and lease were also sub-
stantial, and the expense kept them from enjoying an occasional weekend at 
that bed-and-breakfast at the lake she liked so much. 

174 
CHAPTER 5: Communication
 So, when Judy handed James a thermos of hot coffee and walked with 
him to the door at 4:30 in the morning on the first day of deer season, she was 
already feeling melancholy and lonely. She looked at him and tried to be cheer-
ful, but her smile was forced and her expression downcast as she said in a 
plaintive tone, “Have a nice time, dear.” James happily replied, “Okay, thanks, 
hon. See you Sunday night!” and was gone. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for James and 
Judy? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 When a sender’s intentions differ from the impact that a message has on the 
recipient, a couple faces an  interpersonal gap. 
 Nonverbal Communication 
 Nonverbal communication serves vital functions,  providing information, 
regulating interaction, and  defining the nature of the relationship two people share. 
 Components of Nonverbal Communication. Nonverbal communication 
includes:  
 • Facial expression. Facial expressions are good guides to others’ moods, but 
cultural norms influence expressive behavior. 
 • Gazing behavior.  The direction and amount of a person’s looking is impor-
tant in defining relationships and in regulating interaction. 
 • Body movement. Gestures vary widely across cultures, but the posture and 
motion of the entire body are informative as well. 
 • Touch. Different types of touch have distinctly different meanings. 
 • Interpersonal distance.  We use different zones of personal space—the  inti-
mate, personal, social, and  public zones—for different kinds of interactions. 
 • Smell. Information about one’s emotions is transmitted to others by one’s 
smell.
 • Paralanguage. Paralanguage involves all the variations in a person’s 
voice—such as rhythm, rate, and loudness—other than the words he or she 
uses. 
 • Combining the components. Mimicry occurs when people use similar nonver-
bal behavior without realizing it. Nonverbal actions allow us to fine-tune 
the intimacy of our interactions in subtle but real ways. 
 Nonverbal Sensitivity. Unhappy spouses, especially husbands, do a poor 
job at nonverbal communication.  

CHAPTER 5: Communication 175
 Verbal Communication 
 Self-Disclosure. Intimacy involves sharing personal information about 
oneself to one’s partner. 
 • How self-disclosure develops. As a relationship develops, both the breadth 
and depth of self-disclosure increase. Intimacy develops when we perceive 
responsiveness in others that indicates that they understand us and care 
about us.
 • Secrets and other things we don’t want to talk about. Couples avoid taboo topics, 
and some secrecy is routine even in intimate partnerships. 
 • Self-disclosure and relationship satisfaction. Appropriate self-disclosure breeds 
liking and contentment, and expressions of affection are good for us. 
 Gender Differences in Verbal Communication.  Women are more likely 
than men to discuss feelings and people, but men and women are equally talk-
ative. However, macho men self-disclose relatively little to other men even 
when they are friends, and thus are likely to share their most meaningful inti-
macy only with women. A woman who is high in  blirtatiousness is a precarious 
match for a taciturn man. 
 Dysfunctional Communication and What to Do About It 
 Miscommunication. Distressed couples have trouble saying what they 
mean, and they engage in destructive verbal behavior. 
 Saying What We Mean. Skillful senders use  XYZ statements to focus on 
specific actions and make their feelings clear.  
 Active Listening. Good listeners use  paraphrasing and  perception checking to 
understand their partners. 
 Being Polite and Staying Cool. Happy couples also avoid extended peri-
ods of negative affect reciprocity. 
 The Power of Respect and Validation. Partners should communicate 
respect and recognition of the other’s point of view even when they disagree.  

176
 C H A P T E R  6 
 Interdependency 
 S ocial E xchange  ◆ T he E conomies of R elationships 
 ◆ A re W e R eally T his G reedy?  ◆ T he N ature of C ommitment 
 ◆ F or Y our C onsideration  ◆ C hapter S ummary 
 I f you’ve been in a relationship for a while, why are you  staying in that relation-
ship? Are you obligated to continue it for some reason? Are you simply waiting 
for something better to come along? Hopefully, your current relationships have 
been so rewarding that none of these questions will seem to apply. However, 
all of them provide the focus for this chapter, which will take an  economic view 
of our dealings with others. 
 Our subject will be interdependency, our reliance on others and theirs 
on us for valuable interpersonal rewards. I’ll examine why we stay in some 
relationships and leave others and ponder the nature of lasting relationships. 
I’ll say nothing about love; that’s another chapter. Instead, our focus will be 
the spreadsheets with which we tally the profits and losses of our interactions 
with others. You may not yet have thought of yourself as an interpersonal 
accountant, but doing so provides powerful insights into the workings of close 
relationships. 
 SOCIAL EXCHANGE 
 Interdependency theories assume that people are like shoppers who are brows-
ing at an interpersonal shopping mall. We’re all looking for good buys. We 
seek interactions with others that provide maximum reward at minimum cost, 
and we stay only with those partners who provide sufficient profit (Van Lange 
& Rusbult, 2012). But because everybody behaves this way, both partners in a 
relationship must be profiting to their satisfaction or the relationship is unlikely 
to continue. 
 From this perspective, social life entails the mutual exchange of desirable 
rewards with others, a process called  social exchange. There are several differ-
ent social exchange theories, but the ideas introduced by John Thibaut and 
Harold Kelley (1959; Kelley & Thibaut, 1978)—now known as  interdependence 
theory —are most often used by relationship scientists, so I’ll feature them here. 
Let’s consider the central elements of social exchange.  

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 177
 Rewards and Costs 
 The rewards of interactions are the gratifying experiences and commodities we 
obtain through our contact with others. They come in very different forms ranging 
from impersonal benefits, such as the directions you can get from strangers when 
you’re lost, to personal intimacies, such as acceptance and support from someone 
you love. I’ll use the term  reward to refer to anything within an interaction that is 
desirable and welcome and that brings enjoyment or fulfillment to the recipient. 
 In contrast,  costs are punishing, undesirable experiences. They can involve 
financial expenditures, such as buying drinks for your date, or actual injuries, 
such as split lips. However, some of the most important costs of intimate inter-
action are psychological burdens: uncertainty about where a relationship is 
headed, frustration over your partner’s imperfections, and regret about all the 
things you don’t get to do because you’re in that relationship (Sedikides et al., 
1994). All of the diverse consequences of interaction that are frustrating or dis-
tressing are costs. 
 We’ll summarize the rewards and costs associated with a particular inter-
action with the term  outcome, which describes the net profit or loss a person 
encounters, all things considered. Adding up all the rewards and costs involved, 
Outcomes 5 Rewards 2 Costs
 Obviously, if an interaction is more rewarding than punishing, a positive 
outcome results. But remember, the social exchange perspective asserts that 
people want the  best possible outcomes. The simple fact that your interactions 
are profitable doesn’t mean that they are good enough to keep you coming back 
to that partner. Indeed, one of the major insights of interdependence theory is 
its suggestion that whether your outcomes are positive or negative isn’t nearly 
as important as how they compare to two criteria with which we evaluate the 
outcomes we receive. The first criterion involves our expectations, and the sec-
ond involves our perceptions of how well we could manage without our cur-
rent partner. 
What Do We Expect from Our Relationships? 
 Interdependence theory assumes that each of us has an idiosyncratic  comparison 
level (which I’ll abbreviate as  CL ) that describes the value of the outcomes that 
we believe we deserve in our dealings with others. Our CLs are based on our 
past experiences. People who have a history of highly rewarding partnerships 
are likely to have high CLs, meaning that they expect and feel they deserve very 
good outcomes now. In contrast, people who have had troublesome relation-
ships in the past are likely to expect less and to have lower CLs. 
 A person’s comparison level represents his or her neutral point on a contin-
uum that ranges all the way from abject misery to ecstatic delight. That makes 
our CLs the standards by which our  satisfaction with a relationship is measured. 
If the outcomes you receive exceed your CL, you’re happy; you’re getting more 
than the minimum payoff you expect from interaction with others. Just how 

178 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
happy you are depends on the extent to which your outcomes surpass your 
expectations; if your outcomes are considerably higher than your CL, you’ll be 
very satisfied. On the other hand, if your outcomes fall below your CL, you’re 
dissatisfied even if your outcomes are still pretty good and you’re doing bet-
ter than most people. This is a significant point: Even if you are still making a 
profit on your dealings with others, you may not be happy if the profit isn’t 
big enough to meet your expectations. If you’re a rich, spoiled celebrity, for 
instance, you may have very high expectations and be rather dissatisfied with a 
fabulous partner who would bedazzle the rest of us. 
 So, satisfaction in close relationships doesn’t depend simply on how good 
our outcomes are in an absolute sense; instead, satisfaction derives from how 
our outcomes compare to our expectations—our comparison levels—like this: 
Outcomes 2 CL 5 Satisfaction or Dissatisfaction
 How Well Could We Do Elsewhere? 
 However, another important assumption of interdependence theory is that 
 satisfaction is not the only, or even the major, influence that determines how 
long relationships last. Whether or not we’re happy, we use a second criterion, 
a  comparison level for alternatives (or   CL alt ), to determine whether we could 
be doing even better somewhere else. Your CL alt describes the outcomes you’d 
receive by leaving your current relationship and moving to the best alternative 
partnership or situation you have available. And if you’re a good accountant, 
you can see that our CL alt s are also the lowest levels of outcome we will toler-
ate from our present partners. Here’s why: If other relationships promise better 
profits than we currently receive, we’re likely to 
leave our present partners and enjoy those big-
ger rewards. It wouldn’t matter if we’re currently 
satisfied with what we’re getting; we’d still go 
because, according to interdependency theory, we 
always want the best deal we can get. On the other 
hand, even if we are unhappy in a current relation-
ship, we won’t leave it unless a better alternative 
presents itself. This is a very important point, 
which helps explain why people stay in relation-
ships that make them miserable: Even though they’re unhappy where they 
are, they think they’d be worse off if they left. They won’t go anywhere until 
they think a better situation awaits them elsewhere (Edwards et al., 2011). This 
idea—that our contentment with a relationship is not the major determinant of 
whether we stay in it or go—is one of interdependence theory’s most interest-
ing insights. 
 Thus, our CL alt s determine our  dependence on our relationships. Whether or 
not we’re satisfied, if we believe that we’re already doing as well as we possibly 
can, we depend on our present partners and are unlikely to leave them (Ellis 
et al., 2002). Moreover, the greater the gap between our current  outcomes and 
A Point to Ponder
You love your job, but you 
get an offer for a job that 
is—all things considered— 
even better. Would you 
change jobs? How is our 
behavior in our relation-
ships any different?

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 179
our poorer alternatives, the more dependent we are. If our current outcomes 
are only a little better than those that await us elsewhere, we don’t need our 
current partners very much and may leave if our alternatives improve. 
 But would you really leave a satisfying relationship? Presumably, you 
would, if the alternatives luring you away were genuinely better than what you 
have now. To keep things simple when you consider this, think of your CL alt as 
the global outcome, the net profit or loss, that a person believes will result from 
switching partners, all things considered (Kelley, 2002). If the whole process 
of ending a present partnership and moving to an alternative promises better 
outcomes, a person should move. It’s just economic good sense. 
 A problem, of course, is that these are difficult calculations to make. There’s 
a lot to consider. On the one hand, we need to assess the desirability and avail-
ability of the alternative partners that could lure us away, and going it alone—
being without a p artner—is also an option to ponder. When other partners or 
simple solitude seem attractive, our CL alt s go up. However, we’ll also incur a 
variety of costs by leaving an existing relationship, and they can dramatically 
affect the net profit to be gained by moving elsewhere. For instance, Caryl 
R usbult demonstrated that one’s  investments in a present relationship, the 
things one would lose if the relationship were to end, are also important influ-
ences on one’s decision to stay or go (e.g., Rusbult et al., 2012). The investments a 
person leaves behind can either be tangible goods, such as furniture and dishes 
you have to split with your ex, or intangible psychological benefits, such as love 
and respect from in-laws and friends (Goodfriend & Agnew, 2008). An unhappy 
spouse may refrain from filing for divorce, for example, not because she has no 
other options but because she doesn’t want to accept the potential costs of con-
fused children, disappointed parents, and befuddled friends. All of these would 
reduce the global desirability of leaving and, thus, reduce one’s CL alt . 
 Another complication is that a person’s CL alt is what he or she  thinks it is, 
and a variety of factors can influence people’s perceptions of their alternatives. 
Self-esteem, for one. When people don’t like themselves, they doubt their desir-
ability (Swann & Buhrmester, 2012) and underestimate their prospects with 
other partners. Access to information affects one’s CL alt , too. If you become a 
stay-at-home parent who doesn’t work, you’ll probably have much more lim-
ited information about potential alternatives than you would have if you went 
to work in a large city every day (Rusbult & Martz, 1995); as a result, you’ll 
have a lower CL alt than you would have if you got out and looked around. 
 Indeed, desirable alternatives will only enhance your CL alt if you are aware 
of them, and if you’re content with your current partners, you may not pay 
much attention to people who could be compelling rivals to your existing 
 relationships. In fact, people who are satisfied with their existing partnerships 
are relatively uninterested in looking around to see how they could be doing 
elsewhere. As a result, they think they have lower CL alt s than do those who 
pay more attention to their alternatives (Miller, 2008). This may be important. 
College students who keep track of their options and monitor their alternatives 
with care switch romantic partners more often than do those who pay their 
alternatives less heed (Miller, 2008). 

180 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
 These results mean that although interdependence theory treats satisfac-
tion and dependence as relatively independent influences on relationships, 
they are actually correlated. As an old cliché suggests, the grass may be greener 
in other relationships, but if you’re happy with your current partner, you’re 
less likely to notice. Still, there’s wisdom in remembering that satisfaction with 
a relationship has only a limited role in a person’s decision to stay in it or go. 
Consider the usual trajectory of a divorce: Spouses who divorce have usually 
been unhappy for quite some time before they decide to separate (Lucas, 2007). 
What finally prompts them to act? Something changes: Their CL alt s finally 
come to exceed their current outcomes (Albrecht & Kunz, 1980). Things may 
get so bad that their outcomes in the marriage fall below those that are avail-
able in alternative options that used to seem inadequate. Or the apparent costs 
of ending the marriage may decrease (which raises one’s CL alt ): Because the 
spouses have been unhappy for so long, for instance, their kids, parents, and 
pastor may change their minds and support a divorce for the first time. Or the 
apparent rewards of leaving increase, perhaps because they have saved some 
money or obtained a degree. (This also raises one’s CL alt .) The bottom line is 
that people don’t divorce when they get unhappy; they divorce when, one way 
or the other, their prospects finally seem brighter elsewhere. 
 So, if we remember that CL alt is a multifaceted judgment encompassing 
both the costs of leaving—such as lost investments—and the enticements 
offered by others, we get: 
Outcomes 2 CL alt 5 Dependence or Independence
     Let’s review. The three key elements of social exchange are people’s 
 outcomes, comparison levels (CLs), and  comparison levels for alternatives (CL alts ). 
The net profits or losses people receive from interaction are their outcomes. 
When their outcomes exceed their expectations, or CLs, they are satisfied; how-
ever, if they are not doing as well as they expect (that is, when their outcomes 
are lower than their CLs), they are dissatisfied. In addition, when people’s cur-
rent outcomes are better than those they could get elsewhere (that is, when 
their outcomes exceed their CL alt s), they depend on their current partners and 
are unlikely to leave. However, if their outcomes from their current partners get 
worse than those that can be readily obtained elsewhere (and their outcomes 
fall below their CL alt s), they will be independent and will be likely to depart.  
Four Types of Relationships 
 Let’s see how these calculations combine to define the types of relationships 
people encounter. CLs, CL alt s, and the outcomes people experience can all 
range from low to high along a continuum of outcome quality. Interdepen-
dence theory suggests that when we consider all three of these factors simulta-
neously, four different broad types of relationships result. 
 Consider what happens when people’s outcomes exceed both their CLs and 
their CL alt s. They’re getting more from their partners than they expect  and they 
believe they’re doing better than they could anywhere else. So, they’re happy 

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 181
and (as far as they’re concerned) their relationships are stable. They’re not going 
anywhere. This pleasant situation is depicted in  Figure 6.1 in two different ways. 
In one case, a person’s CL is higher than his or her CL alt  whereas in the other 
case the reverse is true. In these and all the other examples I’ll explain, the spe-
cific amount of satisfaction (or dependence) a person feels depends on the extent 
to which CL (or CL alt ) differs from the person’s current outcomes.  However, 
in both graphs A 1 and A 2 —and this is the point I wish to make—the person is 
in a happy, stable relationship. I showed you both graphs to demonstrate that, 
in terms of the simple classifications illustrated in  Figure 6.1 , it doesn’t matter 
FIGURE 6.1. Types of relationships in interdependence theory.
These examples may look daunting at first glance, but a patient reading of the text will 
make them clear. A1 and A2 are different examples of the same broad type of relationship, 
and D1 and D2 are too. As you can see, for our purposes, when CL and CLalt are both bet-
ter than, or both worse than, one’s current outcomes, it doesn’t matter which of them is 
higher than the other; what matters is where each of them is relative to current outcomes.
Outcome
Quality
Worse
Better
Current Outcomes
CLalt
CL
A Happy, Stable
Relationship
A1
Current Outcomes
CLalt
CL
A Happy, but
Unstable, Relationship
C
A2
Current Outcomes
CLalt
CL
A Happy, Stable
Relationship
D1
Current Outcomes
CLalt
CL
An Unhappy,
Unstable Relationship
B
Current Outcomes
CLalt
CL
An Unhappy, but
Stable, Relationship
D2
Current Outcomes
CLalt
CL
An Unhappy,
Unstable Relationship

182 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
whether CL is higher than CL alt  or vice versa. Even if they’re exactly the same, 
the same broad category will apply; if the person’s current outcomes surpass 
both CL and CL alt , that person will be content and unlikely to leave.1 
 Contrast that situation with what happens when people’s outcomes fall 
below their CLs but are still higher than their CL alt s (in graph  B ). These folks 
are dissatisfied. They’re getting less than they expect and feel they deserve, 
but they’re still doing better than they think they can elsewhere. They’re in an 
unhappy but stable relationship that they will not leave. Hopefully, you’ve never 
encountered such a situation yourself, but if you’ve ever had a lousy job that you 
disliked but couldn’t leave because it was the best job available at the time, you 
know what I’m talking about. That’s the sort of fix these folks are in.
By comparison, if people’s CLalts are higher than their outcomes but their 
CLs are lower, they’re in a much more favorable situation (graph C, Figure 6.1). 
They’re satisfied with their present partners but believe that they have even 
more attractive outcomes, all things considered, awaiting them somewhere else. 
Their current relationships are happy but unstable because they’re not likely 
to stay where they are. In an analogous situation in the workplace, you’d face 
this situation if you liked your existing job but you got an even better offer from 
another employer. If you added it all up—including the friends you’d leave 
behind, the costs of relocating, and the uncertainties of your new p osition—and 
thought you’d be clearly better off by leaving—you would leave, wouldn’t you? 
 Finally, people’s outcomes may be lower than both their CLs and CL alt s. 
Again, at this level of analysis, it wouldn’t matter whether their CLs were lower 
than their CL alt s (graph  D 1 ) or vice versa (graph  D 2 ); as long as their present 
outcomes were lower than both of them, they’d be in an unhappy and unstable 
relationship that probably wouldn’t last much longer. 
 In real relationships, of course, a huge variety of configurations is possible 
as people’s CLs, CL alt s, and outcomes all range from excellent to poor. These 
four types of relationships are meant only to be general guides to diverse pos-
sibilities. CLs, CL alt s, and outcomes can all change over time, too, and that leads 
to further interesting nuances of interdependence theory.  
 CL and CL alt as Time Goes By 
 Imagine you find the perfect partner. He or she is loving, gorgeous, smart, 
rich, and generous, and is an award-winning chef, accomplished masseuse, 
and expert auto mechanic. You receive outcomes from him or her that exceed 
your wildest dreams. When you get home each night, your partner has some-
thing exquisite for you to eat after you get your welcome-home massage and 
pedicure. Would you be satisfied? Of course. But what’s likely to happen after 
you’ve enjoyed several straight months of this bliss? 
1 This is the type of relationship that I hope you’ll settle into someday (if you haven’t already). 
You’ll be satisfied and you’ll believe that you’re doing better with your partner than you could 
be with anyone else. And if your partner feels the same way—if you both need each other and are 
happily interdependent—you’ll both be motivated to nurture your relationship to keep your good 
thing going. One can’t do better than that. 

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 183
 You might get home one evening to find no massage and no supper because 
your partner has been delayed by traffic. “Hey,” you might think, “where’s my 
gourmet meal? Where’s my backrub?” You’ve come to expect such marvelous 
treatment, which means your comparison level has risen. But if your CL goes 
up and your outcomes remain the same, satisfaction wanes. Once you get used 
to your perfect partner, you may find that you derive less pleasure from his or 
her pampering than you used to (Sheldon et al., 2013). 
 Indeed, interdependence theory predicts such a pattern. Because they are 
based on our experiences, our CLs tend to fluctuate along with the outcomes we 
receive. When we first encounter excellent outcomes, we’re delighted, but our 
pleasure may slowly dwindle as we come to take such benefits for granted and 
our CLs rise. In this manner, rewarding relationships can gradually become less 
and less satisfying even though nothing (but our expectations) has changed. 
Power and (In)Dependence
Figure 6.1 portrays the situations that 
may face one member of a couple, but 
a relationship involves two people. How 
might their respective CLalts influence 
their interactions with each other? Let’s 
assume that a romantic couple, Betty 
and Barney, receive similar outcomes 
from their relationship, and each needs 
the other, but Barney’s CLalt is lower 
than Betty’s (see Figure 6.2). That would 
mean that Barney needs Betty more 
than she needs him; if the relationship 
ended, he would lose more by moving 
to his next best option than she would. 
Because neither of them wants to leave 
their partnership, this might seem like 
a trivial matter, but, in fact, this dispar-
ity in dependence gives her more power 
than he has.
As we’ll see in chapter 12, power is 
the ability to infl uence another person’s 
behavior. A nuance of social exchange, 
the principle of lesser interest, suggests 
that the partner who depends less on 
a relationship has more power in that 
relationship (Waller & Hill, 1951). Or, 
the person with less to lose by ending 
a desired partnership gets to call the 
shots. In fact, when it comes to winning 
arguments and getting one’s way, the 
principle seems to be accurate; the more 
independent member of a romantic 
relationship is usually acknowledged 
by both partners to be the more domi-
nant of the two (Sprecher et al., 2006). 
So, for instance, if you want to get mar-
ried more than your partner does, plan 
on doing more of the household chores 
(Erchull et al., 2010).
Betty and Barney’s
Outcomes
Betty’s CLalt
Barney’s CLalt
FIGURE 6.2.  Dependence and Power
In this situation, Betty and Barney depend 
on each other, and neither is likely to 
leave. Nevertheless, Betty’s alternatives 
are better than  Barney’s, and that gives 
her more power in their relationship.

184 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
Does this really happen in a good relationship? Well, perhaps. You cer-
tainly shouldn’t expect the sort of happiness that would lead you to marry to 
continue indefinitely. A remarkable study that tracked more than 5,500 young 
adults in The Netherlands for 18 years (!) found that starting to date  someone, 
choosing to cohabit, and getting married were all associated with noticeable 
increases in happiness. But the participants’ delight faded over the years, and 
14 years later they were no happier than they had been before they met their 
lovers (Soons et al., 2009). An even more amazing study in Germany kept in 
touch with over 30,000 people for 18 years; it also found that getting married 
made people happier, but only for a while. Two years later, most of that delight 
had faded and the spouses were only as happy, on average, as they had been 
before they wed (Lucas, 2007). Quite clearly, finding the love of your life doesn’t 
make you happy forever.
 Worse, since you were born, sociocultural influences have caused our 
expectations to creep up and up. Compared to our grandparents, we now often 
want our romances to be magical rather than merely pleasant, and deeply ful-
filling instead of just fine, and it’s hard to be happy when we expect so much 
(Amato et al., 2007). Indeed, on average, American marriages are less happy 
than they were 30 years ago, and our higher CLs may be partly responsible 
(Glenn, 2007). 
 Cultural changes have also increased our CL alt s. Women’s increased par-
ticipation in the workforce has provided them both interesting coworkers and 
financial resources that make it easier for them to leave unhappy relationships 
(Greenstein & Davis, 2006). People are more mobile than ever before, changing 
residences and traveling at unprecedented rates (Ren, 2011), so their options are 
more diverse. And even if we stay home in one place, a vast array of alterna-
tive partners is available online if we go looking for them (Slater, 2013). More-
over, legal, religious, and social barriers against divorce have gradually eroded 
( Berscheid & Lopes, 1997), so the costs of departing a marriage have declined 
even as many people have found more options and more partners available to 
them. We may even have entered an era of “permanent availability,” in which 
people remain on the marriage market—continuing to size up the people they 
meet as potential future mates—even after they’re married ( Cherlin, 2009)! If 
you add up these influences and look back at  Figure 6.1 , maybe we shouldn’t 
be surprised that the U.S. divorce rate has risen sharply since 1960; when CLs 
and CL alt s are both high, people are more likely to find themselves in unhappy 
and unstable relationships. 
 THE ECONOMIES OF RELATIONSHIPS 
 As you can see, interdependence theory takes an unromantic view of close 
 relationships. In describing some of its nuances, I even likened a happy, stable 
relationship to a desirable job with good benefits. But can the success or failure 
of our relationships really be reduced to little more than the profits or losses on 
an interaction spreadsheet? Are rewards and costs or the size of your “salary” 

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 185
everything that matters? The answer, of course, is “no.” Too specific a focus on 
the rewards and costs of a couple’s interactions can lead us to overlook other 
influences that can make or break a partnership. For instance, your ultimate suc-
cess in an important relationship may someday depend on how well you adapt 
to external stresses that you cannot control (Buck & Neff, 2012). 
 On the other hand, interdependence theory’s businesslike emphasis on the 
outcomes people provide each other is enormously important. Counting up the 
rewards and costs of a relationship provides extraordinary information about 
its current state and likely future. And the picture of normal intimacy that 
emerges from studies of this sort is a bit surprising. The stereotype of i ntimate 
relations is that they are generous and loving, and, sure enough, couples who are 
nice to each other are more likely to stay together over time than are those who 
p rovide each other fewer rewards (e.g., Le et al., 2010). You won’t be surprised 
to hear that the amount of affectionate behavior newlyweds display nicely pre-
dicts how happy they’ll be 16 months later (Graber et al., 2011). 
 But costs are informative, too, and the surprise is that a lot of unpleasant-
ness actually occurs in many relationships. On any given day, 44 percent of us 
are likely to be annoyed by a lover or friend (Averill, 1982). Each week, college 
students report an average of 8.7 aggravating hassles in their romantic relation-
ships, a rate of more than one frustrating nuisance per day (Perlman, 1989). 
Typical spouses report one or two unpleasant disagreements in their marriages 
each month (McGonagle et al., 1992). Long-term intimacy with another per-
son apparently involves more irritation and exasperation than we may expect. 
Indeed, during their lives together, sooner or later, married people are likely 
to be meaner to each other than to anyone else they know (Miller, 1997b). Of 
course, desirable relationships are much more rewarding than punishing over-
all; nevertheless, on those (hopefully rare) occasions when intimates are at their 
worst, they’re likely to be more tactless, impolite, sullen, selfish, and insensitive 
with each other than they would be with total strangers. 
 In fact, research has compared the manners in which people interact with their 
spouses and with total strangers on a problem-solving task (Vincent et al., 1975). 
When they were discussing issues with others they did not know well, people 
were polite and congenial; they withheld criticism, swallowed any disapproval, 
and suppressed signs of frustration. In contrast, with their spouses, people were 
much more obnoxious. They interrupted their lovers, disparaged their points 
of view, and openly disagreed. Intimacy and interdependence seemed to give 
people permission to be impolite instead of courteous and considerate. 
 Does this matter? You bet it does. Over time, irritating or moody behavior 
from a spouse puts a marriage at risk (Gottman, 2011), and outright hostility is 
even worse (Renshaw et al., 2010). And even a few frustrations may be influ-
ential because negative behaviors in a close relationship seem to carry more 
psychological weight than similar amounts of positive behavior do. “Bad,” it 
seems, “is stronger than good” (Baumeister et al., 2001). 
 Here’s an example of what I mean. Imagine that you’re walking down a 
sidewalk when a $20 bill blows into your path. There’s no one else around, and 
it’s obviously yours to keep. Does finding the money feel good? Of course it 

186 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
does. But now imagine that on another occasion you reach into a pocket where 
you put a $20 bill and find nothing but a hole. That’s a disappointment. But 
which has the stronger effect on your mood, finding the new money or losing 
the money you already had? The answer is that losses usually affect us more 
than equivalent gains do; we like gains, but we really hate losses (Baumeister 
et al., 2001). 
 Indeed, undesirable events in close relationships are more noticeable and 
influential than logically equivalent desirable events are (Seidman, 2012). If you 
get one compliment and one criticism from your lover in the same evening, for 
instance, they won’t cancel each other out. The compliment will help soften the 
blow of the criticism, but the combination will leave you somewhat distressed. 
Bad is stronger than good. 
 In fact, to stay satisfied with a close relationship, we may need to main-
tain a rewards-to-costs ratio of at least 5-to-1. That figure comes from research 
by John Gottman and Robert Levenson (1992), who observed married couples 
who were revisiting the topic of their last argument. They carefully coded the 
partners’ behavior during their discussion, giving each spouse a point for each 
attempt at warmth, humor, collaboration, or compromise, and subtracting a 
point for each display of anger, defensiveness, criticism, or contempt. Some 
of the couples were able to disagree with each other in a manner that commu-
nicated respect and regard for each other, and the longer their conversations 
went on, the more positive their scores became. These couples, who were said 
to be at low risk of divorce by Gottman and Levenson, were maintaining a 
ratio of positive to negative exchanges of 5:1 or better. (See  Figure 6.3 .) How-
ever, other couples disagreed with sarcasm and disdain, and in those cases, 
the longer they talked, the worse their scores got. When the researchers com-
pared the two groups at the time of the study, the low-risk couples were more 
satisfied with their marriages than the other couples were. No surprise there. 
More impressively, however, more than half (56 percent) of the high-risk cou-
ples were divorced or separated only 4 years later whereas just under a quarter 
(24 percent) of the low-risk couples had split up. A short discussion on a single 
afternoon clearly provided meaningful information about the chances that a 
marriage would last. And couples who did not maintain a substantial surfeit of 
positive exchanges faced twice the risk that their marriages would fail. 
 So, both rewards and costs are important influences on relationship satis-
faction and stability, and there may need to be many more of the former than 
the latter if a relationship is to thrive. On the surface, this is a pretty obvious 
conclusion; we’d expect happy relationships to be more rewarding than pun-
ishing. For instance, 93 percent of the happily married couples in one study 
reported making love more often than they argued, whereas none of the unhap-
pily married couples did (Howard & Dawes, 1976). But if it’s so obvious, why 
are there so many unhappy relationships? One possibility is that romantic part-
ners simply don’t notice all of the loving and affectionate behaviors their lov-
ers provide; a study that tracked partners’ perceptions for 4 weeks found that 
both men and women failed to notice about one-fourth of the positive behav-
iors that their partners said they performed (Gable et al., 2003). Husbands and 

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 187
wives with dismissing or fearful attachment styles are especially likely to miss 
some of the positive, loving things their spouses do for them. In fact, it appears 
that one reason such people are less comfortable with interdependent intimacy 
is that they don’t fully realize how pleasant it can be (Spielmann et al., 2013a)! 
Another complication is that partners may disagree about the meaning 
and value of the rewards they exchange. Judgments of what favors are worth, 
for example, routinely differ for those who provide the favors and those who 
FIGURE 6.3. The arguments of couples at low and high risk of divorce. 
These are the actual charts of the conversations of two couples who had returned to the 
topics of their last arguments. During their discussions, one couple remained (mostly) 
polite and collaborative whereas the other was more disrespectful, sour, and sarcastic. 
Which of these couples was much more likely to be separated or divorced 4 years later?2
(Pos-Neg 5 number of positive vs. negative exchanges.)
2 Okay, I admit that’s a dumb question. Isn’t the answer obvious?
20
0
–5
0
Accumulated Pos-Neg
Turns at Speech
Husband
Wife
A Low-Risk Couple
05
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
40
60
80
100
120
140
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
160
0
–160
–140
–120
–100
–80
–60
–40
–20
0
20
Accumulated Pos-Neg
Turns at Speech
Husband
Wife
A High-Risk Couple
Source: Gottman & Levenson, 1992.

188 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
receive them (Zhang & Epley, 2009), and gender differences complicate things 
further. So, when spouses are asked what they would change if they could, 
wives say they desire more emotion and affection from their husbands whereas 
the husbands say they want more sex (Heyman et al., 2009). What matters to 
you may not be quite the same as what matters to your partner, and those differ-
ing perceptions add intricacy to your quest for mutually satisfying interaction.
Rewards and Costs Are Different
Another more subtle influence is that rewards and costs have different, separate 
effects on our well-being in relationships, and this causes complexity. Accord-
ing to research by Shelly Gable and her colleagues (Gable & Gosnell, 2013), we 
try to do two things in our close relationships. First, we try to obtain rewards, 
and second, we try to avoid costs—and importantly, these are not the same 
things. In seeking rewards, we try to satisfy an appetite for desirable experi-
ences that is known as an approach motivation. That is, we pursue pleasure 
and our motivation for doing something is to feel good, and when we draw 
near to—or approach—desired experiences, we feel positive emotions such as 
enthusiasm and excitement. Approach motivations for having sex, for instance, 
would be to feel close to our partners and to enjoy the physical experience 
(Cooper et al., 2011). Our desire to avoid costs is a different drive known as an 
avoidance motivation. That is, we also seek to elude or escape punishment and 
pain, so we strive to avoid undesired experiences and to reduce negative feel-
ings such as anxiety and fear. Avoidance motivations for having sex would be 
to avoid rejection or to end a peevish partner’s pouting.
The key point is that our approach and avoidance motives are not just two 
different sides of the same coin. They don’t cancel each other out. Pleasure 
results from fulfilling our approach goals, and pain results from failing to ful-
fill our avoidance goals, but—and here’s where this gets really interesting— 
pleasure and pain are different processes. They operate independently, 
involving different brain mechanisms and causing distinct emotions and 
behaviors (Cacioppo et al., 2012). The provocative result is that pleasure and 
pain can coexist, or both may be absent, in any relationship. Moreover, because 
pleasure and pain are unrelated, safe and secure relationships in which nothing 
bad happens are not necessarily satisfying, and satisfying relationships are not 
always safe and secure. 
 Let’s explore this more fully with a look at  Figure 6.4 , which shows the 
approach and avoidance dimensions arranged at right angles. Every relation-
ship you have lies somewhere along both of those lines, and its current status 
is defined by how well you are fulfilling both your approach and avoidance 
goals. For instance, the vertical line is the approach dimension; relationships 
that are full of positive events are exciting and invigorating—so they would 
lie near the top of the line—whereas those that offer few positive outcomes are 
unfulfilling and stagnant (and they would land near the bottom). Importantly, 
dull relationships aren’t actually painful, they’re just not fun. The horizon-
tal line is the avoidance dimension. Whether or not they’re rewarding, some 

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 189
relationships are full of conflict and danger (which would put them on the left 
side of the line), whereas others are more placid (which is on the right); how-
ever, just because a partnership is safe and has no negatives doesn’t necessarily 
mean it  is fun. As Reis and Gable (2003, p. 142) asserted, “the absence of conflict 
and criticism in a relationship need not imply the presence of joy and fulfill-
ment, just as the presence of joy and fulfillment need not denote the absence of 
conflict and criticism.” 
 So, why do we care, exactly? There are several reasons. First, in a really 
great relationship, we’re able to fulfill both motivations at the same time. Such 
relationships are full of delights and aggravations are absent, and the partner-
ship can be said to be flourishing (Fincham & Beach, 2010). (Take a good long 
look at Figure 6.4.) And clearly, in contrast, if neither motivation is being ful-
filled so that costs are high and rewards are low, a relationship is distressed. 
But because our approach and avoidance motivations operate independently, 
one motivation may also be fulfilled while the other is not, and that allows 
some interesting possibilities. Consider a relationship that offers compelling 
a ttractions—so that it is passionate and exciting—but that is also replete with 
doubts and discord: There’d be a lot of drama, and the potent pleasures of the 
partnership would be infused with danger and uncertainty in a perilous and 
Approach Goals Are Fulfilled
Plenty of novel, enticing rewards
are present, so the relationship is
passionate and invigorating
Approach Goals Are Thwarted
A monotonous lack of
stimulation makes the relationship
dull and stagnant
Avoidance Goals Are Thwarted
Insecurity and discord are
present, so relationship is
dangerous and threatening
Avoidance Goals Are Fulfilled
Aggravation and annoyance
are averted, so relationship is
safe and secure
 With many delights and many
dangers, relationships in this 
zone are PRECARIOUS
 Being safe but dull, 
these relationships are
BORING
 With many delights and few
costs, relationships here are
FLOURISHING
 With few rewards and many
costs, these relationships are
 DISTRESSED
FIGURE 6.4. Approach and avoidance processes in relationships.
People seek rewards and want to avoid costs, but these are two different motivations 
that combine to influence our feelings in close relationships. When avoidance goals are 
fulfilled, people avoid costs but are not necessarily happy. When approach goals are 
fulfilled, people feel engaged and excited but may not feel safe and secure. Only when 
both motivations are fulfilled simultaneously are people wholly content.
Source: Figure based on the insights of Reis & Gable, 2003, and Fincham & Beach, 2010.

190 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
precarious mix. There’d be a lot to like, but one’s costs would be too high, so the 
partners’ feelings about the relationship might vacillate widely, depending on 
which motivation was salient to them at the time (Gable & Poore, 2008).
The interplay of the two motivations also presents a fourth possibility 
that’s important enough to get its own paragraph. Consider what results when 
our avoidance goals are fulfilled and our costs and annoyances are very low—
so there’s really nothing to dislike about the relationship—but our approach 
motivation is unfulfilled, so there’s not much to like about the relationship 
either. The partnership would have few negatives, but it would lack novelty 
and stimulation; it would be dull, stale, and stagnant and, in a word, boring. 
Boredom is characterized by tedium, disinterest, and a lack of energy, and it 
occurs when nothing enticing, intriguing, or new is occurring in an intimate 
relationship (Harasymchuk & Fehr, 2013). There are no sparks, no excitement, 
no arousal, and no fun (Harasymchuk & Fehr, 2012). And, of course, this is 
not a good place to be: Boredom now is linked to dissatisfaction later. In the 
Early Years of Marriage Project,3 spouses who thought that their marriages 
were becoming monotonous after a few years were less happy 9 years later 
than were spouses who weren’t getting bored (Tsapelas et al., 2009). So, what 
does all this suggest we do to live happily ever after? Let me return to that in 
just a moment.
A second reason to note the roles of approach and avoidance motiva-
tions in our relationships is that the chronic strength of people’s motives differ 
(Gable, 2006). Bad is generally stronger than good, for instance, but some peo-
ple are very sensitive to negative events that wouldn’t much ruffle others—and 
such people may feel especially threatened by disagreements or conflict with 
their partners. Indeed, a strong motive to avoid costs leads people to notice 
all of the annoying things their partners do whereas the motive to approach 
rewards leads them to focus on all the thoughtful and generous actions their 
partners take (Strachman & Gable, 2006). (Which point of view do you think 
makes people more content?) When they make small sacrifices to benefit their 
partners (such as going to a movie they don’t much want to see), people with 
approach motives are pursuing greater intimacy with their partners; they feel 
good about their actions, and their relationships profit. In contrast, people with 
avoidance motives are trying to avoid conflict; they begrudge the sacrifice, and 
their relationships suffer (Impett et al., 2014a). And as you might guess from 
these patterns, people who have high approach motivations are also generally 
less lonely and more content (Gable, 2006). They enter social situations eager 
to make new friends whereas people with high aversive motivations just want 
to avoid annoying, offending, or upsetting anybody. Evidently, there’s more 
long-term profit in focusing on obtaining rewards, rather than cutting costs, in 
our close relationships (Impett et al., 2013). 
 Finally, and perhaps most importantly, the independent operation of 
approach and avoidance motivations means that being happy may involve dif-
ferent strategies than those that are involved in not being unhappy. We want 
3 See pages 45 and 407.

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 191
to avoid painful conflict and other costs, of course, but if we wish our relation-
ships to prosper and to be fulfilling, we need to do more than simply avoid any 
unpleasantries. We need to combat boredom: We must strive to meet our part-
ners’ approach goals by providing them joyous, interesting, and exciting experi-
ences (Strong & Aron, 2006). 
 This conclusion is also at the heart of a  self-expansion model of human 
motivation that holds that we are attracted to partnerships that expand the 
range of our interests, skills, and experiences (Aron et al., 2013). Novel activi-
ties, the development of new talents, and the acquisition of new perspectives 
are all thought to be inherently gratifying (Sheldon et al., 2013), and that’s why 
new loves are often so exhilarating: Newfound intimacy typically involves 
increases in knowledge and changes in mutuality that enhance and expand our 
self-concepts (Aron et al., 2013). 
 But self-expansion usually slows once a new partner becomes familiar, and 
that’s when many partnerships begin to feel more bland and ordinary than they 
initially seemed (Sheets, 2014). The key to staying happy, according to the self-
expansion model, is to combat boredom by creatively finding ways to continue 
your personal growth. Thus, as well as continually seeking out novel activi-
ties and challenges, consider the value of intentionally inventing new ways 
to play and have fun and laugh together during your daily routine (Sheldon 
et al., 2013). Monotony can make any relationship seem stale, but innovation 
and novelty may keep boredom at bay. 
 So, rewards and costs are different, and minimizing our costs isn’t the same 
thing as increasing our rewards. And as our discussion of boredom suggests, 
relationships begin when a couple’s interactions are rewarding, but that can 
change with time. Indeed, despite the partners’ best intentions, many relation-
ships gradually become less satisfying as time goes by. Let’s take a closer look 
at how rewards and costs change as relationships develop. 
 Rewards and Costs as Time Goes By 
 Here’s the situation: You’ve started dating a new person and things are going 
great. Your satisfaction is rising fast, and the two of you are quickly grow-
ing closer. Does continual bliss lie ahead? Probably not. After a period of ini-
tial excitement that is characterized by a rapid increase in satisfaction, most 
relationships—even those that are destined to succeed and prosper—hit a lull 
in which the partners’ pleasure stalls for a time (see  Figure 6.5 ). This can be 
disconcerting, but it shouldn’t be surprising; according to a model of  relational 
turbulence created by Leanne Knobloch and Denise Solomon (2004), we should 
 expect a period of adjustment and turmoil as new partners become accustomed 
to their increasing interdependence. In particular, as the partners spend more 
and more time together, they disrupt each others’ routines. Instead of waiting 
to be asked out on a date, for instance, one of the partners may start  assuming 
that they’ll spend the weekend together, and that may interfere with the other’s 
plans. The partners may also encounter some resistance from their friends as 
the new relationship absorbs more of their time and they see less of their old 

192 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
companions. Uncertainty and doubt can also accompany emerging commit-
ment; both partners may wonder where the relationship is going and what the 
future holds, and the more uncertain they are, the more turbulent the situation 
is likely to be ( Knobloch & Theiss, 2010). Altogether, the turbulence model sug-
gests that an unsettled period of adjustment and reevaluation is likely to occur 
at moderate levels of intimacy in a developing relationship as the partners learn 
to coordinate their needs and to accommodate each other. 
 The turbulence model in beginning relationships is depicted in  Figure 6.6 . 
When intimacy levels are low, interdependence is minimal and there is negligi-
ble interference from one’s partner and little doubt about the future of the part-
nership. However, as the partners draw closer, they need to adjust to increasing 
limitations to their autonomy, rising uncertainty, and, perhaps, mounting 
ambivalence from their friends, and this phase—the transition from casual 
dating to more serious involvement in the relationship—can be tumultuous 
(Solomon et al., 2010). If the relationship becomes more established and inti-
macy increases further, things settle down as doubts diminish, friends adjust, 
and the partners grow more adept at being interdependent. Successful relation-
ships survive the turbulent transition to the partners’ new status as a recog-
nized couple, and a new but more gradual increase in satisfaction may occur as 
the relationship continues to develop. (Take another look at Figure 6.5.) 
Turbulence may also occur down the road if a relationship undergoes a 
major transition, as when, for instance, babies are born (Theiss et al., 2013) or 
a soldier returns home from a tour of duty (Theiss & Knobloch, 2014). Rene-
gotiation of old roles and expectations—and some resulting uncertainty and 
Interpersonal Satisfaction
Level of Involvement
FIGURE 6.5. Satisfaction in beginning relationships.
After a rapid rise in satisfaction at the very beginning of their relationships, many 
couples encounter a lull as they adjust to their increasing interdependence. Successful 
relationships survive this period of re-evaluation and become even more satisfying, but 
at a more gradual rate.
Source: Adapted from Eidelson, 1980.

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 193
turmoil—are common in such situations. Hopefully, however, such turbulence 
is temporary, because marriages are more fragile when they result from court-
ships in which the partners are too often uncertain about where they’re heading 
(Halpern-Meekin & Tach, 2013). And it’s particularly worrisome when people 
have lasting doubts about whether they should get married in the first place; 
women with reservations about marrying are about 2.5 times more likely to 
divorce later on than are those who have no doubts (Lavner et al., 2012a). (Men 
have such doubts more often, but they’re only 1.5 times more likely to divorce 
as a result.)
So, periods of uncertainty can be problematic, and it’s customary for new 
partners to experience a lull in their increasing satisfaction as they adjust to 
their new interdependency. Are there predictable changes in satisfaction over 
longer stretches of time in established relationships? There are, and I’ve got 
good news and bad news for you. Let’s begin with the bad news, which starts 
with Figure 6.7. Pictured there are the annual reports of marital satisfaction 
from 538 newlywed couples, many of whom were tracked for 10 years (if they 
stayed married that long). As you can see, the typical trajectory of marital bliss 
involved a gradual erosion of delight that resulted in people becoming less sat-
isfied as the years rolled by (Kurdek, 1999). Even worse, recent studies that 
probed carefully for different trajectories of marital satisfaction over 4 (Lavner 
Transition from Casual
Dating to Serious Involvement
Casual Dating
Increasing Intimacy
Perceptions of Turmoil
Serious Involvement
FIGURE 6.6. The relational turbulence model.
The amount of turmoil and turbulence in a new relationship increases as the partners 
spend more time together, and begin to interfere with each other’s routines and to 
wonder where the relationship is headed. This turmoil reaches a peak when the couple 
decides to become more seriously involved, but it then declines as they adjust to their 
new interdependency.
Source: Figure adapted from Knobloch & Donovan-Kicken, 2006.

194 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
& Bradbury, 2012), 16 (Birditt et al., 2012), and 20 years (Anderson et al., 2010) 
found that in a number of couples—about one in every six—the declines in con-
tentment were much more severe. Some newlyweds find their dreams dashed 
rather quickly.
The good news from the recent studies is that, despite the general trend 
pictured in Figure 6.7, a number of couples—about one in every four—don’t 
experience any decline in their delight at all. Most American marriages don’t 
last as long as 21 years (Elliott & Simmons, 2011), but some do, and clearly, it 
really is possible for some couples to live happily ever after.
What distinguishes those who stay happy from the majority who experi-
ence a decline in their delight? There are several influences, and none of them 
will surprise a careful reader of our prior chapters. Spouses who stay content 
tend to be low in neuroticism and high in self-esteem, and they start their mar-
riages being happier together than most other couples are. They discuss touchy 
issues with affection and humor and without anger, and they luckily encounter 
relatively few stressors such as economic hardship or ill health (Anderson et al., 
2010; Birditt et al., 2012). Over time, then, the outcomes of their interactions are 
undoubtedly more positive than those of couples who are more fretful, inse-
cure, surly, and beset with hassles and burdens—and interdependency theory 
argues that that’s why they stay more content.
FIGURE 6.7. The average trajectory of marital satisfaction.
Some couples experience decreases in satisfaction that are steeper than this, but oth-
ers don’t experience any decline at all. In addition, on average, cohabitating gay and 
 lesbian couples experience milder decreases in satisfaction than heterosexual couples 
do (Kurdek, 2008b). 
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
Years of Marriage
Marital Adjustment Scores
123
121
119
117
115
113
111
105
107
109
Wife
Husband
Source: Data from Kurdek, 1999.

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 195
It also turns out that happy couples keep their expectations in check so 
that their CLs don’t get too high. Remember that it’s hard to be satisfied when 
you expect things to be magnificent, and sure enough, on average, people who 
begin their marriages with the highest expectations of how special and won-
derful wedlock will be are the least happy spouses a few years down the road. 
Justin Lavner, Ben Karney, and Tom Bradbury (2013) followed 251 newlywed 
couples across the first 4 years of their marriages and found that, over time, 
the happiest couples were those who had had the most realistic outlooks about 
what wedded life would be like. In contrast, spouses who had unrealistically 
positive expectations tended to be disappointed once the honeymoon was over. 
It’s not a good idea to expect that “my partner and I will always be able to 
resolve our disagreements” or “my partner and I will always communicate 
well” or even that “my partner will always be interested in how my day went” 
(Neff & Geers, 2013, p. 60) because it’s just not likely to be true.
Indeed, I can offer several reasons why prudent and cautious expecta-
tions about the futures of your intimate relationships are more reasonable and 
sensible than romantic idealism is. First, we all know how to be polite and 
thoughtful, and we can behave that way when we want to, but it takes effort. 
Relationships are more satisfying when people work at them (Shafer et al., 
2014), but once a courtship is over and a partner is won, we usually stop trying 
so hard to be consistently charming. The same people who would never fart 
noisily on a first date may become spouses who fart at will at the dinner table, 
perhaps dismissing their lack of propriety by saying, “Sorry, I couldn’t help it.” 
The point is that they  could help it if they wanted to—they just didn’t go to the 
trouble to do so (Miller, 2001).
 Second, interdependency magnifies conflict and friction. We spend lots of 
time with our intimate partners and depend on them for unique, especially valu-
able rewards, and that means that they are certain to cause us more frustration—
even inadvertently—than anyone else can. For instance, we’re more affected 
by the moods (Caughlin et al., 2000) or work stress (Karney & Neff, 2013) 
of intimate partners than by the similar difficulties of others. Frequent interac-
tion also means that trivial annoyances may gradually cause real grief through 
sheer repetition in the same way that the light tapping of a slowly dripping 
faucet can drive you mad when you’re trying to sleep at night (Cunningham 
et al., 2005). 
 Third, intimacy means that others know your secrets, foibles, and weak-
nesses. That gives them ammunition with which to wound and tease us when 
conflict occurs. But even when they have no wish to do us harm, their access to 
sensitive information practically guarantees that they will accidentally reveal 
some secret (Petronio, 2010), hurt our feelings (McLaren & Steuber, 2013), or 
embarrass us (Miller, 1996) sometime or other. They can unintentionally hurt 
us in ways others can’t. 
 Fourth, even if people are usually aware of most of their incompatibili-
ties and problems before they marry, there will almost always be some sur-
prises ahead. These tend to be of two general types. First, there’s learning the 
truth about things we thought we knew. Good examples of this are the fatal 

196 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
attractions I mentioned in chapter 3. You may like the fact that your lover is 
fun-loving and spontaneous, but you may not appreciate how irresponsible, 
flighty, and unreliable that same behavior may seem after a few years of mar-
riage when you have babies and a mortgage to contend with. Speaking of 
babies, the other type of unwelcome surprise is learning undesired things that 
you didn’t know at all, and the real facts of parenthood are often good exam-
ples. If you don’t have kids, you might assume that parenthood will be fun, 
your kids will be invariably adorable, and raising children will bring you and 
your partner closer together. The reality, however (as you know if you do have 
kids), is that “after the birth of a child the prognosis for the course of the marital 
relationship is unequivocally grim” (Stafford & Dainton, 1994, p. 270). I can 
safely say that parenthood is an extraordinary and often marvelous adventure, 
and children usually bring people more joy than misery (Nelson et al., 2013). 
Nevertheless, parenthood is unquestionably hard on the relationship between 
the parents (Luhmann et al., 2012). Children are expensive and they’re endless 
work, and most parents experience a steep and unexpected decline in the time 
they spend having fun together (Dew & Wilcox, 2011). When babies arrive, con-
flict increases, and satisfaction with the marriage (and love for one’s partner) 
decrease (Doss et al., 2009), and this occurs around the world (Wendorf et al., 
2011). If the parents don’t expect such difficulties, they’re going to be surprised. 
 Finally, all of this means that close relationships are often much differ-
ent from the blissful, intimate idylls we want them to be, and the difference 
between what we expected and what we get can leave us feeling cheated 
and disappointed, sometimes unnecessarily so (Niehuis et al., 2014). To the 
extent that even great relationships involve hard work and sacrifice, people 
with misplaced, glorified expectations about relationships may end up disap-
pointed in their outcomes even when they’re doing better than everyone else 
(Stoeber, 2012). 
 So, through (a)  lack of effort; because (b)  interdependency is a magnify-
ing glass; and through (c)  access to weaponry, (d)  unwelcome surprises, and 
(e)  unrealistic expectations, people usually encounter unanticipated costs, 
even in good relationships (Miller, 1997b), and most spouses’ satisfaction actu-
ally declines during the first years of marriage. These are all normal processes 
in close relationships, so it’s naïve to think that you won’t encounter them. 
More annoyances and nuisances lie ahead than you may have thought.  
 This may seem gloomy, but it isn’t meant to be. Indeed, I don’t want this 
analysis to seem pessimistic at all! To the contrary, knowledge is power, and 
I suspect that being aware of the usual trajectory of marital satisfaction and 
thoroughly understanding these issues can help people avoid needless disap-
pointment, and it may even help them to forestall or avoid a creeping decline 
in outcomes that would otherwise occur. If informed caution leads you to form 
reasonable expectations, you  should be optimistic that your close relationships 
will succeed; a positive outlook that is rooted in good sense is likely to make 
lasting satisfaction more, rather than less, attainable (Neff & Geers, 2013). 
 And importantly, if nothing else, this perspective reminds us of our con-
stant responsibility to be as pleasant as possible to those whose company we 

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 197
value. We want great outcomes, but so do they, and even if they like us, they’ll 
go elsewhere if we don’t provide them enough reward. This is a consequential 
idea, and it leads to some subtleties of the social exchange perspective that we 
have yet to consider.  
 ARE WE REALLY THIS GREEDY? 
 So far in this chapter, we’ve been portraying people as greedy hedonists who 
are concerned only with their own outcomes. That’s not a complimentary por-
trayal, but it is useful because rewards and costs matter enormously in close 
relations. Research supports the basic precepts of interdependence theory quite 
well (Le et al., 2010). Nevertheless, our portrait so far is incomplete. There are 
good reasons why people will usually want their partners to prosper as well. 
 The Nature of Interdependency 
 Okay, you’ve got the idea: According to interdependence theory, we want max-
imum reward at minimum cost, and we want the best interpersonal deals we 
can get. Everybody behaves this way. But what happens when we get a good 
deal? Then we depend on our partners and don’t want to leave them. That’s 
significant because it means that we have an important stake in  keeping our 
partners happy, so that our partners will continue providing those desired 
rewards. If you want to keep valued relationships going, it’s to your advantage 
to ensure that your partners are just as dependent on you as you are on them, 
and a straightforward way to do that is to provide them great outcomes that 
make them want to stay (Murray et al., 2009). 
 Pursuing this strategy can influence the value of many transactions with 
a desired partner. Actions that would be costly if enacted with a stranger can 
actually be rewarding in a close relationship because they give pleasure to 
one’s partner and increase the likelihood that one will receive valuable rewards 
in return (Kelley, 1979). Providing good outcomes to one’s partner, even when 
it involves effort and sacrifice, can ultimately be self-serving if it causes a desir-
able relationship to continue. Indeed, even greedy people should be gener-
ous to others if it increases their own profits! As a writer to an advice column 
reported, “It is heaven to be with someone who enjoys making sure I’m taken 
care of in every way. And it makes me want to do everything I can to see that 
he’s happy in return” (Mitchell & Sugar, 2007, p. A6). 
 So, interdependence theory suggests that in the quest for good outcomes, 
individuals will often be magnanimous to those on whom they depend because 
it is reasonable (and valuable) to do so. And if both partners in a relationship 
want it to continue, both of them should thoughtfully protect and maintain 
the other’s well-being. If people need each other, it can be advantageous to 
be positively philanthropic to each other, increasing the partner’s profits 
to keep him or her around. Thus, even if people are greedy, there is likely to 
be plenty of compassionate thoughtfulness and magnanimity in interdepen-
dent relationships. 

198 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
 Exchange versus Communal Relationships 
 Indeed, when people seek closeness with others, they are often rather gener-
ous, offering more to others than they seek in return (Beck & Clark, 2009). 
We seem to realize that rewarding interdependency is more likely to develop 
when we’re  not  greedily pursuing instant profit. With this in mind, Margaret 
Clark and Judson Mills (2012) proposed a distinction between partnerships 
that are clearly governed by explicit norms of even exchange and other, more 
generous, relationships that are characterized by obvious concern for the part-
ner’s welfare. In exchange relationships, people do favors for others expect-
ing to be repaid by receiving comparable benefits in return. If they accept a 
kindness from someone, people feel obligated to return a similar favor to even 
the scales. Thus, as  Table 6.1  shows, people in exchange relationships don’t 
like to be in one another’s debt; they track each other’s contributions to joint 
endeavors; they monitor the other person’s needs only when they think there’s 
a chance for personal gain; and they don’t feel bad if they refuse to help the 
other person. As you might expect, exchange relationships are typified by 
superficial, often brief, relatively task-oriented encounters between strangers 
or acquaintances. 
 In contrast, in communal relationships, the partners feel a special concern 
for the other’s well-being, and they provide favors and support to one another 
without expecting repayment (Clark & Aragón, 2013). As a result, people who 
seek a communal relationship avoid strict cost accounting, and they’d rather 
TABLE 6.1. Differences between Exchange and Communal Relationships
Situation
Exchange Relationships
Communal Relationships
When we do others a favor
We prefer those who 
pay us back immediately.
We prefer those who don’t 
repay us immediately.
When others do us a favor
We prefer those who 
request immediate 
repayment.
We prefer those who
do not request immediate 
repayment.
When we are working with 
others on a joint task
We seek to distinguish
our contributions
from those of others.
We don’t make any clear
distinction between others’ 
work and our own.
When we help others
Our moods and
self-evaluations change
only slightly.
Our moods brighten and
our self-evaluations 
improve.
When we don’t help others
Our moods do not change.
Our moods get worse.
When we feel vulnerable or 
anxious
We are unwilling to tell 
 others what we are feeling.
We are willing to tell others 
about our true feelings.
When we’re married
We are less satisfied.
We are more satisfied.
Source: Beck & Clark, 2010b; Clark & Aragón, 2013; Clark et al., 2010.

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 199
not have their kindnesses quickly repaid; they monitor their partners’ needs 
even when they see no opportunity for personal gain; and they feel better about 
themselves when they help their partners (Xue & Silk, 2012). People often make 
small sacrifices on behalf of their partners in communal relationships, doing 
costly favors for each other, but they enjoy higher quality relationships as a 
result (Clark & Grote, 1998). Indeed, people like marriages to operate this way, 
and the more generosity and communal concern spouses display toward each 
other, the happier they are (Clark et al., 2010). 
 Clearly, the extent of our generosity in response to our partners’ needs can 
vary from relationship to relationship, and Mills and Clark and their colleagues 
(Mills et al., 2004) have developed a short scale to measure  communal strength, 
the motivation to be responsive to a particular partner’s needs (see  Table 6.2 ). 
As their feelings of communal strength increase, people enjoy making small 
sacrifices for their partners (Kogan et al., 2010), and their spouses are more 
satisfied with their marriages (Mills et al., 2004). Thoughtful concern for the 
well-being of one’s partner is clearly connected to closeness and contentment in 
intimate partnerships (Le et al., 2012). 
 But does the lack of apparent greed in communal relationships indicate 
that the principles of exchange we’ve been discussing do not apply there? Not 
TABLE 6.2. A Measure of Communal Strength
You can compare the communal strength of your relationships with different partners 
by answering these questions more than once. For each relationship, fill in your part-
ner’s initials in the blank. Then answer each question by writing down your rating 
from the scale below:
0
not at all
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
extremely
1. How far would you be willing to go to visit 
?
2. How happy do you feel when doing something that helps 
?
3. How large a benefit would you be likely to give 
?
4. How large a cost would you incur to meet a need of 
?
5. How readily can you put the needs of 
 out of your thoughts?
6. How high a priority for you is meeting the needs of 
?
7. How reluctant would you be to sacrifice for 
?
8. How much would you be willing to give up to benefit 
?
9. How far would you go out of your way to do something for 
?
10. How easily could you accept not helping 
?
Source: Mills et al., 2004.
To determine your score, reverse the rating you gave to questions 5, 7, and 10. If your 
rating was 0, change it to 10; a 1 becomes a 9; 2 changes to 8; and so on. Then add up 
your ratings. Your sum is the strength of your communal motivation toward that par-
ticular partner.

200 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
at all. In businesslike relationships, debts are repaid quickly with comparable 
benefits, and tit-for-tat exchanges are the norm. In contrast, in close communal 
relationships, both partners expect that the other will be attentive and respon-
sive to one’s needs when they arise, whatever they are, and more diverse 
rewards are exchanged by the partners over a longer span of time. What we 
do to meet a partner’s needs may involve very different actions from what the 
partner did to meet our own needs, and the reciprocity that results involves 
broad concern for each other instead of an exchange of specific favors (Clark & 
Aragón, 2013). 
 In addition, the exchange perspective may not seem to describe intimate 
relationships because, when they are healthy, both partners are prospering and 
there seems to be little need to “sweat the small stuff” by explicitly quantify-
ing their respective rewards and costs. People in happy and stable relationships 
probably haven’t been wondering “what has my partner done for me lately?” 
both because the partner has done plenty and because they’re happy enough 
not to care. However, if their outcomes start falling and their heady profits 
evaporate, even intimate partners in (what were) communal relationships may 
begin paying close attention to the processes of exchange (Grote & Clark, 2001). 
When dissatisfaction sets in, people in (what were) communal relationships 
often become very sensitive to minute injustices in the outcomes they receive 
(Jacobson et al., 1982). 
 So, a distinction between exchange and communal relationships isn’t 
incompatible with interdependency theory at all. However, the workings of 
communal relationships do demonstrate how readily people provide ben-
efits to those with whom they wish to develop close relationships and how 
quickly people begin to take others’ welfare under consideration once interac-
tion begins (Beck & Clark, 2009). Most people seem to recognize, as interdepen-
dency theory suggests, that if you want others to be nice to you, you’ve got to 
be nice to them. 
 Equitable Relationships 
 Another point of view argues that you not only have to be nice but also to be 
 fair.  Equity theorists extend the framework of social exchange to assert that 
people are most satisfied in relationships in which there is  proportional justice, 
which means that each partner gains benefits from the relationship that are 
proportional to his or her contributions to it (Hatfield & Rapson, 2012). A rela-
tionship is equitable when the ratio of your outcomes to your contributions is 
similar to that of your partner, or when 
 Note that equity does not require that two partners gain equal rewards 
from their interaction; in fact, if their contributions are different, equality would 
be inequitable. A relationship is fair, according to equity theory, only when a 
partner who is contributing more is receiving more as well. 
Your outcomes
Your contributions
Your 
5
partner's outcomes
Your partner's contributions

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 201
 Let’s look at some examples. Here are three equitable relationships, with 
outcomes and contributions rated on a 0-to-100-point scale:
Fred
Wilma
(a)
80/50
5
80/50
(b)
20/100
5
20/100
(c)
50/25
5
100/50
  In relationships (a) and (b), both partners are receiving equal outcomes and 
making equal contributions, but the quality of outcomes is much higher for 
the partners in relationship (a) than for those in relationship (b). Equity theory 
emphasizes fairness, not the overall amount of rewards people receive, and 
because both (a) and (b) are fair, they should both be satisfying to the partners. 
(Do you think they would be? I’ll return to this point later.) Relationship (c) is 
also equitable even though the partners do not make equal contributions or 
derive equal outcomes. Wilma is working harder to maintain the relationship 
than Fred is, but both of them are receiving outcomes that are proportional to 
their contributions; each is getting two units of benefit for every unit he or she 
contributes, so Wilma’s better outcomes are fair. 
 In contrast, in inequitable relationships, the two ratios of outcomes to con-
tributions are not equal. Consider these examples:
Fred
Wilma
(d)
80/50
Þ
60/50
(e)
80/50
Þ
80/30
 In relationship (d), the partners are working equally hard to maintain 
the relationship, but one of them is receiving better outcomes than the other. 
In (e), their outcomes are the same, but their contributions are different. In 
either case, the partners are likely to be distressed—even if they’re getting good 
outcomes—because the relationship isn’t fair. In such situations, one partner 
is  overbenefited,  receiving better outcomes than he or she deserves, and the 
other is  underbenefited,  receiving less than he or she should. Does that matter? 
Interdependence theory says it shouldn’t, much, as long as both partners are 
prospering, but equity theory says it does. 
 The Distress of Inequity 
 One of the most interesting aspects of equity theory is its assertion that 
everybody is nervous in inequitable relationships. It’s easy to see why under-
benefited partners would be unhappy; they’re being exploited, and they may 
feel angry and resentful. On the other hand, overbenefited partners are doing 
too well, and they may feel somewhat guilty (Guerrero et al., 2008). It’s better 
to be over- than underbenefited, of course, but people are presumed to dislike 
unfairness, being motivated to change or escape it. So, equity theory proposes 
that the most satisfactory situation is an equitable division of outcomes; the 

202 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
theory expects overbenefited people to be somewhat less content than those 
who have equitable relationships, and underbenefited people to be  much less 
satisfied (Hatfield & Rapson, 2012). 
 Ways to Restore Equity 
 If you’re underbenefited, what can you do? First, you can try to restore 
 actual equity  by changing your (or your partner’s) contributions or outcomes 
(Canary & Stafford, 2001). You can request better treatment so that your out-
comes will improve—“it’s your turn to cook dinner while I relax”—or you can 
reduce your contributions, hoping that your outcomes stay about the same.  
 If these efforts fail, you can try to restore  psychological equity, changing your 
perceptions of the relationship and convincing yourself it really is equitable 
after all. You could talk yourself into thinking that your partner is someone 
special who deserves the better deal. Or you could start doubting yourself and 
decide that you deserve your lousy outcomes. 
 Finally, as a last resort, you could  abandon the relationship to seek fair-
ness elsewhere. You could actually leave your partner, or perhaps just have 
an affair. 
 As all these possibilities suggest, equity theory argues that people are moti-
vated to redress inequity when it occurs. That certainly makes sense if you’re 
underbenefited. But would you really want to change things if you’re overben-
efited? Let’s see what the data have to say. 
 How Much Is Enough? Being Treated Fairly versus Being Overbenefited 
 Several studies that have assessed the satisfaction of spouses and other 
romantic couples have obtained results that fit the predictions of equity theory 
very nicely (e.g., Stafford & Canary, 2006): Partners who were overbenefited 
were less relaxed and content than were those whose outcomes were equita-
ble, and people who were underbenefited were less happy still. However, few 
of these studies assessed the participants’ com-
parison levels or otherwise took note of just how 
good their outcomes were. (Remember, you can 
be overbenefited relative to how your partner is 
doing and still be getting crummy outcomes that 
could cause some dissatisfaction.)  Other investiga-
tions that have tracked couples over time (often for 
several years) using a broader array of measures 
provide less support for the particulars of equity 
theory (e.g., Sprecher et al., 2010). Nobody likes 
being u nderbenefited—all studies agree on that—but being overbenefited is 
not always associated with reduced satisfaction. Some people who are overben-
efited like it just fine (Sprecher, 2001). Moreover, several studies that assessed 
the quality of partners’ outcomes found that—just as interdependence theory 
asserts—the overall amount of reward that people receive is a better predictor 
of their satisfaction than is the level of equity they encounter (e.g., Cate et al., 
A Point to Ponder
If you’re treated well 
by your partner and are 
happy in your relation-
ship, would it bother you 
to realize that your partner 
is profiting even more than 
you are?

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 203
1988). In these studies, it didn’t matter what one’s partner gave or got as long as 
one’s own benefits were high enough, and the more rewards people said they 
received from a relationship, the better they felt about it. 
 There’s complexity here. Some studies suggest that fairness is an important 
factor in the workings of intimate relationships, and some do not. One reason 
for these conflicting results may be that some people are more concerned with 
fairness in interpersonal relations than other people are. Across relationships, 
some people consistently value equity more than others do, and they, unlike 
others, are more satisfied when equity exists than when it does not (Donaghue 
& Fallon, 2003). Curiously, however, such people tend to be less satisfied over-
all with their relationships than are people who are less concerned with equity 
(Buunk & Van Yperen, 1991). They may be paying too much attention to a care-
ful accounting of their rewards and costs! 
 Nevertheless, no matter who we are, equity may be more important in 
some domains than in others. Two sensitive areas in which equity appears to 
be advisable are in the allocation of household tasks and child care. When these 
chores are divided equally, both spouses tend to be satisfied with their mar-
riages: “When the burden of housework is shared, each spouse is likely to 
appreciate the other spouse’s contribution, and there may be more leisure time 
for shared activities” (Amato et al., 2007, p. 166). In contrast, when one of the 
partners is doing most of the work, “bad feelings spill over and affect the qual-
ity of the marriage” (Amato et al., p. 166). Unfortunately, equitable allocation 
of these duties is often difficult for married women to obtain; even when they 
have similar job responsibilities outside the home, working wives in the United 
States tend to do about twice as many household chores as their husbands do 
(Parker & Wang, 2013). Cohabiting couples and gay and lesbian couples usually 
divide these tasks more fairly (Coltrane & Shih, 2010), so there may be some-
thing about heterosexual partnerships that leads husbands to do less around 
the house. Whenever it occurs, however, this inequity can produce consider-
able strain on the relationship (Britt & Roy, 2014). Indeed, one general admo-
nition offered by marriage researchers to modern couples is for men “to do 
more housework, child care, and affectional maintenance if they wish to have 
Your parents may not have done things this way, but couples are usually happier these 
days when household tasks and child care are shared by the partners.
Baby Blues © 2013 Baby Blues Partnership, Dist. by King Features.

204 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
a happy wife” (Gottman & Carrère, 1994, p. 225). Equity in these conspicuous 
domains may be much more influential than similar fairness applied to other 
areas of a couple’s interactions. 
 A third and perhaps most important reason why research results are 
mixed may be that equity is a salient issue when people are dissatisfied, but 
it’s only a minor issue when people are content (Holmes & Levinger, 1994). 
When rewards are ample, equity may not matter much. People who are pros-
pering in their relationships may spend little time monitoring their exchanges 
and may not be concerned by any imbalances they do notice. (They might 
also tend to report that their partnerships are “fair” when researchers ask.) 
But if costs rise and rewards fall, people may begin tracking their exchanges 
much more carefully, displaying concern about who deserves to get what. 
And no matter what the truth is, people who are very dissatisfied are likely 
to perceive that they are being underbenefited by their partners (Grote & 
Clark, 2001). In this sense, then, inequity may not cause people to become dis-
satisfied; instead, being dissatisfied could lead people to think they’re being 
treated unfairly. 
Feminism Is Bad for Romance, Right?
Back in chapter 1, I reported that women 
married to traditional, masculine men 
are less content, on average, than are 
women with warmer, more expressive 
husbands. Now we’ve seen that unequal 
divisions of household labor breed 
resentment and distress. Both of these 
points suggest that (if you choose to 
marry), your chances for lasting marital 
bliss will be higher if you don’t adhere 
to rigid, traditional expectations about 
what it means to be husband and wife 
(Stanik et al., 2013). In fact, in the United 
States, women enjoy happier, healthier, 
and more stable romantic relationships 
when they are partnered with men who 
are feminists—that is, who believe in 
the equality of the sexes—than they do 
when their men are more traditional. 
They enjoy better sex, too (Rudman & 
Mescher, 2012a).
Okay, women like their men to 
think of them as equals. But what about 
the guys? The old norms are clearly 
changing—a full third of American 
wives who work now earn noticeably 
higher incomes than their husbands do 
(Pew Research Center, 2013a)—but a lot 
of people still think that women who 
believe in the equality of the sexes are 
likely to be homely, pushy, unromantic 
harpies who are lousy in bed (Rudman 
& Mescher, 2012a). However, to the 
contrary, female feminists are less hos-
tile toward men than other women are 
(Anderson et al., 2009), and men who are 
partnered with feminist women enjoy 
more stable relationships and more sex-
ual satisfaction than do men with tra-
ditional partners (Rudman & Mescher, 
2012a). Clearly, it’s absurd to think that 
feminism is incompatible with romance. 
Thinking of one’s lover as an equal part-
ner may help create a relationship that 
is actually more rewarding and robust 
than a partnership that is based on the 
last century’s old, outmoded expecta-
tions (Amato et al., 2007).

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 205
 Overall, the best conclusion appears to be that both the global quality of 
outcomes people receive  and underbenefit, when it occurs, play important 
roles in predicting how satisfactory and enduring a relationship will be (Spre-
cher, 2001). Being overbenefited doesn’t seem to bother people much, and 
equity doesn’t seem to improve a relationship if it is already highly reward-
ing. In contrast, the inequity that accompanies deprivation and exploitation—
underbenefit— routinely causes distress (Kuijer et al., 2002), and selfishness is 
disliked wherever it’s encountered (Allen & Leary, 2010). Still, the bottom line 
is that outcome level matters more than inequity does; if our outcomes are poor 
and unsatisfactory, it isn’t much consolation if they’re fair, and if our outcomes 
are wonderful, inequity isn’t a major concern. 
 Summing Up 
 So, what’s the final answer? Is simple greed a good description of people’s 
behavior in intimate relationships? The answer offered by relationship sci-
ence is a qualified “yes.” People are happiest when their rewards are high 
and their costs (and expectations) are low. But because we depend on others 
for the rewards we seek in intimate relationships, we have a stake in satisfy-
ing them, too. We readily protect the well-being of our intimate partners and 
rarely exploit them if we want those relationships to continue. Such behavior 
may be encouraged by selfish motives, but it is still thoughtful, generous, and 
often loving. So, even if it is ultimately greedy behavior, it’s not undesirable 
or exploitative.  
 THE NATURE OF COMMITMENT 
 The good news is that happy dependence on an intimate partner leads to 
 commitment, a desire for the relationship to continue and the inclination to 
work to maintain it (Schoebi et al., 2012). People who both need their partners 
and who are currently content associate the concept of commitment with posi-
tive qualities such as sharing, supportiveness, honesty, f aithfulness, and trust 
(Hampel & Vangelisti, 2008); they are affectionate,  attentive, and respectful, and 
they happily plan to be together in the future (Weigel & Ballard-Reisch, 2014). 
(You can see why these people are staying put.) The bad news is that unhappy 
people can be committed to their relationships, too, not because they want to 
stay where they are but because they feel they  must. For these people, commit-
ment is probably experienced more as burdensome entrapment than as a posi-
tive feeling. 
   Different components of commitment are apparent in a handy commitment 
scale developed by Ximena Arriaga and Christopher Agnew (2001) that con-
tains three themes. First, committed partners expect their relationship to con-
tinue. They also hold a long-term view, foreseeing a future that involves their 
partners. And finally, they are psychologically attached to each other so that 
they are happier when their partners are happy, too. Each of these themes is 

206 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
represented by four questions on the commitment scale; take a look at  Table 6.3 
to see if you can tell which theme applies to each question. 
 This portrayal of commitment as a multifaceted decision is consistent 
with a well-known conceptualization of commitment developed by Caryl 
Rusbult and her colleagues known as the  investment model. According 
to the investment model, commitment emerges from all of the elements of 
social exchange that are associated with people’s CLs and CL alt s (e.g., Rusbult 
et al., 2012). First, satisfaction increases commitment. People generally wish 
to continue the partnerships that make them happy. However, alternatives of 
high quality are also influential, and they  decrease commitment. People who 
have enticing alternatives luring them away from their present partners are 
less likely to stay in their existing relationships. But people don’t always pur-
sue such alternatives even when they’re available, if the costs of leaving their 
current relationships are too high. Thus, a third determinant of commitment 
is the size of one’s investments in the existing relationship. High investments 
increase commitment regardless of the quality of one’s alternatives and whether 
or not one is happy. 
 Altogether, then, the investment model suggests that people will wish to 
remain with their present partners when they’re happy, or when there’s no 
TABLE 6.3. Arriaga and Agnew’s Commitment Scale
Answer each of the questions that follow using this scale:
1
not at all
true
2
slightly
true
3
moderately 
true
4
very
true
5
extremely
true
1. I feel very strongly linked to my partner—very attached to our relationship.
2. It pains me to see my partner suffer.
3. I am very affected when things are not going well in my relationship.
4.  In all honesty, my family and friends are more important to me than this 
relationship.
5.  I am oriented toward the long-term future of this relationship (e.g., I imagine 
being with my partner several years from now).
6. My partner and I joke about what things will be like when we are old.
7. I find it difficult to imagine myself with my partner in the distant future.
8.  When I make plans about future events in my life, I think about the impact of my 
decisions on our relationship.
9. I intend to stay in this relationship.
10. I want to maintain our relationship.
11. I feel inclined to keep our relationship going.
12. My gut feeling is to continue in this relationship.
Source: Arriaga & Agnew, 2001.
To determine your total commitment score, reverse the rating you used for questions 
4 and 7. If you answered 1, change it to 5; 2 becomes 4; 4 becomes 2; and so on. Then 
add up your ratings. The higher your score, the greater your commitment.

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 207
other desirable place for them to go, or when they won’t leave because it would 
cost too much (see  Figure 6.8 ). These influences are presumed to be equally 
important, and commitment emerges from the complex combination of all 
three. Thus, as people’s circumstances change, relationships often survive peri-
ods in which one or both partners are dissatisfied, tempted by alluring alter-
natives, or free to walk out at any time. Episodes such as these may stress the 
relationship and weaken the partners’ commitment, but the partnership may 
persist if the other components of commitment are holding it together. 
 In general, research results support the investment model quite well 
(Le et al., 2010). Satisfaction, the quality of one’s alternatives, and the size 
of one’s investments all tell us something useful about how committed a 
person is likely to be, and the model applies equally well to men and women, 
heterosexual and same-sex couples (Kurdek, 2008), and to Eastern (Lin & 
Rusbult, 1995), as well as Western, cultures. Moreover, the usefulness of the 
investment model provides general support for an exchange perspective on 
intimate relationships. The economic assessments involved in the invest-
ment model do a very good job of predicting how long relationships will last 
(Le  et  al., 2010), whether or not the partners will be faithful to each other 
(Drigotas et al., 1999), and even whether battered wives will try to escape 
their abusive husbands (Rusbult & Martz, 1995). 
 However, the investment model treats commitment as a unitary concept—
that is, there’s really only one kind of commitment—and other theorists argue 
that commitment not only springs from different sources, it comes in different 
forms (Rhoades et al., 2010). For instance, sociologist Michael Johnson (1999) 
asserts that there are actually three types of commitment. The first,  personal 
commitment, occurs when people  want to continue a relationship because they 
are attracted to their partners and the relationship is satisfying. In contrast, the 
Quality of
Alternatives
Commitment
Level
such as:
  • Accommodation
  • Willingness to sacrifice
  • Perceived superiority
Relationship Maintenance
Mechanisms
Satisfaction
Level
Investment
Size
1
1
1
2
FIGURE 6.8. The investment model of commitment.
Satisfaction and investments are both positively related to commitment. The happier 
we are and the more we would lose by leaving, the greater our commitment to our 
present partners. However, high-quality alternatives undermine commitment; the 
more alluring our other options, the less committed we are.
Source: From Rusbult et al., 1994.

208 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
second type,  constraint commitment,  occurs when people feel they  have to con-
tinue a relationship because it would be too costly for them to leave. In con-
straint commitment, people fear the social and financial consequences of ending 
their partnerships, and they continue them even when they wish they could 
depart. Finally, the third type of commitment,  moral commitment, derives from 
a sense of moral obligation to one’s partner or one’s relationship. Here, people 
feel they  ought to continue the relationship because it would be improper to end 
it and break their promises or vows. Spouses who are morally committed tend 
to believe in the sanctity of marriage and may feel a solemn social or religious 
responsibility to stay married no matter what (Stafford et al., 2014). 
 Research using this scheme demonstrates that the three types of commit-
ment do feel different to people, and there is value in distinguishing them in 
studies of relationships (Ramirez, 2008). Personal commitment is often the 
Attachment and Interdependency
The attachment dimension of avoid-
ance of intimacy describes the com-
fort with which people accept intimate 
interdependency with others. So, as you 
might expect, avoidance figures promi-
nently in several of the patterns we have 
encountered in this chapter. First, com-
pared to those who are more secure, 
people who are high in avoidance are 
more attentive to their alternatives; they 
keep track of the other romantic options 
open to them (Miller, 2008) and they 
are more attracted to the newcomers 
they meet (Overall &  Sibley, 2008). As a 
result, their CLalts tend to be higher than 
those of other people, and that leaves 
them less committed to their pres-
ent partners (Etcheverry et al., 2013b). 
Avoidant people also value their inde-
pendence and self-sufficiency, so their 
approach motivations are weaker; they 
perceive intimate connections to others 
to be less rewarding than secure people 
do, so they are less highly motivated to 
pursue fulfillment from their partner-
ships with others (Gere et al., 2013). 
They are also less attracted to others 
who use communal norms; they prefer 
people who do not do favors for them 
without expecting something in return 
(Bartz & Lydon, 2008), and they think 
that others do favors for them out of 
obligation, not kindness (Beck & Clark, 
2010a).
People who are anxious over 
abandonment fret that their partners 
may leave them, so they have strong 
avoidance motivations and nervously 
focus on averting confl ict and other 
costly outcomes (Gere et al., 2013). But 
that’s not a recipe for contentment, and 
anxious people tend to be less satis-
fi ed with their relationships than more 
relaxed and trusting—that is, secure—
people are (Etcheverry et al., 2013b).
Thus, both anxiety about aban-
donment and avoidance of intimacy 
are associated—albeit for somewhat 
different reasons—with lower satisfac-
tion and commitment in close relation-
ships as time goes by (Hadden et al., 
2014). Your chances of living happily 
ever after will be greater if you settle 
down with someone who is comfort-
able and secure needing and depend-
ing on you and who is happy to 
accept your dependence on him or her 
in return.

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 209
strongest of the three, but constraint commitment and moral commitment can 
be influential, too. Even when people are unhappy and their personal commit-
ment is low, for instance, they may stay in a partnership if constraint commit-
ment is high because of financial or family pressures (Rhoades et al., 2012a). 
And when people embark on a long-distance romantic relationship, moral 
commitment does a better job of predicting whether or not the partnership will 
survive the period of separation than personal commitment does (Lydon et al., 
1997). Evidently, moral commitment can keep a relationship going even when 
one’s enthusiasm for the relationship wanes. 
 The Consequences of Commitment 
 Nevertheless, whatever its origins or nature, commitment substantially affects 
the relationships in which it occurs (Rusbult et al., 2012). The long-term orien-
tation that characterizes commitment reduces the pain that would otherwise 
accompany rough spots in the relationship. When people feel that they’re in 
a relationship for the long haul, they may be better able to tolerate episodes of 
high cost and low reward in much the same way that investors with a long-
range outlook will hold on to shares of stock during periods of low earnings 
(Arriaga et al., 2007). In addition, commitment can lead people to think of 
themselves and their partners as a single entity, as “us” instead of “him” and 
“me” (Agnew et al., 2004). This may substantially reduce the costs of sacrifices 
that benefit the partner, as events that please one’s partner produce indirect 
benefits for oneself as well. 
 Perhaps the most important consequence of commitment, however, is that 
it leads people to take action to protect and maintain a relationship even when 
it is costly for them to do so. Committed people engage in a variety of behav-
ioral and cognitive maneuvers that both preserve and enhance the relationship 
and reinforce their commitment to it (Ogolsky & Bowers, 2013). We’ll consider 
these  relationship maintenance mechanisms in detail in chapter 14. However, to 
close this chapter, I’ll briefly preview that material. 
 As one example, commitment promotes  accommodation in which people 
refrain from responding to provocation from their partners with similar ire of 
their own (Häfner & IJzerman, 2011). Accommodating people tolerate destruc-
tive behavior from their partners without fighting back; they swallow insults, 
sarcasm, or selfishness without retaliating. By so doing, they avoid quarrels 
and help dispel, rather than perpetuate, their partners’ bad moods. That’s usu-
ally good for the relationship. Such behavior may involve considerable self-
restraint, but it is not motivated by weakness; instead, accommodation often 
involves a conscious effort to protect the partnership from harm. 
 Committed people also display greater  willingness to sacrifice their own 
self-interests for the good of the relationship (Totenhagen et al., 2013). They do 
things they wouldn’t do if they were on their own, and they do not do things they 
would have liked to do in order to benefit their partners and their partnerships. 
 As a final example, commitment changes people’s perceptions of their 
partnerships. Committed people exhibit  perceived superiority —they think 

210 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
their relationships are better than those of other people (Reis et al., 2011). In 
particular, they think that they enjoy more rewards and suffer fewer costs than 
other people encounter in their relationships (Broemer & Diehl, 2003). 
 People maintain their relationships with other mechanisms, but these three 
sufficiently illustrate the manner in which commitment motivates thoughts 
and actions that preserve partnerships. People seek maximum reward at mini-
mum cost in their interactions with others, but dependency on a partner leads 
them to behave in ways that take the partner’s well-being into account. As a 
result, committed partners often make sacrifices and accommodate their part-
ners, doing things that are not in their immediate self-interest, to promote their 
relationships. 
 If people did these things indiscriminately, they would often be self-
defeating. However, when they occur in interdependent relationships and when 
both partners behave this way, such actions provide powerful means of pro-
tecting and enhancing desired connections to others (Ramirez, 2008). In this 
manner, even if we are basically greedy at heart, we are often unselfish, consid-
erate, and caring to those we befriend and love.  
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 One of the things Gregg liked about Gail was that she was a great cook. When 
she would have him over to dinner, she would serve elaborate, delicious meals 
that were much more appealing than the fast food he often ate on his own. 
He liked to keep things tidy and neat, and he noticed that her apartment was 
always disheveled and cluttered, but he didn’t much care because she was an 
exciting, desirable companion. However, once they were married, Gail cooked 
less often; they both worked, and she frequently called him before he came 
home to ask him to pick up take-out meals for dinner. He also became annoyed 
by her sl ovenly housekeeping. He did his fair share of housework, but a pile of 
unfolded laundry constantly occupied their living room couch, and they had to 
push it aside to sit together to watch television. She seemed not to notice just 
how scattered and disorganized her belongings were, and Gregg began to feel 
resentful. 
 What do you think the future holds for Gail and Gregg? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 Social Exchange 
 Interdependence theory offers an economic view of relationships that sug-
gests that people seek maximum reward at minimum cost. 
 Rewards and Costs. Rewards are gratifying and costs are punishing. The 
net profit or loss from an interaction is its  outcome. 

CHAPTER 6: Interdependency 211
 What Do We Expect from Our Relationships? People have  comparison lev-
els (CLs) that reflect their expectations for their interactions with others. When 
the outcomes they receive exceed their CLs, they’re satisfied, but if their out-
comes fall below their CLs, they’re discontent.  
 How Well Could We Do Elsewhere? People also judge the outcomes 
available elsewhere using a  comparison level for alternatives (CL alt ). When the 
outcomes they receive exceed their CL alt s, they can’t do better elsewhere, and 
they’re dependent on their current partners.  
 Four Types of Relationships. Comparing people’s CLs and CL alt s with 
their outcomes yields four different relationship states: happy and stable; 
happy and unstable; unhappy and stable; and unhappy and unstable.  
 CL and CL alt as Time Goes By. People adapt to the outcomes they receive, 
and relationships can become less satisfying as the partners’ CLs rise. Cultural 
influences shape both our expectations and our CL alt s. 
 The Economies of Relationships 
 Counting up the rewards and costs of a relationship provides extraordi-
nary information about its current state and likely future. 
Rewards and Costs Are Different. An  approach motivation leads us to seek 
rewards, an  avoidance motivation leads us to avoid costs, and the extent to which 
each is fulfilled defines different relationship states.
 Rewards and Costs as Time Goes By. A  relational turbulence model suggests 
that new relationships usually encounter a lull when partners adjust to their 
new status as an established couple. Thereafter, marital satisfaction u sually 
decreases over the first years of marriage. This may be due to the partners’  lack 
of effort and to the manner in which interdependence magnifies small ir ritations, 
and to other routine influences such as  unwelcome surprises and  unrealistic expec-
tations. Insight may forestall or prevent these problems. 
 Are We Really This Greedy? 
 The Nature of Interdependency. Interdependent partners have a stake in 
keeping each other happy. As a result, generosity toward one’s partner is often 
benefi cial to oneself. 
 Exchange versus Communal Relationships.  Exchange relationships are 
governed by a desire for immediate repayment of favors, whereas  communal 
relationships involve selfl ess concern for another’s needs. 
 Equitable Relationships.  Equity occurs when both partners gain benefits 
from a relationship that are proportional to their contributions to it.  

212 
CHAPTER 6: Interdependency
 According to equity theory, people dislike inequity and are motivated to 
change or escape it.  However, overbenefit is not always associated with reduced 
satisfaction with a relationship—but underbenefit is. 
 Summing Up. Both the quality of outcomes one receives and underben-
efit, when it occurs, determine how happy and stable a relationship will be.  
 The Nature of Commitment 
 Commitment is a desire to continue a relationship, and an inclination to 
maintain it. The investment model asserts that satisfaction, the quality of one’s 
alternatives, and the size of one’s investments influence commitment. How-
ever, there may be three kinds of commitment: personal, constraint, and moral. 
 The Consequences of Commitment. Committed people take action to 
protect and maintain their relationships, being accommodating, making sacri-
fices willingly, and considering their relationships to be better than most.  

213
 C H A P T E R  7 
 Friendship 
 T he N ature of F riendship  ◆ F riendship  
a cross the L ife C ycle  ◆ D ifferences in F riendship   
◆ Friendship Difficulties  ◆ F or Y our C onsideration  
 ◆ C hapter S ummary  
 I get by with a little help from my friends.  John  Lennon 
 Take a moment and think about your two best friends. Why are they such 
close companions? Why do you think of them as friends? You probably  like but 
don’t  love them. (Or, at least, you’re not “in love” with them, or you’d probably 
think of them as more than just “friends.”) You’ve probably shared a lot of 
good times with them, and you feel comfortable around them; you know that 
they like you, too, and you feel that you can count on them to help you when 
you need it. 
 Indeed, the positive sentiments you feel toward your friends may actually 
be rather varied and complex. They annoy you sometimes, but you’re fond of 
them, and because they’re best friends, they know things about you that no one 
else may know. You like to do things with them, and you expect your relation-
ship to continue indefinitely. In fact, if you look back at the features that define 
 intimacy (way back on page 2), you may find that your connections to your 
best friends are quite intimate, indeed. You may have substantial knowledge 
of them, and you probably feel high levels of trust and commitment toward 
them; you may not experience as much caring, interdependence, responsive-
ness, and mutuality as you do with a romantic partner, but all three are present, 
nonetheless. 
 So, are friendships the same as but just less intimate than our romantic 
partnerships? Yes and no. Friendships are based on the same building blocks 
of intimacy as romances are, but the mix of components is usually different. 
Romances also have some ingredients that friendships typically lack, so their 
recipes do differ. But many of the elements of friendships and romances are 
quite similar, and this chapter will set the stage for our consideration of love (in 
chapter 8) by detailing what it means to  like an intimate partner. Among other 
topics, I’ll describe various features of friendship and question whether men 
and women can be “just friends.” 

214 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
 THE NATURE OF FRIENDSHIP 
 Our friendships are indispensable sources of pleasure and support. One study 
of unmarried young adults found that over one-third of them (36  percent) 
considered a friendship to be their “closest, deepest, most involved, and most 
intimate” current relationship (Berscheid et al., 1989). A larger proportion (47 
percent) identified a romantic relationship as their most important partner-
ships, but friendships were obviously significant connections to others. And 
they remain so, even after people marry. Another study that used an event-
sampling procedure 1 to track people’s interactions found that they were gener-
ally having more fun when they were with friends than when they were alone 
or with family members, including their spouses. The best times occurred when 
both their spouses and their friends were present, but if it was one or the other, 
people derived more enjoyment and excitement from the presence of a friend 
than from the presence of a spouse (Larson & Bradney, 1988). Why? What’s so 
great about friendship?
 Attributes of Friendships 
A variety of attributes come to mind when people think about a good friend-
ship (Fuhrman et al., 2009; Hall, 2012). First, close friends feel affection for one 
another. They like, trust, and respect each other, and they value loyalty and 
authenticity, with both of them feeling free to be themselves without pretense. 
Second, a good friendship involves communion. The partners give and receive 
meaningful self-disclosures, emotional support, and practical assistance, and 
they observe a norm of equality, with both partners’ preferences being valued. 
Finally, friends offer companionship. They share interests and activities, and con-
sider each other to be sources of recreation and fun. At its best, friendship is 
clearly a close, rewarding relationship, which led Beverly Fehr (1996, p. 7) to 
define  friendship as “a voluntary, personal relationship, typically providing 
intimacy and assistance, in which the two parties like one another and seek 
each other’s company.”
 Differences between Friendship and Love 
 How, then, is friendship different from romantic attraction? As we’ll see in 
chapter 8, love involves more complex feelings than liking does. Both liking and 
loving involve positive and warm evaluations of one’s partner, but romantic 
love includes fascination with one’s partner, sexual desire, and a greater desire 
for exclusivity than friendship does (Balzarini et al., 2014). Love relationships 
also involve more stringent standards of conduct; we’re supposed to be more 
loyal to, and even more willing to help, our lovers than our friends (Fuhrman 
et al., 2009). The social norms that regulate friendship are less c onfining than 
 1 If a reminder about event-sampling will be helpful, look back at page 57. (Chapter 2 continues to 
be useful, doesn’t it?) In this study, participants wore pagers that prompted them to record what 
they were doing and who they were with every 2 hours during the day. 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 215
those that govern romantic relationships, and friendships are easier to dissolve 
(Fehr, 1996). In addition, friendships are less likely to involve overt expressions 
of positive emotion, and friends, as a general rule, spend less of their free time 
together than romantic partners do. 
 These differences are not just due to the fact that so many of our friendships 
involve partners of the same sex. Friendships with members of the other sex are 
also less passionate and less committed than romances usually are (Fuhrman 
et al., 2009). So, friendships ordinarily entail fewer obligations and are less 
emotionally intense and less exclusive than romantic relationships. And unlike 
romantic relationships, friendships typically do not involve sexual intimacy 
(although some do; we’ll consider “friends with benefits” later). 
 So, they are less passionate than romances, but rich friendships still con-
tain all the other components that characterize rewarding intimacy with both 
friends and lovers. Let’s consider several of those next.  
 Respect 
 When people respect others, they admire them and hold them in high 
esteem. The specific traits that seem to make a relationship partner worthy of 
respect include commendable moral qualities, consideration for others, accep-
tance of others, honesty, and willingness to listen to others (Frei & Shaver, 
2002). We generally like those whom we respect, and the more we respect a 
friend or lover, the more satisfying our relationship with that person tends to 
be (Hendrick et al., 2010). 
 Trust 
 We trust our partners when we are confident that they will behave benevo-
lently toward us, selflessly taking our best interests into account (Rempel et 
al., 2001). Such confidence takes time to cultivate, but it is likely to develop 
when someone is alert to our wishes and reliably behaves unselfishly toward 
us (Simpson, 2007). Trust is invaluable in any close relationship because it 
makes interdependency more palatable; it allows people to be comfortable and 
relaxed in their friendships, and those who do not fully trust their partners 
tend to be guarded and cautious and less content (Rempel et al.). And the loss 
of trust has corrosive effects on any close relationship (Miller & Rempel, 2004); 
those who have been betrayed by a partner often find trust, and their satisfac-
tion with their relationship, hard to recover (see chapter 10).  
 Capitalization 
 Good friends also tend to enhance, rather than diminish, our delight when 
we share good news or events with them. We don’t always receive enthusias-
tic congratulations from others when we encounter good fortune; on occasion, 
we get bland best wishes, and sometimes others are simply uninterested. But 
good friends are usually pleased by our successes, and their excitement can 
increase our enjoyment of the event (Gable & Reis, 2010). So, in a pattern of 
interaction known as  capitalization,  we usually share good news with friends 
and receive enthusiastic, rewarding responses that increase our  pleasure 

216 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
(Lambert et al., 2013b) and enhance our relationships: We feel closer to those 
who excitedly enhance our happiness than to those who respond to our good 
fortune with apathy or indifference (Reis et al., 2010), and relationships in 
which capitalization routinely occurs are more satisfying and longer lasting 
than those in which it is infrequent (Logan & Cobb, 2013).  
 Social Support 
 Enthusiastic celebration of our good fortune is one way in which our inti-
mate partners uplift us and provide us aid, or social support (Gable et al., 2012). 
We also rely on friends to help us through our difficulties, and there are four 
ways in which they can provide us help and encouragement (Barry et al., 2009). 
We rely on our partners for  emotional support in the form of affection, accep-
tance, and reassurance; physical comfort in the form of hugs and cuddling;  advice 
support in the form of information and guidance; and  material support , or tan-
gible assistance in the form of money or goods. A partner who tries to reassure 
you when you’re nervous about an upcoming exam is providing emotional 
support whereas a friend who loans you her car is providing material support. 
Don’t take these distinctions too seriously, however, because these types of aid 
can and do overlap; because her generous concern would be touching, a friend 
who offers a loan of her car as soon as she learns that yours is in the shop could 
be said to be providing emotional as well as material support. 
 Social support can be of enormous value, and higher amounts of all four 
types of support are associated with higher relationship satisfaction and greater 
personal well-being as time goes by (Barry et al., 2009). Indeed, warm, attentive 
support from one’s partners matters more than money when it comes to being 
happy; your income is likely to have less effect on your happiness than your 
level of social support does (North et al., 2008). But there are several complexi-
ties involved in the manner in which social support operates in close relation-
ships. Consider these points:
 •  Emotional support has real physiological effects.  People who have affectionate 
partners have chronically lower blood pressures, cholesterol levels, and 
stress hormone levels than do those who receive lesser amounts of encour-
agement and caring from others (Seeman et al., 2002), and they recover 
faster from stress, too (Meuwly et al., 2012). In lab procedures, they even 
experience less pain when they submerge their arms in ice-cold water 
(Brown et al., 2003). And when people are under stress, just thinking about 
a supportive friend tends to reduce their heart rates and blood pressures 
(Smith et al., 2004). 
 •  Effective social support also leads people to feel closer to those who provide it. Sen-
sitive, responsive support from others increases our happiness, self-esteem, 
and optimism about the future (Feeney, 2004), and all of these have benefi-
cial effects on our relationships. In marriages, happy spouses provide each 
other more support than distressed couples do (Verhofstadt et al., 2013), 
and higher levels of support when the partners are newly married are asso-
ciated with a lower likelihood of divorce 10 years later (Sullivan et al., 2010). 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 217
 • But  some people are better providers of social support than others are. For instance, 
attachment styles matter. Secure people, who readily accept  interdependent 
intimacy with others, tend to provide effective support that reassures and 
bolsters the recipient, and they do so for altruistic, compassionate reasons 
(Davila & Kashy, 2009). In contrast, insecure people are more self-serving, 
tending to provide help out of obligation or for the promise of reward. 
Moreover, their support tends to be less effective, either because (in the 
case of avoidant people) they provide less help than secure people do or 
because (in the case of anxious people) their help is intrusive and controlling 
Friends Matter More Than We Think
You’re aware of the pleasures to be 
found in a close friendship, but it’s likely 
that your friends are influencing you 
even more than you realize. One way 
our friends often matter is in making 
or breaking our romantic relationships. 
They routinely help new romances get 
started by introducing us to potential 
new partners and running interference 
for us (Ackerman &  Kenrick, 2009). 
And thereafter, they come to approve 
or disapprove of our ongoing romances, 
and their opinions count (Sprecher, 
2011). Our romances are imperiled 
when our friends disapprove of them: 
Even when they’re (initially) satisfied 
with their relationships, young lov-
ers are more likely to have broken up 
7 months later when their friends disap-
prove of their partnerships (Lehmiller & 
Agnew, 2007). One reason this occurs, 
of course, is that our friends are more 
 dispassionate—and thus often more 
discerning—about our romances than 
we are. They tend to disapprove of our 
romances when they judge us to be less 
happy than we ought to be ( Etcheverry 
et al., 2013a), and they sometimes see 
trouble coming before we do. But it’s 
also hard to swim upstream against a 
tide of disapproval (Lehmiller, 2012), 
and even when we would otherwise be 
genuinely happy with a lover, disregard 
of the relationship from others can be 
very burdensome.
Our friends also have surpris-
ing infl uence on whether we’re happy 
or sad (or fat or thin!). A remarkable 
30-year study of the health of more than 
12,000 people found that having happy 
friends makes it more likely that you’ll 
be happy, too (Christakis & Fowler, 
2009). Each friend we have who pos-
sesses good cheer increases the chance 
that we will also be happy by 15 per-
cent. And our friends’ friends also mat-
ter; each happy friend our friends have 
increases our chances of being happy 
by 10 percent even if we’ve never met 
that person! The norms supported and 
the experiences offered by our social 
networks are surprisingly potent, and 
they can work against, as well as for, us. 
For instance, if a friend gets heavy, the 
chance that you will also begin gaining 
too much weight goes up by 57 percent. 
Each unhappy friend we have decreases 
the likelihood that we’re happy by 7 per-
cent. And loneliness is more contagious: 
We’re 52 percent more likely to become 
lonely if a friend gets lonely fi rst, and 
25 percent more likely if a friend’s friend 
becomes lonely (Cacioppo et al., 2009). 
We’re typically more connected to oth-
ers than we realize, and our friends usu-
ally matter more than we think.

218 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
(Collins et al., 2006). People are generally more satisfied with the support 
they receive when their partners have secure, rather than insecure, attach-
ment styles (Kane et al., 2007). 
 
  
In addition, people tend to provide better support when they are 
attentive and empathic and thus are able to tell what their partners need 
( Verhofstadt et al., 2010). People too rarely ask straightforwardly for help 
when they need it (Bohns & Flynn, 2010), so those who are better able to 
read a particular partner’s feelings tend to provide that partner more skill-
ful support.
 • Furthermore,  the best support fits our needs and preferences. Not all social sup-
port is wholly beneficial to its recipients. Even when supportive friends are 
well-intentioned and altruistic, their support may be of the wrong type or 
be too plentiful (Brock & Lawrence, 2009); their efforts to help may threaten 
our self-esteem or be intrusive, and unwelcome indebtedness can occur if 
we accept such help (McClure et al., 2014). So, social support sometimes 
comes with emotional costs, and for that reason, the best help is often 
 invisible support that is subtly provided without fanfare and actually goes 
unnoticed by the recipient (Girme et al., 2013). When cohabiting couples 
kept diaries of the support they gave and received during a stressful period 
in which one of them was preparing for a bar examination, the support that 
was most effective in reducing the test taker’s anxiety was aid the partner 
provided that the test taker did not notice (Bolger et al., 2000). Sometimes, 
the best way to help a friend is to do so unobtrusively in a manner that does 
not add to his or her woes. 
 
  
When support  is visible, it is more effective when it fits the recipi-
ent’s current needs and goals (Brock & Lawrence, 2010). Another study 
with frantic law students preparing for a bar exam found that material 
support—for instance, a partner cooking dinner—was helpful, but emo-
tional support simply made the examinees more anxious (Shrout et al., 
2006). On the other hand, elderly people with impaired vision may be 
annoyed by material support (especially when it makes them feel more 
helpless) but heartened by emotional support (Reinhardt et al., 2006). 
Evidently, there’s no sort of support that’s suitable for all situations; the 
type of help and assistance a friend will appreciate will depend on his or 
her current needs, your capabilities, and the present state of your friend-
ship (Girme et al., 2014). We need to be alert to personal preferences and 
the particular circumstances if we are to provide effective support. 
 • Regardless of what support is offered, one of the most important patterns 
in studies of social support is that  it’s not what people do for us but what we 
think  they do for us that matters in the long run. The support we perceive 
is often only a rough match for the support we actually get (Lakey, 2013), 
and people become distressed when they believe that their partners are 
unsupportive whether or not their partners really are (Bar-Kalifa &  Rafaeli, 
2013). In fact, perceived support has more to do with our satisfaction 
with a partner than with the amount of aid he or she actually provides: 
When we’re content with our friends and lovers, we perceive them to be 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 219
supportive, but when we’re dissatisfied, we perceive them to be neglectful 
and unhelpful (Lemay & Neal, 2014). Our judgments aren’t totally unrealis-
tic; the more support our partners provide us, the more supportive we usu-
ally perceive them to be (Priem et al., 2009). Still, we’re more likely to notice 
and appreciate their aid and assistance when we trust them and we’re content 
with them, so that satisfaction may enhance perceived support at the same 
time that perceived support is increasing satisfaction (Collins et al., 2006). 
In general, then, our judgments of the aid we receive from others “are 
likely to possess both a kernel of truth and a shell of motivated elaboration” 
(Reis et al., 2004, p. 214).  
 • Finally,  our personal characteristics also affect our perceptions of social support 
(Lakey, 2013). People who doubt others’ care and concern for them tend 
to take a biased, and undeservedly critical, view of others’ efforts to aid 
them. In particular, people who have insecure attachment styles judge the 
social support they receive to be less considerate and less helpful than 
do those who hold more favorable, more confident views of themselves 
and their relationships (Collins & Feeney, 2010). Remarkably, even when 
their friends are being genuinely supportive, insecure people are likely to 
consider their partners’ assistance and encouragement to be insufficient 
( Collins et al., 2010). 
 Overall, then, we rely on our friends and lovers for invaluable support, 
but the amount and quality of sustenance we (feel we) receive is affected by 
both our and our partners’ characteristics. The social support we perceive is 
also greatly influenced by the quality of our relationships; in general, partners 
who make us happy seem more supportive than do those with whom we share 
less satisfying friendships. People with roots in Western cultures are also more 
likely to  ask for help when they need it from partners whom they trust and 
who are known to be responsive (Collins et al., 2010). (People from Eastern 
cultures are generally more reluctant to ask for help, but they’re just as pleased 
as Westerners to receive unsolicited support that is freely and thoughtfully pro-
vided [Mojaverian & Kim, 2013].) On the whole, however, whether it is vis-
ible or invisible, the best support is assistance that indicates that our partners 
attentively understand and care about—and thus are responsive—to our needs 
(Maisel & Gable, 2009).
Responsiveness
Each of the characteristics of a good friendship we’ve just encountered—
respect, trust, capitalization, and social support—leave us feeling valued, 
understood, or cared for, so they are all tied to a last component of reward-
ing intimacy that is probably the most important of them all (Reis, 2014): 
 responsiveness, or attentive and supportive recognition of our needs and inter-
ests. Most of the time, our friends are interested in who we are and what we 
have to say. They pay attention to us, and thereby communicate that they value 
their partnerships with us. They are also usually warm and supportive, and 
they seem to understand and appreciate us. And these are all reasons why 

220 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
they’re friends. The judgment that someone is attentive, respectful, caring, 
and supportive with respect to our needs and aspirations, which is known as 
perceived partner responsiveness, is powerfully rewarding,2 and we are drawn 
to those who lead us to feel valued, protected, and understood. (See Table 7.1.)
Perceived partner responsiveness promotes intimacy (Maisel et al., 2008), 
encouraging self-disclosure, trust, and interdependency, and it is unquestion-
ably good for relationships. Two people feel closer and more content with 
each other when they tune in and start looking out for each other’s needs 
(Canevello & Crocker, 2010). Moreover, when we generously attend to oth-
ers, we tend to perceive that they are supportive and caring, too, and that 
also enhances our relationships (Debrot et al., 2012). And remarkably, being 
responsive to our partners is good for us as well as for them; students in fresh-
men dorms who strove to understand and support their roommates adjusted 
better to college life as time went by (and got along better with their room-
mates!) than did those who were less responsive (Canevello et al., 2013). 
There’s enormous value in the understanding, respect, and regard that’s 
offered by a responsive partner, and it’s clear that friends can supply us with 
potent interpersonal rewards.  
2 Indeed, perceived partner responsiveness is so influential, this is second time I’ve mentioned it. 
We encountered it as a key influence on self-disclosure back in chapter 5, on page 159.
TABLE 7.1 The Perceived Responsiveness Scale
Here are items with which Harry Reis measures the extent to which friends and lovers 
judge their partners to be responsive. To use the scale, identify a particular person and 
rate your agreement with all 12 items while you are thinking of him or her. As will be 
apparent, the higher the sum of your combined ratings, the more responsive you per-
ceive your partner to be.
Compared to most experiences I’ve had meeting somebody new, I get the feeling that 
this person:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
not at all 
true
somewhat 
true
very true
completely 
true
_____  1.  … sees the “real” me.
_____  2.  … ”gets the facts right” about me.
_____  3.  … esteems me, shortcomings and all.
_____  4.  … knows me well.
_____  5.  … values and respects the whole package that is the “real” me.
_____  6.  … understands me.
_____  7.  … really listens to me.
_____  8.  … expresses liking and encouragement for me.
_____  9.  … seems interested in what I am thinking and feeling.
_____ 10.  … values my abilities and opinions.
_____ 11.  … is on “the same wavelength” with me.
_____ 12.  … is responsive to my needs.
Source: Reis, Maniaci et al., 2011.

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 221
 The Rules of Friendship 
 Good friends can also be counted on to play by the rules. We don’t often 
explicate our expectations about what it means to be a friend, but most of 
us  nevertheless have  rules for relationships  that are shared cultural beliefs 
about what behaviors friends should (or should not) perform. These stan-
dards of conduct help relationships operate more smoothly. We learn the rules 
during childhood, and one of the things we learn is that when the rules are 
broken, disapproval and turmoil result. For instance, in a seminal study, Brit-
ish researchers generated a large set of possible friendship rules and asked 
adults in Britain, Italy, Hong Kong, and Japan which of the rules they would 
endorse (Argyle & Henderson, 1984). Several rules for conducting friendships 
Responsiveness in Action
One of the most successful relation-
ship self-help books of all time is 80 
years old and still going strong. Dale 
Carnegie published How to Win Friends 
and Influence People in 1936, long before 
relationship scientists began studying 
the interactive effects of responsiveness. 
Carnegie firmly believed that the road to 
financial and interpersonal success lay in 
behaving toward others in a manner that 
made them feel important and appreci-
ated. He suggested six straightforward 
ways to get others to like us, and the 
enduring popularity of his homespun 
advice helps demonstrate why respon-
siveness from a friend is so uplifting. 
Here are Carnegie’s rules (1936, p. 110):
 1. Become genuinely interested in 
other people.
 2. Smile.
 3. Remember that a man’s name is 
to him the sweetest and most 
important sound in any 
language.
 4. Be a good listener. Encourage 
others to talk about themselves.
 5. Talk in terms of the other man’s 
interest.
 6. Make the other person feel 
important—and do it sincerely.
All of these actions help communicate 
the attention and support that con-
stitute responsiveness, and modern 
research supports Carnegie’s advice. 
To favorably impress the people you 
meet at a speed-dating event, for 
instance, offer them genuine smiles 
(Miles, 2009), and then focus on them, 
being warm, interested, and enthu-
siastic (Eastwick et al., 2010). It also 
helps to be Latin American. Latinos 
generally endorse a cultural norm of 
simpático that values friendly courtesy 
and congeniality, and sure enough, 
when they are left alone with a 
stranger in Texas, Mexican Americans 
talk more, look more, smile more, and 
enjoy the interaction more than Amer-
ican whites or blacks do. The people 
who meet them enjoy the interactions 
more, too (Holloway et al., 2009). 
Carnegie was on to something. People 
like to receive warm, attentive interest 
and support from others, and being 
responsive is a good way to make—
and keep—friends.

222 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
appeared to be universal, and they’re listed in  Table 7.2 . As you can see, they 
involve trust, capitalization, and support as well as other desirable aspects 
of intimacy. 
In general, then, we expect good friends to be (Hall, 2012):
 • trustworthy and loyal, having our best interests at heart;
 • confidants with whom we can share our secrets;
 • enjoyable and fun companions;
 • similar to us in attitudes and interests; and
 • helpful, providing material support when we need it.
(It’s also nice when a friend is attractive and financially well-off, but those 
are lesser considerations.) Women, in particular, have high standards for their 
friends (Felmlee et al., 2012); they expect more loyalty, self-disclosure, enjoy-
ment, and similarity than men do (Hall, 2012). But all of us expect more from 
our friends than from less intimate companions, and the more closely we 
adhere to these rules, the closer and more satisfy-
ing our relationships are (Kline & Stafford, 2004). 
Romances are richer, too, involving more love, 
commitment, and sexual gratification, when the 
lovers value their friendship (VanderDrift  et al., 
2013b). So, people profit when they follow the 
rules of friendship, and in most cases when friend-
ships fail, somebody hasn’t been following the 
rules (Argyle & Henderson, 1984).
 FRIENDSHIP ACROSS THE LIFE CYCLE 
 We change as we grow and age, and our friendships do, too. For one thing, our 
attachment styles continue to be shaped by the experiences we encounter, and 
for most of us that’s a good thing: We’re likely to experience less anxiety about 
A Point to Ponder
How rich a friendship 
do you have with your 
romantic partner? How 
would your romance be 
different if you were even 
better friends?
TABLE 7.2. The Rules of Friendship
Don’t nag
Keep confidences
Show emotional support
Volunteer help in time of need
Trust and confide in your partner
Share news of success with your partner
Don’t be jealous of each other’s relationships
Stand up for your partner in his/her absence
Seek to repay debts and favors and compliments
Strive to make him/her happy when you’re together
Source: Argyle & Henderson, 1984.

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 223
abandonment later in life than we do now (Chopik et al., 2013). And here’s 
more good news: You’re likely to be (even) more satisfied with your friend-
ships in your elder years than you are now (Luong et al., 2011). Why is that? 
Let’s survey friendships over the life span to find out. 
 Childhood 
Preschool children have rudimentary friendships in which they have favorite 
playmates. Thereafter, the enormous changes that children encounter as they 
grow and mature are mirrored in their friendships, which gradually grow 
richer and more complex (Howes, 2011). One important change involves chil-
dren’s cognitive development; as they age, children are increasingly able to 
appreciate others’ perspectives and to understand their wishes and points of 
view.  And accompanying this increasing cognitive sophistication are changes 
in the interpersonal needs that are preeminent as children age. According to 
Duane Buhrmester and Wyndol Furman (1986), these key needs are  acceptance 
in the early elementary years,  intimacy in preadolescence, and  sexuality during 
the teen years. The new needs are added on top of the old ones at each stage, 
so that older children have more needs to satisfy than younger children do. 
And the successful resolution of each stage requires the development of spe-
cific competencies that affect the way a child handles later stages; if those skills 
aren’t acquired, problems occur. 
 For instance, when children enter elementary school, the companionship 
of, and  acceptance by, other children is important; those who are not suffi-
ciently accepted by their peers feel excluded. Later, in preadolescence, children 
develop a need for  intimacy that typically focuses on a friend who is similar to 
them in age and interests. This is when full-blown friendships characterized by 
extensive self-disclosure first emerge, and during this period, children develop 
the skills of perspective taking, empathy, and generosity that are the founda-
tion for close adult relationships. Children who were not previously accepted 
by others may overcome their sense of isolation, but if they cannot, they experi-
ence true loneliness for the first time. Thereafter,  sexuality erupts, and the typi-
cal adolescent develops an interest in the other sex. Most adolescents initially 
have difficulty satisfying their new emerging needs, but most manage to form 
sensitive, caring, and open sexual relationships later on. 
 Overall, then, theorists generally agree that our relationships change as we 
grow older. The rich, sophisticated ways in which adults conduct their friend-
ships are years in the making. And to some degree, success in childhood rela-
tionships paves the way for better adult outcomes. For instance, infants who 
are securely attached to their caregivers tend to be well liked when they start 
school; as a result, they form richer, more secure childhood friendships that 
leave them secure and comfortable with intimacy when they fall in love as 
young adults (Oriña et al., 2011). On the other hand, children who are rejected 
by their peers tend to encounter a variety of  difficulties—such as dropping 
out of school, criminal arrests, and psychological maladjustment—more often 
than those who are well-liked (Wong & Schonlau, 2013). Peer rejection doesn’t 

224 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
necessarily cause such problems, but it might: Interventions that teach social 
skills enhance children’s acceptance by their peers, and that reduces their risk 
of later maladjustment (Waas & Graczyk, 1998).  
 Adolescence 
 There are other ways in which friendships change during the teen years. First, 
teens spend less and less time with their families and more and more time with 
their peers. An event-sampling study in Chicago found that children in fifth 
grade spent 35 percent of their time with family members whereas high school 
seniors were with their families only 14 percent of the time (Larson et al., 1996). 
 A second change is that adolescents increasingly turn to their friends for the 
satisfaction of important attachment needs (Fraley & Davis, 1997). Attachment 
theorists identify four components of attachment (Hazan & Zeifman, 1994): 
(a)  proximity seeking, which involves approaching, staying near, or making con-
tact with an attachment figure; (b)  separation protest,  in which people resist being 
separated from a partner and are distressed by separation from him or her; 
(c)  safe haven, turning to an attachment figure as a source of comfort and support 
in times of stress; and (d)  secure base, using a partner as a foundation for explora-
tion of novel environments and other daring exploits. All of these components 
of attachment can be found in the relationships young children have with their 
parents, but, as they grow older, they gradually shift their primary attachments 
from their parents to their peers in a component-by-component fashion. 
 For instance, around the ages of 11 to 14, young adolescents often shift 
the location of their safe haven from their parents to their peers; if something 
upsets them, they’ll seek out their friends before they approach their parents. 
Indeed, about a third of older teens identify a peer (who is usually a romantic 
partner rather than a friend), not a parent, as their primary attachment figure 
(Rosenthal & Kobak, 2010). Peers gradually replace parents in people’s lives. 
 Young Adulthood 
 During their late teens and twenties, people enter young adulthood, a period in 
which a central task—according to Erik Erikson (1950), a historically prominent 
theorist—is the development of “intimacy versus isolation.” It’s at this age, Erikson 
believed, that we learn how to form enduring, committed intimate relationships. 
 You may be undertaking your quest for intimacy in a novel environment: 
a college some distance from home. Leaving home to go to school has probably 
influenced your friendships (Roberts & Dunbar, 2011), and you’re not alone if 
you haven’t seen much of your old high school friends lately. A year-long sur-
vey of a freshman class at the University of Denver found that the friendships 
the students had at home tended to erode and to be replaced by new relation-
ships on campus as the year went by (Shaver et al., 1985). This didn’t happen 
immediately, and the students’ satisfaction with their social networks was low-
est in the fall after they arrived at college. But by the end of that first year, 
most people were again content with their social networks. They had made 
new friends, but it had taken some time. 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 225
 What happens after college? In one impressive study, 113 young adults kept 
diaries of their social interactions on two separate occasions, once when they 
were still in college and again 6 years after they had graduated (Reis et al., 1993). 
Overall, the participants saw less of their friends each week once they were out 
of school; in particular, the amount of time spent with same-sex friends and 
groups of three or more people declined. The total amount of time spent with 
friends or lovers of the other sex increased, but the number of those  partners 
decreased, especially for men. Still, just as developmental theory suggests, the 
average intimacy levels of the participants’ interactions increased during their 
twenties. After college, then, people tend to interact with fewer friends, but they 
have deeper, more interdependent relationships with the friends they have.  
 Midlife 
 What happens when people settle down with a romantic partner? It’s very 
clear: When people gain romantic partners, they spend less time with their 
families and friends. A pattern of  dyadic withdrawal  occurs; as people see 
more and more of a lover, they see less and less of their friends (Fehr, 1999). 
One study found that people spent an average of 2 hours each day with good 
friends when they were casually dating someone, but they saw their friends for 
What’s a Best Friend?
People usually have a lot of friendly 
acquaintances, a number of casual 
friends, a few close friends, and just one 
or two best friends with whom they share 
especially rich relationships. What’s so 
special about a best friend? What distin-
guishes a best friend from all of the other 
people who are important to us?
The simple answer is that it’s all 
a matter of degree (Fehr, 1996). Best 
friendships are more intimate than 
common friendships are, and all of the 
components of intimacy are involved. 
Consider knowledge: Best friends are 
usually our closest confi dants. They 
often know secrets about us that are 
known to no one else, including our 
spouses! Consider trust: We typically 
expect a very high level of support from 
our best friends, so that a best friend is 
“someone who is there for you, no mat-
ter what” (Yager, 1997, p. 18). Consider 
interdependence: When our best friends 
are nearby and available to us, we try to 
see more of them than our other friends; 
we interact with them more often and in 
a wider range of situations than we do 
with lesser buddies. And fi nally, con-
sider commitment: We ordinarily expect 
that a best friend will be a friend forever. 
Because such a person “is the friend, 
before all others,” best friendships rou-
tinely withstand “the tests of time and 
confl ict, major changes such as moving, 
or status changes, such as marrying or 
having a child” (Yager, 1997, p. 18).
In general, then, best friendships 
are not distinctly different relation-
ships of some unique type (Fehr, 1996). 
Instead, they are simply more intimate 
than 
other 
friendships—involving 
richer, more rewarding, and more per-
sonal connections to others—and that’s 
why they are so prized.

226 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
less than 30 minutes per day once they became engaged (Milardo et al., 1983). 
Romantic couples do tend to have more contact with friends they have in com-
mon, but this doesn’t offset declines in the total number of friends they have 
and the amount of time they spend with them (Wrzus et al., 2013). 
 The erosion of people’s friendships doesn’t stop once they get married. 
Friendships with members of the other sex are especially affected; people tend 
to see much less of friends who could be construed by a spouse to be potential 
romantic rivals (Werking, 1997). Still, even though they see less of their friends, 
spouses often have larger social networks than they did when they were single 
because they see a lot more of their in-laws (Milardo et al., 1983). (Make no mis-
take about this, and beware if you don’t like your lover’s family: You will see a 
lot more of them if you marry!) 
 Thus, people’s social lives don’t wither away completely when they com-
mit themselves to a spouse and kids, but the focus of their socializing does shift 
from their personal friends to family and friends they share with their spouses. 
In fact, it appears to be hard on a marriage when a husband and wife have 
no friends in common. As you can see in  Figure 7.1 , couples have more mar-
ital problems when none of their personal friendships involve their spouses 
(Amato et al., 2007). Having some friends of one’s own does no harm, but hav-
ing only exclusive friendships seems to be risky. 
FIGURE 7.1. Friendship networks and marital adjustment.
Spouses encounter more frustrations and difficulties when they have no friends 
in common.
−0.1
−0.1
−0.2
0
Spouses' Friendship Networks
Some friends shared
No friends shared
All friends shared
Mean Number of Marital Problems
(Standardized Scores)
0.1
0.2
0.3
Source: Data from Amato et al., 2007.

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 227
 Old Age 
 Ultimately, elderly people have smaller social networks and fewer friends than 
younger people do (Wrzus et al., 2013). They’re not unsociable, they’re just 
more selective: They have just as many close friends as they did when they 
were younger, but they spend less time with casual friends and other periph-
eral social partners (Fung et al., 2001). 
 A  socioemotional selectivity theory argues that this change occurs because 
seniors have different interpersonal goals than younger people do (Löckenhoff 
& Carstensen, 2004). With a long life stretching out before them, young adults 
are presumed to pursue future-oriented goals aimed at acquiring information 
that will be useful later in life. (That’s presumably what you’re doing now if 
you’re in college.) With such ends in mind, young people seek relatively large 
social networks that include diverse social partners (and, often, hundreds of 
Facebook “friends”!). However, when people age and their futures seem more 
and more finite, they become oriented more toward the present than toward the 
future, and they emphasize emotional fulfillment to a greater extent (Fung & 
Carstensen, 2004). The idea is that as their time perspective shrinks, seniors aim 
for quality not quantity; they focus on a select group of satisfying friendships 
that are relatively free of conflict (Fingerman & Charles, 2010), work harder to 
maintain and enrich them (Lang et al., 2013), and let more casual partnerships 
lapse. Indeed, the theory predicts that anyone who considers his or her future 
to be limited will also choose to spend more time with a small number of close 
friends instead of a wider variety of more casual buddies—and that’s exactly 
what happens in younger adults whose time orientation is changed by con-
tracting the human immunodeficiency virus that causes AIDS (Carstensen et 
al., 1999). In general, socioemotional selectivity theory seems to be a reasonable 
explanation for age-related changes in sociability. 
 Finally, let’s note that—reflecting the vital role of intimacy in our lives—
elderly people who have good friends live longer, healthier lives than do those 
who are less connected to others (Sabin, 1993). Friendships are invaluable for 
as long as we live. 
 DIFFERENCES IN FRIENDSHIP 
 Friendships don’t just differ across the life cycle; they also differ from person to 
person and from partner to partner. In this section of the chapter, we’ll consider 
how the nature of friendships is intertwined with gender and other individual 
differences.  
 Gender Differences in Same-Sex Friendships 
 Consider these descriptions of two same-sex friendships: 
 Wilma and Betty are very close friends. They rely on each other for support 
and counsel, and if they experience any problems in their romantic relation-
ships, they immediately call each other, asking for, and getting, all the advice 

228 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
and consolation they need. Wilma and Betty feel that they know everything 
about each other. 
 Fred and Barney are very close friends. Often, they stay up half the night 
playing cards or tinkering with Fred’s beloved 1966 Chevy, which is constantly 
breaking down. They go everywhere together—to the bars, to ball games, and 
to work out. Barney and Fred feel they are the best of friends. 
 Do these two descriptions sound familiar? They might. A good deal 
of research shows that women’s friendships are usually characterized by 
 emotional sharing  and self-disclosure, whereas men’s friendships revolve 
around  shared activities,  companionship, and fun (Fehr, 1996; Marshall, 2010). 
It’s an oversimplification, but a pithy phrase coined years ago by Wright (1982) 
is still serviceable today: Women’s friendships are “ face-to-face, ” whereas men’s 
are “ side-by-side .” 3
  This difference emerges from several specific patterns in same-sex friend-
ships (Fehr, 1996):
 • women spend more time talking to friends on the phone; 
 • men and women talk about different topics: Women are more likely to talk 
about relationships and personal issues, whereas men are more likely to 
talk about impersonal interests such as sports; 
 • women self-disclose more than men do; 
 • women provide their friends more emotional support than men do; and 
   • women express more feelings of affection in their friendships than men do.    
 3  This clever statement is oversimplified because it implies that women just talk and men just play, 
and of course that isn’t true. Women share enjoyable activities with their friends about as often as 
men do (Fehr, 1996). However, men are more reluctant than women to share their feelings and fears 
with their friends, so emotional sharing does distinguish women’s friendships from those of men, 
on average (Marshall, 2010). 
Of course, there are fewer differences in guys’ and girls’ friendships than are shown 
here. Nevertheless, women’s friendships do tend to be more intimate than men’s. 
That’s important, as we’ll see on page 240.
ZITS © 2006 Zits Partnership, Dist. by King Features.

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 229
Can Pets Be Our Friends?
We’ve all heard that “a dog is a man’s 
best friend.” Really? Can a pet be a 
friend?
People certainly behave as if that’s 
the case: The presence of a beloved pet 
can help someone manage stressful situ-
ations even better than a human friend 
can. Pets generally improve the auto-
nomic and cardiovascular health of their 
owners (Julius et al., 2013), and in a study 
that compared pets to people (Allen et al., 
2002), participants were asked to work 
a mental math problem for 5 minutes––
rapidly counting backward by threes 
from 7,654––when they were (a) alone, (b) 
with their spouses, or (c) with their pets 
but no one else. The presence of a pet was 
soothing; the diffi cult task caused only 
slight arousal when people were with 
their pets, but their heart rates and blood 
pressures went up substantially when 
they were alone, and their cardiovascu-
lar readings soared when their spouses 
were present. A human audience, even 
a loving partner, made the potentially 
embarrassing task more stressful, but a 
companion animal made it less taxing.
These results are intriguing, but 
they could be due to idiosyncrasies in 
the people who choose to have pets. So, 
in another test of this effect (Allen et al., 
2001), businessmen who lived alone 
were randomly assigned either to adopt 
pets from an animal shelter or to con-
tinue to live alone. When they were then 
put under stress, the new pet owners 
displayed increases in blood pressure 
that were only half as large as those that 
occurred among those without pets. 
Moreover, the fewer friends the men had, 
the greater the benefi ts of owning a pet.
Now, 
let’s 
not 
overstate 
this 
“friend” business. Animals can soothe 
us even when they are strangers to us; 
people who were excluded by others in 
a lab procedure found the experience 
less painful when the experimenter’s dog 
was in the room than when it was not 
(Aydin et al., 2012). And pet ownership 
isn’t benefi cial for some people: There 
appear to be differences from person to 
person in attachment to pets that mir-
ror the anxiety and avoidance seen in 
human relationships (Zilcha-Mano et 
al., 2011). And of course, a pet cannot 
supply the same respect, responsive-
ness, or trust that human friends can.
Still, people often imagine that 
their pets have human traits and quali-
ties (Epley et al., 2008), and they can feel 
that their relationships with their pets 
are just as close as their partnerships 
with other humans (Kurdek, 2008b). 
When they’re distressed, pet owners 
are even more likely to turn to their pets 
for solace than they are to seek out their 
(human) friends (Kurdek, 2009). And if 
they had to choose one or the other, one 
of every seven pet owners would dis-
card their spouses rather than lose their 
pets (Italie, 2011)! So, given the pleasure 
and genuine support that pets provide, 
sure, as long as we use the term loosely, 
pets can be our friends.
 Add all this up, and women’s same-sex friendships tend to be closer and 
more intimate than men’s are. The net result is that women typically have part-
ners outside their romantic relationships to whom they can turn for sensitive, 
sympathetic understanding and support, but men often do not. For instance, 
ponder this provocative question (Rubin, 1986, p. 170): “Who would you turn 
to if you came home one night and your wife [or husband or lover] announced 
she [or he] was leaving you?” When research participants actually considered 

230 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
Can Men and Women Be Close Friends?
Of course. They often are. Most peo-
ple have had a close friendship with a 
member of the other sex, and such rela-
tionships are commonplace among col-
lege students. However, once they leave 
college, most people no longer maintain 
intimate cross-sex friendships (Mar-
shall, 2010). Why? What’s going on?
The fi rst thing to note is that men 
and women become friends for the same 
reasons they grow close to their same-
sex friends; the same responsiveness, 
trust, and social support are involved 
(Fuhrman et al., 2009). And because 
they are dealing with women instead 
of other men, men are often more open 
and expressive with their female friends 
than with their male companions (Fehr, 
1996). Indeed, men who have higher 
levels of exp ressivity and women who 
have higher levels of instrumentality 
are more likely than their peers to have 
close friendships with the other sex 
(Lenton & Webber, 2006). As always, 
perceived similarity attracts.
However, cross-sex friendships face 
a hurdle that same-sex partnerships do 
not ordinarily encounter: determining 
this question, nearly every woman readily named a same-sex friend, but only a 
few men did (Rubin, 1986). (In fact, most men could not come up with anyone to 
whom they could turn for solace if their lovers left them.) 
 Why are men’s same-sex friendships less intimate than women’s? Are men 
less capable of forming close friendships with each other, or are they just less 
willing? Usually, they are less willing; men seem to be fully capable of form-
ing intimate friendships with other men when the circumstances support such 
closeness—but they generally choose not to do so because such intimacy is less 
socially acceptable among men than among women (Reis, 1998). And why is 
that?  Cultural norms and gender roles appear to be the main culprits (Bank & 
Hansford, 2000). A traditional upbringing encourages men to be instrumen-
tal, but not expressive, 4 and (as we found in chapter 5), a person’s expres-
sivity predicts how self-disclosing he or she will be. Androgynous men tend 
to have closer friendships than traditional, sex-typed men do, but more men 
are sex-typed than androgynous. Also, in keeping with typical gender roles, 
we put pressure on men to display more  emotional constraint than we put on 
women. Cultural norms lead men to be more reluctant than women to express 
their worries and emotions to others, and gender differences in the intimacy of 
friendship disappear in societies (such as the Middle East) where expressive 
male friendships are encouraged (Reis, 1998).
 Thus, the lower intimacy of men’s friendships usually isn’t due to an inabil-
ity to share meaningful, close attachments to other men. Instead, it’s a choice 
that is supported by cultural pressures. Many men would probably have closer 
same-sex friendships if Western cultures did not discourage psychological inti-
macy with other men.  
 4  Would you like a quick reminder about the nature of instrumentality and expressivity? Look back 
at page 25 in chapter 1. 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 231
 Individual Differences in Friendship 
Another personal characteristic that influences our social networks is sex-
ual orientation. In a convenience sample5 of 1,415 people from across the United 
States, most heterosexual men and women did not have a close friend who 
5 Chapter 2: the gift that keeps on giving. See p. 47. 
whether the relationship is a friendship 
or a romance. Friendships are typically 
nonexclusive, nonsexual, equal partner-
ships, and people may fi nd themselves 
in unfamiliar territory as they try to 
negotiate an intimate friendship with 
someone of the other sex. A big question 
is whether the partners—who, after all, 
are very close—will have sex. Men are 
more likely than women to think that 
sex would be a fi ne idea (Lehmiller et 
al., 2011), and they typically think their 
female friends are more interested in 
having sex than they really are ( Koenig 
et al., 2007). In turn, women usually 
underestimate how much their male 
friends would like to sleep with them, 
so some misunderstanding often occurs: 
“Most women do not  reciprocate their 
male friend’s sexual yearnings, despite 
the fact that men sometimes delude 
themselves that their female friends do” 
(Buss, 2003, p. 262). As a result, “sexual 
tension” is often mentioned as the thing 
people dislike most about their cross-
sex friendships (Marshall, 2010).
Most cross-sex friendships never 
become sexual (Halatsis & Christakis, 
2009). But when they do, they take a 
variety of forms (Mongeau et al., 2013). 
Some partners are genuinely close 
friends who trust and respect each other 
and who share a variety of activities in 
addition to the sex—and who are thus 
true “friends with benefi ts,” or FWBs 
(Lehmiller et al., 2014)—whereas oth-
ers get together solely to have sex and 
so are really just engaging in a series 
of casual “booty-calls” (Jonason et al., 
2011). Moreover, the partners may be 
on their way from being just friends to 
conducting a romance or, conversely, 
transitioning out of a romance that has 
failed. Either trajectory can be complex, 
but there are differences between FWB 
relationships and romances, so the part-
ners may know where they stand. More 
commitment is involved in romances 
(VanderDrift et al., 2012); FWB partners 
are less likely to be monogamous, hav-
ing sex with a wider variety of other 
people, and although more of the time 
they spend together is devoted to sex, 
they tend to be less satisfi ed than roman-
tic lovers are with both the sex they 
have and their relationship ( Lehmiller 
et al., 2014).
Notably, most FWBs continue their 
friendship when the sex ends, espe-
cially if they were genuine friends and 
weren’t just in it for the sex (Owen et 
al., 2013). But even when they’re not 
sexual, cross-sex friendships can be 
tricky to maintain if the partners marry 
others. Spouses are often threatened by a 
partner’s close connection to a potential 
rival, and sometimes with good reason: 
When people are attracted to a current 
cross-sex friend, they tend to be less 
satisfi ed with their romantic relation-
ships (Bleske-Rechek et al., 2012). As 
a result, married people are less likely 
than singles to have close cross-sex 
friendships, and that’s a major reason 
that such relationships become less com-
mon after people fi nish their schooling.

232 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
was gay, lesbian, or bisexual, but most gays, lesbians, and bisexuals (or GLBs) 
did have friends who were straight (Galupo, 2009). Only about one in every 
six heterosexuals (knew that they) had GLB buddies, but about 80 percent of 
GLBs had close heterosexual friends. So, the friendship networks of straight 
people tend to be less diverse with regard to sexual orientation than those of 
GLBs. If heterosexuals are actually steering clear of GLBs, they may be mak-
ing a mistake: The friendships of GLBs with h eterosexuals are just as close 
and rewarding, on average, as their friendships with other GLBs (Ueno et al., 
2009), and the more contact heteros have with GLBs, the more they like them 
(Merino, 2013).
 Finally, some of us think of ourselves mostly as independent, autonomous 
agents, and the qualities that are foremost in our self-concepts are the traits that 
distinguish us from others. In contrast, others of us define ourselves to a greater 
extent in terms of our relationships to others; our self-concepts emphasize 
the roles we fill and the qualities we display in our intimate partnerships. An 
intriguing individual difference, an interdependent self-construal, describes 
the extent to which we think of ourselves as interdependent, rather than inde-
pendent, beings. For those of us with a highly interdependent self-construal, 
relationships are central features in our self-concepts, and we “tend to think 
and behave so as to develop, enhance, and maintain harmonious and close 
relationships” with others (Cross & Morris, 2003, p. 513). An interdependent 
self-construal makes someone a desirable friend (Morry et al., 2013); compared 
to those who are more independent, interdependent people better understand 
others’ opinions and values, and they strive to behave in ways that benefit 
others as well as themselves. Motivations supporting both independence and 
interdependence tend to be present in everyone, but Western cultures such as 
that of the United States tend to celebrate and emphasize independence and 
autonomy. So, highly interdependent self-construals are more common in other 
parts of the world (Cross et al., 2011). 
 FRIENDSHIP DIFFICULTIES 
 Now, in this last section of the chapter, let’s examine some of the states and 
traits that interfere with rewarding friendships. We’ll focus on two problems, 
 shyness and  loneliness, that are common but painful. As we’ll see, shy or lonely 
people usually want to develop close friendships, but they routinely behave in 
ways that make it difficult to do so. 
 These days, we may need every friend we’ve got. More than one out of 
every eight adult Americans lives alone—a proportion that’s doubled since 
1960 (Wilson & Lamidi, 2013)—and intimate friendships are less common in 
the United States than they used to be, too (McPherson et al., 2006). The num-
ber of people who say they have no close confidant of any sort has soared from 
only 10 percent in 1985 to 25 percent. One of every four adult Americans has no 
one to whom to turn for intimate counsel and support. Another 19 percent say 
they have only one confidant (who is often a spouse or a sibling), and, overall, 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 233
the average number of intimate partners people have, including both close 
friends and lovers, has plummeted from three (in 1985) to two. Many of us 
have hundreds of “friends” on Facebook, but only rarely are they companions 
who offer the rich rewards of real intimacy. And once they leave school, only 
slightly more than half of all Americans (57 percent) have a close confidant to 
whom they are not related. Many Americans have none. And shyness and lone-
liness make things even worse. 
 Shyness 
 Have you ever felt anxious and inhibited around other people, worrying about 
what they thought of you and feeling awkward in your conversations with 
them? Most of us have. Over 80 percent of us have experienced  shyness, the 
syndrome that combines social reticence and inhibited behavior with nervous 
discomfort in social settings (Miller, 2009). Take a look at Table 7.3; when people 
are shy, they fret about social disapproval and unhappily anticipate unfavorable 
TABLE 7.3. The Shyness Scale
How shy are you? Rate how well each of the following statements describes you, using 
this scale:
 
0 5 Extremely uncharacteristic of me
 
1 5 Slightly characteristic of me
 
2 5 Moderately characteristic of me
 
3 5 Very characteristic of me
 
4 5 Extremely characteristic of me
___1. 
I am socially somewhat awkward.
___2. 
I don’t find it hard to talk to strangers.
___3. 
I feel tense when I’m with people I don’t know well.
___4. 
When conversing, I worry about saying something dumb.
___5. 
I feel nervous when speaking to someone in authority.
___6. 
I am often uncomfortable at parties and other social functions.
___7. 
I feel inhibited in social situations.
___8. 
I have trouble looking someone right in the eye.
___9. 
I am more shy with members of the opposite sex.
Source: Adapted from Cheek & Buss, 1981.
The first thing you have to do to calculate your score is to reverse your answer to 
number 2. If you gave yourself a 0 on that item, change it to a 4; a 1 becomes a 3, a 3 
becomes a 1, and a 4 should be changed to 0. (2 does not change.) Then add your rat-
ings. The average score for both men and women is about 14.5, with a standard devia-
tion of close to 6 points. Thus, if your score is 8 or lower, you’re less shy than most 
people, but if your score is 20 or higher, you’re more shy.

234 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
judgments from others. They feel self-conscious, uncomfortable, and inept 
(Arroyo & Harwood, 2011). As a result, they interact with others in an impov-
erished manner. If they don’t avoid an interaction altogether, they behave in an 
inhibited, guarded fashion; they look at others less, smile less, speak less often, 
and converse less responsively (Ickes, 2009). Compared to people who are not 
shy, they manage everyday conversation poorly. 
 Shyness may beset almost anyone now and then. It’s especially common 
when we’re in unfamiliar settings, meeting attractive, high-status strangers for 
the first time, and it’s less likely when we’re on familiar turf interacting with 
old friends (Leary & Kowalski, 1995). However, some people are  chronically 
shy, experiencing shyness frequently, and three characteristics distinguish them 
from people who are shy less often. First, people who are routinely shy  fear 
negative evaluation from others. The possibility that others might dislike them 
is rarely far from their minds, and the threat of derision or disdain from others 
is more frightening to them than it is to most people. They worry about social 
disapproval more than the rest of us do (Miller, 2009). Second, they tend to 
doubt themselves.  Poor self-regard usually accompanies chronic shyness, and 
shy people tend to have low self-esteem (Tackett et al., 2013). Finally, they feel 
less competent in their interactions with others, and sometimes with good rea-
son: Overall, they have lower levels of  social skill than do people who are not 
shy (Ickes, 2009). 
 This unwelcome combination of perceptions and behavior puts shy people 
between a rock and a hard place. They worry about what people are thinking 
of them and dread disapproval from others but don’t feel capable of making 
favorable impressions that would avoid such disapproval. As a result, they 
adopt a cautious, relatively withdrawn style of interaction that deflects inter-
est and enthusiasm from others (Oakman et al., 2003). For instance, if they find 
an attractive woman looking at them, shy men won’t look back, smile, and say 
hello; instead, they’ll look away and say nothing (Ickes, 2009). Rewarding con-
versations that would have ensued had the men been less shy sometimes do 
not occur at all. 
 The irony here is that by behaving in such a timid manner, people who 
are either temporarily or chronically shy often make the negative impressions 
on others that they were hoping to avoid in the first place. Instead of elicit-
ing sympathy, their aloof, unrewarding behavior often seems dull or disinter-
ested to others. Let’s think this through. Imagine that you’re at a dance, and 
some acquaintances are out on the floor moving to the music in a small mob. 
They call to you––”C’mon!”––urging you to join them, but because you’re not 
a confident dancer and you don’t want to look silly, you stay on the side-
lines. You’d like to join them, but your concern over the evaluations you might 
receive is too strong, so you hang back and watch. The problem with your reti-
cence, of course, is that instead of being sociable and encouraging everyone’s 
happy enthusiasm, you’re just standing there. Inside you may feel friendly, 
but you’re certainly not being playful, and to all appearances, you may seem 
awkward and a little dull. Indeed, it’s probably safe to say that you’re mak-
ing a poorer impression on others standing on the sidelines than you would 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 235
by joining the mob and dancing clumsily; nobody much cares how well you 
dance as long as you’re lively and lighthearted, but people do notice when 
you’re simply no fun. 
 In fact, shy behavior does not make a good impression on others, as 
F igure 7.2 shows. The timid, reserved, and hesitant behavior that characterizes 
shyness can seem aloof and unfriendly, and it is likely to be met by reactions 
from others that are less sociable and engaging 
than those that would follow from more gregari-
ous behavior (Bradshaw, 2006). Over time, shy 
people may be more likely to encounter neglect 
and rejection than understanding and empathy, 
and such outcomes may reinforce their shyness. 
Indeed, shy people make new friends much more 
slowly than do those who are not shy, and the 
friendships they do have tend to be less satisfying and supportive, too (Asen-
dorpf & Wilpers, 1998). As a result, they also tend to be lonelier than those who 
are not shy (Bradshaw, 2006). And these effects are consequential; on average, 
shy spouses are less happily married than are those who are less shy (Tackett 
et al., 2013). 
 Thus, shy behavior may make one’s shyness even worse, and obviously, 
it’s usually better to feel confident than shy in social life. Now, on occasion, 
shyness can be useful; when people really are confronted with novel situations 
and don’t know how to behave, brief bouts of shy caution may keep them from 
A Point to Ponder
Think back to the last time 
you timidly chose not to 
speak to someone you 
wanted to meet. How’d 
that work out for you?
Shy concern over
others’ evaluations
Negative impressions
on others; perceived to
be aloof, unsociable, and
unfriendly
Timid, reticent, and
awkward social behavior;
low eye contact,
low self-disclosure, and
low responsiveness
Others’ responses are
less engaging, less
self-disclosing, and 
more distant
FIGURE 7.2. Interpersonal effects of shyness.
Shy behavior makes negative impressions on others, often creating the unfavorable 
evaluations that shy people fear. Poorer interactions result, fueling the shy person’s 
fears, and the cycle continues.

236 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
doing something inappropriate (Leary, 2010). More often, however, shy people 
run scared from the threat of social disapproval that hasn’t occurred and never 
will, so their shyness is an unnecessary and counterproductive burden (Miller, 
2009). Formal programs that help people overcome chronic shyness often teach 
them a more positive frame of mind, helping them manage their anxiety about 
social evaluation. The programs also teach social skills, focusing on how to ini-
tiate conversations and how to be assertive. Both positive thinking and effec-
tive behavior are then rehearsed in role-playing assignments and other practice 
settings until the clients feel comfortable enough to try them on their own 
(Henderson & Zimbardo, 2010). 
 However, most shy people probably do not need formal training in interac-
tion skills because they do just fine when they relax and quit worrying about 
how they’re being judged. If you’re troubled by shyness now, you may make 
better impressions on others if you actually care  less about what they think. 
Evidence for this possibility comes from an intriguing study by Mark Leary 
(1986), who asked people to meet and greet a stranger in a noisy environment 
that was said to simulate a crowded singles bar. Leary created a multi-track 
tape of overlapping conversations, three different songs, radio static, and party 
noise (such as laughing and yelling)––it was definitely “noise”––and played it 
at a mildly obnoxious level as each couple conversed. Importantly, the tape was 
always played at the same volume, but some people were told that the noise 
was so loud that it would probably interfere with their conversation and make 
it hard for them to have a nice chat, whereas others were told that the noise 
was soft enough that it wouldn’t be a problem. Once these expectations were in 
place, people who were either shy or not shy were left alone with a stranger––a 
setting that is ordinarily threatening to shy people. Leary monitored the heart 
rates of his participants to track their anxiety and arousal, and  Table 7.4 shows 
what he found. When the noise was “soft” and there wasn’t a good excuse for 
their interactions to go poorly, shy people exhibited considerably more arousal 
TABLE 7.4. Doing Better with an Excuse for Failure
In Leary’s (1986) study, when noise that was said to be impossibly “loud” gave shy 
people an excuse for their interactions to go badly, they behaved no differently than 
did people who were not shy. In contrast, “soft” noise that was not supposed to inter-
fere with their conversations left them tense and anxious, even though the noise was 
played at exactly the same volume in both the “loud” and “soft” conditions.
Change in Heart Rate (in beats per minute)
 
Noise Volume
Participants’ Chronic Shyness 
“Soft” 
“Loud”
Low
5.3
4.7
High
15.8
4.5

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 237
than normal people did; their heart rates increased 3 times as much, which 
is typical among those who are shy (Shimizu et al., 2011). Even worse, they 
looked obviously shy and uncomfortable to people who later watched video-
tapes of their conversations. On the other hand, when they had an excuse—the 
impossibly “loud” noise—that lowered everyone’s expectations, they behaved 
as if they weren’t shy at all. They exhibited a normal, moderate increase in 
heart rate as their interactions began and gave observers no clue that they were 
usually shy. 
 Interestingly, if they couldn’t be blamed if their interactions went badly, 
the shy people in Leary’s (1986) study stayed relatively relaxed and conducted 
their conversations without difficulty. When the threat of personal failure was 
removed from an upcoming interaction, their shyness disappeared. Their 
shyness, then, was not the result of some persistent lack of skill; it depended 
on the context in which interaction occurred. Similarly, shy people are much 
more relaxed when they interact with others relatively anonymously and at 
their own pace online (Weidman et al., 2012). But add webcams to the mix, 
so shy people can see and be seen by their online partners, and their reticence 
returns; their self-disclosure drops and their shyness is again apparent (Brunet 
& Schmidt, 2007). 
 If their shyness comes and goes depending on whether others can see 
them, people (and this probably includes you if you feel shy) don’t need addi-
tional training in basic social skills. What they do need is greater calm and 
self- confidence (Arroyo & Harwood, 2011), and although that may not be easy 
to come by, shy people should consider the alternative: They’re not winning 
friends and influencing people by acting shy, so what do they have to lose by 
trusting themselves and expecting interactions to go well? If you’re shy, instead 
of thinking about yourself the next time you make a new acquaintance, simply 
try to find out as much as you can about the other person.6 Things will prob-
ably go better than you expect (Kashdan et al., 2011).  
 Loneliness 
 It’s one thing to feel anxious and timid in social settings and another to feel dis-
satisfied, deprived, and distressed because you have no intimate friends. The 
unpleasant boredom, sadness, and desperation of  loneliness occur when there 
is an unhappy discrepancy between the number and quality of partnerships 
we want and those we have (de Jong Gierveld et al., 2006). Loneliness isn’t the 
same as being alone; we can often feel very content in complete solitude, at 
least for a while (Leary et al., 2003). Instead, loneliness occurs when we want 
more, or more satisfying, connections with others than we presently have (Mel-
lor et al., 2008). Thus, if your relationships with others are all rather superficial, 
it’s possible to be lonely even if you’re surrounded by others and have lots of 
Facebook “friends.” 
6 The box on page 221 has some tips on how to proceed.

238 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
 Loneliness has different facets. Theorist Robert Weiss (1973) was the first to 
suggest that we can suffer either  social isolation,  being dissatisfied because we 
lack a social network of friends and acquaintances, or  emotional isolation, being 
lonely because we lack affection and emotional support from at least one intense 
relationship (Liu & Rook, 2013). Both elements of loneliness can be found on the 
UCLA Loneliness Scale, the measure most widely used in research on loneliness 
in adults (see Table 7.5). The scale has three themes (Hawkley et al., 2005). The 
first is  isolation  from others. Lonely people feel alone and less in contact with 
others than they want to be. They also feel less  close connection to others than 
they wish to have. They perceive their relationships with others to be less mean-
ingful and close than they wish they were. Finally, loneliness also results from 
experiencing too little  social connection  to people in general. Lonely people feel 
that they have insufficient ties to a network of friends and playmates, so they get 
too little pleasure and social support from their interactions with others. 
 People suffer when they are poorly connected to others. Back in chapter 1, 
I suggested that humans have a  need to belong, and loneliness is an example of 
what happens when the need goes unsatisfied. Compared to those with richer, 
more satisfying friendships, lonely people have chronically higher blood pres-
sure and higher levels of stress hormones in their blood. They sleep more poorly 
and their immune systems don’t work as well (Hawkley & Cacioppo, 2013). 
And over time, the wear and tear of loneliness may have very noticeable effects 
on general well-being; in both the United States (Luo et al., 2012) and the United 
Kingdom (Steptoe et al., 2013), lonely people over the age of 50 are more likely 
to die in the next 6 years than are those with richer connections to others. When 
it is prolonged, loneliness may have very deleterious effects on our health. 
 The good news, however, is that loneliness is often a temporary state. A 
period of separation from one’s social network can cause anyone distress, but it 
may be short lived, ending in reunion or the development of new friendships. 
The bad news is that some of the personal characteristics that are associated 
with loneliness are lasting traits that change only gradually—if at all—over 
time. For one thing, loneliness is heritable. That is, about half of the variation 
in loneliness from person to person (48 percent) is due to  genetic influences 
that are inherited at birth (Boomsma et al., 2005). Some of us are literally born 
being more likely than others to experience bouts of loneliness in life. Indeed, 
people’s  personalities predict how lonely they will turn out to be; higher levels 
of extraversion, agreeableness, and conscientiousness are all linked to lower 
 loneliness, whereas higher neuroticism increases the chances that we will be 
lonely (Cacioppo & Hawkley, 2009). 
 Loneliness also varies with other attributes that are somewhat 
more changeable.  Insecure attachment is one. Both dimensions of attachment—
anxiety about abandonment and avoidance of intimacy—are related to loneli-
ness, and the less anxious and less avoidant people are, the less lonely they 
tend to be (Givertz et al., 2013). Self-esteem is another. Consistent with the 
sociometer model of self-esteem, 7 people who don’t have satisfying, fulfilling 
 7 Need a reminder about the sociometer model? Take a look back at page 30. 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 239
TABLE 7.5. The UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3)
Instructions: The following statements describe how people sometimes feel. For each 
statement, please indicate how often you feel the way described by writing a number 
in the space provided. Here is an example:
How often do you feel happy?
If you never feel happy, you would respond “never”; if you always feel happy, you 
would respond “always.”
NEVER
RARELY
SOMETIMES
ALWAYS
1
2
3
4
 *1. How often do you feel that you are “in tune” with the people around you? ___
 2. How often do you feel that you lack companionship? ___
 3. How often do you feel that there is no one you can turn to? ___ 
 4. How often do you feel alone? ___ 
 *5. How often do you feel part of a group of friends? ___ 
 *6.  How often do you feel that you have a lot in common with the people around 
you? ___ 
 7. How often do you feel that you are no longer close to anyone? ___
 8.  How often do you feel that your interests and ideas are not shared by those 
around you? ___
 *9. How often do you feel outgoing and friendly? ___
 *10. How often do you feel close to people? ___
 11. How often do you feel left out? ___
 12.  How often do you feel that your relationships with others are not meaningful? ___
 13. How often do you feel that no one really knows you well? ___
 14. How often do you feel isolated from others? ___
 *15. How often do you feel you can find companionship when you want it? ___
 *16. How often do you feel that there are people who really understand you? ___
 17. How often do you feel shy? ___
 18. How often do you feel that people are around you but not with you? ___
 *19. How often do you feel that there are people you can talk to? ___
 *20. How often do you feel that there are people you can turn to? ___
Source: Russell, D.W. (1996).
Note that the word “lonely” does not appear on the scale. This is intentional. Men are less willing than women 
to admit that they’re lonely, so none of the items uses the term. To determine your score, reverse the rating you 
provided on the items with an asterisk. If your answer was 1, change it to a 4; a 2 becomes a 3; 3 becomes 2, and 
4 becomes 1. Then, add up your answers. Young men tend to be lonelier than women, and their average total 
is 42. The average for young women is 39 (Russell, 1996). The standard deviation of the scores for both sexes is 
9.5. So, you’re lonelier than most men if your score is 53 or higher, and you’re lonelier than most women if your 
score is 49 or higher. You’re less lonely than most men if your score is 31 or lower, and less lonely than most 
women if your score is 29 or lower. By the way, the average score for elderly people is 32. How do you compare 
to them?

240 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
connections to others tend not to like themselves very much: Lonely people 
tend to have  low self-esteem (Cacioppo & Hawkley, 2009).
 Moreover, men are lonelier than women are on average (Pinquart, 2003), 
but a lot depends on whether they are currently close to a female partner. 
Because women often have close friendships with other women, they usu-
ally enjoy plenty of intimacy in their lives even when they’re not dating 
anyone. Heterosexual men, on the other hand, share relatively superficial 
interactions with other men, and they tend to really open up only when 
they’re with a woman. Thus, most men seem to be dependent on women to 
avoid being lonely in a way that women are not dependent on them in return 
(as  Table 7.6 shows). 
 It’s actually more correct, however, to say that it’s  macho men who need 
women to keep from being lonely. One of the psychological ingredients that 
promotes meaningful, fulfilling interactions with others is  expressivity, 8 and the 
qualities that make someone warm, sensitive, and kind appear to make it less 
likely that he or she will be lonely (Wheeler et al., 1983). Women tend to be high 
in expressivity, and that’s a primary reason why they tend to be less lonely than 
men. But androgynous men are also high in  expressivity, and unlike their more 
traditional macho brothers, they are  not more lonely than women are. So, the 
global difference between men and women in loneliness appears to be a gen-
der difference rather than a sex difference. People who are low in expressivity 
(and that includes most men) tend toward loneliness when they are not paired 
with an expressive partner who brings intimacy into their lives, but many men 
(about a third of them) are just as expressive as most women (Bem, 1993), and 
they do not rely on women to keep from being lonely.
8 You’ve probably got this one down, but it’s on pages 24–25 if you want to review it.
TABLE 7.6.  Loneliness in Men and Women with and without Romantic 
Partners
The table lists loneliness scores of young adults who do have romantic partners along-
side the scores of those who do not. Women’s loneliness does not depend much on 
whether or not they currently have a romantic partner, but men’s loneliness does; het-
erosexual men are much more lonely, on average, when they do not have an intimate 
relationship with a female partner.
With a Romantic
 Partner
Without a Romantic 
Partner
Men
16.9
31.2
Women
20.2
24.3
Source: Data from Wheeler et al., 1983.

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 241
Are Your Facebook “Friends” Really Your Friends?
Well, sure, some of the people you’ve 
friended on Facebook are confidants 
and companions who are clearly good 
friends. But if you’re a typical young-
adult user, most of the people on your 
list of “Friends” are either mere acquain-
tances or strangers you’ve never met 
(Miller et al., 2014), and you’ve accepted 
friend requests from people you actu-
ally dislike because you were too timid 
to tell them to go away and leave you 
alone. Your list also contains hundreds 
of “friends,” but only a small fraction 
of them know you very well, have real 
affection for you, and will drive you to 
the airport when you’re leaving on a 
trip. So, of course, only a few of them 
meet our definition of friendship on 
page 214.
In fact, Facebook isn’t all that 
much involved in close friendships. 
Offl ine intimacy is associated with 
fewer back-and-forth conversations on 
Facebook (Ivcevic & Ambady, 2013); 
when two people are really close, they 
tend to conduct more of their interac-
tions through other channels. More-
over, people who spend a lot of time on 
Facebook tend to have more Facebook 
“friends” than the rest of us, but they 
don’t have more face-to-face friends, 
and they aren’t any closer to the offl ine 
friends they have (Pollet et al., 2011). 
Instead, what Facebook does well is to 
expand our casual social networks; we 
effi ciently stay in touch with a wider 
variety of people and hear about more 
parties and other social events (Aubrey 
& Rill, 2013). And active participation 
on Facebook can combat loneliness; 
when researchers asked lonely people 
to post more than they usually do, 
they felt more connected to others and 
were less lonely a week later (Deters & 
Mehl, 2013).
However, Facebook has disadvan-
tages, too. If you’re not entertaining 
to others, you may get a cool recep-
tion. For instance, people with low 
self-esteem think Facebook is a safe 
place to open up to the world, but their 
dreary, dispirited posts don’t get many 
“likes”—and that can reinforce their 
low self-esteem (Forest & Wood, 2012). 
The rest of us may fi nd that everybody 
else seems to be having a great deal of 
fun that we missed completely, and 
envy and disappointment often result 
(Krasnova et al., 2013). And constant 
comments and updates from minor 
players in one’s life can be so tedious 
and wearying that most Facebook users 
(61 percent) have at least once taken a 
break and ignored the site for several 
weeks or more (Rainie et al., 2013). For 
shorter periods, there are apps such as 
“Anti-Social” that block one’s access 
to Facebook for specifi ed lengths of 
time. (The app’s slogan: “With Anti-
Social, you’ll be amazed how much 
you get done when you turn off your 
friends.” Isn’t it remarkable that 
such programs exist?)
The bottom line is that sprawling 
social networks fi lled with acquain-
tances are no substitute for rich, intimate 
friendships offl ine. We can’t depend on 
our Facebook “friends” for much social 
support (Miller et al., 2014), and scroll-
ing through our Newsfeeds usually 
does not make us happy or improve our 
satisfaction with life—but time spent in 
the company of real friends does (Kross 
et al., 2013).

242 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
 Finally, when people are lonely, they’re not much fun. Their distress and 
desperation is evident in  negative attitudes toward others (Tsai & Reis, 2009). Iron-
ically, lonely people tend to mistrust and dislike the very people from whom 
they seek acceptance and regard. Perhaps as a result, their interactions are usu-
ally  drab and dull . Lonely people are slow to respond to things that are said 
to them, they don’t ask many questions, and they read rejection into innocent 
utterances from others, so they’re not much fun to chat with. In addition, they 
don’t self-disclose much; their conversation is usually shallow and inconse-
quential, so it’s hard for them to develop the intimacy they seek (Cacioppo & 
Hawkley, 2009). 
 Unfortunately, none of this escapes notice. The cynical outlook and dull, 
halfhearted manner of lonely people often elicit negative reactions from oth-
ers, who typically feel that they don’t know or like them very much (Tsai & 
Reis, 2009). Loneliness is thus similar to shyness in being potentially self- 
perpetuating, but it probably has more potent effects. Whereas shy behavior is 
essentially innocuous and aloof, lonely behavior is more corrosive and obnox-
ious. Shy people just keep their distance, but lonely people irritate and annoy 
us. On college campuses, lonely students have just as many interactions with 
their peers as anyone else, but they experience fewer positive outcomes such 
as support and affection and more negative outcomes such as conflict and dis-
trust (Hawkley et al., 2005). Thus, even when they are surrounded by other 
people, lonely people often behave in off-putting ways that can make their 
loneliness worse. 
 To add insult to injury, loneliness can also lead to depression (Vanhalst 
et al., 2012). Depression is a broader, more global state of dissatisfaction and 
distress than loneliness is—loneliness emerges from interpersonal troubles 
whereas depression stems from losses and setbacks of all sorts (Weeks et al., 
1980)—but each can fuel the other, and being depressed makes it even harder 
to behave in effective ways that are inviting to others (Baddeley et al., 2013). In 
addition to being gloomy and glum, depressed people engage in an obnoxious 
pattern of  excessive reassurance seeking:  They persistently probe for assurances 
that others like and accept them but doubt the sincerity of such declarations 
when they are received (Haeffel et al., 2007). Discontent and anxious, they con-
tinue to seek more convincing comfort and gradually wear out their partners’ 
patience (Lemay & Cannon, 2012). 
 None of this is pleasant. What are lonely people to do? If you’re lonely 
now, the last few pages may seem pretty pessimistic, but all is certainly 
not lost. Some people are more likely than others to encounter loneliness, 
but the situations we encounter are clearly influential, too (Larose et al., 
2002). Adverse  circumstances can cause anyone to become lonely—but 
 circumstances change, and it’s important to remain hopeful. Loneliness need 
not last. Indeed, when young adults were hypnotized and asked to think 
of experiences involving friendship and belongingness, they were less shy, 
more sociable, happier, and less lonely than they were when they focused 

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 243
on feelings of loneliness (Cacioppo et al., 2006). One’s outlook can make a 
tremendous difference. 
 In particular, college freshmen overcome loneliness more readily when 
they attribute their distress to unstable, short-lived influences rather than to 
lasting deficiencies in either themselves or others (Cutrona, 1982). Judging 
one’s loneliness to be the result of temporary or changeable difficulties offers 
the optimistic possibility that things will improve, and hopefulness is more 
likely to cure loneliness than dour pessimism is (Newall et al., 2009). Further-
more, because loneliness emerges from the discrepancy between the partner-
ships we want and those we’ve got, lonely people should be careful not to set 
their sights too high. For instance, students who move away from home to go 
to school are  usually lonely for a while; it comes with the (new, unfamiliar) ter-
ritory (Weeks et al., 1980). But over the ensuing year, those who simply seek to 
make new friends usually succeed and become less lonely, whereas those who 
hunt for a compelling romance are usually disappointed and remain dejected 
(Cutrona, 1982). 
 To overcome loneliness then, we should seek new friendships, not 
romances, and to do that we need to be  friendly. If you’re lonely now, watch 
out for any sour, self-defeating attitudes (Masi et al., 2011). Are you beginning 
to think that people are generally selfish, shallow, and uncaring? That nega-
tive outlook is almost certainly making you less charming, and it may become 
a self-fulfilling prophecy: What you expect may be what you get. Indeed, if 
you take a more positive approach—focusing on others’ good qualities, expect-
ing them to be pleasant, and patiently recognizing that friendship takes time—
you’ll probably enjoy more rewarding interactions with others.  
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 Don and Teddi became best friends when they went through graduate school 
together. They started their studies the same year and took the same classes, 
and they worked together on several projects outside of class. They learned that 
they were both conscientious and clever, and they came to respect and trust 
each other completely. Each learned the other’s most intimate secrets. They also 
had great fun together. They were both nonconformists, and they shared a wry 
and offbeat sense of humor; they would frequently laugh at jokes that nobody 
else seemed to get. The night that Teddi finished her doctoral dissertation, 
they got drunk and almost had sex, but they were interrupted and the moment 
passed. And soon thereafter, they graduated and took jobs in different parts of 
the country; he moved to California and she went to Minnesota. Now, 6 years 
later, they have both married, and they see each other only every year or so at 
professional meetings. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for Don and 
Teddi’s friendship? Why? 

244 
CHAPTER 7: Friendship
 CHAPTER SUMMARY  
 The Nature of Friendship 
 Our friendships are indispensable sources of pleasure and support. 
 Attributes of Friendships. Close friendships are genuinely intimate rela-
tionships that involve affection, communion, and companionship, but they are 
usually less passionate and committed than romances are. They involve:
 •  Respect. We usually admire our friends and hold them in high esteem. 
 •  Trust. We confidently expect benevolent treatment from our friends. 
 •  Capitalization. Friends usually respond eagerly and energetically to our 
happy outcomes, sharing our delight and reinforcing our pleasure. 
 •  Social support.  This comes in various forms, including affection, advice, and 
material assistance. Some people are better providers of social support than 
others are, and the best support fits our needs and preferences. Invisible 
support that goes unnoticed by the recipient is sometimes very beneficial, 
but perceived support is very important; it’s not what people do for us but 
what we  think they do for us that matters in the long run. 
 • Responsiveness. Friends provide attentive and supportive recognition of 
our needs and interests, and perceived partner responsiveness is powerfully 
rewarding. 
 The Rules of Friendship. Friendships also have rules, shared beliefs 
within a culture about how friends should (or should not) behave.  
 Friendship across the Life Cycle 
 Childhood. As children grow and mature, their friendships gradually 
grow richer and more complex. The sophisticated ways in which adults con-
duct their friendships are years in the making.  
 Adolescence. During the teen years, adolescents increasingly turn to their 
friends for the satisfaction of important attachment needs.  
 Young Adulthood. After college, people tend to interact with fewer 
friends, but they have deeper relationships with the friends they have.  
 Midlife.  Dyadic withdrawal occurs as people see more of a lover; they see 
less of their friends (but a lot more of their in-laws).  
 Old Age.  Socioemotional selectivity theory suggests that seniors aim for qual-
ity, not quantity, in their friendships.  
 Differences in Friendship 
 Gender Differences in Same-Sex Friendships. Women’s friendships are 
usually characterized by  emotional sharing and self-disclosure, whereas men’s 
friendships revolve around  shared activities, companionship, and fun.  

CHAPTER 7: Friendship 245
 Individual Differences in Friendship. Most gays and lesbians have het-
erosexual friends, but most heterosexuals do not (think that they) have gay 
or lesbian friends. Interdependent self-construals lead people to emphasize their 
relationships rather than their independence.  
 Friendship Difficulties 
 Shyness. Shy people fear social disapproval and behave timidly, often 
making the negative impressions that they were hoping to avoid. Many shy 
people interact comfortably with others when they are given an excuse for 
things to go poorly, so they need increased self-confi dence instead of better 
social skills. 
 Loneliness. Dissatisfaction and distress occur when we want more, 
or more satisfying, connections with others, and both  social isolation and 
 emotional isolation  may be involved. Loneliness results from genetic infl uences, 
insecure attachment, low self-esteem, and low expressivity. It is associated 
with negative attitudes and drab interactions that are unappealing to others. 
Hopeful attributions and reasonable expectations are helpful in overcoming 
loneliness.  

246
 C H A P T E R  8 
 Love  
 A B rief H istory of  L ove  ◆ T ypes of L ove 
 ◆ I ndividual and Cultural D ifferences in L ove 
 ◆ D oes L ove L ast?  ◆ F or Y our C onsideration  ◆ C hapter S ummary 
 Here’s an interesting question: If someone had all the other qualities you 
desired in a spouse, would you marry that person if you were not in love 
with him or her? Most of us reading this book would say no. At the end of 
the twentieth century, huge majorities of American men and women consid-
ered romantic love to be necessary for marriage (Simpson et al., 1986). Along 
with all the other characteristics people want in a spouse—such as warmth, 
good looks, and dependability—young adults in Western cultures insist on 
romance and passion as a condition for marriage. What makes this remarkable 
is that it’s such a new thing. Throughout history, the choice of a spouse has 
usually had little to do with romantic love (Ackerman, 1994); people married 
each other for political, economic, practical, and family reasons, but they did 
not marry because they were in love with each other. Even in North America, 
people began to consider love to be a requirement for marriage only a few 
decades ago. In 1967, 76 percent of women and 35 percent of men  would have 
married an otherwise perfect partner whom they did not love (Kephart, 1967). 
These days, most people would refuse such a marriage. 
 In a sense, then, we have embarked on a bold experiment. Never before 
have people considered love to be an essential reason to marry (Coontz, 2005). 
People experience romantic passion all over the world, but there are still many 
places where it has little to do with their choice of a spouse. North Ame-
ricans use romance as a reason to marry to an unprecedented degree (Hatfield 
&  Rapson, 2008). Is this a good idea? If there are various overlapping types 
of “love” and different types of lovers—and worse, if passion and romance 
decline over time—marriages based on love may often be prone to confusion 
and, perhaps, disappointment. 
 Consideration of these possibilities lies ahead. I’ll start with a brief history 
of love and then ponder different varieties of love and different types of lovers. 
Then, I’ll finish with a key question:   Does love last? (What do you think the 
answer is?) 

CHAPTER 8: Love 247
 A BRIEF HISTORY OF LOVE 
 Our modern belief that spouses should love one another is just one of many 
perspectives with which different cultures have viewed the experience of love 
(Hunt, 1959). Over the ages, attitudes toward love have varied on at least four 
dimensions:
 •  Cultural value. Is love a desirable or undesirable state? 
 •  Sexuality. Should love be sexual or nonsexual? 
 •  Sexual orientation. Should love involve heterosexual or same-sex partners? 
 •  Marital status. Should we love our spouses, or is love reserved for others? 
Different societies have drawn upon these dimensions to create some strikingly 
different patterns of what love is, or should be. 
 In ancient Greece, for instance, passionate attraction to another person was 
considered a form of madness that had nothing to do with marriage or family 
life. Instead, the Greeks admired platonic love, the nonsexual adoration of a 
beloved person that was epitomized by love between two men. 
 In ancient Egypt, people of royal blood often married their siblings, and in 
ancient Rome, “the purpose of marriage was to produce children, make favor-
able alliances, and establish a bloodline . . . it was hoped that husband and wife 
would be friends and get on amiably. Happiness was not part of the deal, nor 
was pleasure. Sex was for creating babies” (Ackerman, 1994, p. 37). 
 Heterosexual love took on more positive connotations in the concept of 
“courtly love” in the twelfth century. Courtly love required knights to seek love 
as a noble quest, diligently devoting themselves to a lady of high social standing. 
It was very idealistic, very elegant, and—at least in theory—nonsexual. It was 
also explicitly adulterous. In courtly love, the male partner was expected to be 
unmarried and the female partner married to someone else! In the Middle Ages, 
marriage continued to have nothing to do with romance; in contrast, it was a 
deadly serious matter of politics and property. Indeed, passionate, erotic desire 
for someone was thought to be “dangerous, a trapdoor leading to hell, which was 
not even to be condoned between husband and wife” (Ackerman, 1994, p. 46). 
 Over the next 500 years, people came to believe that passionate love could 
be desirable and ennobling but that it was usually doomed. Either the lovers 
would be prevented from being with each other (often because they were mar-
ried to other people), or death would overtake one or the other (or both) before 
their love could be fulfilled. It was not until the seventeenth and eighteenth 
centuries that Europeans, especially the English, began to believe that romantic 
passion could occasionally result in a happy ending. Still, the notion that one 
 ought to feel passion and romance for one’s husband or wife was not a widespread 
idea; indeed, in the late 1700s, defenders of “traditional marriage” were generally 
horrified by the emergence of love as a reason for marriage (Coontz, 2013). 
 Even now, the assumption that romantic love should be linked to mar-
riage is held only in some regions of the world (Merali, 2012). Nevertheless, you 
probably do think love and marriage go together. Why should your beliefs be 
different from those of most people throughout history? Why has the acceptance 

248 
CHAPTER 8: Love
of and e nthusiasm for marrying for love been most complete in North America 
(H atfield & Ra pson, 2008)? Probably because of America’s individualism and 
economic prosperity (which allow most young adults to live away from home 
and choose their own marital partners) and its lack of a caste system or ruling 
class. The notion that individuals (instead of families) should choose marriage 
partners because of emotional attachments (not economic concerns) makes more 
sense to Americans than it does to many other peoples of the world. In most 
regions of the world, the idea that a young adult should leave home, fall in love, 
decide to marry, and then bring the beloved home to meet the family seems com-
pletely absurd (Buunk et al., 2010). This is slowly changing, as technology and 
socioeconomic development spread around the world (Allendorf, 2013), but for 
now, the marital practices of North Americans strike most folks as odd. 
 In any case, let’s consider all the different views of love we just encountered:
 • Love is doomed.
 • Love is madness.
 • Love is a noble quest.
 • Love need not involve sex.
 • Love and marriage go toge ther.
 • Love can be happy and fulfilling.
 • Love has little to do with marriage.
 • The best love occurs among people of the same sex.
Some of these distinctions simply reflect ordinary cultural and historical varia-
tions (Eastwick, 2013). However, these different views may also reflect an 
important fact: There may be diverse forms of love. Let’s ponder that possibility. 
 TYPES OF LOVE 
 Advice columnist Ann Landers was once contacted by a woman who was 
perplexed because her consuming passion for her lover fizzled soon after 
they were married. Ms. Landers suggested that what the woman had called 
“the love affair of the century” was “not love at all. It was one set of glands 
calling to another” (Landers, 1982, p. 2). There was a big distinction, Ms. Landers 
asserted, between horny infatuation and real love, which was deeper and richer 
than mere passion. Love was based in tolerance, care, and communication, 
Landers argued; it was “friendship that has caught fire” (p. 12). 
 Does that phrase characterize your experiences with romantic love? Is 
there a difference between romantic love and infatuation? According to a lead-
ing theory of love experiences, the answer to both questions is probably “yes.”  
 The Triangular Theory of Love 
 Robert Sternberg (1987, 2006) proposed that three different building blocks 
combine to form different types of love. The first component of love is  intimacy, 
which includes the feelings of warmth, understanding, trust, support, and 

CHAPTER 8: Love 249
sharing that often characterize loving relationships. The second component is 
 passion, which is characterized by physical arousal and desire, excitement, and 
need. Passion often takes the form of sexual longing, but any strong emotional 
need that is satisfied by one’s partner fits this category. The final ingredient of 
love is  commitment,  which includes feelings of permanence, stability, and the 
decisions to devote oneself to a relationship and to work to maintain it. Com-
mitment is mainly cognitive in nature, whereas intimacy is emotional and pas-
sion is a motive, or drive. The “heat” in loving relationships is assumed to come 
from passion, and the warmth from intimacy; in contrast, commitment can be a 
cool-headed decision that is not emotional or temperamental at all. 
 In Sternberg’s theory, each of these three components is said to be one 
side of a triangle that describes the love two people share. Each component 
can vary in intensity from low to high, so triangles of various sizes and shapes 
are possible. In fact, countless numbers of shapes can occur, so to keep things 
simple, we’ll consider the relatively pure categories of love that result when 
one or more of the three ingredients is plentiful but the others are very low. As 
we proceed, you should remember that pure experiences that are this clearly 
defined may not be routine in real life.
 Nonlove. If intimacy, passion, and commitment are all absent, love does 
not exist. Instead, you have a casual, superficial, uncommitted relationship 
between people who are probably just acquaintances, not friends.  
 Liking. Liking occurs when intimacy is high but passion and commitment 
are very low. Liking occurs in friendships with real closeness and warmth 
that do not arouse passion or the expectation that you will spend the rest of 
your life with that person. If a friend  does arouse passion or is missed ter-
ribly when he or she is gone, the relationship has gone beyond liking and 
has become something else. 
 Infatuation. Strong passion in the absence of intimacy or commitment is 
infatuation, which is what people experience when they are aroused by 
others they barely know. Sternberg (1987) admits that he pined away for 
a girl in his 10th-grade biology class whom he never got up the courage to 
get to know. This, he now acknowledges, was nothing but passion. He was 
infatuated with her.  
 Empty love. Commitment without intimacy or passion is empty love. In 
Western cultures, this type of love may occur in burned-out relationships 
in which the warmth and passion have died, and the decision to stay is the 
only thing that remains. However, in other cultures in which marriages 
are arranged, empty love may be the first, rather than final, stage in the 
spouses’ lives together. 
None of the categories I’ve mentioned so far may seem much like love to you. 
That’s probably because each is missing some important ingredient that we 
associate with being in love—and that is precisely Sternberg’s point. Love is 
a multifaceted experience, and that becomes clear when we combine the three 
components of love to create more complex states. 

250 
CHAPTER 8: Love
 Romantic love. When high intimacy and passion occur together, people 
experience romantic love. Thus, one way to think about romantic love is 
as a combination of liking and infatuation. People often become committed 
to their romances, but Sternberg argues that commitment is not a defining 
characteristic of romantic love. A summer love affair can be very romantic, 
for instance, even when both lovers know that it is going to end when the 
summer is over. 
 Companionate love.  Intimacy and commitment combine to form love for a 
close companion, or companionate love. Here, closeness, communication, 
and sharing are coupled with substantial investment in the relationship as 
the partners work to maintain a deep, long-term friendship. This type of 
love is epitomized by a long, happy marriage in which the couple’s youth-
ful passion has gradually died down. 
 Fatuous love. Passion and commitment in the absence of intimacy create 
a foolish experience called fatuous love. (“Fatuous” means “stupid” and 
“lacking substance.”) This type of love can occur in whirlwind courtships 
in which two partners marry quickly on the basis of overwhelming passion 
but don’t know (or necessarily like) each other very well. In a sense, such 
lovers invest a lot in an infatuation—and that’s a risky business.  
 Consummate love. Finally, when intimacy, passion, and commitment are all 
present to a substantial degree, people experience “complete,” or consum-
mate, love. This is the type of love many people seek, but Sternberg (1987) 
suggests that it’s a lot like losing weight: easy to do for a while, but hard to 
maintain over time.  
 Love can last a lifetime. But what kind of love do you think this couple shares?  

CHAPTER 8: Love 251
 Thus, according to the triangular theory of love, diverse experiences can 
underlie the simple expression “I love you” (as you can see in  Table 8.1 ). 
Another complication that makes love tricky is that the three components can 
change over time, so that people may encounter various types of love in a given 
relationship (Ahmetoglu et al., 2010). Of the three, however, passion is assumed 
to be the most variable by far. It is also the least controllable, so that we may 
find our desire for others soaring and then evaporating rapidly in changes we 
cannot consciously control (Sternberg, 1987). 
 Is the theory right? Are these assertions accurate? Consider that, if the 
triangular theory’s characterization of romantic love is correct, one of its major 
ingredients is a high level of passion that simply may not last. There’s much 
to consider in wondering whether love lasts, however, so I’ll put that off for a 
while. For now, I’ll note that the three components of intimacy, passion, and 
commitment do all appear to be important aspects of loving relationships 
(Aron & Westbay, 1996); in particular, each of the three components makes a 
loving relationship more satisfying, and the most rewarding romances contain 
big servings of all three ingredients (Sternberg, 2006). 
 A Physiological Perspective
Studies of the physical foundations of love also suggest that passion and 
intimacy are distinct experiences. The regions of the brain that regulate our sex-
ual desire for others appear to be different from those that manage our feelings 
of attachment and commitment to our lovers (Diamond & Dickenson, 2012). In 
some state-of-the-art studies of love, researchers are using fMRI technology to 
examine the activity in people’s brains as they look at pictures of their lovers (as 
opposed to other people), and passion activates different areas of the brain than 
affection and commitment do, both in the United States (Acevedo & Aron, 2014) 
and in China (Xu et al., 2011). Thus, it really is possible to feel strong desire 
for those we do not love and to feel little passion for those to whom we are hap-
pily attached (Diamond, 2013a). (But you probably already knew that.) 
 Indeed, theorist Helen Fisher (2006) argues that it makes evolutionary 
sense for there to be three interrelated but distinct biological systems that 
control components of love experiences. First, there’s  lust, or the sex drive, 
 TABLE 8.1.  The Triangular Theory of Love: Types of Relationships 
Intimacy
Passion
Commitment
Nonlove
Low
Low
Low
Liking
High
Low
Low
Infatuation
Low
High
Low
Empty love
Low
Low
High
Romantic love
High
High
Low
Companionate love
High
Low
High
Fatuous love
Low
High
High
Consummate love
High
High
High
 Source: Based on Sternberg, 2006. 

252 
CHAPTER 8: Love
which is regulated by the sex hormones. Lust drives successful reproduction 
by providing us the motivation to mate with others. Then there’s  attraction, 
which promotes the pursuit of a particular preferred romantic partner. Attrac-
tion drives pair-bonding by fueling romantic love, which is regulated by the 
neurotransmitter dopamine in specific regions of the brain that control feel-
ings of reward (Acevedo & Aron, 2014). Increased levels of dopamine may 
be responsible for the excitement and exhilaration that occur when we fall 
in love, explaining “why lovers feel euphoric, rejuvenated, optimistic, and 
energized, happy to sit up talking all night or making love for hours on end” 
(Ackerman, 1994, p. 165). Indeed, when people have just fallen in love, a look 
at their lovers makes pain not hurt as much. Romantic love also activates the 
areas of the brain that are affected by pain-relieving drugs, and sure enough, 
when they see their sweethearts, young lovers can shrug off pain (produced 
by a computer-controlled heating pad attached to a hand) that would be quite 
troubling under other circumstances (Younger et al., 2010). Finally, there’s 
 attachment, a term used here to describe the feelings of comfort, security, and 
connection to a long-term mate that keep a couple together long enough to 
protect and sustain their very young children. Attachment drives compan-
ionate love, which is regulated by the neuropeptide oxytocin. (More on 
that later.) 
 Thus, we may be equipped with three different physiological systems that 
each evolved to facilitate some component of successful reproduction—and 
they support the triangular theory’s proposition that the related experiences of 
passion, intimacy, and commitment can be rather independent of each other, 
separately ranging from weak to strong at any given time. On the other hand, 
intimacy, passion, and commitment are clearly interrelated in many loving 
relationships (Whitley, 1993). For instance, if men become sexually aroused by 
inspecting porn, they report more love for their romantic partners than they do 
when they’re not turned on (Dermer & Pyszczynski, 1978).  
 As a result, as I warned you earlier, the clearly defined categories offered 
by the triangular theory may not seem so distinct in real life. People’s actual 
experiences of love are complex. For instance, a father’s love for his son is likely 
to resemble his love for his own father, but the two feelings are also likely to 
differ in meaningful ways that the triangular theory does not readily explain. 
Different types of love probably overlap in a messier, more confusing way than 
the theory implies (Fehr, 2013). 
 Nevertheless, the theory offers a very useful framework for addressing 
different types of love, and whether or not it is entirely correct, it identifies two 
types of love that may be especially likely to occur in most romantic relation-
ships over the long haul. Let’s examine each of them more closely.  
 Romantic, Passionate Love 
 Has anyone ever told you, “I love you, but I’m not  in love with you”? If so, it 
was probably bad news. As you probably knew, he or she was trying to say, “I 
like you, I care about you, I think you’re a marvelous person with wonderful 

CHAPTER 8: Love 253
q ualities and so forth, but I don’t find you sexually desirable” (Myers & 
Berscheid, 1997, p. 360). Just as the triangular theory of love proposes, sex-
ual attraction (or passion) appears to be one of the defining characteristics of 
 romantic love (Regan, 2008). So, it’s disappointing if a romantic partner implies, 
“I just want us to be friends.” 
 The fact that romantic love involves passion is important. Passion involves 
activation and arousal, and remarkably,  any form of strong arousal, good or 
bad, can influence our feelings of romantic love. 
 Arousal 
A classic analysis of romantic love by Elaine Hatfield and Ellen Berscheid 
proposed that passionate attraction is rooted in two factors: (1) physiological 
arousal such as a fast heart beat that is coupled with (2) the belief that another 
person is the cause of your arousal (Berscheid & Walster, 1974). According to this 
two-factor perspective, romantic love is produced, or at least intensified, when 
feelings of arousal are associated with the presence of another attractive person. 
 Now, imagine this: You’re in a park in North Vancouver, British  Columbia, 
starting across a long, narrow bridge made of wooden planks that are sus-
pended by wire, hanging hundreds of feet over a deep gorge. The bridge 
bounces and tilts and sways as you walk across it, and it has a low wire railing 
that comes up only to your waist. Far, far below is a rocky creek, and (because 
you’re just like all the rest of us) you can’t help but feel some nervous excite-
ment (or perhaps outright fear) as you make your way across. But, then, right in 
the middle of the precarious bridge, you encounter an attractive person of the 
other sex who asks you to answer a few questions. You’re shown a picture and 
asked to make up a story, and your interviewer thanks you warmly and invites 
you to call later if you have any questions. How attracted would you be to the 
person you met on the bridge? 
 This is just the question that was asked in a famous experiment by  Dutton 
and Aron (1974), who sent attractive women to interview unaccompanied 
young men (between 19 and 35 years of age) either in the middle of the spooky 
suspension bridge or on another bridge that was stable and just a few feet off 
the ground in another part of the park. The stories that the men wrote were 
scored for sexual imagery, and Dutton and Aron found that the men on the 
swaying suspension bridge were thinking sexier thoughts than other men. In 
addition, those men were more likely to call the assistant later at her home. They 
were more attracted to her, and the arousal—or fear—caused by the dangerous 
bridge had evidently fueled their interest in her. Other men who encountered 
the same woman in a less dramatic place found her less compelling. On the 
precarious bridge, fear had apparently fueled attraction. 
 Or had it? Could nervous excitement caused by a shaky bridge really be 
mistaken, at least in part, for romantic attraction to a stranger? Well, try this 
 procedure: You’re a young man who runs in place for either 2 minutes or 
15 seconds, so your pulse rate is high and you’re breathing hard, or you’re 
just a little more aroused than normal. Flushed with high or low arousal, you 
move to another room and inspect a video of a young woman whom you think 

254 
CHAPTER 8: Love
you’re about to meet. You and other men all see the same woman, but, through 
the wonders of makeup, she looks either quite becoming or rather unattract-
ive. What do you think of her? When real research participants reported their 
reactions, it was clear that high arousal intensified the men’s responses to the 
Is Romantic Love an Emotion?
I’ll confess up front: The issue is still in 
doubt, so I don’t have a definite answer to 
the question posed by the title of this box. 
Romantic love certainly involves fervent 
feelings and strong motives, but theorists 
in affective science typically reserve the 
term emotion for an organized response 
with particular characteristics. Many (but 
not all) researchers consider emotions to 
result from specific events that cause dis-
crete physiological reactions and that elicit 
distinct patterns of expressive behavior 
and goal-oriented responses (Keltner et 
al., 2014). Emotions exist, theorists argue, 
because they promote effective, adaptive 
responses to important, recurring tasks 
(Ekman & Cardaro, 2011). Thus, if it is 
unequivocally an emotion, romantic love 
should have a concrete, useful function, 
and it should occur in response to par-
ticular stimuli, cause distinctive physical 
changes, be visible to others, and engen-
der recognizable behavioral responses. 
(If you pause for a moment and consider 
these criteria, you may see why the issue 
is in doubt.)
In focusing our attention and ener-
gies on particular partners, romantic love 
promotes commitment that can increase 
our reproductive success (Gonzaga et 
al., 2008). It is also elicited by others who 
we think would make compelling mates. 
But it doesn’t activate specifi c, delim-
ited areas of the brain as many other 
emotions do; regions regulating reward 
switch on, but so do several other areas, 
so romantic love has more diffuse effects 
than other discrete emotions (Xu et al., 
2011). People who are in love display 
enthusiastic interest in their partners, 
with lots of nodding, smiling, and close 
interpersonal distances (Gonzaga et al., 
2006), but the extent to which these cues 
are defi nitive signals of love per se is 
arguable. And people fi nd it more dif-
fi cult to talk themselves into feeling in 
love than they do some other emotions. 
If you vividly envision the provoca-
tion that last made you angry, you can 
bring back some of your anger—but 
people have less success reigniting the 
preoccupied passion of romantic love on 
command (Aron, 2010). The existing evi-
dence leads some observers to think that 
romantic love is more a mood with par-
ticular motives than a discrete emotion 
(Reis & Aron, 2008).
And why should you care, exactly? 
Well, consider that emotions are rather 
brief events (Keltner et al., 2014). Every 
other potent emotion you’ve ever experi-
enced fl ared up quickly, burned brightly, 
and then faded away. Moods last longer, 
but they’re more diffuse events that have 
more variable effects on our behavior; 
if romantic love is a mood, it may have 
different effects on different people.
So, exactly what sort of affective 
experience romantic love is remains unde-
cided. But whatever it is, there’s another 
question that now looms large: Other 
emotions, moods, and motives don’t last 
forever, so does love last? Can our roman-
tic, passionate attraction to a particular 
partner continue indefi nitely? Keep this 
key question in the back of your mind as 
you continue reading, and we’ll return to 
it at the end of the chapter.

CHAPTER 8: Love 255
woman (White et al., 1981). The attractive version of the woman was always 
preferred to the unattractive version, of course, but as you can see in  Table 8.2 , 
the men liked the attractive model even more—and liked the unattractive 
model even less—when they were aroused than when they were calm. High 
arousal magnified the guys’ responses, so that men who encountered an attrac-
tive woman when their pulses were racing thought that she was  really hot. 
 Moreover, the effects of arousal on attraction do not depend on the type of 
arousal that is produced. In another procedure (White et al., 1981), men listened 
to one of three tapes:
 •  Negatively arousing. A description of the brutal mutilation and killing of a 
missionary while his family watched. 
 •  Positively arousing. Selections from Steve Martin’s comedy album,  A Wild 
and Crazy Guy.1 
 •  Neutral. A boring description of the circulatory system of a frog. 
Thereafter, as before, the men viewed a video of a lovely or plain woman and 
provided their impressions of her. Arousal again fueled attraction, and it didn’t 
matter what type of arousal it was. When the men had experienced either type 
of strong emotion—whether by laughing hard at the funny material or by being 
disgusted by the gory material—they were more attracted to the appealing 
woman and less attracted to the unappealing woman than they were when 
they had listened to the boring biology tape. 
 Taken together, these studies demonstrate that adrenaline fuels love. High 
arousal of various types, including simple exertion, and amusement, all seem 
to be able to enhance our feelings of romantic attraction to desirable potential 
partners.  Consider the implications: Have you ever had a screaming argument 
with a lover and then found that it was especially sweet to “kiss and make up” 
a few minutes later? Might your anger have fueled your subsequent passion? Is 
that what being “in love” is like? 
1 You’ve probably never heard this. You should.
The higher the scores, the more desirable the men judged the woman to be. The lovely 
woman was always judged to be more desirable than the unattractive woman, but a 
faster heart beat accentuated this effect: When their pulses were racing, men thought 
that an attractive woman was more compelling and an unattrac tive woman was even 
less desirable.
 TABLE 8.2.  Arousal and Attraction 
Attractiveness of the Woman
Arousal of the Men
High
Low
Low
26.1
15.1
High
32.4
9.4
Source: Data from White et al., 1981.

256 
CHAPTER 8: Love
 To some degree, it is. One useful measure of the passion component of 
romantic love is a Passionate Love Scale created by Elaine Hatfield and Susan 
Sprecher (1986). The short form of the scale is reprinted in  Table 8.3 ; as you 
can see, the scale assesses fascination and preoccupation with, high desire for, 
and strong emotions about the object of one’s love. Scores on the Passionate 
Love Scale increase as someone falls deeper and deeper into romantic love 
with someone else, only leveling off when the partners become engaged or 
start  living together. (Note that—as I mentioned earlier—American couples 
decide to marry or live together when their passion is at a peak.) The vision of 
romantic love that emerges from the Passionate Love Scale is one of need and 
 TABLE 8.3.  The Short Form of the Passionate Love Scale 
This questionnaire asks you to describe how you feel when you are passionately in 
love. Please think of the person whom you love most passionately right now. Keep this 
person in mind as you complete this questionnaire. 
Answer each item using this scale:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
Not at all 
true
Moderately 
true
Definitely 
true
 1. I would feel deep despair if ______ left me.
 2. Sometimes I feel I can’t control my thoughts; they are obsessively on ______.
 3. I feel happy when I am doing something to make ______ happy.
 4. I would rather be with ______ than anyone else.
 5. I’d get jealous if I thought ______ was falling in love with someone else.
 6. I yearn to know all about ______.
 7. I want ______ physically, emotionally, mentally.
 8. I have an endless appetite for affection from ______.
 9. For me, ______ is the perfect romantic partner.
 10. I sense my body responding when ______ touches me.
 11. ______ always seems to be on my mind.
 12. I want ______ to know me—my thoughts, my fears, and my hopes.
 13. I eagerly look for signs indicating ______’s desire for me.
 14. I possess a powerful attraction for ______.
 15. I get extremely depressed when things don’t go right in my relationship 
with ______.
 Source: Hatfield & Sprecher, 1986. 
Higher scores on the PLS indicate greater passionate love. Across all 15 items, the 
average rating per item—add up all your ratings and divide by 15—for both men and 
women is 7.15. If your average is 9 (the highest possible), you’re experiencing more 
passionate love than most people, and if your average is 5.25 or lower, you’re experi-
encing less.

CHAPTER 8: Love 257
desire—ecstasy when one is loved in return and agony when one is not—and 
these are clearly responses that burn brighter when one is aroused than when 
one is calm and relaxed. 
 So, one aspect of romantic love is the exhilaration and euphoria of high 
arousal, and various events that excite us may increase our feelings of love for 
our partners. Romance is more than just passion, however. It also involves our 
thoughts. 
 Thought 
The two-factor theory of passionate love emphasizes the role of our 
thoughts and beliefs in accounting for arousal. Our judgments are also linked 
to romance in other ways, with lovers thinking about each other in ways that 
differ from the ways they think about their friends. Some of these distinctions 
are apparent in the contents of a Love Scale and a Liking Scale created by Zick 
Rubin in 1973. Years before Hatfield and Sprecher created the Passionate Love 
Scale, Rubin created dozens of statements that reflected a wide range of inter-
personal attitudes and asked people to use them to describe both a lover and a 
friend. The handful of items that epitomized people’s romances ended up on a 
Love Scale that gives a partial indication of what lovers are thinking. 
 One theme in the items on the Love Scale is  intimacy, just as the triangular 
theory of love defines it. Romance is characterized by openness, communica-
tion, and trust (see item 1 in  Table 8.4 ). A second theme is needy  dependence (see 
item 2 in  Table 8.4 ). The dependence items describe ardent longing for one’s 
partner that has much in common with the passion we’ve discussed. A last 
theme on the Love Scale, however, describes feelings that are not mentioned 
by the triangular theory:  caring. Romantic lovers report concern for the welfare 
and well-being of their partners (see item 3). They want to take care of their 
partners and keep them happy. 
 Thus, like other efforts to characterize love (e.g., Fehr, 2013), the Love 
Scale portrays romantic love as a multifaceted experience that involves 
both giving (i.e., caring) and taking (i.e., dependence). If you’re in love with 
 TABLE 8.4.  Rubin’s (1973) Love and Liking Scales: Some Example Items 
Rubin’s Love Scale
 1. I feel that I can confide in my partner about virtually anything.
 2. If I could never be with my partner, I would be miserable.
 3. I would do almost anything for my partner.
Rubin’s Liking Scale
 1. My partner is one of the most likable people I know.
 2. My partner is the sort of person that I would like to be.
 3. I think that my partner is unusually well-adjusted.

258 
CHAPTER 8: Love
someone, it’s probably partly selfish—you love your partner because of how 
that person makes you feel—and partly generous; you genuinely care for your 
partner and will work to satisfy and protect him or her. (In fact, compassionate 
concern for those we love may define yet another type of love, as we’ll see on 
page 262.) In addition, these diverse sentiments are experienced with relative 
intensity and urgency: You’d do  anything for your partner and be  miserable 
without him or her. 
 Compare those thoughts and feelings to the sorts of things people say 
about their friends. As you can see in  Table 8.4 , the Liking Scale seems bland 
by comparison. People say they like their friends because their friends are nice, 
well-adjusted, likable people. But they love their lovers because they need them 
and would do anything the lover asks. There’s a fervor to the thoughts that 
characterize romantic love that is lacking when we just like someone. 
 The specific judgments people make of their partners are important, too. 
As we saw in chapter 4, people tend to hold rosy views of their relationship 
 partners, and their tendency to idealize and glorify their lovers is probably at 
a peak when they are most in love. In fact, the moment romance enters the 
picture, people start ignoring or reinterpreting undesirable information about 
potential partners. Imagine that you’re a male college student who is asked to 
play the role of a restaurant owner who is evaluating the work of a woman who 
is pitching you an advertising campaign (Goodwin et al., 2002). You watch a 
video of her presentation, which is either coherent and clever or clumsy and 
inept. Would you be able to tell the difference between the competent and 
incompetent work? Of course you would. But what if you knew that you’d 
be going out on a date with the woman on Friday? Would the possibility of 
a romance influence your judgment? You may not think so, but when men 
really participated in a procedure like this, a romantic orientation had a big 
effect, as  Figure 8.1 illustrates. The upcoming date obviously contaminated 
the men’s judgment, magically transforming a lousy performance into one of 
much higher quality. Any distinction between good and bad work disappeared 
entirely when the possibility of romance was in play. 
 As these results suggest, in a real way, “love is blind”: People underesti-
mate or ignore their lovers’ faults. They hold idealized images of their lovers 
that may differ in meaningful ways from the concrete realities they face. In fact, 
a major difference between love and friendship may be our imaginations: Our 
lovers are fascinating, mysterious, and appealing in ways our friends are not 
(Aron et al., 2008). 
 Romantic love also makes it easier to put tempting alternatives to our pres-
ent partners out of our minds. When we’re fascinated and preoccupied with 
a lover, we may have difficulty focusing and concentrating on anyone—or 
anything—else (van Steenbergen et al., 2014). Here’s another provocative pro-
cedure: Imagine yourself inspecting photos of attractive members of the other 
sex, picking the best-looking one of the bunch, and then writing essays on 
(a) why that person is attractive and (b) what a perfect first meeting with that 
person would be like. Clearly, the researchers have you pondering a com-
pelling alternative to your current romantic partner (Gonzaga et al., 2008). 

CHAPTER 8: Love 259
But the plot thickens; you’re now asked to put the fantasy alternative out of 
mind and to stop thinking about him or her while you write another essay 
about (a) your love for your partner, (b) your sexual desire for your partner, or 
(c) just your current stream of thought. Can you do it? You can if you’re men-
tally rehearsing your love for your partner. People were better able to distract 
themselves from the alternative—and they remembered less about the alterna-
tive’s looks—when they envisioned their love for their partners than in the other 
two conditions. Evidently, love keeps our attention on one preferred partner; 
rehearsing our romantic love for our partners even makes us less likely to notice 
other attractive people in the first place (Maner et al., 2008). 
 Finally, even our thoughts about ourselves can change when we fall in love. 
Arthur and Elaine Aron’s  self-expansion model suggests that love causes our 
self-concepts to expand and change as our partners bring us new experiences 
and new roles, and we gradually learn things about ourselves that we didn’t 
know before (Aron et al., 2013). Indeed, a study that tracked young adults for 
10 weeks while they fell in love found that their self-concepts become more 
diversified and their self-esteem went up, which were two reasons why falling 
in love was so delightful (Aron et al., 1995). 
 All of this is potent stuff. The arousal and cognition that characterize 
romantic, passionate love involve surging emotion, imagination and idealiza-
tion, and occasional obsession (Aron et al., 2008). And it is the presence of this 
complex, hectic state that leads most North Americans to consider marriage. 
Dispassionate
Competence Ratings
Manager’s Mindset
Romantic
Competent Target
Incompetent Target
3.0
5.8
5.3
5.2
3
0
4
5
7
6
 FIGURE 8.1.  Love is blind. 
When men expected to date a woman, they thought her lousy work was much better 
than it really was.  
 Source: Data from Goodwin et al., 2002. 

260 
CHAPTER 8: Love
However, romantic passion may not be the reason they stay married in the 
years that follow. Whether or not a relationship lasts may have more to do with 
companionate love (Berscheid, 2010). 
 Companionate Love 
 Because it does not depend on passion, companionate love is a more settled 
state than romantic love is. The triangular theory suggests that it is a combi-
nation of intimacy and commitment, but I can characterize it more fully as a 
“comfortable, affectionate, trusting love for a likable partner, based on a deep 
sense of friendship and involving companionship and the enjoyment of com-
mon activities, mutual interests, and shared laughter” (Grote & Frieze, 1994, 
p. 275). It takes the form of a rich, committed friendship with someone with 
whom our lives are intertwined. 
 Sounds pleasant, but isn’t it a bit bland compared to the ecstasies of roman-
tic passion? Perhaps so, but you may want to get used to it. When hundreds of 
couples who had been married at least 15 years were asked why their  marriages 
had lasted, they  didn’t say that they’d do anything for their spouses or be miser-
able without them, like romantic lovers do (Lauer & Lauer, 1985). Instead, for 
both men and women, the two most frequent reasons were (a) “My spouse is 
my best friend,” and (b) “I like my spouse as a person.” Long-lasting, satisfying 
marriages seem to include a lot of companionate love. 
 A useful measure of companionate love is the Friendship-Based Love 
Scale created by Nancy Grote and Irene Frieze (1994). As you can see in 
 Table 8.5 , the feelings described by the scale are very different than those that 
accompany passionate love; friendship and companionship are much more 
in evidence on the Friendship-Based Love Scale than they are on measures of 
romantic love. 
 Of course, deep friendships also occur often in the context of romantic 
love. In one study, 44 percent of the young adults in premarital relationships 
reported that their romantic partners were also their closest friends (Hendrick 
& Hendrick, 1993). However, when they are a part of romantic love, friend-
ships are combined (and sometimes confused) with sexual arousal and passion. 
The predominant importance of friendship in creating the experience is easier 
to detect in companionate love, when intimacy is paired with commitment, 
than in romantic love, when intimacy is paired with passion. 
A Physiological Foundation
 Companionate love also has a physiological foundation that differs from 
that of romantic love. The neuropeptide  oxytocin, which promotes relaxation 
and reduces stress, seems to be involved (Carter, 2014). O xytocin is released 
by mothers during childbirth and breastfeeding (and in fact, a synthetic form 
of oxytocin, pitocin, is used to induce labor), and the more oxytocin a young 
mother has in her blood, the more she’ll cuddle and coo, look, and smile at 
her baby (Feldman et al., 2007). Among adults, a lot of it is produced during 
orgasm; oxytocin may be one of the causes of the relaxed lethargy that couples 

CHAPTER 8: Love 261
often experience after lovemaking (Floyd, 2006). Moreover, people who have 
higher levels of oxytocin in their blood tend to be warmer and kinder when 
they discuss touchy topics with their spouses (Gouin et al., 2010), and research 
participants who snort a spray of oxytocin start behaving more pleasantly dur-
ing a disagreement with a lover (Ditzen et al., 2009). They also become more 
trusting toward strangers (Guastella & MacLeod, 2012). These patterns suggest 
that oxytocin promotes a soothing sense of well-being, and it may encourage 
enduring attachments to those who become associated with its presence in the 
bloodstream (Floyd, 2006). In short, the production of oxytocin may provide a 
biological basis for feelings of companionate love. 
 Still, even if dopamine is a key player in romantic love and oxytocin a cen-
tral ingredient in companionate love, both agents are always present in the 
body in some amount, so we rarely encounter pure experiences of romantic and 
companionate love in which one is present and the other is not. Companion-
ate lovers can and do experience passion, and romantic lovers can and do feel 
commitment. As we experience them, the distinctions between romantic and 
companionate love are much fuzzier than this discussion may have implied 
(Graham, 2011). Nevertheless, if we’re willing to tolerate some ambiguity, we 
can conclude that there appear to be at least two major types of love that fre-
quently occur in American romance: a love that’s full of passion that leads peo-
ple to pair off with each other, and a love that’s full of friendship that underlies 
 relationships that last. Over time, companionate love is typically stronger in 
TABLE 8.5. The Friendship-Based Love Scale
Think about your closest current relationship, and then rate your agreement or dis-
agreement with each of these questions on the following scale:
1
2
3
4
5
strongly 
disagree
strongly 
agree
 1. I feel our love is based on a deep and abiding friendship.
 2. I express my love for my partner through the enjoyment of common activities and 
mutual interests.
 3. My love for my partner involves solid, deep affection.
 4. An important factor in my love for my partner is that we laugh together.
 5. My partner is one of the most likable people I know.
 6. The companionship I share with my partner is an important part of my love for 
him or her.
Source: Adapted from Grote & Frieze, 1994.
The average total score for married men is 25.2, and the average total for married women 
is 26.4. Scores ranging between 21 and 30 are typical for men, and scores between 22 
and 30 are routine for women. Scores on the scale are more highly correlated with rela-
tionship satis faction and duration than scores on the Passionate Love Scale are.

262 
CHAPTER 8: Love
enduring relationships than romantic, passionate love is (Ahmetoglu et al., 2010), 
and it is more highly correlated with the satisfaction people enjoy (Langeslag 
et al., 2013). I’ll return to this point at the end of the chapter. 
Compassionate Love
There’s a third type of love that occurs in successful romances (Berscheid, 2010) 
that is not delineated by the triangular theory of love because the theory does 
not assert that considerate caring for other people is a specific component of 
love. Perhaps it should. An altruistic care and concern for the well-being of 
one’s partner is a defining characteristic of compassionate love, a type of love 
that combines the trust and understanding of intimacy with compassion and 
caring that involves empathy, selflessness, and sacrifice on behalf of the beloved 
(Fehr & Sprecher, 2013). (Now before we go any further, let’s take a moment 
and examine the label “compassionate” love. It sounds like a combination of 
romantic, passionate love [which obviously involves passion] and companionate 
love [which includes the word “companion”], but it is different from either one. 
Compassion involves empathy for others and the benevolent wish to aid those 
who are need help. Don’t confuse companionate love with compassionate love.2)
People who feel compassionate love tend to share the pain or joy that their 
loved ones experience, and they would rather suffer themselves than to allow 
someone close to them to be hurt. They are empathic and generous, and their 
care and concern for their loved ones are evident in a Compassionate Love 
Scale created by Susan Sprecher and Beverley Fehr (2005). (See Table 8.6.) As 
you might expect, compassionate lovers provide their partners more support—
and take more pleasure in doing so—than do those who are less compassionate 
(Sprecher et al., 2007).
The thoughtful, benevolent, and generous behaviors that compassionate 
lovers offer their partners are good for their relationships. Each night for two 
weeks, Harry Reis and his colleagues (2014) asked 175 newlywed couples from 
across the United States and Canada to report which of the specific behaviors in 
Table 8.7 had occurred that day. The young lovers did these things often, but 
not that often; on average, a new spouse performed at least one of these kind 
acts on only about 60 percent of all days. But when they did occur, both spouses 
were more satisfied with their relationship the next day. You probably won’t be 
surprised, then, to read that greater compassionate love for one’s partner, which 
2 And don’t blame me for the similarity of the terms. It’s not my fault.
TABLE 8.6. Items from the Compassionate Love Scale
To what extent are these statements true about you?
 1. I spend a lot of time concerned about the well-being of those people close to me.
 2. If a person close to me needs help, I would do almost anything I could to help him 
or her.
 3. I would rather suffer myself than see someone close to me suffer.

CHAPTER 8: Love 263
is evident when compassionate acts like these occur often, is associated with 
more relationship satisfaction, too (Fehr & Sprecher, 2013).
Compassionate love is highly correlated with experiences of romantic 
love and companionate love—they all have intimacy in common—but there 
are still differences among them that are worth 
noting (Fehr, 2013). Whereas romantic love is 
“blind,” compassionate love is rooted in more 
accurate understanding of our partners’ strengths 
and weaknesses; we recognize their deficiencies, 
but we love them anyway (Neff & Karney, 2009). 
And the selfless concern that defines compas-
sionate love may be invaluable in protecting and 
maintaining a relationship if the partners become 
infirm with age or if a “malevolent fate plunges 
one of the partners from ‘better’ to a permanent ‘worse’” (Berscheid, 2010, p. 17). 
Is compassionate love necessary for continued satisfaction in long-term rela-
tionships? We don’t yet know: Those studies have yet to be done. Nevertheless, 
along with passion and friendship, compassionate caring for one’s partner may 
be another key ingredient in the very best experiences of love. 
 Styles of Loving 
 Another scheme for distinguishing different types of love experiences was 
offered by sociologist John Alan Lee (1988), who used Greek and Latin words 
A Point to Ponder
Imagine that you’re devel-
oping the recipe for the 
perfect love that you’d like 
to get from a perfect lover. 
What would that love 
include? What would your 
lover feel about you?
TABLE 8.7. A Compassionate Love Acts Diary
Which of these things have you done today? Both you and your lover will be more 
satisfied with your relationship if you up your game and intentionally behave this way 
more frequently. And just how pleasant and profitable will your partnership be if you 
both behave this way?
Today, I voluntarily did something special for my partner.
Today, I went out of my way to “be there” for my partner.
Today, I said or did something to show that I value my partner.
Today, I expressed a lot of tenderness and caring for my partner.
Today, I willingly put my partner’s goals or wishes ahead of my own.
Today, I really tried to understand my partner’s thoughts and feelings.
Today, I willingly modified my plans or activities for my partner’s sake.
Today, I was genuinely open and receptive to things my partner said or asked of me.
Today, I really tried to be accepting rather than judging of something about my partner.
Today, I did something to show my partner that I respect and admire him/her as a person.
Source: Reis, Maniaci, & Rogge, 2014.

264 
CHAPTER 8: Love
to describe six styles of love that differ in the intensity of the loving experience, 
commitment to the beloved, desired characteristics of the beloved, and expecta-
tions about being loved in return. (See  Table 8.8 .) One style is  eros, from which 
the word  erotic comes. Eros has a strong physical component, and erotic lovers 
are likely to be heavily influenced by physical appearance and to believe in love 
at first sight. 
 A second style,  ludus (pronounced “loo-dus”), treats love as an uncom-
mitted game. Ludic lovers are often fickle and (try to) have several different 
partners at once. In contrast, a third style,  storge, (“store-gay”) leads people to 
de-emphasize strong emotion and to seek genuine friendships that gradually 
lead to real commitment. 
 A fourth style,  mania, is demanding and possessive and full of vivid fan-
tasy and obsession. A fifth style,  agape (“ah-gaa-pay”), is giving, altruistic, and 
selfless, and treats love as a duty. Finally, the last style,  pragma, is practical and 
pragmatic. Pragma leads people to dispassionately seek partners who will logi-
cally be a good match for them. 
 How useful are these distinctions? Instead of thinking of them as six addi-
tional types of love, it makes more sense to consider them as six themes in 
love experiences that overlap and are differentially related to the types of love 
we’ve considered so far. In particular, storge, mania, and pragma have little in 
common with romantic love, companionate love, or compassionate love; the 
obsession of mania and the cool, friendly practicality of storge and pragma dif-
fer noticeably from the loving intimacy at the heart of all three types of love 
( Graham, 2011). However, all of the components of love described by the 
triangular theory—that is, intimacy, passion, and commitment—are positively 
related to eros and agape (remember, love involves both giving and taking), 
and negatively related to ludus (which means that love is serious business) 
(G raham, 2011). So, some of the styles described by Lee (1988) are related to 
other widely studied types of love, but others of them are not. Susan and Clyde 
Hendrick have developed a Love Attitudes Scale to measure people’s endorse-
ment of the six styles, and they have found that men score higher on ludus 
than women do, whereas women are more storgic and pragmatic than men 
( Hendrick &  Hendrick, 2006). Other researchers have detected a tendency for 
TABLE 8.8. Styles of Loving
Eros
The erotic lover finds good looks compelling and seeks an intense, 
p assionate relationship.
Ludus
The ludic lover considers love to be a game and likes to play the field.
Storge
The storgic lover prefers friendships that gradually grow into lasting 
commitments.
Mania
The manic lover is demanding, possessive, and excitable.
Agape
The agapic lover is altruistic and dutiful.
Pragma
The pragmatic lover is practical, careful, and logical in seeking a mate.
Source: Based on Lee, 1988.

CHAPTER 8: Love 265
people to pair off with others who share similar attitudes toward love (Morrow 
et al., 1995). In general, then, the love styles remind us of intriguing sources of 
individuality (such as practicality) that are sometimes overlooked.  
 INDIVIDUAL AND CULTURAL DIFFERENCES IN LOVE 
 Obviously, there are various feelings people may be experiencing when they 
say, “I love you.” To complicate things further, some people may be more likely 
than others to experience certain types of love. Several individual differences 
and cultural influences are linked to love, and I’ll begin our consideration of 
them by considering whether love differs from one culture to the next.  
Culture
If you’re using fMRI, romantic love in China looks just like romantic love in 
the  United States: The areas of the brain that are activated when people see 
A Type of Love You Probably Don’t Want to Experience
Unrequited Love
Have you ever loved someone who 
did not love you back? You probably 
have. Depending on the sample, 80 per-
cent (Aron et al., 1998) to 90 percent of 
young adults (Baumeister et al., 1993) 
report that they have experienced unre-
quited love: romantic, passionate attrac-
tion to someone who did not return 
that love. It’s a common experience that 
seems to be most frequent in one’s late 
teens, between the ages of 16 and 20 
(Hill et al., 1997). Still, it doesn’t strike 
everybody; it happens to more men 
than women (Hill et al., 1997) and is 
more likely to befall people with a pre-
occupied attachment style than those 
with secure or avoidant styles (Aron 
et al., 1998).
Why do we experience such loves? 
Several factors may be involved. First, 
would-be lovers are very attracted to 
their unwilling targets, and they assume 
that relationships with them are worth 
working and waiting for. Second, they 
optimistically overestimate how much 
they are liked in return (Aron et al., 
1998). And third, perhaps most impor-
tantly, as painful as it is, unrequited 
love has its rewards. Along with their 
frustration, would-be lovers experience 
the real thrill, elation, and excitement of 
being in love (Baumeister et al., 1993).
It’s actually worse to be the target 
of someone’s undesired adoration. Sure, 
it’s nice to be wanted, but those on the 
receiving end of unrequited love often 
fi nd their pursuers’ persistence to be 
intrusive and annoying, and they usually 
feel guilty when they turn their ardent 
pursuers down. They are usually nice, 
“well-meaning people who fi nd them-
selves caught up in another person’s 
emotional whirlwind and who them-
selves often suffer acutely as a result” 
(Baumeister & Wotman, 1992, p. 203). As 
distressing as it was to gradually realize 
that the objects of our affection would 
not become our steady partners, we may 
have made it harder on them when we 
fell into unrequited love.

266 
CHAPTER 8: Love
photos of their romantic partners are generally the same in both cultures 
(Xu et al., 2011). This isn’t surprising because romantic love appears to be a uni-
versal human experience that is found in all the peoples of the world (Hatfield 
et al., 2007). The distinction between romantic love and companionate love is 
also apparent in both Western and Eastern cultures (Fehr, 2013). Fundamen-
tally, the various types of love seem to operate similarly in diverse cultures. 
Still, within these broad similarities lie some cultural nuances that make love a 
little different from place to place.
When they describe their experiences of falling in love, for instance, 
Americans emphasize the similarity and good looks of their partners more 
than Chinese people do, and the Chinese mention a desirable personality, 
others’ opinions, and their own physical arousal more than Americans do 
(Riela et al., 2010). (Which group do you think is falling in love for the better 
reasons?) Then, when they’re in love, married couples in the United States and 
China both feel a lot of compassionate caring and horny desire for their part-
ners, but there are cultural differences, too. Romantic fantasies—thinking of 
love as a fairy tale, with expectations of living happily ever after—are more 
prominent in America, whereas acknowledgments that one’s partner is baffling 
and incomprehensible and that love itself is a mixed blessing are more common 
in China (Jackson et al., 2006). (Again, which culture do you think has it right?) 
Finally, people in individualistic Western nations such as the United States are 
more likely than those in Eastern countries that emphasize interdependence to 
insist on love as a reason to marry (Merali, 2012). In particular, college students 
in China are more likely than those in the United States to be guided by their 
parents’ wishes regarding whom they should marry (Zhang & Kline, 2009). 
Whereas marriage in China is often a family decision, young adults in America 
typically expect that their choice of a spouse will be entirely up to them. 
(Whom would your parents choose for you, if they could? See the box on the 
next page.)
 Attachment Styles 
 Because they are rather subtle, cultural influences on love are less consequen-
tial than some individual differences are. In particular, whatever one’s cul-
ture, the  attachment dimensions of anxiety over abandonment and avoidance 
of intimacy are enormously important because they are associated with all 
of the  elements of love we’ve encountered: intimacy, passion, commitment, 
and caring.
 •  Intimacy. People with secure attachment styles generally have high regard 
for others, viewing them as trustworthy, dependable, and kind (Luke et al., 
2004), and they tend to be more open with their partners, happily engaging 
in a lot of self-disclosure. Those who are insecure are more wary of others. 
In particular, people who are high in avoidance typically view others with 
suspicion, perceiving them to be dishonest and undependable (Collins & 
Allard, 2001). As a result, they tend to be close-mouthed, telling their part-
ners relatively little about their feelings and desires (Feeney et al., 2000). 

CHAPTER 8: Love 267
In general, then, secure people enjoy greater intimacy with their partners 
than insecure people do (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). 
 •  Passion. There’s a lot of drama in the lives of preoccupied people, but much 
of it isn’t pleasant. Their anxiety over abandonment often has them on edge, 
nervously experiencing apprehension rather than delight in their intimate 
interactions (Davis et al., 2004). Those who are avoidant of intimacy are 
more distant and detached, and their passion (such as it is) is more imper-
sonal. So, the best, most fulfilling sex is enjoyed by people with secure 
attachment styles. Secure people have more frequent sex that involves 
more arousal, greater pleasure, more frequent orgasms, and greater satis-
faction (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). 
 •  Commitment. Secure people also tend to be more committed to their part-
nerships than insecure people are (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2007). This is also 
no surprise because day by day, secure people have more intimate, more 
positive, and more satisfying interactions with their lovers than insecure 
people do (Kafetsios & Nezlek, 2002). 
 •  Caring and caregiving. Finally, when their partners are nervous and need 
support, insecure people are less effective caregivers, providing less reas-
surance than secure people do and leaving their partners less at ease 
(Davila & Kashy, 2009). In particular, people who are high in avoidance 
behave more negatively and sometimes get angry when they are asked to 
provide comfort and consolation to a needy partner (Campbell et al., 2001). 
Anxious people often offer a lot of help, but they tend to do so for selfish 
reasons, hoping to gain approval from their partners. Overall, compassion-
ate love for one’s partner is enhanced and increased by a secure attachment 
style and reduced by avoidance of intimacy (Sprecher & Fehr, 2011). 
Whom Do Your Parents Want You to Marry?
Arranged marriages in which one’s 
spouse is chosen by one’s family are com-
monplace in Asia and the Middle East 
(Merali, 2012), and they beg an interest-
ing question: If it were (or is) up to them, 
who would (or do) your parents want 
you to marry? In general, your parents 
probably want the same qualities you do: 
They seek sons- and daughters-in-law 
with good economic prospects who are 
attractive, smart, stable, and kind. What’s 
intriguing is that they probably have dif-
ferent priorities than you do, so that if 
they can’t have it all—and who can?—
they value some characteristics more 
than you do. P hysical at tractiveness 
doesn’t matter as much to them as it does 
to you ( Perilloux et al., 2011). You’ll care 
more about whether your spouse smells 
nice and is the right height and a trim 
weight than your folks will, whereas 
they’ll care more about your mate’s race, 
social class, family background, and reli-
gion (Buunk & Solano, 2010). They also 
don’t want you hooking up in casual 
sexual  liaisons, especially if you’re their 
daughter ( Apostolou, 2009). Overall, 
then, parents think fundamental similari-
ties and commitment are more vital than 
their offspring do, and that’s true across 
cultures (Buunk & Solano, 2010). Might 
they have a point?

268 
CHAPTER 8: Love
Thus, a secure style is positively related to all four of the building blocks that 
seem to create different love experiences, and sure enough, secure people expe-
rience more intense romantic, companionate, and compassionate love than 
insecure people do (Hepper & Carnelley, 2012). 
 Importantly, however, all of us typically have several different partners, 
such as lovers, parents, and friends, who are important attachment figures at 
any one time, and we may be relatively secure in some of those relationships 
and somewhat insecure in others (Sibley & Overall, 2008). Lurking within the 
global orientations toward relationships that we label as attachment styles may 
be several different sets of feelings about specific partners, so that our attach-
ment quality can vary from partner to partner (Fraley et al., 2011). Those of us 
who are anxiously attached to our mothers, for instance, may nevertheless trust 
our romantic partners wholeheartedly. So, attachment varies from relationship 
to relationship, making attachment styles in loving partnerships rather complex. 
 Still, the global attitudes I’ve described here are important. Varying levels 
of avoidance of intimacy and anxiety over abandonment characterize relation-
ships all over the world (Schmitt, 2008). And they clearly set the stage for our 
dealings with others. Toddlers who are securely attached to their mothers tend 
to get along with others in elementary school and then to have close friendships 
in high school—and then, as a result of those successful friendships, they tend 
to have satisfying adult romances (Haydon & Roisman, 2013). The potent, last-
ing influences of attachment styles demonstrate that not only are there different 
types of loves, there are different kinds of lovers.  
 Age 
 Another slowly changing personal characteristic that may affect love is 
one’s age.  Most people mellow as they get older (Shallcross et al., 2013). When 
researchers compared spouses in their sixties to those in their forties, they 
found that the older couples interacted with more good cheer but less physi-
cal arousal. Their emotions were less intense, but more positive on the whole, 
even in marriages that were not particularly happy at the time (Levenson et al., 
1994). So, some of the burning, urgent, emotional intensity that leads young 
people to marry seems to dwindle with time to be replaced with a more genial 
and more mature outlook on love. 
 Men and Women 
 A potentially important individual difference that does not change with time 
is one’s sex. On the whole, men and women are more similar than different 
when it comes to love (Canary & Emmers-Sommer, 1997). They experience the 
various types of love similarly, and there are few differences in the propor-
tions of men and women who have each attachment style; men tend to be more 
dismissing than women are, but the difference is rather small (Schmitt, 2008). 
Women do experience more intense and more volatile emotions than men do, 
on average (Brody & Hall, 2010); nevertheless, there are rarely any differences 

CHAPTER 8: Love 269
between men and women on measures of romantic feelings such as the Love 
Scale (Rubin, 1973) and the Passionate Love Scale (Galperin & Haselton, 2010). 
Evidently, as we have seen before, it’s just plain silly to think that men come 
from one planet and women come from another. 
 On the other hand, men tend to possess more romantic attitudes than 
women do; they’re more likely than women to think that if you just love some-
one enough, nothing else matters (Sprecher & Metts, 1999). They’re also more 
likely to believe that it’s possible to experience “love at first sight,” and they 
tend to fall in love faster than women do (Galperin & Haselton, 2010). Women 
are more cautious than men when it comes to love; they’re more selective about 
 whom they love, feeling passion more slowly and limiting their affection to 
partners of higher mate value (N. Li et al., 2012). Men tend to be less discrimi-
nating, a fact that is reflected by their greater acceptance, on average, of casual 
sex (Schmitt, 2005). Along those lines, I can report that, contrary to popular 
stereotypes, men are usually the first to say “I love you” in a new relationship, 
doing so 70 percent of the time (Ackerman et al., 2011). (All of these patterns, 
I should remind you, are consistent with an evolutionary perspective, which 
predicts that women  should be cautious about whom they love because their 
parental investments in any offspring are so much greater than men’s [Buss, 
2013]. In contrast, a sociocultural model attributes women’s greater selectivity 
to their traditionally lower status in many societies; according to this perspec-
tive, careful selection of a high- status mate is one of the few means available 
to women to obtain resources that are more accessible to men [Eagly & Wood, 
2013a]. Which explanation do you find more convincing?) 
 Men also seem to put more stock in passion. Men and women agree that 
love should be affectionate and committed, but men also think it should be 
more passionate than women do (Fehr & Broughton, 2001). Indeed, of the three 
components of love, passion is most highly associated with men’s satisfaction 
with their relationships, whereas commitment is the best predictor of satisfac-
tion for women (Sternberg, 2006). This puts men in the position of relying on 
the component of love that, according to the triangular theory, is the least stable 
and reliable as time goes by. 
 DOES LOVE LAST? 
 So, how does the passage of time affect love? Does love last? This is a hard ques-
tion to answer conclusively because, as we’ve seen, there are  different types 
of loves and idiosyncratic types of lovers. Your experiences with love through 
the years may differ from those of others. Nevertheless, the prototypical North 
American marriage occurs when people in their twenties who are flushed with 
romantic passion pledge to spend the rest of their lives together, probably 
expecting their passion to last. Will it? Despite the couples’ good intentions, the 
best answer relationship science can provide is, probably not, at least not to the 
extent the partners expect. 

270 
CHAPTER 8: Love
 The simple truth is that romantic love typically decreases after people marry 
( Sprecher & Regan, 1998). Scores on romantic and passionate love scales go 
down as the years go by (Tucker & Aron, 1993), and that’s among couples who 
manage to stay married! After several years, husbands and wives are no lon-
ger claiming to the same degree that they’d do anything for each other or that 
they melt when they look into each other’s eyes.  Figure 8.2  provides an interest-
ing example of this in a study conducted in India that compared couples who 
chose to marry for love—like most North Americans do—to couples whose mar-
riages were arranged for them by their families (Gupta & Singh, 1982). Romantic 
couples who were still married after 10 years reported much lower scores on 
Rubin’s (1973) Love Scale than did those who had been married only for a year or 
two. (Couples who divorced and were not married that long were not included 
in the data you see in  Figure 8.2 . What do you think their love scores would be?) 
 What’s more, the decrease in a couple’s romantic love may sometimes be quite 
rapid. After only two years of marriage, average spouses express affection for each 
other only half as often as they did when they were newlyweds (Huston & Chorost, 
1994). Worldwide, divorces occur more frequently in the fourth year of marriage 
than at any other time (Fisher, 1995). Many, if not most, couples fail to maintain the 
urgent longing for each other that leads them to marry in the first place.  
0–1
1–2
2–5
Arranged Marriages
Love Marriages
5–10
10+
Years of Marriage
40
0
50
60
70
Scores on Rubin’s Love Scale
(9-item version; possible range 9 to 81)
80
90
FIGURE 8.2. Romantic love decreases after people marry for love. 
A study in India compared arranged marriages to those in which the spouses married 
because they were in love. Just as in the average American marriage, romantic love 
decreased substantially as the years went by after people married for love.
Source: Myers, 2008.

CHAPTER 8: Love 271
 Why Doesn’t Romantic Love Last? 
 In fact, if we consider it carefully, there may be several reasons why we should 
expect romantic love to decline over time (Walster & Walster, 1978). First,  fantasy 
enhances romance. As we’ve seen, love is blind to some degree. Flushed with 
passion, lovers tend to idealize their partners and minimize or ignore informa-
tion that should give them pause. Imagination, hope, and flights of fancy can 
make people who are quite different from us seem appealing, at least temporar-
ily. The problem, of course, is that fantasy erodes with time and experience. To 
the extent that romance is enhanced by idealized glorification of one’s partner, 
we should expect it to decline when people begin living together and reality 
slowly intrudes. “Ideals are easily tarnished, spells broken, sleights of hand 
exposed . . . romance fades over time because familiarity provides a more real-
istic, ‘warts and all’ view of the other; the harsh sunlight of the morning after 
dispels the enchantment of the moonlight” (Mitchell, 2002, p. 94). Or, according 
to author Erica Jong (2003, p. 48), who became famous with her description of 
a “zipless” sexual encounter between two strangers,3 “since passion is about 
fantasy and marriage is about reality, passion and marriage are the oddest of 
odd bedfellows.” 
 In addition, sheer  novelty adds excitement and energy to new loves. A 
first kiss is often much more thrilling than most of the thousands that follow, 
and when people are invigorated and fascinated by a new partner, they may 
be unable to appreciate how familiar and routine that same lover may seem 
30 years later. Indeed, novelty causes sexual arousal in other species: If a male 
rat is caged with a female in estrus, he’ll mate with her repeatedly until he 
appears to be sexually exhausted; however, if the first female is then replaced 
with another receptive female, the male will mount her with renewed interest 
and vigor. By continuing to replace an old partner with a new one, research-
ers can elicit two to three times as many ejaculations from the male as would 
have occurred with only the single female (Dewsbury, 1981). Researchers call 
this effect of novelty on arousal the  Coolidge effect, referring to an old story 
that may or may not be true. Supposedly, President Calvin Coolidge and his 
wife were once touring a chicken farm when Mrs. Coolidge noticed a rooster 
covering one hen after another. Impressed with the bird’s prowess,she asked 
the guide to mention the rooster to the president. When he heard about the 
rooster’s stamina, Coolidge is said to have reflected a moment and then 
replied, “Please tell Mrs. Coolidge that there is more than one hen” (Walster & 
Walster, 1978). 
 Does novelty have similar effects on people? It might. Engaging in novel, 
arousing activities together gets romantic couples to feel more in love with each 
other (Strong & Aron, 2006). Furthermore, Roy Baumeister and Ellen Bratslavsky 
(1999) have suggested that romantic passion is directly related to changes in our 
relationships. When we’re falling in love, our selves are expanding, everything is 
new and intimacy is increasing, and passion is likely to be very high. However, 
3 Google it. I’m aiming for a PG-13, not an R, rating here.

272 
CHAPTER 8: Love
once a relationship is established, and novelty is lost, passion slowly subsides; the 
longer a relationship lasts, the less passionate it becomes (Ahmetoglu et al., 2010). 
This pattern is apparent in the results of a broad survey of U.S. sexuality that 
showed that an average couple’s frequency of intercourse (one measure of their 
passion for each other) declines continually over the course of their marriage 
(Call et al., 1995). A similar pattern occurs in Germany, too (Klusmann, 2002). This 
decline is obviously confounded with age, as  Fig-
ure 8.3 shows. However, people who remarry and 
change partners increase their frequency of sex, at 
least for a while, so aging does not seem to be 
wholly responsible for the decline of passion with 
time. Arguably, “romance thrives on novelty, mys-
tery, and danger; it is dispersed by familiarity. 
Enduring romance is therefore a contradiction in 
terms” (Mitchell, 2002, p. 27). 
 Finally, as  Figure 8.3 also implies,  arousal  fades as time goes by. As we’ve seen, 
there’s no question that physical arousal—such as a rapid pulse rate and fast, 
shallow breathing—fuels passion. But it’s impossible to stay keyed up forever! In 
the case of romantic love, the brain may simply not produce as much dopamine 
when a partner becomes familiar, so that even if your partner is as wonderful as 
ever, you’re not as aroused. In any case, for whatever reason, the passion compo-
nent of love is less lasting than either intimacy or commitment (Ahmetoglu et al., 
2010), and that means that romantic love is less durable as well.  
A Point to Ponder
The amount of passion 
people experience typi-
cally declines dramatically 
as they age. Why does 
that occur? Will that 
happen to you?
19–24 25–29 30–34 35–39 40–44 45–49 50–54 55–59 60–64
70–74
65–69
75+
Remarried
Cohabiting
Married Once
Age
2
4
6
8
10
12
14
Times per Month
FIGURE 8.3. Frequency of sexual intercourse by age.
In general, most romantic relationships become less passionate as the years go by. 
Source: Data from Call et al., 1995.

CHAPTER 8: Love 273
 So, What Does the Future Hold? 
 Because three important influences on romantic passion—fantasy, novelty, 
and arousal—tend to dwindle over the years, romantic love decreases, too 
(Walster & Walster, 1978). Now, let’s be clear: Some couples do continue to 
feel lots of romantic love for each other after decades together; 40 percent of 
a random sample of Americans who had been married for 10 years or more 
reported that they were “very intensely in love” with their spouses. But even 
their love was less intense, on average, than it had been when they married 
(O’Leary et al., 2012). So, it’s fair to conclude that almost everybody’s loving 
feelings change somewhat over time. When they see photos of their beloved 
spouses, people who are still very much in love after 10 years of marriage still 
experience activation of the dopamine-rich reward centers in their brains, just 
as they did when they had just fallen in love—but other areas that are associ-
ated with monogamy and commitment in mammals become more active, too 
(Acevedo et al., 2012). The obsessive preoccupation with one’s beloved that 
characterizes new love also tends to fade, even when desire and caring remain 
(Acevedo & Aron, 2009). The bottom line is that the burning love that gets 
people to marry tends not to stay the same, and that’s one likely reason that the 
U.S. divorce rate is so high: A common complaint is that the “magic” has died 
(see chapter 13). 
 However, I really don’t want this news to be depressing! To the contrary, 
I think it offers important advice about how long-term romances can succeed. 
Often, the love that encourages people to marry is not the love that keeps them 
together decades later. Passion declines, but intimacy and commitment both 
increase as we age (Ahmetoglu et al., 2010). Thus, companionate love may be 
more stable than romantic love is (Sprecher & Regan, 1998). And, as we saw 
earlier, people who have been happily married for a long time typically express 
a lot of companionate love for their spouses (Lauer & Lauer, 1985). Such 
people are often genuinely happy, too: Although it does not rely on passion, 
companionate love is very satisfying to those who experience it (Hecht et al., 
1994). And because intimacy and passion are correlated (Whitley, 1993), being 
good friends may help to keep your passion alive. 
 So, you should commit yourself only to a lover who is also a good friend. 
You can also purposefully and creatively strive to forestall any boredom that 
would undermine your contentment. Relationships become stagnant when 
they become repetitive and monotonous, and as we saw in chapter 6, boredom 
occurs not when bad things happen but when nothing interesting, exciting, or 
challenging occurs (Harasymchuk & Fehr, 2013). And because boredom is anti-
thetical to love and satisfaction, it’s very bad news (Tsapelas et al., 2009). When 
novelty is lost, create some more. Don’t stop seeking out new and engaging 
ways to have fun together. 
 So, there’s your game plan. Enjoy passion, but don’t make it the founda-
tion of the relationships that you hope will last. Nurture friendship with your 
lover. Try to stay fresh; grab every opportunity to enjoy novel adventures with 
your spouse (Strong & Aron, 2006). And don’t be surprised or disappointed if 

274 
CHAPTER 8: Love
your urgent desires gradually resolve into placid but deep affection for your 
beloved. That happy result is likely to make you a lucky lover. 
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 Before Daniel and Catherine met, neither of them had been in love, so they 
were both excited when their dating relationship gradually developed into a 
more intimate love affair. Each was the other’s first lover, and they found sex 
to be both awkward and thrilling, and, within a few weeks, flushed with more 
romantic feelings than either of them had known, they decided to marry. But 
Daniel soon became annoyed by Catherine’s apparent desire to know every-
thing about his day. She would call him every morning and afternoon when he 
was at work, just to “be in touch,” and she would start to fret if he met clients 
over lunch or was out of the office running errands. For her part, Catherine was 
troubled by Daniel’s apparent reluctance to tell her what was on his mind. He 
prided himself on his self-sufficiency and didn’t feel that it was necessary to tell 
her everything, and he began to feel crowded by her insistent probing. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for Daniel 
and Catherine? Why?  
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 A Brief History of Love
 Different societies have held very different perspectives on love, and only 
recently has love been associated with marriage.  
 Types of Love 
 The Triangular Theory of Love. I ntimacy, passion, and  commitment are 
thought to combine to produce eight different types of love.  
Young relationships are often full of discoveries and new entertainments that invigo-
rate and promote passion. But once those new pleasures become routine, they can 
lose some of their value. Couples who creatively collaborate to continue to have fun 
together are likely to stay in love longer than those who allow their partnerships to 
become monotonous.
Source: Sally Forth © 2014 by King Features Syndicate, Inc. World rights reserved.

CHAPTER 8: Love 275
 Romantic, Passionate Love. Intimacy and passion, which increases when 
a person becomes aroused for any reason, combine to form romantic love. It is 
characterized by idealized evaluations of one’s partner. 
 Companionate Love. Intimacy and commitment combine to form 
companionate love, a deep friendship with someone with whom one’s life is 
intertwined. Happy spouses usually say that they are good friends.  
Compassionate Love. Intimacy combines with selfl ess caring for the beloved 
to form compassionate love. Compassionate acts enhance relationships.
 Styles of Loving. Six themes in love experiences that are differentially 
correlated with the various types of love have also been identifi ed. 
 Individual and Cultural Differences in Love 
Culture. Love is much the same around the world, but cultural nuances exist.
 Attachment Styles. Secure people enjoy stronger experiences of romantic, 
companionate, and compassionate love than insecure people do.  
 Age. People mellow with age, experiencing less intense love as time goes by. 
 Men and Women. Men and women are more similar than different when 
it comes to love. However, women pick their lovers more carefully and fall in 
love less quickly than men do. 
 Does Love Last? 
In most—but not all—cases, romantic love decreases after people marry, 
sometimes quite rapidly. 
 Why Doesn’t Romantic Love Last? Romance and passion involve  fantasy, 
novelty, and  arousal, and each fades with time. 
 So, What Does the Future Hold? Companionate love is very satisfying and 
is more stable than romantic love is. If lovers are good friends and work to battle 
boredom, they may improve their chances for a long, contented relationship.    

276
 C H A P T E R  9  
 Sexuality 
 Sexual Attitudes  ◆  Sexual Behavior 
◆  Sexual Satisfaction  ◆ Sexual Coercion 
◆ For Your Consideration  ◆ Chapter Summary 
 I have two questions for you. First, if a mischievous genie offered you a con-
stant supply of compelling orgasms but required that you experience them 
alone and never again have sex with another person, would you accept the 
offer? Second, if you discovered on your honeymoon that your new spouse had 
been secretly taking a drug like Viagra to enhance his or her sexual response to 
you, would you be hurt? 
 Different people will undoubtedly answer these questions in different 
ways. Those who have not had sex with an intimate romantic partner for a long 
time may find compelling orgasms, even solitary ones, an attractive option. But 
I suspect that most people would be reluctant to give up a potential future of 
physical connections with a lover or lovers. Orgasms are more fulfilling when 
they are shared with someone (Bensman, 2012), and most of us would be dis-
appointed were we no longer able to share sex with someone we love. And we 
want our lovers to find  us compelling and to want us in return. So, it may be 
hurtful to learn that a partner’s apparent desire for us is the result, at least in 
part, of some drug (Morgentaler, 2003). 
 As these questions may imply, there’s a lot more to human sexuality than great 
orgasms. For some of us, sex need not always involve romantic intimacy, but for 
most of us, romantic intimacy involves sex. Our close romantic relationships often 
have a sexual component, and our sexual behavior and sexual satisfaction are often 
dependent on the nature, and health, of those relationships. As we’ll see in this 
chapter, there’s a close connection between sexuality and intimate relationships.  
 SEXUAL ATTITUDES 
 Attitudes about Casual Sex 
Times have changed, and you’re probably more accepting of premarital sex-
ual intercourse 1  than your grandparents were. Fifty years ago, most people 
 1 Not all people will marry, of course. But “premarital” is a more familiar, more convenient term 
than “unmarried” is. 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 277
disapproved of sex “before marriage,” but these days, fewer than 25 percent 
of us think that premarital sex is “always or almost always wrong” (Wells & 
Twenge, 2005). The circumstances matter. Most of us hold a permissiveness 
with affection standard (Sprecher et al., 2006): We believe that sex between 
unmarried partners is fine as long as it occurs in the context of a commit-
ted, caring relationship. We’re more ambivalent about hookups—sexual 
interactions with nonromantic partners that usually last one night and do 
not involve any expectation of a lasting relationship (Lewis et al., 2013). On 
the one hand, both men and women usually have more positive than nega-
tive feelings after a hookup, but mixed feelings are common, particularly 
when intercourse occurs (Garcia et al., 2012). And hookups aren’t actually 
as popular as they seem to be: Both sexes enjoy hookups less than they 
think other people do (Reiber & Garcia, 2010), and big majorities of both 
men and women, as it turns out, prefer dating someone to just hooking up 
(Bradshaw et al., 2010). 
 Do men and women differ in their sexual opinions? On average, they do: 
Men hold more permissive sexual values and attitudes, although the difference 
is shrinking over time, and how big it is depends on the particular attitude 
being measured (Hyde, 2014). One of the larger sex differences is in attitudes 
toward casual premarital sex; men are more likely than women to think that 
sex without love is okay, so they usually feel better the morning after a hookup 
than women do (Halpern & Kaestle, 2014). This difference undoubtedly influ-
ences the things that men and women  regret about their past sexual behavior: 
Whereas women are more likely than men to regret things they’ve done (such 
as having a hookup), men are more likely than women to regret things they 
 didn’t do (such as not having sex when they had the chance). When it comes to 
casual sex, women tend to regret their actions, but men regret their  in actions 
(Galperin et al., 2013). 
 A person’s sex may be involved in other sexual attitudes, as well. Tradi-
tionally, women have been judged more harshly than men for being sexually 
experienced or permissive. Whereas men who have multiple sexual partners 
may be admired as “studs,” women with the same number of partners may be 
dismissed as “sluts.” This asymmetry is known as the  sexual double standard, 
and years ago it was quite obvious, but it appears to be more subtle today: We 
tend to disapprove of anyone, male or female, who hooks up “a lot” (Allison & 
Risman, 2013). But the double standard still exists, especially among men 
( Rudman et al., 2013). Women expect more disregard than men do if they 
accept an offer of casual sex (Conley et al., 2012), a woman with a sexually 
transmitted infection (or STI) is judged more harshly than a man is (Smith et al., 
2008), and a woman who participates in a threesome is liked less than a man is 
(Jonason & Marks, 2009). 2 So, a strong sexual double standard no longer seems 
to exist, but a person’s sex can still influence others’ evaluations of his or her 
sexual experiences.  
 2 And no, it didn’t matter if the three participants were two women and one man or two men and 
one woman; female participants were judged more negatively in both cases.

278 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
 Attitudes about Same-Sex Sexuality 
A person’s sexual orientation matters to some people, too. A noticeable minor-
ity of adult Americans—about 38 percent—feel that sexual relations between 
adults of the same sex are “morally wrong.” However, most Americans do 
not hold that view; a clear majority of them—59 percent—consider same-
sex relations to be “morally acceptable” (Newport & Himelfarb, 2013). This 
hasn’t always been true, of course, but our attitudes about same-sex sexuality 
are changing, and changing fast. In March 2014, for instance, an impressive 
59 percent of  Americans supported legal marriage between same-sex partners 
and only 34 percent were opposed (Craighill & Clement, 2014)—and that was 
both a new record and the reverse of what people had opined only 8 years ear-
lier. Take a look at Table 9.1: Few issues have elicited such a dramatic shift 
in attitudes in such a short period of time as “gay marriage” has, both in the 
United States and in several other areas of the world (such as England, Uru-
guay, New Zealand, and Argentina; see Pew Research, 2014a). Even most of 
those Americans who oppose gay marriage see legal recognition of same-sex 
marriage as “inevitable” in the United States in the years to come (Pew Research 
Center, 2013a).
Why has this occurred? I’ll touch on two contributing reasons. First, gays and 
lesbians are more visible in public life than ever before—consider the influence 
over the years of very popular TV shows such as Will and Grace, Glee, and Modern 
Family—and the more contact people have with gays and lesbians, the more favor-
able their feelings toward them tend to be (Cunningham & Melton, 2013; Merino, 
2013). Young adults in the United States have much more favorable attitudes 
toward gays and lesbians than elderly people do (Craighill & Clement, 2014), but 
they’re much more likely to know (and like) openly gay or lesbian people, too.
A second stimulus is that we understand same-sex sexuality much better 
than we used to. For instance, our judgments of same-sex relationships have 
much to do with our beliefs about why someone is gay or lesbian, as Figure 9.1 
TABLE 9.1. Americans Now Approve of Marriage for Same-Sex Couples 
Here are the results of five polls conducted jointly by the Washington Post and ABC 
News in recent years. Each of them surveyed a representative national sample of 
American adults. As you can see, not long ago, Americans were not in favor of 
 marriage for same-sex couples—but they are now.
“Do you think it should be legal or illegal for gay and lesbian couples to get married?
Date of Poll
“Legal”
“Illegal”
No Opinion
August 29, 2004
32%
62%
6%
June 4, 2006
36%
58%
6%
February 8, 2010 
47%
50%
3%
March 10, 2012
52%
43%
5%
March 4, 2014
59%
34%
7%
Source: http://apps.washingtonpost.com/g/page/politics/washington-post-abc-news-poll-march-2014-politics-obama-and-
2014-midterms/855/.
Note: The margin of possible sampling error in each poll was ±3 percentage points.

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 279
shows. By a very large margin, people consider homosexuality to be acceptable 
when they believe that sexual orientation results from biological influences that 
occur before we are born. On the other hand, by a substantial margin, people 
find homosexuality unacceptable if they believe that it is a lifestyle one chooses 
to adopt. So, it’s important that for the last 20 years the number of people who 
believe that one’s sexuality is already set at birth has been gradually increas-
ing and the number of those who believe that people choose to be gay or les-
bian has declined. It’s important because the first group is right and the second 
bunch is wrong. In just the last few years, psychological and biological science 
has determined that “preference in sexual identity and partnerships is appar-
ently irrevocably etched in the developing fetal brain and cannot be changed. 
Who we are sexually, and who and how we love sexually, seem in most cases to 
be hardwired, beginning even before birth” (Horstman, 2012, p. 60).
Sexual orientation is complex, involving one’s emotional and sexual attrac-
tions to others, one’s actual behavior, and one’s identity (Priebe & Svedin, 2013), 
and we humans aren’t just gay or straight: Researchers are finding that at least 
five categories of sexual orientation—heterosexual, mostly heterosexual, bisex-
ual, mostly gay/lesbian, and gay/lesbian—are needed to capture the range of 
sexual behavior people display (Savin-Williams et al., 2013). And to some degree 
(more for women than for men), our behavior and self- concepts can change over 
FIGURE 9.1. Tolerance of same-sex sexuality depends on one’s beliefs about its origins.
Here are the results of a poll conducted by the Pew Research Center that surveyed a rep-
resentative national sample of Americans in May 2013. People were much more likely 
to be tolerant of homosexuality—saying that it should be accepted by society—if they 
believed that sexual orientation was something that people are born with. On the other 
hand, if they believed that people choose to be gay or lesbian, they were intolerant of such 
behavior. The poll’s margin of error was 3 points. N 5 1,504.
Respondents’ Beliefs about the Origins of Sexual Orientation
58
13
30
63
% "Homosexuality should be ACCEPTED by society"
% "Homosexuality should be DISCOURAGED by society"
"Which Statement Comes Closer To Your Own Views?"
People are born 
gay or lesbian
Just the way some
people choose to live
6
13
Result of a person’s
Upbringing
Source: Pew Research Center, 2013b.

280 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
Can Same-Sex Sexuality Have Evolutionary Origins?
Sexual orientation has a genetic basis 
(Långström et al., 2010), but gays and 
lesbians tend not to have many children 
of their own. So, how does the evolution-
ary principle of sexual selection work to 
maintain a small but consistent propor-
tion of gays and lesbians in a predomi-
nantly heterosexual population? There 
are several possibilities, and here are two, 
emerging from studies of gay men. First, 
gay men make great uncles; they devote 
themselves to their nieces and nephews 
more than other men do, and thereby 
help their siblings reproduce more suc-
cessfully (Vasey &  VanderLaan, 2010). 
Second, compared to other women, the 
sisters of gay men are more fecund—that 
is, more fertile—and they have more 
babies (Iemmola & Ciani, 2009). They are 
also more likely than other women are 
to marry “up,” marrying men of higher 
social status (Barthes et al., 2013). Thus, 
throughout history, gay men seldom 
may have fathered their own offspring, 
but their sisters had more children who 
received better care and protection, on 
average, than other children did. In dif-
ficult environments, it might have been 
even advantageous, on the whole, for 
same-sex orientations to run in one’s 
family. It is possible, then, for same-sex 
sexuality to have evolutionary origins. 
The next time you hear sexual bigots 
claim that being gay or lesbian can’t be 
natural because they don’t have chil-
dren, feel free to show them this box.
time (Dickson et al., 2013). But we don’t “catch” same-sex attractions from our 
friends (Brakefield et al., 2014), and our upbringing doesn’t teach us to be gay 
(Långström et al., 2010). Most gays and lesbians feel that they’ve had no choice 
whatsoever about their orientations (Herek et al., 2010), and there are a variety 
of physical differences between straight and gay men (Myers, 2013). The bottom 
line is that there’s no longer any doubt that same-sex sexual behavior is based, 
in part, in one’s genes (Långström et al., 2010), and “clearly, sexual orientation is 
not a matter of conscious, moral choice” (Myers, 2013, p. 90). Slowly but surely, 
more of us are coming to understand that—and greater tolerance often follows.
 As part of this process, social scientists are going public with the con-
clusion that there is no empirical justification for denying gays and lesbians 
access to the legal benefits (involving, for instance, taxation, health insurance, 
pensions, and property rights) that heterosexual spouses enjoy (Myers, 2013). 
Indeed, the American Psychological Association has resolved that because 
(a) same-sex relationships operate in much the same manner as heterosexual 
partnerships (Balsam et al., 2008), (b) sexual orientation has nothing to do with 
a person’s ability to be a loving, nurturing parent (Goldberg & Smith, 2013), 
and (c)  marriage is good for people, including gays and lesbians (Riggle et al., 
2010), it is ill-informed, unfair, and discriminatory to deny gays and lesbi-
ans legal  recognition of their relationships. (The formal resolution stating the 
 psychologists’  position is intriguing reading [and only four pages long]; it’s 
available at    http://www.apa.org/about/policy/same-sex.aspx). The American 
Sociological Association and the National Council on Family Relations have 
taken similar, scientifically grounded, public positions.

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 281
 So, we’re seeing dramatic changes in attitudes about same-sex sexual-
ity. American laws about gay marriage are following suit, and you can keep 
up with the changing legal landscape at http://www.washingtonpost.com/
wp-srv/special/politics/same-sex-marriage/.  
 Cultural Differences in Sexual Attitudes 
 In general, then, sexual attitudes have become more permissive over time. 
And if you’re an American witnessing these changes, you may be tempted to 
think of the United States as being more permissive than most countries. But 
you’d be wrong. In fact, the sexual attitudes of Americans look surprisingly 
conservative when compared to the opinions expressed by people in many 
other countries. Denmark was registering gay and lesbian relationships as civil 
unions in 1989 and Norway started doing so in 1993. Full-fl edged marriages 
are now available to gays and lesbians in those countries and in Canada, South 
Africa, France, Argentina, and several other countries (Pew Research 2014a). 
So, the United States certainly isn’t leading the pack on that issue. Indeed, a 
large cross- cultural survey found that the United States held more conservative 
beliefs about premarital sex, extramarital sex, and same-sex relations than did 
 Australia,  Germany, Great Britain, Israel, Russia, 
Spain, and Sweden (Widmer et al., 1998). Canada 
was more permissive than the United States, too, 
so countries that are close neighbors do not neces-
sarily share the same sexual attitudes. Things may 
be changing, but Americans still hold relatively 
conservative sexual attitudes. 
W ithin the United States, African Americans 
hold more permissive sexual attitudes than whites 
do, with Hispanic Americans and Asian  Americans 
being more conservative, in that order (Fugère 
et al., 2008). However, African Americans hold 
more negative attitudes toward gays and lesbians 
than whites do (Vincent et al., 2009), and Republi-
cans, religious fundamentalists, and older folks are more opposed to same-sex 
marriage than Democrats, nonreligious people, and young Americans are (Pew 
Research Center, 2013b). Sexual attitudes are evidently shaped by a variety of 
historical, religious, political, and other societal influences: They clearly differ 
from country to country and from group to group.
 SEXUAL BEHAVIOR 
 It’s one thing to ask what people are thinking and another to find out what 
they’re actually doing. Studies of sexual behavior are intriguing because they 
provide a context for our own actions. Do remember, however, as you read 
this next section, that broad descriptions of sexual behavior mask enormous 
A Point to Ponder
Dolores Frias-Navarro 
and her colleagues (2014) 
found that the beliefs of 
Spanish university stu-
dents about the origins 
of homosexuality were 
changed by reading about 
its genetic roots. Have the 
last four pages influenced 
your attitudes? Why or 
why not?

282 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
variability in people’s experiences. And behavior that is common is not neces-
sarily healthier or more desirable than behavior that is less typical. We’ll find 
that what is perhaps most important about sexual behavior in relationships is 
that it is desired by and satisfying for both partners.  
 Sex for the First Time 
 These days, almost all—97 percent—of us have intercourse before we get mar-
ried (Haydon et al., 2014). As you probably recall, typical Americans don’t 
marry until their mid-to-late twenties, but the average age of first intercourse—
the age at which half of us have had sex and half have not—is now 17 for both 
men and women. By the age of 20, rather few of us (only 14 percent) have not 
yet had sex (Chandra et al., 2011). 
 These patterns are very different from those your grandparents experi-
enced—people in their generation usually waited 2 to 3 years longer to begin 
having sex (Wells & Twenge, 2005)—and there is both good news and bad 
news in the way we do things now. On the one hand, American teens are being 
more responsible than they used to be. Most adolescents use some form of birth 
control when they first have intercourse, and the teen birth rate is much lower 
now than it was 15 years ago (Guttmacher Institute, 2013). On the other hand, 
American teens are still not being careful enough: More than one of every four 
female teenagers in the United States has a sexually transmitted infection! Most 
often, it’s the human papillomavirus (HPV), the virus that causes genital warts, 
which is found in 18 percent of young women (Forhan et al., 2009). 
 A sizable majority of teens have sex for the first time with someone who 
is a partner in a steady, emotionally important relationship, and they come 
to have intercourse following a gradual trajectory of increasingly intimate 
behavior in which kissing leads to petting, and intercourse ultimately follows 
(de Graaf et al., 2009). Relatively few people (21 percent) are merely acquain-
tances or casual friends of their first sexual partners (Reissing et al., 2012). As a 
result, most teens find their first experience with sex to be more positive than 
negative, on the whole. Men enjoy it a lot more, being much more likely to 
reach orgasm, but on average, both sexes have few regrets (Impett et al., 2014b). 
Timing matters, though. An early sexual debut—that is, intercourse before the 
age of 16—is usually more awkward and less rewarding (Walsh et al., 2011), 
and it’s associated with both a pattern of risky sexual behavior that tends to 
persist into adulthood (Huibregtse et al., 2011) and a higher risk of divorce 
down the road (Paik, 2011). (However, this doesn’t necessarily mean that an 
early debut causes those later problems; instead, those of us who have sex at 14 
or 15 already tend to be more daring and prone to risk [Harden, 2014].)
Once we’re sexually active, most of us again encounter someday the ques-
tion of when to have sex in a new, developing relationship. So, here’s a bit of 
advice: Taking your time seems to pay off. Couples who have sex on their first 
date (or soon thereafter) experience poorer outcomes down the road, being less 
satisfied and communicating less well, than do those who wait a few weeks 
to become sexually intimate (Willoughby et al., 2014a). One reason this occurs 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 283
may be that a sense of commitment to one’s part-
ner usually improves sexual experiences; most 
of us enjoy sex more (and have orgasms more 
frequently) when we feel committed to our part-
ners than when we’re casually just fooling around 
(Galinsky & Sonenstein, 2013). There are undoubt-
edly other reasons, too; it’s an interesting point to 
ponder  . 
Ignorance Isn’t Bliss
Sex among unmarried teens is common-
place, and sexually transmitted infec-
tions are prevalent. In response to 
these patterns, there are hundreds of 
programs being staged throughout 
the United States that seek to dissuade 
American teens from having sex ( Kantor 
et al., 2008). These programs take 
various forms, but many of them are 
 abstinence-only programs that provide no 
information whatsoever about how to 
prevent pregnancy and how to have safe 
sex; they merely preach that “true love 
waits” for marriage. Striving to get their 
point across, some of them even teach 
misinformation—such 
as 
“condoms 
don’t work, and you’ll get HIV if you 
have sex”—that has been repudiated by 
medical science (Lin & Santelli, 2008). 
Such efforts may be well intended, but 
they’re misguided for two reasons. First, 
they don’t work. For instance, it’s typical 
for U.S. sex education programs to pro-
mote abstinence by encouraging teens to 
make public promises to remain virgins. 
But only one year after they make a vir-
ginity pledge, most teens (53 percent) 
deny having made one, and 5 years later, 
82 percent claim that they never said any 
such thing (Rosenbaum, 2009). Second, 
even worse, abstinence-only programs 
sometimes do more harm than good. On 
average, graduates of abstinence pro-
grams are not less likely to have sex, but 
they are less likely to use contraception; 
most programs that preach abstinence 
do not get teens to delay having sex or to 
have fewer partners; they just discour-
age their pupils from having respon-
sible, safe sex (Kirby, 2008; Rosenbaum, 
2009).1
Supporters of abstinence-only “edu-
cation” think that such programs work 
(Bleakley et al., 2010), but they must be 
basing their opinions on their intuitions 
instead of the facts. And there are several 
other meaningful facts about teen sex 
that many people don’t seem to know. 
Here are three: (1) Sex that occurs in a 
steady relationship, which is the kind 
of sex most teens have, is not associated 
with adverse psychological outcomes for 
teens, either when they begin having sex 
(Impett et al., 2014b) or over time (Else-
Quest et al., 2005). (2) HPV vaccinations 
do not encourage teens to start having 
risky sex (Mayhew et al., 2014); those who 
are vaccinated do not catch other STIs or 
get pregnant more often than those who 
are not (Bednarczyk et al., 2012). (3) A 
very effective way to reduce unwanted 
1 Programs vary. An innovative program in 
Philadelphia that featured abstinence was able 
to get some kids to delay having sex for the first 
time by encouraging them to develop personal 
lists of goals and dreams that might be affected 
by having sex ( Jemmott, 2010). Importantly, 
however, the program didn’t preach absti-
nence or employ scare tactics like many others 
do, so it wasn’t a typical abstinence program.
A Point to Ponder
Why is sex on a first date 
associated with lower 
relationship satisfaction 
later on if a couple stays 
together?

284 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
 Sex in Committed Relationships 
 So what motives lead people to choose to have sex? There are literally hun-
dreds of different reasons. When students at the University of Texas at Austin 
were asked to “list all the reasons you can think of why you, or someone you 
have known, has engaged in sexual intercourse in the past,” 237 distinct rea-
sons were identified (Meston & Buss, 2007, p. 479). The most common reasons 
involved positive states: “attraction, pleasure, affection, love, romance, emo-
tional closeness, arousal, the desire to please, adventure, excitement, experi-
ence, connection, celebration, curiosity, and opportunity” (Meston & Buss, 
p. 498). The infrequent reasons were more calculating and callous, involving 
the desires to do harm (“I was mad at my partner, so I had sex with someone 
else”), to gain some advantage (“I wanted to get a raise”), or to enhance one’s 
social status (“I wanted to impress my friends”). Sexual motives evidently 
ranged from altruistic to vengeful and from intimate to impersonal. 
 Four themes seemed to underlie the sprawling list of specific reasons. One 
of them involved the  emotional  component of sex as a communication of love 
and commitment. Another involved the  physical aspects of sex; it included both 
the physical pleasure to be gained from sex, and the physical attractiveness of a 
potential partner. Other reasons were more  pragmatic,  involving the wish to attain 
some goal or accomplish some objective that could range from making a baby to 
making someone jealous. Still other reasons were based in  insecurity, involving 
the desire to boost one’s self-esteem or to keep a partner from straying. Men and 
women endorsed emotional reasons with equal frequency, but men were more 
likely than women to have had sex for physical, pragmatic, and insecure reasons 
(Meston & Buss, 2007). These differences were often slight, but men nevertheless 
pregnancies and abortions is to give away 
free birth control. A program in St. Louis 
that provided 9,256 teens and women 
free long-lasting contraceptives (either 
IUDs or implants) cut their abortion rates 
in half and reduced their rate of teen 
births to less than one-fi fth of the national 
average but did not increase their rates of 
sexual activity (Peipert et al., 2012).
So, there are two points I’d like to 
make about all this. First, knowledge is 
power. For the record, sex education is 
most effective in getting teens to delay 
sex and in reducing pregnancies when 
it provides explicit instruction in how 
to negotiate sexual interactions and 
how to use contraception ( Guttmacher 
Institute, 2012). The better and more 
accurately informed teens are, the more 
 sexually responsible and conscientious 
they tend to be (Kirby, 2008). The Ameri-
can teen birth rate is at an all-time low 
not because teens are remaining absti-
nent but because they are using con-
doms more than ever before when they 
do have sex (Guttmacher Institute, 2013). 
Education is benefi cial; misinformation 
and ignorance are not.
Second, here’s another example 
of the ethical imperative that underlies 
relationship science: When dispassion-
ate, careful study of human partnerships 
can provide reliable knowledge that 
improves our chances for health and hap-
piness, we should do those studies, even 
when they take us into sensitive territory. 
Some people still think that ignorance 
is bliss when it comes to human sexual-
ity, but that’s a point of view with which 
relationship scientists fi rmly disagree.

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 285
reported more varied, and more practical, reasons for having sex than women did. 
And clearly, although sex is often a loving act, it sometimes has no romantic aim. 
 The frequency with which people have sex is influenced by the nature—
and duration—of their relationships. Young couples who are cohabiting have 
sex about three times per week, on average, whereas those who are married 
have sex about two times per week (Willetts et al., 2004). Couples in both 
kinds of relationships, however, have sex more often than those who are single 
(Smith, 2006), probably because singles are less likely to have consistent access 
to a sexual partner. Married people may sometimes envy the swinging life of 
singles, but they usually get more sex than singles do. 
 Another important factor associated with sexual frequency is a person’s age. 
Look back at Figure 8.3 on page 270: Older people generally have sex much less 
frequently than younger people do. In 2009, most American men and women in 
their late twenties (86 percent) reported that they had had intercourse with some-
one in the past year. However, only about half of men (58 percent) and women 
(51 percent) in their fifties had done so, and a minority of men (43 percent) and 
women (22 percent) who were 70 or older had had vaginal sex (Herbenick et al., 
2010b). Most elderly Americans have not had intercourse with anyone in the last 
12 months (Karraker & DeLamater, 2013). Physical changes associated with aging 
are influential in this regard (DeLamater, 2012): Decreased hormone levels can 
reduce one’s desire, and declines in physical health can erode one’s vigor, so we 
shouldn’t be surprised that sexual desire wanes somewhat over the years. In cou-
ples who have been together for a long time, however, there is another, more sub-
tle possibility: The passion partners feel for one another may simmer down over 
the long haul as each becomes a familiar and routine sexual partner and the thrill 
of discovery and novelty is lost (Rubin & Campbell, 2012). As I noted in chapter 
8, this is one likely reason romantic love becomes less intense as relationships age, 
and the size of this effect (see Figure 8.3) leads me to offer this caution: If you’re a 
young adult who’s staying in a relationship (at least in part) because of great, hot 
sex, it’s simply silly to expect that your passion, desire, and need for that partner 
will never change. Of course it will; “the average couple has more frequent sexual 
activity during the first year of their relationship than they will ever have again” 
(Diamond, 2013b, p. 591). 
 A final factor associated with sexual frequency is sexual orientation. When 
their relationships are young, gay men have more sex with their partners than 
lesbians or heterosexuals do. (See  Figure 9.2 , and keep this pattern in mind 
when I discuss sexual desire a few pages from now.) After 10 years together, 
everybody has sex less often, but the drop in frequency is greater for gays, and 
they end up having sex less frequently than heterosexual couples do. On the 
other hand, regardless of the duration of the relationship, lesbians have sex 
less often than any other relationship group. When it’s just up to them, women 
have sex much less frequently than they do when there is a man involved. 
 Infidelity 
 Most people around the world strongly disapprove of someone who is in a 
committed relationship engaging in  extradyadic sex  (that is, having sex outside 

286 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
the dyad, or couple, with someone other than one’s partner) (Widmer et al., 
1998).3 Thus, we might expect that sexual infidelity would be relatively rare. 
But is it? A compilation of 47 different investigations involving more than 
58,000 participants, most of them in the United States and most of them mar-
ried, found that 21 percent of the women and 32 percent of the men had been 
sexually unfaithful to their romantic partners at least once. Most husbands and 
wives never have sex with other people after they marry, but about one out of 
every five wives and one out of three husbands do (Tafoya & Spitzberg, 2007). 
 As you can see, men are more likely to cheat on their partners than women 
are. They hold more positive attitudes toward casual sex, and they often pursue 
extradyadic sex for the sake of sexual variety (whereas women are more likely 
to seek an emotional connection) (Impett et al., 2014b). Indeed, these sex differ-
ences are particularly pronounced in the same-sex relationships of gay and les-
bian couples, where male and female fidelity operate free of the influence of the 
other sex. Gay men have a lot more extradyadic sex than both lesbian women 
3 The “sex” I’ll be referring to in this section will be vaginal intercourse. Extradyadic behavior takes 
a variety of forms ranging from erotic texting and cybersex to kissing, heavy petting, oral sex, and 
intercourse, but people differ in their definitions of which of these are “cheating” (Kruger et al., 
2013). So that we’ll all be on the same page, I’ll focus on behavior that almost everybody considers 
to be unfaithful.
FIGURE 9.2. Differences in sexual frequency by type and length of relationship.
The figure displays the proportion of couples in each type of relationship who reported 
having sex at least once a week. (There is no value provided for cohabiting relation-
ships that lasted for more than 10 years because there were not enough couples in this 
category to provide a reliable estimate.)
10
0
0–2
Married
20
30
40
50
Proportion
of Respondents
60
70
80
90
100
2–10 10+
0–2
Cohabitators
2–10
0–2
Gay Men
2–10 10+
0–2
Lesbians
2–10 10+
Type of Relationship
Years
Together
Source: Blumstein & Schwartz, 1983.

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 287
and heterosexual men do (Peplau et al., 2004), as you can see in Figure 9.3, which 
depicts the results of a large survey of Americans back in the early 1980s that 
obtained data on spouses, cohabitating couples, and gay and lesbian couples 
(Blumstein & Schwartz, 1983). In many cases, the gay men had such sex with the 
permission of their partners, who wanted the same freedom (Mitchell, 2014), and 
some observers have speculated that many heterosexual men would also behave 
this way if their female lovers would let them get away with it (Peplau, 2003)! 
Men Report More Sexual Partners than Women Do. How?
The best, most comprehensive surveys 
of sex in the United States paint some-
what different pictures of the sexual 
behavior of men and women. In par-
ticular, the National Center for Health 
Statistics (2007) found that the average 
middle-aged American man has had 
seven sexual partners during his life-
time whereas the average woman has 
had only four. Men in their young twen-
ties have had an average of 4.1 partners, 
and women 2.6 (Chandra et al., 2011). 
Men also report having sex more often 
than women do. Why don’t these  figures 
agree? One would think that each time 
a man has sex with a new partner, that 
partner does, too. So, why is this sex dif-
ference routinely found?
There are several possible reasons, 
and one is procedural. Despite their 
careful sampling techniques, surveys 
usually fail to include representative 
numbers of those particular women—
prostitutes—who have sex with many 
men (if for no other reason than that 
they’re not home at night when the 
surveys are usually conducted). When 
researchers make special efforts to 
include prostitutes in their samples, the 
average numbers of partners reported 
by men and women are more similar 
(Brewer et al., 2000).
Some studies have also found that 
men and women tend to defi ne “sex” dif-
ferently. If a heterosexual couple engages 
only in oral sex, for instance, he may be 
more likely to say that they’ve had “sex” 
than she is (Gute et al., 2008). The sexes 
agree completely that vaginal intercourse 
is “sex,” but men may be more likely than 
women to count as “sex p artners” lovers 
with whom intercourse did not occur.
However, 
the 
most 
important 
source of the discrepancy is the tendency 
for men to exaggerate, and for women 
to minimize, the number of partners 
they’ve had. When they are connected to 
(what they think are effective) lie detec-
tors, men report having had fewer sex 
partners, and women report having had 
more (Fisher, 2013). (In fact, when they 
thought any lies could be detected, these 
women—who were students at a large 
university in the midwestern United 
States—reported having had more part-
ners than the men did.) So, self-reports 
like these are clearly prone to social desir-
ability biases like those we covered back 
in chapter 2 (Schick et al., 2014), and they 
speak to some of the diffi culties research-
ers face in studying intimate behavior.
One more point: When college stu-
dents are asked how many sex partners 
they would like to have during the next 
year, the typical response from a major-
ity of women is “one,” and most men 
say “two” (Fenigstein & Preston, 2007). 
Only tiny minorities hope to have many 
partners. So, there is a sex difference 
of note here—men want to have more 
partners than women do—but very few 
people want to be promiscuous.

288 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
 Certainly, however, not all men are promiscuous and not all women are 
chaste, and there is an influential individual difference that makes both men 
and women more likely to engage in extradyadic sex. For some of us, sex is 
connected to love and commitment: It’s not especially rewarding to have sex 
with people we don’t know well or don’t care much about, and we have casual 
sex with acquaintances or strangers rarely, if at all. For others of us, however, 
sex has less to do with love and commitment; we think that “sex without love 
is OK,” and we’re content to have sex with people for whom we have no par-
ticular feelings. These different approaches to sex emerge from our  sociosexual 
orientations, the traitlike collections of beliefs and behaviors that describe our 
feelings about sex (Simpson et al., 2004). Individual differences in  sociosexual-
ity were discovered by Jeff Simpson and Steve Gangestad (1991), who used 
the measure in the box on the next page to measure respondents’ sociosexual 
 orientations. People who were generally willing to have sex only in the context 
of a committed and affectionate relationship were said to have a “restricted” 
sociosexual orientation, whereas those who did not seek much closeness or 
commitment before pursuing sex were said to have “unrestricted” sociosexual-
ity. As it turns out, people   with unrestricted orientations tend to be dynamic, 
flirtatious people who are always on the prowl for new partners (Simpson 
et al., 2004). And around the world, men are more unrestricted on average than 
women are (Schmitt, 2005). 
10
0
Husbands
Wives
Male
Cohabitors
Female
Cohabitors
Gay Men
Lesbians
20
30
40
50
Percent
60
70
80
90
FIGURE 9.3.  Percentages of individuals reporting any instance(s) of extradyadic sex 
since the beginning of their relationships. 
Gay men clearly have more extradyadic sex than anyone else, but in many cases they 
are not “cheating” on their partners. Note, too, that men and women who are cohabit-
ing are more likely to have sex with other people than husbands and wives are. Mar-
riage involves more thoroughgoing commitment than cohabiting does.
Source: Blumstein & Schwartz, 1983.

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 289
 You probably won’t be surprised, then, to learn that sociosexuality is asso-
ciated with the likelihood that people will have extradyadic sex. Over their 
 lifetimes, compared to those with more restricted orientations, unrestricted people 
Measuring Sociosexuality
Sociosexuality describes the degree 
to which a person is comfortable hav-
ing sex in the absence of any love or 
commitment. Jeff Simpson and Steve 
Gangestad (1991) developed this brief 
measure, the Sociosexual Orientation 
Inventory, to assess sociosexuality. 
Respondents are asked to answer these 
questions as honestly as possible:
 1. With how many different partners 
have you had sex (sexual inter-
course) within the past year? 
 2. How many different partners do 
you foresee yourself having sex with 
during the next five years? (Please 
give a specific, realistic estimate). 
 3. With how many different partners 
have you had sex on one and only 
one occasion? 
 4. How often do you fantasize about 
having sex with someone other 
than your current dating partner? 
(Circle one).
1. never
2. once every 2 or 3 months
3. once a month
4. once every 2 weeks
5. once a week
6. a few times each week
7. nearly every day
8. at least once a day
 5. Sex without love is OK.
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9
   
I strongly 
disagree
I strongly 
agree
 6. I can imagine myself being com-
fortable and enjoying “casual” sex 
with different partners.
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9
   
I strongly 
disagree
I strongly 
agree
 7. I would have to be closely 
attached to someone (both emo-
tionally and psychologically) 
before I could feel comfortable 
and fully enjoy having sex with 
him or her.
1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9
   
I strongly 
disagree
I strongly 
agree
Responses to the last item (# 7) are 
reverse scored, and a total score is com-
puted by weighing the scores of some 
items more heavily than others. In gen-
eral, higher numbers on each question 
(and for the total score) refl ect an unre-
stricted sexual orientation, and lower 
numbers refl ect a restricted orientation. 
Compared to those with a lower score, 
people with an unrestricted orienta-
tion “typically engage in sex earlier in 
their romantic relationships, are more 
likely to engage in sex with more than 
one partner at a time, and tend to be 
involved in sexual relationships char-
acterized by less expressed investment, 
less commitment, and weaker affec-
tional ties” (Simpson & Gangestad, 1991, 
p. 879). Sociosexuality is a good example 
of how characteristics of individuals 
have a powerful impact on the nature of 
sexual interactions.

290 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
have more sexual partners and are more likely to cheat on their primary lovers 
( Ostovich & Sabini, 2004). David Seal and his colleagues (1994) shed light on this 
pattern in a clever study of heterosexual college students who were currently in 
dating relationships but who were asked to evaluate a computer dating video of 
an attractive member of the other sex. After viewing the tape, participants were 
told they could enter a drawing to win a free date with the person in the video, and 
they were invited to indicate how willing they would be—if they went on the date 
and had a good time—to engage in a series of physically intimate behaviors with 
the date. The researchers found that 36 percent of those who were unrestricted 
in their sociosexuality entered the drawing for the date whereas only 4 percent 
of those who were restricted did. (Remember, all the participants were currently 
involved in existing relationships!) Unrestricted individuals were also more inter-
ested in having sex with their new dates than restricted individuals were. Socio-
sexuality is clearly a meaningful characteristic that distinguishes those who are 
likely to cheat from those who are not. 
It’s intriguing, then, that when their faces are presented side-by-side, observ-
ers can generally distinguish people with unrestricted orientations (who tend to 
be on the prowl) from those with restricted orientations (who are more likely to be 
faithful) (Boothroyd et al., 2011). Unrestricted women tend to have facial features 
that are somewhat more masculine than those of other women—and remarkably, 
although their faces are more attractive, men consider them to be less desirable 
as long-term mates. They’re lovely, but they seem less trustworthy than other 
women do (Campbell et al., 2009). Unrestricted men look more masculine, too, but 
women prefer the faces of restricted men for long-term mates (Boothroyd et al., 
2008); they seem to sense that unrestricted men would make riskier husbands.
An evolutionary perspective has an interesting spin on all this. With their 
lower parental investment, 4 men can afford to engage in relatively casual sex, and, 
arguably, sexual selection 5 has historically favored men who mated with as many 
women as possible. But why would evolution encourage a woman to cheat? Given 
the potentially violent costs she might incur if her actions are discovered (Kaigho-
badi et al., 2008), what reproductive advantage would there be? One provocative 
answer is that she’d not be able to produce more children by having extradyadic 
sex, but she might be able to have  better (that is, healthier and more attractive) chil-
dren. A  good genes hypothesis suggests that some women—in particular, those 
with less desirable mates—can profit from a  dual mating strategy in which they (a) 
pursue long-term partners who will contribute resources to protect and feed their 
offspring while ( b) surreptitiously seeking good genes for their children from 
other men (Pillsworth & Haselton, 2006). By obtaining commitment and security 
from one man and having taller, stronger, healthier children with another, women 
could bear offspring who were especially likely to survive and thrive.
 Some modern patterns of behavior are consistent with the good genes 
 hypothesis. First, as we noted in chapter 3, women find sexy, symmetrical 
men—those who display visible markers of masculine fitness—to be especially 
 4  This key concept was introduced way back in chapter 1 on p. 34.  
5 Ditto. Chapter 1, p. 33. 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 291
compelling each month when they are fertile and can conceive a child ( Gildersleeve 
et al., 2014). Second, children have more robust immune systems when their 
parents each give them different sets of genes of the type that regulate immune 
responses—and women whose partners have  similar genes are more likely than 
those whose partners have  different genes to have sex with other men, particu-
larly when they’re fertile (Garver-Apgar et al., 2006). If women were pursuing 
extradyadic sex simply for the sake of variety, it would be foolhardy to entertain 
other lovers during the few days they’re fertile each month, but that’s exactly 
what they do; women are more attracted to extradyadic mates when they’re fer-
tile than when they’re not, and this tendency is more pronounced when their 
primary partners are relatively unattractive (Larson et al., 2013). 
 If our ancient female ancestors behaved this way, they often would have 
had children who were healthier and more attractive than those who would 
have been fathered by the women’s usual mates (and thus, their extradyadic sex 
would have offered some advantages). Does this sort of thing  happen today? 
It does. A meta-analysis of 67 studies of paternity found that 2 percent of the 
world’s children, on average, are being raised by men who don’t know that 
someone else is the child’s biological father (Anderson, 2006). Moreover, in the 
United States, about 1 out of every 400 pairs of fraternal twins involves simulta-
neous siblings who were fathered by two different men (Blickstein, 2005). 
 These results suggest that, historically, men have occasionally encountered 
situations involving  sperm competition, which occurs when the sperm of two 
or more men occupy a woman’s vagina at the same time (Shackelford & Goetz, 
2007). Some researchers contend that in response to such situations, evolution 
has equipped men with a penis that is ideally shaped to scoop any semen from 
other men away from their partner’s cervix (Gallup & Burch, 2006). Common 
sense might expect that a second lover would only push an earlier lover’s ejac-
ulate through the cervix and into the woman’s uterus, but that’s not what hap-
pens: Deep thrusts force any sperm that is already present behind the head of 
the penis, which then pulls the sperm out of the woman. Indeed, consistent 
with this notion, when men believe that their partners are attractive to other 
men, they tend to have intercourse in a manner—involving a higher number of 
unusually deep thrusts over a longer period of time—that is particularly likely 
to displace any sperm that might be present (Goetz et al., 2005). 
 Thus, an evolutionary perspective argues that extradyadic sex can have 
reproductive benefits for some women, and that in response to such challenges, 
men have adapted. An entirely different perspective on infidelity focuses on the 
current quality of a couple’s relationship. In general, as you’d expect, people 
are more likely to cheat when they’re dissatisfied with their present partners 
and the quality of their alternatives is high (Tsapelas et al., 2011). Unhappy lov-
ers who have tempting alternatives available to them are less likely to remain 
faithful. If they do cheat in such situations, women are more likely than men 
to break up with their old partners and begin a new long-term relationship 
with the new mate (Impett et al., 2014b); thus, women are more likely to switch 
mates as a result of an affair. However, if you’re shopping around, you may 
want to steer clear of someone who’s cheating on his or her current partner to 

292 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
be with you. Compared to the rest of us, cheaters tend to be callous, manipula-
tive people (Jones & Weiser, 2014) who are low in agreeableness and consci-
entiousness (Schmitt & Shackelford, 2008) but relatively high in anxiety about 
abandonment (Russell et al., 2013). You can probably do better.  
 Sexual Desire 
 Men’s higher sociosexuality scores and more frequent infidelity may be results, 
in part, of another, broader difference between the sexes. On average, men have 
higher  sex drives  than women do. They experience more frequent and more 
intense sexual desires and are routinely more motivated to engage in sexual activ-
ity than women are (Vohs et al., 2004). One study of young adults found that men 
reported episodes of sexual desire 37 times per week whereas women reported 
only 9 (Regan, 2013). Because you’re being a thoughtful consumer of relationship 
science, you should remember that there are sizable individual differences at work 
here, and there are certainly many men who are chronically less horny than many 
women are. Nevertheless, a wide array of facts demonstrates that on average, and 
around the world (Lippa, 2009), men have higher sex drives than women do:
 • Men masturbate more often their entire lives (Das et al., 2011), perhaps 
because their sexual impulses are stronger and harder for them to control 
(Tidwell & Eastwick, 2013). Almost half of all men who have a regular 
sex partner still masturbate more than once a week, whereas only 16 per-
cent of women who are in sexual relationships masturbate as frequently 
( Klusmann, 2002). In England, it’s likely that 73 percent of the men between 
the ages of 16 and 44 have masturbated in the past month, but only 
37  percent of the women have (Gerressu et al., 2008). 
 • Men want sex more often than women do, and they are more likely than 
women to feel dissatisfied with the amount of sex they get (Sprecher, 2002). 
 • In developing relationships, men typically want to begin having sex sooner 
than women do (Sprecher et al., 1995). As a result, women are usually the 
“gatekeepers” who decide when sex begins in a new relationship. On aver-
age, when he first wants to have sex, he has to wait, but when she wants to 
have sex, they do. 
 • Men think about sex more often than women do. When young adults carry 
clickers with which to count their thoughts, sex-related thoughts enter 
men’s minds 34 times a day, women’s only 19 (Fisher et al., 2012).  
 • Men spend more money on sex, buying more sex toys and porn (Laumann 
et al., 1994). In particular, men sometimes pay to obtain sex––in one study 
in Australia, 23 percent of men had paid for sex at least once––but women 
almost never do (Pitts et al., 2004). 
 • Finally, as we’ve already seen, men are more accepting of casual sex, on 
average, than women are (Sprecher, Treger, & Sakaluk, 2013). They’d like 
to have sex with more people, too (Schmitt et al., 2012). 
 Add up these patterns, and the sex difference in sex drive may be no 
small matter. To a greater or lesser degree, each of these patterns may lead to 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 293
The Ins and Outs of Cybersex
There’s a lot of real and imagined sexual 
activity taking place online these days. 
The Web offers a unique mix of charac-
teristics that allow us to have rather per-
sonal contact with others cheaply and 
easily: accessibility to large numbers of 
people, affordability that makes a cyber-
date inexpensive, and anonymity that 
lowers inhibitions and prevents our part-
ners from following us home (S ubotnik, 
2007). The interactions that result often 
take place in “a sexual space midway 
between fantasy and action” (Ross, 2005, 
p. 342); they may fulfill our fantasies 
when we’re only sitting at home typ-
ing, and they can feel very intimate even 
when we have very little, if any, factual 
information about our partners.
Is cybersex innocuous? Those who 
engage in cybersex generally think so 
(Grov et al., 2011), but it’s a complex 
issue; sex takes three broad forms online, 
and they have different implications 
for face-to-face relationships  (Henline 
et al., 2007). First, people pursue porn. 
Most of us don’t disapprove of a part-
ner’s consumption of pornography, 
but a quarter of us do, considering it to 
be either undesirable or unacceptable 
when one is in a committed relationship 
(Olmstead et al., 2013). And the critics of 
porn may have a point. Most porn por-
trays women in a demeaning manner—
as horny sluts who are always ready to 
serve and please men—and there’s a lot 
of gagging, slapping, and name-calling 
in porn (Bridges et al., 2013), so it may 
teach lessons that can have an adverse 
effect on close relationships. In particu-
lar, teens who consume a lot of porn 
tend to endorse casual, recreational atti-
tudes toward sex, to hold more favor-
able views of extradyadic sex, and to 
think of women as sex objects, that is, 
devices to be used for men’s pleasure 
(Wright, 2013). And people who watch 
porn alone tend to be less satisfi ed with 
(Maddox et al., 2011), and less com-
mitted to (Lambert et al., 2012b), their 
romantic partners than are people who 
watch porn with their partners—or not 
at all. 
Visits to porn sites usually don’t 
involve interactions with others online, 
but other forms of online sex do. Some-
times it’s just sexy fl irting and talk-
ing dirty, but an interaction becomes 
cybersex when it involves sexual chat 
for the purpose of sexual  gratifi cation 
( Daneback et al., 2005) with, as one 
example, the participants sharing ex-
plicit descriptions of sexual activities 
while they each masturbate. Cyber-
sex is often shared anonymously by 
strangers who never meet (and who 
may not be who they say they are), but 
many of us, 45 percent, would fi nd it to 
be a serious type of infi delity (Henline 
et al., 2007). 
Even more consequential, however, 
may be the last form of online sex, which 
involves emotional involvement with 
someone at the other end of an Internet 
connection. People can and do form inti-
mate connections with others they have 
never actually met, and such liaisons 
seem unfaithful to 39 percent of us. But 
because these partnerships are usually 
much more personal than the typical 
episode of cybersex—often involving 
deep self-disclosure—they are often 
more problematic for existing face-to-
face relationships. People who become 
emotionally involved online are more 
likely to arrange a way to meet offl ine, 
and then real extradyadic sex sometimes 
occurs (Henline et al., 2007). Online 
sex can be a playful fl ight of fancy or a 
serious search for a new partner, and 
we sometimes don’t know which until 
some damage has been done to our cur-
rent relationships.

294 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
misunderstanding or annoyance as heterosexual couples negotiate their sexual 
interactions. Some husbands may be chronically frustrated by getting less sex 
than they want at the same time that their wives are irritated by their frequent 
insistence for more. (I’m reminded, in this regard, of a clever bit in the movie 
 Annie Hall,  which beat  Star Wars  to win the Academy Award for Best Picture 
for 1977: On a split screen, both members of a romantic couple are visiting their 
therapists, who have asked how often they have sex; he laments, “Hardly ever, 
maybe three times a week,” as she complains, “Constantly, I’d say three times 
a week.”) The typical sex difference in sex drive means that some couples will 
encounter mismatches in sexual desire, and difficulty may result ( Willoughby 
et al., 2014b). And the mismatch may get only worse with time; most women 
experience a drop in desire after they go through menopause (McCabe & 
 Goldhammer, 2012), so perhaps we shouldn’t be surprised that a study of 
 German 60-year-olds didn’t find  any couple in which she wanted as much sex 
as he did (Klusmann, 2006). 
There may be further consequences of men wanting more sex than women 
do. As the gatekeepers who decide when sex occurs, women may find men 
willing to offer various concessions in exchange for sex (Kruger, 2008). Men’s 
greater interest in sex may put the principle of lesser interest  6 in action:  Women’s 
control over access to something that they have and that men want may give 
them power with which to influence their men. In some relationships, sex may 
be “a valued good for which there is a marketplace in which women act as sell-
ers and men as buyers” (Baumeister & Vohs, 2004, p. 359).
 This sounds pretty tacky, but partners need not be consciously aware of 
this pattern for it to affect their interactions. Instead, without ever thinking 
about it, people may just take it for granted that a woman who, over a period 
of time, accepts a series of gifts from a man—such as expensive dates and other 
desirable entertainments––should feel some obligation to offer sex in return (or 
else she should stop accepting the gifts). Advice columnists acknowledge this: 
“Women do not owe sexual favors for a free dinner, but when men bear the 
entire cost of dating, they believe the woman is interested in a romantic, even-
tually intimate relationship. They otherwise feel used and resent it” (Mitchell & 
Sugar, 2008, p. B2). A dark consequence of this pattern is that some men may 
feel justified in pressuring or coercing women to have sex when they feel that 
the women “owe it” to them (Basow & Minieri, 2011).  
 Safe, Sensible Sex 
 There’s a lot of casual sex going on, and only some of it is safe. Most college 
students—about three-fourths—have had  hookups, with about half of them 
 having had one in the past year (LaBrie et al., 2014). Most hookups involve 
partners with whom one is well acquainted—much of the time, the partner is a 
friend—but a lot of hookups (37 percent) involve others who are either strang-
ers or who are not well known (Grello et al., 2006). Some hookups just involve 
6  Do you need to refresh your understanding of the principle of lesser interest? Look back at 
page 183.  

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 295
kissing and heavy petting, but about half of them include oral sex or intercourse 
(especially if people have been drinking), and when sex occurs, condoms are 
used only about half the time (Lewis et al., 2012). 
 Sex is no safer off-campus. A survey of 740 women (most of them in their 
30s and 40s) who were seeking new partners on dating Web sites found that the 
women were generally very careful when they met a new guy face-to-face for 
the first time; they had long conversations, ran background checks, and nego-
tiated boundaries before agreeing to a meeting, and then they met in a public 
place, carried pepper spray, or had a friend nearby. But all of that caution did 
not translate into safe sex. Perhaps because they already (believed that they) 
knew so much about each other, 30 percent of the women had sex with their new 
partners when they first met. And, overall, whenever it occurred, 77 percent of 
the women who met online partners did not use a condom when they first had 
sex (Padgett, 2007). 
 Thus, many people do not use condoms when they have sex with a new or 
temporary partner, and they forgo safe sex in an environment in which 1 of every 
5 teen girls in the United States is infected with either HPV or genital herpes 
(Tanner, 2008). What’s going on? Why is it that so many smart people are hav-
ing so much unsafe sex? There are several reasons:
 •  Underestimates of risk. First, a lot of us are lousy at math. For instance, the 
chance that a woman will be infected with human immunodeficiency virus 
(HIV) in a single unprotected sexual encounter with an infected male is 
actually quite low, less than 1 percent. But of course, if you give a low-
frequency event several chances to occur, the probability that it  will occur 
at least once goes up. If a woman has unprotected sex with an infected man 
a few dozen times, it becomes very likely that she will be infected, too; her 
chance of infection gets very high (Linville et al., 1993). 
 In a similar manner, almost all of us underestimate the cumulative 
overall risk that a new partner who has been sexually active in the past is 
carrying a sexually transmitted infection (Knäuper et al., 2008), and that 
false sense of security deters condom use. (A lot of us never even ask if a 
new partner has an STI, either [Manning et al., 2012].) Someone who has 
had several prior sexual partners is more likely to be infected than we 
think, even if the individual risk encountered with each of those other part-
ners was low. And we are particularly likely to underestimate a partner’s 
risk when he or she is attractive; the better looking someone is, the lower 
the risk we perceive, and the less likely we are to use a condom if sex occurs 
(Knäuper et al., 2008). 
 A particular bias known as the  illusion of unique invulnerability can 
also influence our estimates of risk. Many of us believe that bad things are 
generally more likely to happen to others than to us, so we fail to take sen-
sible precautions that would prevent foreseeable dangers (Burger & Burns, 
1988). The irony here, of course, is that those who consider themselves rela-
tively invulnerable to STIs are less likely to use condoms, and that makes 
them  more likely to catch one. People even think they’re unlikely to catch 
an STI after they’ve already got one. A representative national survey of 

296 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
young adults in the United States found that only 22 percent of those who 
tested positive for chlamydia, gonorrhea, or trichomoniasis had noticed 
any symptoms in the past year, so most people didn’t know they were car-
rying an STI—and only 28 percent of those who already had one of these 
STIs believed that they were at risk of becoming infected (Wildsmith et al., 
2010). There’s a lot of biased—or simply ignorant—assessment of risk out 
there (O’Sullivan et al., 2010). 
 •  Faulty decision making. People who intend to use condoms sometimes 
change their minds in the heat of the moment and then regret their deci-
sion afterward. What causes us to make poor decisions?  Sexual arousal, for 
one. When college men are turned on, they see things differently than they 
do when they’re not aroused: Diverse sexual behaviors (such as spanking, 
a threesome with another man, and sex with a 60-year-old woman) seem 
more appealing; morally questionable behavior (such as slipping a woman 
a drug to get sex) seems more acceptable; and condoms seem less desirable 
(Ariely & Loewenstein, 2006). Men, at least, really can get “carried away” 
when they get turned on. 
 Intoxication can also alter our decision making, particularly when we’re 
sexually aroused (Ebel-Lam et al., 2009). When people get drunk, they’re 
less likely to use condoms when they’re having sex with someone for the 
first time, in part because intoxication leads them to ignore the potential 
consequences and to think that having sex is a great idea (Zawacki, 2011). 
This is an example of a phenomenon known as  alcohol myopia, which 
involves the reduction of people’s abilities to think about and process all 
of the information available to them when they are intoxicated (Giancola 
et al., 2010). This limited capacity means that they are able to focus only 
on the most immediate and salient environmental cues. When they’re 
drunk, people may not be able to think of anything but how attractive their 
partners are, and they completely forget their prior intentions to use the 
condoms they’re carrying in a pocket or purse (MacDonald et al., 2000). 
Alcohol and arousal are evidently a recipe for high-risk sexual behavior.  In 
particular, a lot of hookups would never have happened if the participants 
hadn’t been drinking (LaBrie et al., 2014).
 •  Pluralistic ignorance. One of the striking things about hookups is that they 
are not as popular as most people, including the participants, think they 
are. Both men and women overestimate their peers’ approval of, enthu-
siasm for, and frequency of hooking up (Barriger & Vélez-Blasini, 2013). 
Women tend to regret hookups that involve intercourse or oral sex (Garcia 
et al., 2012), but because they believe that  other people generally approve of 
such behavior, they can feel some social pressure to engage in it, too (Lewis 
et al., 2014). 
 This is an example of  pluralistic ignorance, which occurs when 
people wrongly believe that their feelings and beliefs are different from 
those of others. By misperceiving each other’s true preferences, a group 
of people can end up following norms that everyone thinks are preva-
lent but that almost no one privately supports. Thus, young adults may 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 297
wisely want to have safe sex but fail to pursue it because they wrongly 
believe that it’s unpopular. Indeed, women think that men hold more 
negative attitudes toward condoms than they really do (Edwards & 
 Barber, 2010), and both sexes underestimate how often their peers use 
condoms, and overestimate how frequently they have casual sex (Lewis 
et al., 2014). Facebook isn’t helpful in this regard; when people browse 
others’ sexy, playful photos, they come to believe that their friends are 
having more hookups and using fewer condoms than they really are 
(Young & Jordan, 2013). 
 •  Inequalities in power. As we’ll see in chapter 12,  power is the ability to get a 
partner to do what you want. When two partners possess different levels 
of power, they are unlikely to use condoms if the more powerful partner 
opposes them (Woolf & Maisto, 2008). In general, the more powerful the 
woman is (Pulerwitz et al., 2000), and the more honest and forthright she is 
(Impett et al., 2010), the more likely she and her partner are to use condoms 
when they have sex. 
 •  Abstinence education. In order to convince teens that abstinence is the only 
way to go, some abstinence education programs teach their students 
that condoms don’t work (which, of course, is nonsense) (Lin & Santelli, 
2008). The undesired result is that when those teens have sex—and most 
of them do—they are less likely than other adolescents to use condoms 
( Rosenbaum, 2009).  
 •  Decreased intimacy and pleasure. The most important deterrent of all, how-
ever, may be that people enjoy sex more, on average, when they don’t use 
condoms than when they do. Both men and women find intercourse more 
pleasurable when condoms are not involved, with men being particularly 
likely to prefer unprotected sex (Randolph et al., 2007). People who don’t 
use condoms consider their sex to be more intimate and emotionally satisfy-
ing (Smith et al., 2008), and, consequently, lots of people—30 percent of men 
and 41 percent of women—have had a partner try to talk them out of using 
a condom. Remarkably, people who have had intercourse with more than 10 
different partners—and who therefore present a rather high cumulative risk 
of having an STI—are  more likely than those who have had fewer partners to 
try to dissuade their new lovers from using condoms (Oncale & King, 2001). 
 Clearly, condom use is subject to diverse influences. Education can coun-
teract some of the misunderstandings that deter condom use, but changing the 
perception that condoms are impersonal and unpleasant may be more difficult. 
So, I have two suggestions. Condoms are less 
likely to “break the mood” when they’re treated as 
a part of sexy foreplay (Scott-Sheldon & Johnson, 
2006). Don’t treat condoms as if they’re a nuisance 
that interrupts your love-making; when it’s time, 
help your partner put one on in a manner that cre-
atively and deliberately enhances, rather than 
detracts from, your excitement and anticipation. 
A Point to Ponder
Have you ever wanted to 
use a condom but didn’t? 
Why? Do you think that 
you’ll ever allow that to 
happen again? Why?

298 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
I also suggest that these days it communicates more respect, care, and concern 
for each other when you  do use a condom than when you do not. It’s likely that 
a new partner who tries to talk you out of having safe sex does not value you or 
your relationship as much as one who is glad to respect your wishes (Davis 
et al., 2014). And you certainly shouldn’t be embarrassed to ask a new lover to 
use a condom. Most people will be glad you brought it up—and if your partner 
is reluctant to do what you want, you probably don’t want to share yourself 
with that person anyway. 
 SEXUAL SATISFACTION 
 What people do in their sexual relationships is important, but how those actions 
make them  feel is even more influential. It’s good news, then, that when they are 
in good health, free of sexual problems, and have a steady partner, most peo-
ple have happy sex lives (Heiman et al., 2011). When they had all three things 
going for them, for instance, only 6 percent of the women who participated in 
a large study in Boston were dissatisfied with their overall sex lives (Lutfey 
et al., 2009). However, past middle age, people often don’t enjoy smooth sex-
ual sailing; among older respondents, only about half of the Boston sample (51 
 percent) had had sex with anyone in the past month; many of them had had 
no available partner, and others simply hadn’t been interested in having sex. 
And of those who had been sexually active, over a third (39 percent) had expe-
rienced frustrating problems with pain, a lack of desire, or difficulty reaching 
orgasm. Similar problems afflict men, so when all these influences are com-
bined, a minority (43 percent) of Americans 45 and older are presently having 
satisfying sex (Schwartz et al., 2014).
That’s disappointing. Is there anything we can do, if we’re healthy, to attain 
more sexual satisfaction? Yes, probably, and a variety of investigations have 
offered some insights. Interestingly, in the United States, high levels of content-
ment are more common in people who have had only one lover in the past year 
than in those who have had two or more—and in general, people who are deeply 
committed to their partnerships and who value monogamy (and who remain 
faithful to one another) are likely to be satisfied with their sex lives (Waite & 
Joyner, 2001). It may be stimulating to have more than one lover, but most people 
seem to find more fulfillment in devoting themselves to one special mate. Indeed, 
U.S. men get more pleasure from sex with a steady relationship partner than they 
get from sex with anyone else (Herbenick et al., 2010a), and in Germany, Spain, 
Brazil, Japan, and the United States, the fewer sexual partners men have had dur-
ing their lives, the more sexually satisfied they are now (Heiman et al., 2011).  
 The frequency with which people have sex is influential, too—at least for 
men. In one classic study, 89 percent of husbands and wives who had sex three 
times a week or more reported that they were content with their sex lives, 
whereas only 32 percent of spouses having sex just once a month felt the same 
sexual satisfaction (Blumstein & Schwartz, 1983). Of course, several things 
could be at work in a correlation like this, but two patterns are noteworthy. 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 299
First, the frequency of sex matters more to men than to women (Heiman et al., 
2011), and second, more frequent sex  does increase the satisfaction newlywed 
men derive from their sex lives (McNulty & Fisher, 2008); over time, they’re 
pleased when sex becomes more frequent and distressed if it slows. 
 But no matter how frequent they are, sexual interactions are most reward-
ing when they fulfill basic human needs for  autonomy, competence, and  related-
ness.  According to the tenets of Self-Determination Theory, we are happiest and 
healthiest when we routinely engage in activities that allow us to choose and con-
trol our own actions (that’s  autonomy ), to feel confident and capable (that’s  compe-
tence ), and to establish close connections to others ( relatedness ) (Deci & Ryan, 2012). 
How to Improve Your Sex Life: 
Don’t Believe Everything You Read (or Hear)
Sex is portrayed in various ways in 
the media, and not all of the lessons 
you can learn there will benefit your 
relationships. In their efforts to appeal 
to the masses (few of whom, regretta-
bly, will ever read this book),  modern 
media reinforce stereotypes, play on 
fears, and show us a lot of casual, 
 unprotected sex. For instance, condoms 
and other  matters of sexual responsi-
bility are rarely  mentioned when sex 
shows up on television (Kunkel et al., 
2007), and “reality” dating programs 
such as The Bachelor and The Bachelorette 
depict developing relationships as crass 
 sexual competitions. Indeed, people 
who watch a lot of these shows tend to 
endorse the sexual double standard and 
to think that dating is a contest in which 
horny men care only about women’s 
looks and pressure them for sex, blithely 
ignoring them when they  pretend to 
be uninterested (Zurbriggen & Mor-
gan, 2006). Magazines such as Cosmo-
politan and Cleo suggest that a woman 
needs to develop mad skillz in bed if 
she expects a guy to remain commit-
ted to her. If she doesn’t have plenty 
of tricks up her sleeve, she’ll find it 
hard to keep a man. She has to tread 
lightly, though, because men are also 
said to be very sensitive about possible 
 inadequacies and  shortcomings (Far-
vid & Braun, 2006). And this last point 
is reinforced by  endless streams of spam 
e-mail  messages warning men that, if 
they don’t increase their penis size, they 
will surely continue to  disappoint their 
women.
Nonsense. The last time they had 
sex, most American teens (90 percent!) 
used some form of contraception, usu-
ally condoms (Guttmacher Institute, 
2013). There’s a lot more safe sex in real 
life than on TV. And a survey of over 
52,000 women on the Web found that a 
sizable majority of them were satisfi ed 
with the size of their partner’s penis. 
Only 6 percent of the female respondents 
thought their partners were “small” (as 
opposed to “average” or “large”), and 
most of that group did wish that their 
partners were bigger. Still, overall, 84 
percent of the women thought their 
men were just fi ne, 14 percent wished 
they were larger, and 2 percent wanted 
them to be smaller (Lever et al., 2006). 
Six out of every seven women have no 
wish for their men to be larger, and if 
that’s a surprise, you’ve probably been 
reading the wrong magazines and visit-
ing the wrong Web sites. Don’t believe 
everything you read or hear about sex 
in close relationships.

300 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
Sex fits this framework, too (Brunell & Webster, 2013): The best, most gratifying 
sexual interactions allow us to do the things we want, to do them well, and to feel 
loved and respected in the process. 
 That probably doesn’t surprise you. What  is notable is that a lot of people 
routinely have sex that is less satisfying than it could be because it doesn’t ful-
fill those needs. In particular, people who subscribe to traditional gender roles 
tend to take it for granted that men should take the lead in directing sexual 
activity and that proper, feminine women should be submissive and subservi-
ent to their men;  he’s supposed to make the moves, and she’s supposed to do 
what he wants (Sanchez et al., 2012a). The problem is that these expectations 
cast women into a passive role that undermines their autonomy in bed; they 
rarely choose the agenda and they rarely call the shots, so they often don’t get 
what they want. And robbing women of their initiative and control decreases 
their sexual desire, reduces their arousal, and makes it harder for them to reach 
orgasm, so sex is a lot less fun for them (Kiefer & Sanchez, 2007). For their part, 
some men chafe at always having to be in control. Many men want to feel that 
they are compelling targets for their partners’ desire, so it’s exciting for them 
when, instead of being passive, women initiate sex and take the lead (Dwor-
kin & O’Sullivan, 2005). Thus, the dictates of traditional gender roles seem to 
rob both men and women of some sexual freedom and abandon, so that their 
sexual interactions are less satisfying than they could be; couples who allow 
each other more autonomy and choice enjoy more gratifying sex (Sanchez et 
al., 2012b). 
The motivations that underlie our sexual interactions also seem to influence 
the satisfaction we derive from them (Stephenson et al., 2011). As we saw earlier 
(back on p. 284), people have sex for lots of different reasons, and one way to orga-
nize them is to employ the approach and avoidance dimensions I introduced in 
chapter 6. 7 We sometimes have sex to obtain (or “approach”) positive outcomes 
such as increased intimacy or personal pleasure. For instance, if we seek to cel-
ebrate and enrich the intimacy of our relationships by having sex, we’re pursu-
ing positive outcomes. In contrast, when we have sex hoping to forestall or avoid 
unpleasant consequences, we are pursuing different goals. We may be seeking to 
prevent a partner’s anger or to keep a partner from losing interest in us. Which 
type of motive do you think is more fulfilling? Sex diaries from students at UCLA 
have revealed that sex is more satisfying, intimate, and fun when people engage 
in sex for positive reasons. In contrast, when they have sex to avoid unwanted 
outcomes, they experience more negative emotions and their relationships suffer; 
over time, partners who have sex for avoidance reasons are more likely to break 
up (Impett et al., 2005). People with strong approach motivations in bed also have 
more intense and longer lasting sexual desire for their partners (Impett et al., 2008). 
It’s clear that those who have sex to express their love for their partners, to deepen 
their relationship, and to give and obtain physical pleasure eagerly pursue—and 
enjoy—sexual interactions more than do those who have sex for other reasons 
(Pascoal et al., 2014), and their partners are more satisfied, too (Muise et al, 2013).
7 Refresh your memory on pages 188–191.  

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 301
 Sexual Communication 
 Here’s an influence on sexual satisfaction that’s important enough to get its 
own subheading. A lot of people feel awkward talking about sex, so too often, 
they don’t. Couples often have sex without ever discussing it at all: One of 
them might signal a desire for sex by moaning, intimate touching, and unbut-
toning a shirt, while the other silently signals his or her consent simply by 
doing nothing to resist (Vannier & O’Sullivan, 2011). Is wordless sex a prob-
lem? It can be. It’s wasteful if we never talk honestly, fearlessly, and openly 
with our partners about our sexual likes and dislikes, for one very big reason: 
Clear communication about sex is associated with greater satisfaction with 
sex (MacNeil & Byers, 2009). People who talk candidly about sex have more 
fulfilling sexual interactions with their partners than do those who just grunt 
and moan now and then. 
 The famous sex researchers William Masters and Virginia Johnson (1970) 
highlighted the importance of good sexual communication in a provocative 
study that compared the sexual experiences of heterosexuals and gays and 
lesbians. Masters and Johnson observed couples having sex and interviewed 
them extensively, and they concluded that the subjective quality of the sex-
ual experience—including psychological involvement, responsiveness to the 
needs and desires of the partner, and enjoyment of each aspect of the sexual 
experience—was actually greater for gays and lesbians than it was for het-
erosexuals. Same-sex sex was better sex. One advantage of the sexual inter-
actions shared by gays and lesbians was that both participants  were of the 
same sex; knowing what they liked themselves, gays and lesbians could rea-
sonably predict what their partners might like, too. However, Masters and 
Johnson argued that the primary foundation for more rewarding same-sex 
relations was good communication. Gays and lesbians talked more easily and 
openly about their sexual tastes than heterosexuals did. They would ask each 
other what was desired, provide feedback on what felt good, and generally 
guide their lovers on how to please them. In contrast, heterosexual couples 
exhibited a “persistent neglect” of open communication and a “potentially 
self-destructive lack of intellectual curiosity about the partner” (Masters & 
Johnson, p. 219). 
 The good news is that if heterosexuals honestly tell each other what they 
like and don’t like and how each of them is doing, they’re more likely to have 
superb sex, too (MacNeil & Byers, 2009). This sort of discussion is very inti-
mate, and couples who engage in a lot of it not only enjoy more sexual satisfac-
tion but also feel more contented overall in their relationships as well (Montesi 
et al., 2011). 
 Better communication can also help us manage situations in which we 
do not want to have sex and our intentions are being misunderstood. You 
may have already learned the hard way that women and men sometimes 
interpret sexual situations differently, and frustration or antagonism can 
result. Men have stronger sexual desires than women do, and they’re literally 
thinking about sex more often than women are, so they tend to read sexual 

302 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
interest into innocent behavior from women who have no sexual intentions 
 (Galperin & Haselton, 2013). This was first demonstrated in a classic study 
by Antonia Abbey (1982), who invited men and women to get acquainted 
with each other, chatting one-on-one, while another man and another woman 
observed their conversation. Both the men participating in the interactions 
and those watching them tended to interpret friendliness from the women 
as signs of sexual interest, even when the women doing the talking had no 
wish to be sexually provocative and the women looking on saw no such con-
duct. The men literally perceived signs of sexual flirtatiousness that were not 
intended and that probably did not exist. 
 This sort of thing isn’t rare; most men (54 percent) have misperceived a 
woman’s intentions at least once (Jacques-Tiura et al., 2007). Undoubtedly, 
some of those mistakes were relatively innocent, being rooted in clueless-
ness regarding nonverbal behavior, which is more common in men than in 
women (Lindgren et al., 2012). And, men who reject traditional gender roles 
and who value equality between the sexes are unlikely to make these mis-
takes at all ( Farris et al., 2008). However, misjudgments of a woman’s inter-
est are  common—especially when everyone’s been drinking—among macho 
men who consider sex to be an exploitative contest and who like to dominate 
women (Jacques-Tiura et al., 2007). These are the men who are most likely to 
engage in sexual coercion, and misperception of a woman’s sexual interest 
is often the first step toward such unwelcome episodes (Farris et al., 2008). 
Explicit, unambiguous communication is sometimes needed to set such men 
straight—and the best refusals are assertive, consistent, and persistent (Yagil 
et al., 2006). Don’t be coy or playful when it’s time to make your feelings 
known; plainly state your disinterest, and repeat as necessary.  
 Sexual Satisfaction and Relationship Satisfaction 
 Finally, let’s note that sexual satisfaction does not occur in a vacuum; we are 
unlikely to be satisfied with our sex lives if we’re  dis satisfied with our rela-
tionships with our partners. Sexual satisfaction and relationship satisfaction go 
hand-in-hand. Whether they are married or cohabiting, heterosexual or not, the 
most gratifying sex is enjoyed by couples who are satisfied with, and commit-
ted to, their relationships (Holmberg et al., 2010). 
 One reason sexual satisfaction and relationship satisfaction are linked is 
that they are subject to similar influences. Similarity and stress are two exam-
ples. We generally like those who are similar to us, and spouses are more con-
tent when they share similar sexual histories. The larger the difference in the 
number of past sexual partners a husband and wife have had, the less happily 
married they are likely to be (Garcia & Markey, 2007). Furthermore, hassles 
and stress at work or at home affect both sexual satisfaction and relationship 
satisfaction in much the same way; people who are beset with frustration and 
difficulties tend to be discontented both in bed and in general (Bodenmann 
et al., 2010). 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 303
 Most importantly, however, we tend to be more satisfied in intimate 
relationships in which there’s good sex because fulfilling sex makes a part-
nership more gratifying, and love for a partner makes sex more rewarding 
in turn (Yucel & Gassanov, 2010). Pleasing sex with a partner reduces stress 
and improves one’s mood in a way in which a solitary orgasm through mas-
turbation does not. Then, that positive mood and a happy outlook increase 
the levels of physical affection and sexual activity that follow (Burleson 
et al., 2007). Sexual satisfaction thus increases relationship satisfaction, and 
vice versa. 
 What’s more, this pattern persists throughout life. A study of elderly 
couples married for an average of 43 years found that, even though they had 
less of it than they used to, sex continued to be an influential component of 
their marital satisfaction (Hinchliff & Gott, 2004). Overall, then, studies of 
Attachment and Sexuality
People who are anxious about abandon-
ment are needy, and people who want 
to avoid intimacy keep their distance, 
and both of these dimensions of attach-
ment are closely tied to sexual behavior 
(Birnbaum, 2010). Perhaps because sex 
is often a very intimate act, avoidant 
people have less frequent sex with their 
romantic partners (Brassard et al., 2007), 
and more frequent sex with casual, short-
term partners (Feeney & Noller, 2004), 
than secure people do. They tend not to 
have sex to foster closeness with, and to 
celebrate their intimacy with, their lov-
ers. On the contrary, in order to “get 
some space” and to maintain their free-
dom, men with a dismissing attachment 
style are more likely than secure men to 
cheat on their partners ( Mikulincer & 
Shaver, 2013).
By comparison, people who are 
high in attachment anxiety have more 
passionate, needier sex that springs 
from their desire to feel accepted by their 
partners (Davis et al., 2004). Passion is 
great, but it’s tinged with desperation 
in anxious people; to avoid displeasing 
their partners, they are also less likely to 
use condoms and to refuse to do things 
they don’t want to do (Strachman & 
Impett, 2009). And with their endless 
appetites for reassurance, people who 
are high in anxiety also have more extra-
marital affairs than secure people do 
(Fish et al., 2012).
Moreover, people with high levels 
of either anxiety or avoidance are less 
likely than secure people are to be hon-
est and open in discussing their needs 
and desires with their partners (Davis 
et al., 2006). It shouldn’t surprise us, 
then, that they’re less satisfi ed with 
their sex lives—and their partners often 
are, too; people with avoidant spouses 
wish their sex was less detached and 
distant (Butzer & Campbell, 2008).
All things considered, whether 
they’re gay or straight (Starks &  Parsons, 
2014), the greatest sexual self-confi dence, 
best communication, and most satisfac-
tion with sex are enjoyed by people with 
secure attachment styles. Secure people 
are more playful and open to explora-
tion in bed, and they more happily and 
readily commit themselves to faithful, 
monogamous intimacy (Mikulincer & 
Shaver, 2013). Great lovers tend to be 
secure lovers.

304 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
sexual satisfaction point out that sex isn’t some kind of magical ingredient 
that automatically makes a relationship fulfilling. The best sex also seems to 
depend on:
 • each person having his or her needs met by a partner who understands and 
respects one’s specific sexual desires,  
 • valuing one’s partner and being devoted to the relationship, and 
 • enjoying being with each other, in bed and out of it. 
 SEXUAL COERCION 
 These desirable ingredients are absent when one partner intentionally cajoles, 
induces, pressures, or even forces another to engage in sexual activities against 
his or her will. These actions can take various forms (DeGue & DiLillo, 2005). 
The  type of pressure that is applied can range from (a) mildly coercive verbal 
persuasion (that may involve false promises, guilt induction, or threats to end 
the relationship); to (b) plying someone with alcohol or drugs to weaken his 
or her resistance; and on to (c) the threat of—or actual use of—physical force 
to compel someone’s submission. The  unwanted sexual behavior  that results can 
range from touching and fondling to penetration and intercourse. 
 Take a look at  Figure 9.4 , which portrays these two dimensions. Together, 
they depict four different broad types of sexual violation. The boundaries 
between them are not exact—they blend from one to the other depending on the 
specific circumstances—but they still make useful distinctions. The first category, 
in quadrant 1, includes interactions in which one person coaxes and cons another 
to submit to touching that he or she doesn’t want. Because the violations that 
result are relatively less severe, you may not consider them to be a form of sexual 
coercion; most college students take them for granted as a normal nuisance asso-
ciated with dating (Oswald & Russell, 2006). Many of us still expect sex to be a 
competition in which men and women are adversaries—with women holding a 
prize that men seek to win through guile, persistence, and superior might—so 
interactions in which men ignore women’s disinterest and “cop a feel” whenever 
possible may seem unremarkable (Krahé et al., 2007). However, because they are 
unwanted, these actions are not innocuous. They disrespect one’s partner, and 
when they are directed at women, they are most likely to be enacted by men who 
quietly hold hostile attitudes toward women and who believe that all women 
would secretly like to be raped (Hoyt & Yeater, 2011). They also have a corrosive 
effect on relationships, being associated with both lower sexual satisfaction and 
relationship satisfaction (Katz & Myhr, 2008). 
 In quadrant 2, verbal manipulation and/or intentional intoxication lead 
to penetration of the genitals. If a woman does not actively and strenuously 
protest this behavior, a lot of people will consider her to share the responsi-
bility for the act (Cohn et al., 2009), so these behaviors are rarely prosecuted. 
Quadrants 3 and 4 involve various degrees of physical force (or a drug-induced 
stupor that leaves the victim unable to resist), and the behaviors there are more 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 305
likely to seem patently illegal. Many legal jurisdictions would prosecute the 
actions in quadrant 4 as “forcible rape” if they became known. 
 Most men and women never direct any of these forms of sexual coercion 
toward the other sex (Spitzberg, 1999). Nevertheless, they are scarily com-
mon. Specific counts depend on the precise definitions employed, but one out 
of every six college women encounters coercion in some form every 2 months 
(Gidycz et al., 2008), and most women (56 percent) suffer such interactions dur-
ing their college careers (Crown & Roberts, 2007). Ten percent of the women in 
Great Britain have, through pressure or force, had sex with someone against 
their will (Macdowall et al., 2013). Overall, men use more physical force than 
women do—they are more likely to be the perpetrators than the victims in 
quadrants 3 and 4—but women are just as likely as men to verbally coerce 
reluctant partners to have unwanted intercourse; about 25 percent of both men 
and women have done so (Spitzberg, 1999). 
 These actions are certainly not compassionate and loving, and they’re not 
even well-intentioned. The people who enact them tend to have belittling, 
unsympathetic, and surly attitudes toward the other sex (Hines, 2007). Men 
who behave this way tend to be callous and manipulative; they lack remorse 
(Jones & Olderbak, 2013) and tend to think of women as animals or objects 
(Rudman & Mescher, 2012b). They do some damage, too: Women who have 
FIGURE 9.4. Four broad types of sexual violation. 
Two different dimensions—the type of pressure that is applied and the behavior that 
results—combine to delineate four different broad types of sexual misconduct. In all 
cases, the sexual contact is unwanted, and consent is either coerced or never given—and 
thus, a violation occurs.
1
2
4
3
Fondling
Unwanted
Sexual
Behavior
that
results
Type of Pressure
that is applied
Verbal Coercion
Intercourse
Physical Force
Source: Adapted from DeGue & DiLillo, 2005.

306 
CHAPTER 9: Sexuality
been forced or frightened into unwanted sex have poorer mental and physical 
health thereafter, especially if they are victimized more than once (Perilloux 
et al., 2012), and the wounds that result tend to be even greater when they are 
inflicted by an intimate partner than by a stranger or an acquaintance (Impett 
et al., 2014b). 
 So the prevalence of sexual coercion, whatever its form, is very distress-
ing. What can be done to reduce its frequency? I have several suggestions. First, 
beware of potential partners who view sex as a contest. They are unlikely to have 
your best interests at heart. Second, beware of intoxication in either you or your 
partner; it makes people more likely to act inappropriately, and indeed, most epi-
sodes of sexual coercion involve alcohol or drugs (Cleere & Lynn, 2013). Third, 
resolve to assertively resist unwanted advances; women who decide in advance 
to rebuff sexual misconduct are less likely to passively submit if such a situa-
tion develops (Gidycz et al., 2008). Fourth, reduce the need for such assertion by 
setting sexual boundaries with frank, direct discussion before you start an inti-
mate interaction. (At a minimum, tell your partner, “If I say no, I’m gonna  mean 
no.”) Miscommunication and misunderstanding are often at work in interactions 
involving sexual coercion, and the distinction between right and wrong is clearer 
when the ground rules are laid out in advance (Winslett & Gross, 2008). Finally, 
consider the value of thinking of your lover as an equal partner whose prefer-
ences and pleasure are as important as your own. Not only is such respect and 
thoughtfulness incompatible with sexual coercion, if you and your lover both feel 
that way, you’re likely to have great sex (Rudman & Phelan, 2007).  
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 Chad was in love with Jennifer. He felt a lot of sexual desire for her, and he 
always enjoyed having sex with her, but he still felt something was missing. She 
was usually glad to have sex, and she seemed to enjoy it, too, but she rarely took 
any initiative and he typically did all the work. She usually just lay there, and he 
wanted her to be more active and take the lead now and then. He wished that 
she would be more inventive, and he wanted her to work him over occasionally. 
Nevertheless, he didn’t say anything. Their sex was good, if not great, and he 
worried that any complaints would make things worse, not better, between them. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for Chad and 
Jennifer? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 Sexual Attitudes 
 Attitudes about Casual Sex. People’s attitudes about sex have become 
more permissive over time. Today, most people tolerate unmarried sex if the 
partners care for each other, but a  sexual double standard may still lead us to 
judge women’s sexuality more harshly than men’s. 

CHAPTER 9: Sexuality 307
 Attitudes about Same-Sex Sexuality. Americans dislike gays or lesbians if 
they think sexual orientation is a choice. Nevertheless, times have changed, and 
most Americans now approve of gays’ and lesbians’ marriages. 
 Cultural Differences in Sexual Attitudes. Sexual attitudes in the United 
States are relatively conservative compared to those  in many other countries. 
 Sexual Behavior 
 Sex for the First Time. Almost all of us have sex before we marry, and 
the fi rst time usually involves a steady close relationship. If the partners aren’t 
close, some regret typically follows.  
 Sex in Committed Relationships. People have sex for diverse reasons, 
and their relationship status, age, and sexual orientation all infl uence the fre-
quency with which sex occurs. 
 Infidelity. Men cheat more than women do, and they are more likely than 
women to have an unrestricted  sociosexual orientation. The  good genes hypothesis 
suggests that women cheat in order to have healthy offspring, and  sperm compe-
tition may have evolved to counteract such behavior. 
 Sexual Desire. Men have higher  sex drives  than women do. This may lead 
to annoyance as heterosexual couples negotiate their sexual interactions.  
 Safe, Sensible Sex. Most college students have had  hookups, sometimes 
having intercourse without condoms. Condom use is infl uenced by underes-
timates of risk, faulty decision making, pluralistic ignorance, inequalities of 
power, abstinence education, and concerns about intimacy and pleasure. 
 Sexual Satisfaction 
 The best sex is motivated by approach goals and fulfills basic needs, but 
traditional gender roles tend to undermine women’s choice and control in bed. 
 Sexual Communication. Direct and honest sexual communication is asso-
ciated with greater sexual satisfaction. Because gays and lesbians discuss their 
preferences more openly than heterosexuals do, they enjoy better sex. Good 
communication may also avoid misperceptions of sexual intent.  
 Sexual Satisfaction and Relationship Satisfaction. Partners who are sat-
isfi ed with their sex lives tend to be more satisfi ed with their relationships, with 
each appearing to make the other more likely. 
 Sexual Coercion 
 Various forms of pressure and behavioral outcomes describe four broad 
types of sexual violations. These are distressingly prevalent, but several strate-
gies may make them less common. 

308
 C H A P T E R  1 0  
 Stresses and Strains 
Perceived  R elational Value  ◆ H urt F eelings  ◆ O stracism  
 ◆ J ealousy  ◆  D eception and L ying  ◆  B etrayal  ◆  F orgiveness  
 ◆ F or Y our C onsideration  ◆ C hapter S ummary  
 Let’s take stock. In previous chapters, we have encountered adaptive and 
maladaptive cognition, good and bad communication, and rewarding and 
unrewarding social exchange. We’ve been evenhanded in considering both 
beneficial and disadvantageous influences on close relationships. But that 
won’t be true here. This chapter focuses on various pitfalls, stumbling blocks, 
and hazards that cause wear and tear in relationships (with just one bright 
spot at the end). And importantly, the stresses and strains I cover here—hurt 
feelings, ostracism, jealousy, lying, and betrayal—are commonplace events 
that occur in most relationships somewhere along the way. We’ve all had 
our feelings hurt (Vangelisti, 2009), and sooner or later, almost everyone lies 
to their intimate partners (DePaulo et al., 2009). Even outright betrayals of 
one sort or another are surprisingly widespread and hard to avoid (Baxter 
et al., 1997). 
 However, the fact that these incidents are commonplace doesn’t mean they 
are inconsequential. Negative events like these can be very influential. They 
help explain why most of us report having had a very troublesome relation-
ship within the last 5 years (Levitt et al., 1996). And despite their idiosyncra-
sies, all of these unhappy events may share a common theme (Leary & Miller, 
2012): They suggest that we are not as well liked or well respected as we wish 
we were.  
 PERCEIVED RELATIONAL VALUE 
 Fueled by our need to belong, 1 most of us care deeply about what our intimate 
partners think of us. We want them to want us. We want them to value our com-
pany and to consider their partnerships with us to be valuable and important.
 We want our partners to evaluate their relationships with us positively, and 
sometimes, we want that relationship to be very meaningful and close. As a 
result, according to theorist Mark Leary (Leary & Miller, 2012), it’s painful to 
1 Need a reminder about the human need to belong? Look back at p. 4 in chapter 1.

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 309
perceive that our  relational value —that is, the degree to which others consider 
their relationships with us to be valuable, important, or close—is lower than we 
would like it to be. 
 Over time, we’re likely to encounter various degrees of acceptance and 
rejection in our dealings with others, and Leary (2001) has suggested that they 
can be arranged along the continuum described in  Table 10.1 . At the extreme 
of  maximal inclusion, people seek our company and don’t want to have a party 
unless we can come. They are somewhat less accepting, but still positively 
inclined toward us when they offer us  active inclusion:  They invite us to the 
party and are glad we can come. However, their acceptance is more passive 
when they don’t invite us to the party but admit us if we show up, and they are 
 ambivalent, neither accepting nor rejecting, when they genuinely don’t care one 
way or the other whether we show up or not. 
 If we want others to like us and value their relationships with us, noncom-
mittal ambivalence from them may be bad enough, but things can get worse. 
We encounter  passive exclusion when others ignore us and wish we were else-
where, and we suffer  active exclusion when others go out of their way to avoid 
us altogether. However, the most complete rejection occurs when, in  maximal 
exclusion, others order us to leave their parties when they find us there. In such 
instances, merely avoiding us won’t do; they want us gone. 
 Our emotional reactions to such experiences depend on how much we 
want to be accepted by particular others, and just what their acceptance or 
rejection of us means. On occasion, people exclude us because they regard us 
positively, and such rejections are much less painful than are exclusions that 
result from our deficiencies or faults. Consider the game show  Survivor: Con-
testants sometimes try to vote the most skilled, most able competitors off the 
island to increase their personal chances of winning the game. Being excluded 
because you’re better than everyone else may not hurt much, but rejection 
that suggests that you’re inept, insufficient, or inadequate usually does (Çelik 
et al., 2013). 
 In addition, it’s not much of a blow to be excluded from a party you didn’t 
want to attend in the first place. Exclusion is much more painful when we want 
TABLE 10.1. Degrees of Acceptance and Rejection
Being accepted or rejected by others is not an all-or-nothing event. People can desire 
our company to greater or lesser degrees, and researchers use these labels to describe 
the different extents to which we may be included or excluded by others.
Maximal inclusion
Others seek us out and go out of their way to interact with us.
Active inclusion
Others welcome us but do not seek us out.
Passive inclusion
Others allow us to be included.
Ambivalence
Others do not care whether we are included or not.
Passive exclusion
Others ignore us but do not avoid us.
Active exclusion
Others avoid us, tolerating our presence only when necessary.
Maximal exclusion
Others banish us, sending us away, or abandon us.
Source: Adapted from Leary, 2001.

310 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
to be accepted by others than when we don’t much care what they think of us. 
Indeed, it’s also possible to be accepted and liked by others but be hurt because 
they don’t like us as much as we want them to. This is what unrequited love is 
often like (see p. 265). Those for whom we feel unrequited love may be fond of 
us in return, but if we want to be loved instead of merely liked, their mildness 
is painful. 
 All of these possibilities suggest that there is only a rough connection 
between the objective acceptance or rejection we receive from others and our 
 feelings of acceptance or rejection that result, so we will focus on the  percep-
tion that others value their relationships with us less than we want them to as a core 
ingredient of the stresses and strains that we will inspect in this chapter (Leary 
& Miller, 2012). We feel hurt when our perceived relational value for others is 
lower than we want it to be. 
 HURT FEELINGS 
 In fact, the feelings of acceptance or rejection we experience in our dealings 
with others are related to their evaluations of us in a complex way: Maximal 
exclusion doesn’t feel much worse than simple ambivalence does (Buckley 
et al., 2004). Take a careful look at  Figure 10.1 . The graph depicts people’s reac-
tions to evaluations from others that vary across a 10-point scale. Maximal 
exclusion is described by the worst possible evaluation, a 1, and maximal inclu-
sion is described by the best possible evaluation, a 10; ambivalence, the point 
at which others don’t care about us one way or the other, is the 5 at the mid-
point of the scale. The graph demonstrates that once we find that others don’t 
want us around, it hardly matters whether they dislike us a little or a lot: Our 
momentary judgments of our self-worth bottom out when people reject us to 
any extent (that is, when their evaluations range from 4 down to 1). 
 On the other hand, when it comes to acceptance, being completely adored 
doesn’t improve our self-esteem beyond the boost we get from being very well-
liked. Instead, we appear to be very sensitive to small differences in regard 
from others that range from ambivalence at the low end to active inclusion at 
the high end. As people like us more and more, we feel better and better about 
ourselves until their positive regard for us is fully ensured. This all makes sense 
from an evolutionary perspective (Leary & Cottrell, 2013); carefully discerning 
degrees of acceptance that might allow access to resources and mates is more 
useful than monitoring the enmity of one’s enemies. (After all, when it comes 
to reactions from potential mates, there are usually few practical differences 
between mild distaste and outright disgust!) 
So, mild rejection from others usually feels just as bad as more extreme rejec-
tion does. But decreases in the acceptance we receive from others may have a greater 
impact, particularly when they occur in that range between ambivalence and active 
inclusion—that is, when people who liked us once appear to like us less now. Leary 
and his colleagues demonstrated the potent impact of decreases in acceptance 
when they manipulated the evaluations that research participants received from 

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 311
new acquaintances (Buckley et al., 2004). As young adults talked about themselves 
to another person over an intercom system, they received intermittent approval 
ratings on a computer screen (see Figure 10.2); the ratings supposedly came from 
their conversation partner, but they were actually controlled by the experimenters, 
who provided one of four patterns of feedback. Some people received consistent 
acceptance, receiving only 5’s and 6’s, whereas others encountered constant rejec-
tion, receiving only 2’s and 3’s. It’s painful to be disliked by others, so of course, 
those who were accepted by the unseen acquaintance were happier and felt better 
about themselves than those who were rejected. But other people received evalu-
ations that changed over time, starting poorly and getting better, or starting well 
and getting worse. In the latter case, over a span of 5 minutes, the research par-
ticipants received successive ratings of 6, 5, 3, 3, and 2. Apparently, as the new 
acquaintance got to know them better, the less the acquaintance liked them.
 The pattern of decreasing acceptance was particularly painful, causing 
more negative reactions than even constant rejection did (Buckley et al., 2004). 
Evidently, it’s especially awful to experience  drops in our perceived relational 
value —that is, relational devaluation, or apparent decreases in others’ regard 
for us—and it causes a variety of unhappy emotions. When their partners 
turned against them, people felt sad, angry, and  hurt, with the latter emotion 
being a particular sensation that is uniquely associated with losses of relational 
FIGURE 10.1. Reactions to acceptance and rejection.
This curve describes how our momentary feelings about ourselves map onto the treat-
ment we receive from others. Self-esteem increases sharply as people move from being 
ambivalent about us to wanting us around, but any rejection at all causes our self-
esteem to bottom out. When people prefer to ignore us, we feel nearly as bad about 
ourselves as we do when they order us to leave or throw us out.
1
3
5
8
10
Maximal
Exclusion
State Self-Esteem Inventory
90
78
65
53
40
Rejection–Acceptance
Ambivalence
Maximal
Inclusion
Source: Data from Leary et al., 1998.

312 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
value (Leary & Leder, 2009). Hurt feelings have much in common with real 
pain; when people suffering from romantic rejection are placed in fMRI scan-
ners and asked to study pictures of the ex-lovers who broke up with them, 
their brains respond as if they were experiencing physical pain (Eisenberger, 
2013). Rejection really hurts. And remarkably, the pain reliever acetaminophen 
reduces the pain of social rejection just as it does a headache:2 After a week-
and-a-half of daily doses of acetaminophen, college students had fewer hurt 
feelings at the end of the day than did other students who were taking a pla-
cebo (DeWall et al., 2010). Marijuana blunts3 social pain, too (Deckman et al., 
2014). Obviously, psychological wounds can cause real distress, and the sense 
of injury that characterizes hurt feelings—the feeling that relationship rules 
have been broken and that one has been damaged, shattered, cut, or stabbed—
makes hurt feelings a distinct emotional experience (Feeney, 2005). 
 When relational devaluation occurs, some people experience more hurt 
than others do. As always, attachment styles are influential. People who have 
high levels of anxiety about abandonment experience more hurt in response 
to drops in perceived relational value than those with lower anxiety do. (As 
you can imagine, their nervous dread that others don’t love them magnifies the 
hurt they feel.) And people who are high in avoidance of intimacy experience 
less pain when others withdraw; exclusion hurts less when you don’t want to 
2 Acetaminophen, the active ingredient in the product known to Americans as Tylenol, is called 
paracetamol in most places outside North America.
3 No pun intended.
Not at all
Moderately
Very much
When told to begin, please start talking about yourself and do not stop until instructed to do so.
At one minute intervals, you will receive the other participant's answer to the question,
"How much would you like to get to know the person who is speaking?," on the scale below.*
*Low ratings will indicate that the other participant is not at all interested in getting to know you.
*High ratings indicate that the other participant is very interested in getting to know you.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
FIGURE 10.2. Low relational value in the lab.
Imagine that as you describe yourself to someone in another room, one of these num-
bers lights up every 60 seconds, and you receive evaluations that start high but get 
worse and worse over time. After 5 minutes, the other person is giving you a “2” that 
indicates that he or she is quite uninterested in meeting you. How would you feel?
Source: Buckley, Winkel, & Leary, 2004.

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 313
be close to others to begin with (Shaver & Mikulincer, 2013a). People’s levels 
of self-esteem matter, too: People with low self-esteem get their feelings hurt 
more easily than those with higher self-regard do (Ford & Collins, 2010). 
 In fact, self-esteem may be an important predictor of how people respond 
to potent experiences of rejection, such as ostracism. Let’s see what happens 
when people get their feelings hurt by being ignored and getting the “silent 
treatment.” 
 OSTRACISM 
 A specific form of rejection that often occurs even in close relationships is 
 ostracism, in which people are given the “cold shoulder” and ignored by those 
around them. When the silent treatment is intentional, ostracizers deliberately 
refrain from responding to others, sometimes pretending that their targets are 
not even present. Most of us have experienced ostracism; in one broad survey, 
67 percent of Americans admitted that they had given an intimate partner the 
cold shoulder, and 75 percent reported that they had received such treatment 
from a loved one (Williams, 2001). 
 Why do people sometimes intentionally ignore their partners? Ostraciz-
ers usually justify their actions as an effective way to punish their partners, 
to avoid confrontation, or to calm down and cool off following a conflict, and 
they usually believe that the ostracism was beneficial in helping them achieve 
their goals (Sommer et al., 2001). But by its very nature, ostracism often leaves 
its targets wondering why they are being ignored. Only rarely is an explanation 
offered when a partner remains silent, and the victims of ostracism often have 
no idea why it is happening. As a result, the targets of ostracism typically do 
not consider their partners’ withdrawal to be a kind or effective way to behave, 
and they usually believe that the ostracism has damaged their relationships 
(Zadro et al., 2008). 
 Ostracism can be potent and painful because it threatens basic social 
needs (Wesselmann & Williams, 2013). It’s dehumanizing (Bastian & Haslam, 
2010). The silent treatment threatens our need to belong, damages our feelings 
of self-worth, and reduces our perceived control over our interactions. And 
our initial reactions to such threats usually involve confused, unhappy disar-
ray ( Wesselmann et al., 2012). A “cold shoulder” feels cold: When people feel 
excluded, they think the room is cooler and that warm food and drink are more 
desirable than they do when they have not been rejected (Zhong & Leonardelli, 
2008). Our bodies show signs of stress; our adrenal glands dump cortisol, a 
stress hormone, into our blood (Dickerson & Zoccola, 2013). Time seems to pass 
more slowly, too; in one study in which they were asked to estimate how much 
time had passed during a 40- second interval, people who felt accepted by others 
offered an average (and quite accurate) estimate of 42 seconds, whereas those 
who were rejected believed that 64 seconds had passed (Twenge et al., 2003). 
 What happens next seems to depend on which of a person’s needs are 
in the most peril (Wesselmann & Williams, 2013). When belongingness is 

314 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
threatened, people who are being ostracized may work hard to regain their 
partners’ regard, being compliant and doing what their tormentors want, espe-
cially when they think the relationship—and their relational value—can be 
repaired (Richman & Leary, 2009). However, they may also start looking for 
new, less punishing partners. After an experience with exclusion, people are 
often especially eager to make new, kinder friends (Maner et al., 2007). 
 More antagonistic reactions may occur when ostracism seems illegitimate 
and unjust and threatens people’s feelings of control or self-worth (Lemay et al., 
2012). When ostracized people get angry, they dismiss the opinions of those 
who are ignoring them as unfounded, unfair, and dim-witted, and they become 
more surly and aggressive (even toward innocent bystanders) than cowed and 
compliant (DeWall et al., 2009). In fact, instances of ostracism or romantic rejec-
tion precede most of the awful cases in which students take guns to school and 
shoot innocent classmates (Leary et al., 2006). Those who ostracize others are 
just as likely to frustrate and anger them as to shame or instruct them. 
 Researchers who study ostracism have developed a variety of ingenious 
procedures to create potent experiences of rejection in the lab. After short intro-
ductions to strangers, people have learned that no one wanted to work with 
them (Leary, 2005), and others have been ignored in face-to-face discussions or 
Internet chat rooms run by research assistants (Williams, 2001). But an inspired 
procedure created by Kipling Williams and his colleagues that involves a sim-
ple game of catch is especially nefarious. If you encounter this procedure, you’ll 
find yourself sitting for 5 minutes with two other people who begin playfully 
tossing and bouncing a racquetball back and forth. You’ve all just met, and 
you’re all just passing time, waiting for an experimenter to return; so, the first 
minute of play, in which you frequently receive the ball, is pretty lighthearted. 
But then things change. Over the next 4 minutes, nobody tosses you the ball. 
The two other people gleefully toss the ball between themselves and completely 
ignore you, neither looking your way nor acknowledging any protest. It’s as if 
you have ceased to exist. 
 Researchers have even conducted studies of ostracism online, and thou-
sands of people around the world have now encountered a variation of the 
ball-tossing procedure on the Web (Williams & Jarvis, 2006). In this version, 
people believe that they are online with two other people represented by screen 
icons who are sending a Cyberball back and forth by clicking each other’s 
icons. What happens next is all controlled by the computer program and there 
really aren’t any other people involved, but as in real life, after a few warm-up 
throws, participants are partially or fully excluded from the “tossing” of the 
ball. What’s striking is that this Internet ostracism is quite painful even when it 
is (apparently) dispensed by strangers one will never meet. In fact, even after 
people learn that their exclusion is controlled by the computer and that no real 
interpersonal evaluation is even remotely involved, they still get their feelings 
hurt when the computer program fails to toss them the ball (Zadro et al., 2004)! 
Ostracism even hurts when it is dispensed by groups we despise, such as the 
Ku Klux Klan (Gonsalkorale & Williams, 2007). Our species seems to be quite 
sensitive to even the merest hint of social rejection. 

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 315
 So, ostracism is an obnoxious, unpleasant experience that can be just as 
likely to engender hostility as compliance. And people with high self-esteem 
are relatively unlikely to put up with it. When they are ignored by others, peo-
ple with high self-regard are more likely than those with lower self-esteem to 
end their relationships with their ostracizers and to seek new partners who will 
treat them better—and perhaps as a result, they get the silent treatment less 
often. In comparison, people with low self-esteem experience more ostracism, 
and they are more likely to carry a grudge and to ostracize others in return 
(Sommer & Rubin, 2005). Instead of leaving those who ostracize them, people 
with low self-regard are more likely to hang around but be spiteful. 
 In sum, then, we are likely to feel sadness, anger, and hurt when others 
ostracize us, and a core ingredient in such experiences seems to be the perception 
that those others do not value their relationships with us as much as we wish 
they did. Let’s turn now to the special kind of threat to our relational value that 
occurs when we believe that a romantic rival is luring a beloved partner away.  
 JEALOUSY 
 A different kind of negative emotional experience results from the potential 
loss of a valued relationship to a real or imagined rival.  Jealousy can involve a 
variety of feelings, ranging all the way from sad dejection to actual pride that 
one’s partner is desirable to others, but the three feelings that define jealousy 
best are  hurt,  anger, and  fear (Guerrero et al., 2005). 4 
 Hurt follows from the perception that our partners do not value us enough 
to honor their commitments to our relationships, and fear and anxiety result 
from the dreadful prospect of abandonment and loss. But the unique element 
in jealousy is the romantic rival who threatens to lure a partner away: “To be 
jealous, one must have a relationship to lose and a rival to whom to lose it” 
(DeSteno & Salovey, 1994, p. 220). It’s being cast aside for someone else that 
gets people angry, and that anger is usually directed both at the meddlesome 
rival and at the partner who is beginning to stray (Schützwohl, 2008b). Some-
times that anger turns violent; 13 percent of all the murders in the United States 
result from one spouse killing another, and when that occurs, jealousy is the 
most common motive (Buss, 2000). 
 Obviously, jealousy is an unhappy experience. 
But here’s an interesting question: How would 
you feel if you  couldn’t make your lover jealous? 
Would you be disappointed if nothing you did 
gave your partner a jealous twinge? Most people 
probably would be, but whether or not that’s 
4 Jealousy is sometimes confused with envy, but the two are quite different (DelPriore et al., 2012). 
We envy someone when we wish we had what they have; envy is characterized by a humiliating 
longing for another person’s possessions. In contrast, jealousy is the confused state of hurt, anger, 
and fear that results from the threat of losing what we already have, a relationship that we do not 
wish to give up.
A Point to Ponder
Is getting your partner just 
a little jealous every now 
and then an acceptable 
thing to do? Why or 
why not?

316 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
a sensible point of view may depend on what type of jealousy we’re talking 
about, why your partner is jealous, and what your partner does in response to 
his or her jealousy. Let’s explore those issues. 
 Two Types of Jealousy 
 Reactive jealousy  occurs when someone becomes aware of an actual threat to 
a valued relationship (Buunk & Dijkstra, 2006). The troubling threat may not be 
a current event; it may have occurred in the past, or it may be anticipated in the 
near future (if, for instance, your partner expresses the intention to date some-
one else), but reactive jealousy always occurs in response to a realistic danger. A 
variety of behaviors from one’s partner can cause concern; just fantasizing about 
or flirting with someone else is considered “cheating” by most young adults in 
the United States (Kruger et al., 2013). Unfortunately, there may be a lot to be jeal-
ous about. In two surveys of over 800 American college students, lots of young 
adults reported having dated, kissed, fondled, or slept with someone while they 
were in a serious dating relationship with someone else (Brand et al., 2007). Half 
of the women and two-fifths of the men said they had kissed or fondled someone 
else, and a fifth of both men and women said they had had intercourse with a 
rival (most of them more than once). 
 In contrast,  suspicious jealousy occurs when one’s partner  hasn’t misbe-
haved and one’s suspicions do not fit the facts at hand (Buunk & Dijkstra, 2006). 
Suspicious jealousy results in worried and mistrustful vigilance and snooping 
as the jealous partner seeks to confirm his or her suspicions, and it can range 
from a mildly overactive imagination to outright paranoia. In all cases, how-
ever, suspicious jealousy can be said to be unfounded; it results from situations 
that would not trouble a more secure and more trusting partner. 
 The distinction between the two types of jealousy is meaningful because 
almost everybody feels reactive jealousy when they realize that their partners 
have been unfaithful (Buss, 2000), but people vary a lot in their tendencies to feel 
suspicious jealousy in the absence of any provocation. Nevertheless, the distinc-
tion between the two isn’t quite as sharp as it may seem. A jealous reaction to a 
partner’s affair may linger on as suspicious jealousy years later when trust, once 
lost, is never fully regained. And people may differ in their judgments of what 
constitutes a real threat to their relationship ( Guerrero, 1998). Knowledge that 
a partner is merely fantasizing about someone else may not trouble a secure 
partner who is not much prone to jealousy, but it may cause reactive jealousy 
in a partner who is insecure. So, the boundary between them can be vague, and 
as we explore individual differences in susceptibility to jealousy in our next 
section, I’ll ask a generic question that refers to both types of jealousy.  
 Who’s Prone to Jealousy? 
 On the whole, men and women do not differ in their jealous tendencies (Buunk, 
1995), but there are individual differences in susceptibility to jealousy that lead 
some people to feel jealous more readily and more intensely than other people 

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 317
do. One obvious precursor of jealousy is  dependence  on a relationship (Rydell 
et al., 2004). When people feel that they need a particular partner because their 
alternatives are poor—that is, when people have a low CL alt —any threat to their 
relationship is especially menacing. In contrast, people who have  desirable 
alternatives tend to be less jealous because they have less to lose if the relation-
ship ends. 
 Jealousy also increases with feelings of  inadequacy in a relationship (White, 
1981). People who worry that they can’t measure up to their partners’ expecta-
tions or who fret that they’re not what their lovers are looking for are less cer-
tain that their relationships will last, and they are more prone to jealousy than 
are people who feel certain they can keep their partners satisfied (K nobloch 
et al., 2001). Self-confidence in a relationship is undoubtedly affected by a 
person’s global sense of self-worth, and people with high self-esteem do tend 
to be less prone to jealousy than those with low self-esteem (DeSteno et al., 
2006). However, a person’s perceptions of his or her adequacy as a partner in a 
specific relationship are especially important, and even people with generally 
high self-esteem can be prone to jealousy if they doubt their ability to fulfill a 
 particular partner. 
 One of the ingredients in such doubt is a discrepancy in the mate value each 
person brings to the relationship (Buss, 2000). If one partner is more desirable 
than the other, possessing (for example) more physical attractiveness, wealth, 
or talent, the less desirable partner is a less valuable mate, and that’s a potential 
problem. The less desirable partner is likely to be aware that others could be a 
better match for his or her lover, and that may cause a sense of inadequacy that 
does not exist in other areas of his or her life (or with other partners). Here is 
another reason, then, why  matching  occurs with people pairing off with others 
of similar mate value (see chapter 3): Most of us want the most desirable part-
ners we can get, but it can be threatening to realize that our partners could do 
better if they really wanted to. 
 In any case, consider the perilous situation that faces people who feel both 
dependent on and inadequate in their current relationships: They need their 
partners but worry that they’re not good enough to keep them. It’s no  wonder 
that they react strongly to real or imagined signs that a romantic rival has 
entered the scene. 
Suspicious jealousy does not fit the facts at hand.
Bizarro © 2008 Dan Piraro, Dist. By King Features.

318 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
 Of course,  attachment styles influence jealousy, too. To some extent, 
people with a preoccupied style routinely find themselves in a similar fix: 
They greedily seek closeness with others, but they remain chronically wor-
ried that their partners don’t love them enough in return. That’s a recipe 
for jealousy, and sure enough, preoccupied people experience more jealousy 
than do those with the other three styles (Buunk, 1997). The folks who are 
least affected when a relationship is threatened are typically those with a 
dismissing style of attachment. Feeling self-sufficient and trying not to 
depend on others is apparently one way to stay relatively immune to jeal-
ousy  (Guerrero, 1998). 
 Finally, personality traits are also involved. People who are high in neuroti-
cism, who tend to worry about a lot of things, are particularly prone to jeal-
ousy. On the other hand, agreeable people, who tend to be cooperative and 
trusting, are less likely than others to become jealous (Buunk & Dijkstra, 2006). 
 Who Gets Us Jealous? 
 We become jealous when our partners are interested in someone else, but not 
all rivals are created equal. It’s particularly obnoxious when our friends start 
horning in on our romantic relationships; rivalry from a friend is more upset-
ting than is similar behavior from a stranger (Bleske & Shackelford, 2001). It’s 
also especially painful when our partners start expressing renewed interest in 
their former lovers (Cann & Baucom, 2004). But no matter who they are, roman-
tic rivals who have high mate value and who make us look bad by comparison 
are worrisome threats to our relationships, and they arouse more jealousy than 
do rivals who are milder competition. 
 And what kind of rivals are those? It depends on what our partners like. 
As you’ll recall from chapter 3, women care more than men do about a mate’s 
resources, so men are more jealous of other men who are self-confident, domi-
nant, assertive, and rich than they are of rivals who are simply very handsome 
(Buunk et al., 2011). On the other hand, a handsome rival is bad enough: Every-
body likes lovely lovers (Eastwick & Finkel, 2008), so attractive competitors 
evoke more jealousy in both men and women than homely rivals do (Massar 
& Buunk, 2009). The good news is that our rivals are usually not as attractive 
to our partners as we think they are, so our fears are usually o verblown—but 
the bad news is that we do make such mistakes, overestimating the desirabil-
ity of our competition and thereby suffering more distress than is warranted 
(Hill, 2007).  
 What Gets Us Jealous? 
 Evolutionary psychology has popped up here and there in this book, and 
here’s another place it’s pertinent. In this case, an evolutionary perspective 
suggests that jealousy evolved to motivate behavior designed to protect our 
close relationships from the interference of others. Presumably, early humans 
who reacted strongly to interlopers—being vigilant to outside interference, 

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 319
fending off rivals, and working hard to satisfy and fulfill their current partners—
m aintained their relationships and reproduced more successfully than did 
those who were blasé about meddlesome rivals. This perspective thus suggests 
that because it offered reproductive advantages in the past, jealousy is now a 
natural, ingrained reaction that is hard to avoid (Buss, 2000). More provoca-
tively, it also suggests that men and women should be especially sensitive to 
different sorts of infidelity in their romantic partners. 
 Remember (from chapter 1) that men face a reproductive problem that 
women do not have: paternity uncertainty. A woman always knows whether 
or not a particular child is hers, but unless he is completely confident that his 
mate hasn’t had sex with other men, a man can’t be certain (without using some 
advanced technology) that he is a child’s father. And being cuckolded and 
raising another man’s offspring is an evolutionary dead end; the human race 
did not descend from ancestors who raised other people’s children and had 
none of their own! Indeed, the potential evolutionary costs of failing to detect 
a partner’s infidelity are so great that natural selection may have favored men 
who were  too suspicious of their partners’ faithfulness over those who were not 
suspicious enough (Haselton & Galperin, 2013). Unwarranted doubt about a 
partner’s fidelity is divisive and painful, but it may not be as costly and danger-
ous to men in an evolutionary sense as being too trusting and failing to detect 
infidelity when it occurs. Thus, today, men have more extramarital affairs than 
women do (Tafoya & Spitzberg, 2007), but it’s men, not women, who are more 
accurate at detecting sexual infidelity in a cheating partner (Andrews et al., 
2008). And vigilance is sometimes sensible; as we saw in chapter 9, about 
2  percent of the world’s children are being raised by men who do not know that 
the children were fathered by another man (Anderson, 2006). 
 For their part, women presumably enjoyed more success raising their chil-
dren when they were sensitive to any signs that a man might withdraw the 
resources that were protecting and sheltering them and their children. Assum-
ing that men were committed to them when the men in fact were not would 
have been risky for women, so sexual selection may have favored those who 
were usually skeptical of men’s declarations of true love. Unfairly doubting a 
man’s commitment may be obnoxious and self-defeating, but believing that a 
mate was devoted and committed when he was not may have been more costly 
still. In our ancestral past, women who frequently and naïvely mated with men 
who then abandoned them probably did not reproduce as successfully as did 
women who insisted on more proof that a man was there to stay. Thus, modern 
women are probably the “descendants of ancestral mothers who erred in the 
direction of being cautious,” who tended to prudently underestimate the com-
mitment of their men (Haselton & Buss, 2000, p. 83). 
 As a result of all this, an evolutionary perspective suggests that men should 
experience more jealousy than women do at the thought of  sexual infidelity in 
their mates, whereas women should react more than men do to the threat of 
 emotional infidelity, the possibility that their partners are falling in love with 
someone else. Either type of infidelity can provoke jealousy in either sex, of 
course, but they differ in their evolutionary implications. For a man, it’s not a 

320 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
Stresses and Strains on Facebook
Along with its amazing reach to friends 
near and far, Facebook also makes 
possible an impressive variety of new 
ways to get our feelings hurt. Sooner 
or later, we’re likely to be disappointed 
or stung when others ignore or deny a 
friend request, remove our messages or 
photo tags, or simply don’t “like” our 
clever comments with the frequency 
they deserve (Tokunaga, 2011). We also 
learn of gatherings we missed (or to 
which we weren’t invited) and see a lot 
of conclusive photographic proof that 
everybody else is having more fun than 
we are (Krasnova et al., 2013). Because 
it connects us to a lot of acquaintances 
who, in truth, don’t value their relation-
ships with us all that much (Miller et al., 
2014), threats to perceived relational 
value abound on Facebook.
Diffi culties don’t disappear in our 
more intimate partnerships. In devel-
oping relationships, the partners have 
to decide when (if?) to go “Facebook 
offi cial” by announcing their relation-
ship to the world. Everybody assumes 
that a new status of “in a relationship” 
signals that the two who make up the 
couple now feel some commitment to 
each other (Fox et al., 2013), but women 
tend to assume that that status is more 
meaningful, entailing stronger feelings 
and more exclusivity, than men do (Fox 
& Warber, 2013). Annoyance and dissat-
isfaction can result, particularly when 
one partner feels that he or she is “in 
a relationship” and the other does not 
(Papp et al., 2012). This is not a problem 
your grandparents faced forty or fi fty 
years ago.
Finally, if you’re prone to suspi-
cious jealousy, Facebook can be a place 
of torment and peril. You can fi nd old 
photos of your partner smiling along-
side a prior partner, fret that there aren’t 
enough pictures of you on his or her 
profi le page, and stew over any of his or 
her new friends who are unfamiliar to 
you (Muscanell et al., 2013). Indeed, when 
they’re feeling jealous, women spend 
more time snooping—monitoring their 
partner’s Facebook activity—particularly 
when they’re anxious about abandon-
ment (Muise et al., 2014). (Men are less 
likely to do this, but then they tend to 
respond to jealousy differently than 
women do, as we’ll see on page 325). 
Overall, despite its wonderful capabili-
ties, Facebook has its hazards. If you fi nd 
yourself snooping a lot, and worrying 
needlessly as a result, you may want to 
step away from your screen.
partner’s love for someone else that’s the bigger threat to his reproductive 
success—it’s the  sex; his children may still thrive if his mate loves another man, 
but he certainly does not want to raise the other man’s children. For a woman, 
it’s not a partner’s intercourse with someone else that’s more dangerous, it’s 
the  love; as long as he continues to provide needed resources, her children may 
still thrive even if he impregnates other women—but if he falls in love and 
moves out entirely, her kids’ future may be imperiled. 
 This reasoning led David Buss and his colleagues (Buss et al., 1992, p. 252) 
to pose this compelling question to research participants: 
 Please think of a serious committed romantic relationship that you have had 
in the past, that you currently have, or that you would like to have. Imagine 

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 321
that you discover that the person with whom you’ve been seriously involved 
became interested in someone else. What would distress or upset you more 
( please pick only one ): 
 
 (A)  Imagining your partner forming a deep emotional attachment 
to that person. 
 
 (B)  Imagining your partner enjoying passionate sexual intercourse 
with that other person. 
 Which one would you pick? Most of the men—60 percent—said the sex would 
upset them more, but only 17 percent of the women chose that option; instead, 
a sizable majority of the women—83 percent—reported that they would be 
more distressed by a partner’s emotional attachment to a rival. Moreover, a 
 follow-up study demonstrated that men and women differed in their physi-
ological reactions to these choices (Buss et al., 1992). Men displayed more auto-
nomic changes indicative of emotional arousal when they imagined a partner’s 
sexual, rather than emotional, infidelity, but the reverse was true for women. 
 These results are consistent with an evolutionary perspective, but they 
have engendered controversy (Carpenter, 2012; Sagarin et al., 2012) with critics 
suggesting that they are less convincing than they seem. One straightforward 
complaint is methodological. The use of a “forced-choice” question in which 
research participants have to pick one option or the other can exaggerate a sub-
tle and relatively minor difference between the sexes (DeSteno, 2010). If men 
find sexual infidelity only slightly more threatening than women do, a forced-
choice question could yield the striking results Buss et al. (1992) obtained even 
if the actual difference in men’s and women’s outlooks was rather trivial. And 
in fact, when they are allowed to simply indicate that they would find both 
types of infidelity equally upsetting, most people—both men and women—do 
(Lishner et al., 2008). 
More subtly, the two types of infidelity may mean different things to 
women than they do to men (DeSteno & Salovey, 1996). Because men are more 
accepting of casual sex, women may routinely assume that a man’s sexual 
infidelity is just that: casual sex. His emotional infidelity, however, may mean 
that he’s having sex with someone else and is in love with her, which would 
make emotional infidelity the more serious threat. For their part, men may 
assume that women often love someone without having sex, but usually love 
those with whom they do have sex, and that would make her sexual infidel-
ity more momentous. In fact, men and women do generally hold such views 
(Whitty & Quigley, 2008). We tend to think that a cheating spouse is more 
likely to be emotionally attached to the illicit lover when the cheater is a 
woman instead of a man (Sprecher et al., 1998). Thus, because we assume that 
sex and love are more closely connected for women than for men,5 a choice 
between the two types of infidelity probably does mean different things for 
men than for women.
5 This assumption, you’ll recall, is correct. On average, sex and love are more closely connected 
for women than for men. Look back at our discussion of sociosexual orientation that begins on 
page 288.

322 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
Mate Poaching
The good news with regard to roman-
tic rivalries is that huge majorities— 
99 percent!—of American college stu-
dents say that they want to settle down 
with a mutually monogamous sexual 
partner at some point in their lives 
(Pedersen et al., 2002). Most of us expect 
to be faithful to one special person some -
time down the road. However, the bad 
news is that mate poaching, behavior 
that is intended to lure someone away 
from an existing relationship, is com-
monplace. Around the world, most men 
(54  percent) and quite a few women 
(34 percent) have tried to poach some-
one else’s partner (Davies et al., 2007), 
and about four-fifths of them have suc-
ceeded at least once (Schmitt et al., 2004). 
Moreover, about 70 percent of us have 
encountered a poacher’s efforts to lure 
us away from our partners (at least for 
one night), and most men (60 percent) 
and half of all women who have been 
pursued have succumbed to a poaching 
attempt (Schmitt et al., 2004).
What sort of person pursues some-
one else’s mate? In general, mate poach-
ers are horny, extraverted people who 
are low in agreeableness and conscien-
tiousness and who approve of adulter-
ous promiscuity (Schmitt & Buss, 2001); 
they also tend to be narcissistic and 
manipulative (Jonason et al., 2010) and 
to have avoidant attachment styles, so 
they are relatively disinterested in trust-
ing intimacy with others (Schachner 
& Shaver, 2002). Instead, they’re moti-
vated to poach by the challenge and 
the ego boosts they experience when 
they’re successful (Davies et al., 2010). 
None of this is very loving, and poach-
ers sound like lousy long-term mates! 
Nevertheless, the more attractive they 
are, the more successful their poaching 
attempts tend to be (Sunderani et al., 
2013), and their success may lie in the 
fact that those who succumb to poach-
ing attempts tend to resemble their 
pursuers; people who are lured away 
by poachers tend to be sexually attrac-
tive, horny, extraverted people who 
are open to experience and who do not 
much value sexual fi delity (Schmitt 
et al., 2004).
The poaching tactics used by men 
and women tend to differ. When they 
are trying to entice someone else’s mate, 
women advertise their good looks and 
sexual availability, whereas men publi-
cize their power and their willingness to 
provide their lovers desirable resources 
(Schmitt & Buss, 2001). The sexes also 
tend to adopt different approaches 
when they want to be poached and they 
wish to communicate their availability 
to potential poachers. In such cases, 
women fl aunt their beauty, promise 
access to sex, and complain about their 
current partners, whereas men offer 
compliments and are overly gener-
ous to those whose attention they seek 
(Schmitt & Shackelford, 2003).
Presumably, people succumb to 
poaching when poachers appear to 
offer benefi ts that are better than those 
available from their present partners 
(Greiling & Buss, 2000). In the long run, 
however, they may not be doing them-
selves a favor. Relationships that result 
from mate poaching inevitably begin 
with betrayal, and the partnerships that 
follow do not seem to be as satisfying 
and committed, on average, as those in 
which poaching does not occur. Poach-
ers are untrustworthy, and to some 
degree, people get poached because 
they are looking around for something 
better, and everybody involved tends 
to keep looking around even after they 
start a new relationship. Having been 
unfaithful once, they tend to be unfaith-
ful again (Foster et al., 2004).

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 323
So, consider this: You’ve discovered that your partner has fallen in love 
with someone else and is having great sex with him or her. Both emotional and 
sexual infidelity have occurred. Which aspect of your partner’s faithlessness, 
the sex or the love, bothers you more? This scenario answers the criticism that, 
individually, they mean different things to the different sexes, and in the United 
States, Korea, and Japan, more men than women chose sexual infidelity as the 
more hurtful insult (Buss et al., 1999). (In the United States, 61 percent of the 
men chose sexual infidelity as the more alarming threat, but only 13  percent of 
the women did.) In addition, the same sex difference is usually (Sagarin et al., 
2012)—but not always (Zengel et al., 2013)—obtained when people rate their 
distress in response to the two infidelities instead of just picking the one that 
bothers them most (Edlund & Sagarin, 2009), so the pattern doesn’t depend 
much on how you ask the question.
 Various other research results are also consistent with the evolutionary 
perspective. Men and women show different patterns of neural activity when 
they think about jealousy-evoking situations; regions of the brain controlling sex 
and aggression are more active in men when they think about sexual infidelity 
than when they imagine emotional infidelity, but no such difference appears in 
women (Takahashi et al., 2006). And sex differences disappear when parents are 
asked to envision the infidelity of a daughter-in-law or son-in-law. Grandmoth-
ers face the same challenges to their reproductive success as grandfathers do, so 
an evolutionary perspective suggests that they should not differ in their reactions 
to infidelity from a child’s partner. And indeed, when they imagine their sons 
or daughters having a cheating spouse, both mothers and fathers regard sex-
ual infidelity to be more worrisome when it is committed by a daughter-in-law, 
and emotional infidelity to be more distressing when it is committed by 
a son-in-law (Shackelford et al., 2004). Siblings feel the same way about their 
sisters- and brothers-in-law (Michalski et al., 2007). 
 At bottom, men and women appear to be differentially sensitive to the two 
types of threat. When the possibility exists, men are quicker to assume that 
sexual infidelity is occurring than women are, whereas women decide that 
emotional i nfidelity is occurring faster than men do (Schützwohl, 2005). After 
suspicions arise, men are more preoccupied by the threat of their mate’s sexual 
infidelity whereas women fret more about their partner’s emotional infidelity 
(Schützwohl, 2006). For instance, if they interrogate their partners, men are more 
likely than women to inquire about the sexual nature of the illicit relationship, 
whereas women are more likely than men to ask about its emotional nature 
(Kuhle et al., 2009). This pattern is evident on the TV show Cheaters, which 
allows viewers to eavesdrop as unfaithful partners are confronted with evidence 
of their infidelity by their jealous partners; careful coding of 55 episodes of the 
show revealed that jealous men were usually more keen to find out if sex had 
happened, whereas women more often wanted to know if their men had fallen 
in love with their rivals (Kuhle, 2011; see Figure 10.3). And if their suspicions 
turn out to be unfounded, men are more relieved to learn that sexual infidelity 
has not occurred, whereas women are more relieved to find that their partners 
do not love someone else (Schützwohl, 2008a). 

324 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
 Finally, the sex difference disappears, and men dread sexual infidelity only 
as much as women do when the cheating carries no risk of conceiving a child—
that is, when their partners cheat with someone of the  same sex in a gay or 
lesbian affair (Sagarin et al., 2003). Paternity uncertainty is irrelevant when a 
romantic rival is of the same sex as one’s partner, and sure enough, men and 
women are equally threatened by the two types of infidelity in such situations. 
(And which kind of rival is worse? By a large margin, men consider a lover’s 
affair with another man to be worse than one with a woman, but women think 
it would be equally awful for their men to cheat with either a woman or a man 
[Kruse et al., 2008]). 
 Our responses to the dreadful prospect of a partner’s infidelity are com-
plex, and men and women don’t differ much: All of us tend to get angry 
at the thought of a lover’s sexual infidelity, and we’re hurt by the prospect 
of an emotional affair (Green & Sabini, 2006). Clearly, the most reasonable 
conclusion from all of these studies is that everybody hates both types of 
infidelity, and here, as in so many other cases, the sexes are more similar to 
each other than different. Still, to the extent that they differ at all, women are 
likely to perceive a partner’s emotional attachment to a rival as more peril-
ous than men do, whereas men are more threatened by extradyadic sex—
and evolutionary psychology offers a fascinating, if arguable, explanation of 
these reactions.  
0
20
40
60
80
“Did you have SEX
with him/her?”
“Do you LOVE
him/her?”
The Wounded Partners’ Primary Focus
Percentage of Cases
Men
Women
FIGURE 10.3. What do jealous victims of infidelity want to know?
When they confronted their cheating partners, men were more likely than women to 
ask if their partners had had sex with an interloper. Women were more interested in 
whether their partners had fallen in love with someone else.
Source: Data from Kuhle, 2011.

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 325
 Responses to Jealousy 
 People may react to the hurt, anger, and fear of jealousy in ways that have either 
beneficial or destructive effects on their relationships (Dindia & Timmerman, 
2003). On occasion, jealous people lash out in ways that are unequivocally harm-
ful, retaliating against their partners with violent behavior or verbal antag-
onism, or with efforts to make them jealous in return (Guerrero et al., 2005). 
On other occasions, people respond in ways that may be intended to protect 
the  relationship but that often undermine it further: spying on their partners, 
restricting their partners’ freedom, or derogating or threatening their rivals. 
There are times, however, when people respond positively to jealousy by 
straightforwardly expressing their concerns and trying to work things out with 
their partners or by making themselves or their relationships more desirable (by, 
for instance, improving their appearance, sending the partner gifts, or doing 
more housework) (Guerrero & Andersen, 1998). 
 Attachment styles help determine what people will do. When they become 
jealous, people who are relatively comfortable with closeness—those with 
secure or preoccupied attachment styles—are more likely to express their con-
cerns and to try to repair their relationships than are those with more avoidant 
styles (Guerrero, 1998). By comparison, people who are dismissing or fearful 
are more likely to avoid the issue or deny their distress by pretending nothing 
is wrong or by acting like they don’t care. 
 Men and women often differ in their responses to jealousy, too, with 
consequences that can complicate heterosexual relationships. Imagine your-
self in this situation: At a party, you leave your romantic partner sitting on 
a couch when you go to refill your drinks. While you’re gone, your partner’s 
old boyfriend or girlfriend happens by and sits for a moment, and they share 
a light kiss of greeting just as you return with the drinks. What would you 
do? When researchers showed people videotapes of a scenario like this and 
measured their intentions, men and women responded differently (Shettel-
Neuber et al., 1978). Women said they would react to the rival’s interference 
by seeking to  improve the relationship; they intended to put on a show of indif-
ference but compete with the rival by making themselves more attractive to 
their partners. In contrast, men said they would strive to  protect their egos; 
they planned to get drunk, confront and threaten the rival, and pursue other 
women. Whereas women seemed to focus on preserving the existing relation-
ship (Aylor & Dainton, 2001), men considered leaving it and salving their 
wounded pride with conquests of new partners. 
 Sex differences such as these have also been obtained in other studies (Miller 
& Maner, 2008), and one thing that makes them worrisome is that women are 
much more likely than men to  try to get their partners jealous (White, 1980a). 
When they induce jealousy—usually by discussing or exaggerating their attrac-
tion to other men, sometimes by flirting with or dating them—they typically 
seek to test the relationship (to see how much he cares) or try to elicit more 
attention and commitment from their partners (Fleischmann et al., 2005). They 
evidently want their men to respond the way women do when they get jeal-
ous, with greater effort to protect and maintain the relationship. The problem, 

326 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
of course, is that that’s not the way men typically react. Women who seek to 
improve their relationships by inducing jealousy in their men may succeed only 
in driving their partners away.  
 Coping Constructively with Jealousy 
 An unhappy mixture of hurt, anger, and fear occurs when your partner wants 
you but isn’t sure he or she can keep you. It may be a natural thing for humans 
to feel, but it’s often an ugly, awful feeling that results in terribly destructive 
behavior (Buss, 2000). Someday you may find yourself wishing that you could 
feel it less intensely and limit its effects. What can be done? 
 When jealousy is justified and a rival is real, the experts suggest that we 
work on reducing the connection between the exclusivity of a relationship and 
our sense of self-worth (Salovey & Rodin, 1988). Finding that someone we love 
is attracted to a rival can be painful—but it doesn’t mean that your partner is a 
horrible, worthless person, or that you are. We react irrationally when we act as 
though our self-worth totally depended on a particular relationship. 
 In fact, when they succeed in reducing unwanted jealousy, people tend to 
use two techniques that help them to maintain a sense of independence and 
self-worth (Salovey & Rodin, 1988). The first is  self-reliance, which involves 
efforts to “stay cool” and to avoid feeling angry or embarrassed by refus-
ing to dwell on the unfairness of the situation. Endless rumination about the 
injustice that’s been done is painful, and it undermines successful adjustment 
(Elphinston et al., 2013). The second is  self-bolstering, boosting one’s self-esteem 
by doing something nice for oneself and thinking about one’s good qualities. 
Maintaining a sense of self-confidence about one’s ability to act and to survive 
independently apparently helps keep jealousy at manageable levels. 
 When people are unable to do that on their own, formal therapy can help. 
Clinical approaches to the treatment of jealousy usually try to (a) reduce irra-
tional, catastrophic thinking that exaggerates either the threat to the relation-
ship or the harm that its loss would entail; (b) enhance the self-esteem of the 
 jealous partner; (c) improve communication skills so the partners can clarify 
their expectations and agree on limits that prevent jealous misunderstandings; 
and (d) increase satisfaction and fairness in the relationship (Pines, 1998). Most 
of us don’t need therapy to cope with jealousy. But it might help some of us if 
romantic relationships came with a warning label: 
 WARNING: It may be dangerous to your and your partner’s health if you do 
not know beyond doubt that you are a valuable and worthwhile human being 
with  or without your partner’s love. 
 DECEPTION AND LYING 
 Other sources of stress and strain occur much more often than jealousy does. 
Indeed, the hazards I’ll consider next, lying and other forms of deception, occur 
so often in social life that they are commonplace (whether we realize it or not). 

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 327
As we’ll see, deception of some sort or another occurs regularly even in inti-
mate relationships that are based on openness and trust. 
 Deception  is intentional behavior that creates an impression in the recipi-
ent that the deceiver knows to be untrue (Vrij et al., 2010). Outright lying in 
which people fabricate information and make statements that contradict the 
truth is the most straightforward example of deceptive behavior, but there are 
various other ways to convey misleading impressions without coming right out 
and saying things that are untrue (Buller & Burgoon, 1994). For instance, people 
may simply  conceal information and not mention details that would communi-
cate the truth, or they may  divert attention  from vital facts, abruptly changing 
topics to avoid the discussion of touchy subjects. On other occasions, they may 
mix truthful and deceptive information into  half-truths that are misleading. I’ll 
focus on lies because they have been studied much more extensively than other 
forms of deception, but we’ll only be scratching the surface of the various ways 
intimate partners mislead each other.  
 Lying in Close and Casual Relationships 
 Research by Bella DePaulo and her colleagues (2009) has painted a remark-
able portrait of lying in everyday life. College students who keep diaries of 
their interactions with others report telling two lies a day on average, lying to 
one out of every three people with whom they interact (DePaulo et al., 1996). 
Adults off campus tell fewer lies, about one per day, lying in one of every five 
interactions. These averages are a little misleading because on any given day, 
most people—about 60 percent—don’t tell any lies, and a small minority of 
prolific liars lie a lot (Serota et al., 2010). Most people are honest most of the 
time, and only a small minority of us lie frequently (Halevy et al., 2014). Nev-
ertheless, very few people, only 5 percent, report having told no lies at all in a 
given week. Most of these lies are casual, spontaneous events that are not con-
sidered to be serious by those who tell them, and most of them are successful; 
the liars are confident that their lies are accepted most (59 percent) of the time, 
and they feel that they’ve been caught lying only rarely (19 percent of the time). 
(On other occasions, they aren’t sure of the result.) 
 In most interactions, the most common type of lie is one that benefits the 
liar, warding off embarrassment, guilt, or inconvenience, or seeking approval 
or material gain. In particular, when they are trying to appeal to a member of 
the other sex, men and women may tell lies that exaggerate their attractiveness. 
Men are more likely than women to misrepresent their ambition and income 
and to claim they are committed to a relationship when they are not. Women 
are more likely to promise but not provide sex, cry out in fake pleasure during 
sex (Brewer & Hendrie, 2011), and to fake orgasms (Muehlenhard & Shippee, 
2010). Both sexes, then, tell selfish lies that are especially designed to appeal to 
the other sex (Haselton et al., 2005). 
 However, one-fourth of all lies are told to benefit others, protecting their feel-
ings or advancing their interests, and when women interact with other women, 
such lies are as common as self-centered ones (DePaulo et al., 1996). People are 

328 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
especially likely to misrepresent the truth when brutal honesty would hurt the 
feelings of someone who is highly invested in the issue at hand. For instance, 
imagine that you really dislike a painting but are describing your feelings about 
it to an art student who may have painted it. Would you be totally  honest? In 
just such a situation, no one was (DePaulo & Bell, 1996). People typically admit-
ted that the painting wasn’t one of their favorites, but they were much less criti-
cal than they had been in prior written evaluations of the piece. 
 Some lies are obviously undertaken to promote polite, friendly interaction 
with others. We often claim to agree with others when in fact we do not, and we 
often say that we are more pleased with events than we really are. Most lies in 
close relationships, where we expect our partners to be generous and honest, are 
benevolent, small lies like these (DePaulo & Kashy, 1998). Partners may (try to) 
communicate more affection to each other than they really feel (Horan & 
Booth-Butterfield, 2013), and claim that they find each other more attractive 
than they really do (Lemay et al., 2013). But overall, people tell fewer self- 
serving, greedy lies—and fewer lies overall—to their lovers and friends than to 
acquaintances and strangers. 
 These patterns make lying sound rather innocuous in close relationships. 
However, people still tell a lot of lies to their intimate partners—in one study, 
97 percent of the participants admitted that they had lied to their lovers within 
the last week (Guthrie & Kunkel, 2013)6—and when they do tell serious lies 
about topics that could destroy their reputations or relationships, they tell them 
more often to their closest partners than to anyone else (DePaulo et al., 2004). 
The biggest deceptions we undertake occur more often in our intimate relation-
ships than anywhere else. 
 In addition, lies can be consequential even when they go undetected. In 
general, people consider interactions in which they tell a lie for any reason to be 
less pleasant and less intimate than interactions in which they are totally honest, 
and lying to a close partner makes them particularly uncomfortable (DePaulo & 
Kashy, 1998). Despite its prevalence in social life, most of us judge lying harshly 
(Tyler et al., 2006), and people evidently know they’re living dangerously when 
they lie to others. Moreover, lying in close relationships undermines the liar’s 
trust in the partner who receives the lie (Sagarin et al., 1998). This is a phenome-
non known as  deceiver’s distrust:  When people lie to others, they often begin to 
perceive the recipients of the lies as less honest and trustworthy as a result. This 
seems to occur both because liars assume that other people are just like them, 
so they assume that others share their own deceitful motives, and because they 
feel better about themselves when they believe their faults are shared by others 
(Sagarin et al., 1998). In either case, lying can sully a relationship even when the 
liar is the only one who knows that any lying has taken place. 
 Liars are also likely to think that their lies are more harmless and inoffen-
sive than the recipients do (Kaplar & Gordon, 2004). This is a common pattern 
when someone misbehaves in a partnership, and we’ll see it again a few pages 
from now when we discuss betrayals: The recipient (or victim) of a partner’s 
6 And the other 3 percent may have been lying when they said they hadn’t. That’s ironic, isn’t it?

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 329
wrongdoing almost always considers it more informative and influential than 
the perpetrator does (Cameron et al., 2002). Thus, what liars consider to be a 
small fib may be considered to be a harmful and duplicitous deceit by others 
if the lie becomes known. But that begs the question, how often do liars get 
caught? As we’ll see, the answer is, “it depends.” 
 Lies and Liars 
 Some people do lie more than others do (Kashy & DePaulo, 1996). Those who 
are gregarious and sociable, and those who are more concerned with the impres-
sions they make on others, tell more lies than do those who are less  outgoing. In 
addition, people who have insecure attachment styles tell more lies than secure 
partners do (Gillath et al., 2010). 
 However, frequent liars are not necessarily more successful liars. High 
social skill makes people more convincing (Burgoon & Bacue, 2003), but a 
liar’s performance also depends on the level of motivation (and guilt and fear) 
with which he or she enacts the lie. Lies are typically shorter and less detailed 
than truths are (Newman et al., 2003) unless the lie is important and the liar is 
highly motivated to get away with the lie; when liars care enough to send their 
very best, they create scripts that are more convincing than those authored 
by liars who are less highly motivated (DePaulo et al., 1983). However, when 
they deliver their lies, motivated liars do a poorer, more suspicious job than 
do those who have less to lose and who are more spontaneous and relaxed 
(Forrest & Feldman, 2000). People who really want to get away with a lie tend 
to be more obvious than they would be if they didn’t care so much because 
strong emotions are harder to conceal than mild feelings are (Porter et al., 2012). 
 What goes wrong when lies are detected? Most of us assume that liars look 
shifty, avoiding eye contact, fidgeting, and generally looking nervous, but that’s 
not necessarily true at all. Liars can appear to be cool and calm, and those tell-
ing the truth can fidget, and there’s no reliable relation between any particu-
lar pattern of nonverbal behavior and lying (Levine et al., 2011). Really, there is 
nothing that people do, “not a single verbal, non-verbal, or physiological cue 
[that is] uniquely related to deception” (Vrij, 2007, p. 324); “there are no clear-cut 
guaranteed clues to deceit” (Frank & Svetieva, 2013). However, careful atten-
tion to what people are saying—not just how they are saying it—can alert us to 
inconsistencies in their statements (Reinhard et al., 2011), and there may be dis-
crepancies between their verbal and nonverbal behavior that give them away. A 
fascinating frame-by-frame analysis of television coverage of people who were 
emotionally pleading for the return of a missing relative was able to distinguish 
the liars (who, as it turned out, had actually murdered the missing person!) from 
those who were telling the truth (and who were genuinely upset); these were 
high-stakes lies, and the liars could not fake entirely convincing sadness and 
completely conceal their secret pleasure (Ten Brinke & Porter, 2012). Their faces 
didn’t seamlessly match what they were saying, but the discrepancies were sub-
tle and hard to detect. And there wasn’t any particular thing that the liars were 
always doing that indicated that they weren’t telling the truth.  

330 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
 So, How Well Can We Detect a Partner’s Deception? 
 The problem is that the specific reactions that indicate that a person is lying 
can be quite idiosyncratic. People differ in their mannerisms. Some of us speak 
hesitantly most of the time, whereas others are more verbally assertive; some 
people engage in frequent eye contact, whereas others rarely look us in the eye. 
Lying is usually apparent in changes in a person’s ordinary demeanor, but to 
notice those changes, one may need some prior familiarity with the person’s 
style (Vrij et al., 2010). People can learn to detect deception in others: When 
research participants get repeated opportunities to judge whether or not some-
one is lying—and are given continuing feedback about the accuracy of their 
judgments7—they do become better judges of that person’s truthfulness. How-
ever, their improvement is limited to that particular person, and they’re no bet-
ter at detecting lying in anyone else (Zuckerman et al., 1984)! 
 Intimate partners have personal, idiosyncratic knowledge of each other 
that should allow them to be sensitive judges of each other’s behavior. But 
they also  trust each other (or their relationship probably isn’t very intimate), 
and that leads them to exhibit a  truth bias in which they assume that their 
partners are usually telling the truth (Burgoon & Levine, 2010). As a result, 
intimate partners often make very confident judgments of each other’s veracity, 
but their confidence has nothing whatsoever to do with how accurate they are 
(DePaulo et al., 1997). This means that people are sometimes certain that their 
partners are telling the truth when their partners are actually lying. 
 In fact, as relationships become intimate and trust increases, the partners’ 
accuracy in detecting deception in each other doesn’t improve, it declines 
(McCornack & Parks, 1990). Now,  if anyone routinely knows when  your inti-
mate partner is lying, you probably do. But any belief that our partners are 
completely transparent to us is probably misplaced. People tend not to be very 
skilled lie detectors: A sprawling meta-analysis of studies involving 24,483 
research participants demonstrated that we correctly distinguish truths from 
lies 54 percent of the time (Bond & DePaulo, 2006)—but because we’d be right 
50 percent of the time just by flipping a coin, that’s not very good. So, despite 
our considerable experience with our close friends and lovers, we usually do 
a poorer job of distinguishing their fact from fancy than we realize (Elaad et 
al., 2012). In fact, not many lies in close relationships are detected at the time 
they’re told; if the truth comes out, it’s usually later on, when information 
from others, physical evidence, and the occasional confession come into play 
( Burgoon & Levine, 2010). 
 Thus, people tell lots of lies, even in close relationships, and they get away 
with most of them. However, don’t pat yourself on the back if you’re currently 
deceiving a partner. You’re probably not as good at it as you think you are 
(Grieve & Hayes, 2013). And consider the big picture. People tell fewer lies 
in the relationships they find most rewarding, in part because lying violates 
7 Researchers can provide feedback like this in a lab procedure, but it doesn’t often happen in real 
relationships. How often do you get exact and accurate feedback about your judgments of a lover’s 
truthfulness?

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 331
shared expectations of honesty and trust. Keeping secrets isn’t easy. And even 
if your lies go undetected, they may poison the atmosphere in your relation-
ship, contributing to unwarranted suspicion and doubt. And you run the risk 
that if they are detected, your lies may seem to your partner to be a despicable 
example of our next topic: betrayal of an intimate partner. 
 BETRAYAL 
 People don’t always do what we want or expect them to do. Some of the sur-
prises our partners spring on us are pleasant ones (Afifi & Metts, 1998), but 
our partners occasionally do harmful things (or fail to do desirable things) that 
violate the expectations we hold for close confidants. Such acts are  betrayals, 
disagreeable, hurtful actions by people we trusted and from whom we reason-
ably did not expect such treachery. Sexual and emotional infidelity and lying 
are common examples of betrayal, but any behavior that violates the norms of 
benevolence, loyalty, respect, and trustworthiness that support intimate rela-
tionships may be considered treasonous to some degree. People who reveal 
secrets about their partners, gossip about them behind their backs, tease in 
hurtful ways, break important promises, fail to support their partners, spend 
too much time elsewhere, or simply abandon a relationship can be considered 
to have betrayed their partners (Fitness, 2012). 
 All of these actions involve painful drops in perceived relational value. 
When we are victimized by intimate partners, their betrayals demonstrate 
that they do not value their relationships with us as much as we had believed, 
or else, from our point of view, they would not have behaved as they did 
(Fitness, 2012). The sad irony is that for losses of relational value of this sort to 
occur, we must have (or think we have) a desired relationship that is injured; 
thus, casual acquaintances cannot betray us as thoroughly and hurtfully as 
trusted intimates can (Jones & Burdette, 1994). We’re not always hurt by the 
ones we love, but the ones we love  can hurt us in ways that no one else can 
(Miller, 1997b). 
 In fact, when our feelings get hurt in everyday life, it’s usually our close 
friends or romantic partners who cause us distress (Leary & Springer, 2001). 
Those partners are rarely being intentionally malicious—which is fortu-
nate because it’s very painful to believe that our partners intended to hurt us 
( Vangelisti & Hampel, 2010)—but they often disappoint us anyway. Almost 
all of us have betrayed someone and have been betrayed by someone else in a 
close relationship at some time or another. 
 Because caring and trust are integral aspects of intimacy, this may be sur-
prising, but perhaps it shouldn’t be. Most of us are close in some way to more 
than one person, and when people try to be loyal simultaneously to several 
different relationships, competing demands are inescapable. And when obliga-
tions overlap, occasional violations of the norms in a given relationship may be 
unavoidable (Baxter et al., 1997). If two of your close friends schedule their 
weddings in different cities on the same day, for instance, you’ll have to 

332 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
 disappoint one of them, even without wanting to. Moreover, we occasionally 
face competing demands within a given relationship, finding ourselves unable 
to appropriately honor all of the responsibilities of a caring friend or lover. I 
once learned that the ex-wife of a good friend was now sleeping with my 
friend’s best friend.  Honesty and openness required that I inform my friend of 
his other friend’s—and, arguably, his ex-wife’s—betrayal. However, caring and 
compassion suggested that he not be burdened with painful, embarrassing 
news he could do nothing about. It was a no-win situation. Seeking to protect 
my friend’s feelings, I decided not to tell him 
about his other friend’s betrayal—but a few 
months later, when he learned the truth (and real-
ized that I had known), he was hurt and disap-
pointed that I had kept such a secret from him. 
 Perceived betrayals sometimes occur when people 
have the best intentions but simply cannot honor 
all of the overlapping and competing demands 
that intimacy and interdependency may make 
(Peetz & Kammrath, 2011).  
 Individual Differences in Betrayal 
 Nevertheless, some of us betray our partners more often than others do. Using 
the Interpersonal Betrayal Scale in Table 10.2, Warren Jones found that betrayal 
is more frequent among college students majoring in the social sciences, edu-
cation, business, and the humanities than among those studying the physical 
sciences, engineering, and other  technical fields (Jones & Burdette, 1994). Off-
campus, betrayal is less frequent among those who are older, better educated, 
and religious. More importantly, those who report repeated betrayals of others 
tend to be unhappy and maladjusted. Betrayers tend to be resentful, vengeful, 
and suspicious people. They’re prone to jealousy and cynicism, have a higher 
incidence of psychiatric problems, and are more likely than others to come from 
broken homes. Overall, betrayers do not trust others much, perhaps because 
they wrongly attribute to others the same motives they recognize in themselves 
(Couch & Jones, 1997). 
 Men and women do not differ in their tendencies to betray others, but they 
do differ in the targets of their most frequent betrayals (Jones & Burdette, 1994). 
Men are more likely than women to betray their romantic partners and busi-
ness associates, whereas women betray their friends and family members more 
often than men do. Whether one is at particular risk for betrayal from a man or 
woman seems to depend on the part one plays in his or her life.  
 The Two Sides to Every Betrayal 
 Those who betray their intimate partners usually underestimate the harm they 
do. As we saw in chapter 4, it’s normal for people to be self-serving when they 
consider their actions, but when it comes to betrayal, this tendency leads people 
A Point to Ponder
Imagine that you discover 
your lover cheating on 
you with your best friend. 
Who do you think has 
committed the greater 
betrayal? Why?

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 333
to excuse and minimize actions that their partners may find quite harmful (Foster 
& Misra, 2013). Betrayers often consider their behavior to be inconsequential and 
innocuous, and they are quick to describe mitigating circumstances that vindi-
cate their actions (Stillwell et al., 2008). However, their victims rarely share those 
views. Those who are betrayed routinely judge the transgression to be more 
severe than the betrayers do (Feeney & Hill, 2006).  
 These two different perspectives lead to disparate perceptions of the 
harm that is done. People who are betrayed almost never believe that such 
events have no effect on their relationships; 93 percent of the time, they 
feel that a betrayal damages the partnership, leading to lower satisfaction 
and lingering suspicion and doubt (Jones & Burdette, 1994). In contrast, the 
perpetrators acknowledge that their behavior was harmful only about half 
TABLE 10.2. The Interpersonal Betrayal Scale
How often have you done each of these things? Respond to each item using this scale:
 
     1 5 I have never done this.
 
     2 5 I have done this once.
 
     3 5 I have done this a few times.
 
     4 5 I have done this several times.
 
     5 5 I have done this many times.
__ 1. Snubbing a friend when you are with a group you want to impress.
__ 2. Breaking a promise without good reason.
__ 3. Agreeing with people you really disagree with so that they will accept you.
__ 4. Pretending to like someone you detest.
__ 5. Gossiping about a friend behind his or her back.
__ 6. Making a promise to a friend with no intention of keeping it.
__ 7.  Failing to stand up for what you believe in because you want to be accepted by 
the “in” crowd.
__ 8. Complaining to others about your friends or family members.
__ 9. Telling others information given to you in confidence.
__10. Lying to a friend.
__11. Making a promise to a family member with no intention of keeping it.
__12.  Failing to stand up for a friend when he or she is being criticized or belittled by 
others.
__13. Taking family members for granted.
__14. Lying to your parents or spouse about your activities.
__15. Wishing that something bad would happen to someone you dislike.
Source: Jones & Burdette, 1994.
Add up your answers to calculate your score. The average score for college men and 
women is 36. The average for adult men and women off campus is 35. However, in a 
sample of older people over age 65, the average score was 28. The standard deviation 
of the scores people get on the scale is 8 points, so if your own score is 44 or higher, 
your betrayal score is higher than average. On the other hand, if your score is 28 or 
lower, you betray others less often than most other people do.

334 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
the time. They even think that the relationship has  improved as a result of 
their transgression in one of every five cases. Such judgments are clearly ill-
advised. We may feel better believing that our occasional betrayals are rela-
tively benign, but it may be smarter to face the facts: Betrayals almost always 
have negative, and sometimes lasting, effects on a relationship. Indeed, they 
are routinely the central complaint of spouses seeking therapy or a divorce 
(Amato & Previti, 2003).  
 Why Revenge Isn’t Such a Good Idea 
When they’ve been wronged, victims of both sexes may feel that they want 
to get some payback and exact a little revenge (Haden & Hojjat, 2006)—but 
that’s ordinarily a destructive motive and a bad idea, for several reasons. A 
first problem with revenge stems from the different perspectives of perpetra-
tor and victim, who rarely agree on the amount of retribution that’s just: When 
victims inflict reciprocal injury that seems to them to be equal to the harm they 
suffered, their retribution seems excessive to the original perpetrators (who are 
now the new victims). And if I seem to you to have been meaner to you than 
you were to me, you then need to hurt me again to balance the scales, and a cycle 
of vengefulness continues (Stillwell et al., 2008). We also tend to excuse actions 
of our own that we judge to be blameworthy in others. Self-serving perceptions 
like these were evident in a remarkable study (Buunk, 1987) of dozens of Dutch 
couples in which both partners had cheated, having extradyadic sex: Almost 
everybody thought that their faithlessness had been relatively innocuous and 
meaningless but that their partner’s infidelity had been a gross betrayal. If it’s 
okay when I do it but wrong when you do it, revenge is impossible to calibrate 
so that genuine justice is served.
A second problem is that we routinely expect revenge to be more satisfying 
than it turns out to be. When you nurse a grudge, rehearsing an injury and plot-
ting your revenge, you keep your wounds fresh and delay any healing. As it 
turns out, those who are given an opportunity for revenge stay distressed and 
surly longer than those who are wronged but then just have to move on and get 
over it (Carlsmith et al., 2008). We do ourselves no favors when we prolong an 
injury by thirsting for revenge. In addition, retaliation is usually fulfilling only 
when those who have wronged us connect the dots, understand why they’re 
now being harmed, and see the error of their ways; revenge is actually less 
satisfying than doing nothing at all when the original perpetrator fails to see 
that he or she had it coming (Gollwitzer et al., 2011). And how often does your 
partner say, “Yes, dear, you’re right, I see that I deserved that because of my 
prior misbehavior”?
Finally, people who are prone to vengeance tend to be pretty sour folks who 
are high in neuroticism, low in agreeableness, and generally less happy with 
life than those of us who are less vengeful (McCullough et al., 2001). They’re 
greedy and manipulative, too, so they’re not a fun bunch (Lee & Ashton, 2012).
So, when partners have been betrayed, they do sometimes take hurtful action 
by, for instance, destroying old letters and gifts, pursuing other relationships, 

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 335
and defaming their partners to others (Yoshimura, 2007). But spite is costly, 
both to one’s partnership and to oneself. So, let’s end our look at painful stresses 
and strains by considering the alternative: the healing process that can help a 
relationship survive a partner’s wrongdoing.
 FORGIVENESS 
 If a relationship is to continue to thrive after a painful betrayal, forgiveness 
may be necessary (McCullough, 2008). Forgiveness is “a decision to give up 
your perceived or actual right to get even with, or hold in debt,  someone 
who has wronged you” (Markman et al., 1994, p. 217). It’s a  process in which 
“harmful conduct is acknowledged” and “the harmed partner extends unde-
served mercy” to the one who has misbehaved (Waldron &  Kelley, 2008, p. 19). 
When you forgive someone, you give up your grudge and discard the desire 
to retaliate; you don’t condone—or forget—a partner’s misbehavior, but you 
do communicate your “willingness to exit from a potential cycle of abuse and 
recrimination” (Fincham & Beach, 2002, p. 240). Forgiveness doesn’t necessarily 
A Practical Guide to Getting Away with It
Deception is corrosive and forgiveness 
is good for people, so I hesitate to offer 
advice about how to get away with 
betraying someone. Nevertheless, I’m 
here to present relationship science to 
you as objectively as possible, so here 
goes. Relationships are more adversely 
affected, and forgiveness is harder to 
obtain, if our partners catch us in an act 
of betrayal or learn of it from some third 
party than if we tell them of it ourselves 
when they ask (Afifi et al., 2001). (The 
least damaging mode of discovery, if 
our partners do learn of our betrayal, is 
for us to admit our wrongdoing without 
being asked [Essayli et al., 2010], but 
that’s not the point of this box.)
So, admitting a wrong is better 
than being caught red-handed, but just 
what we say is important, too. When 
you’re asked about a transgression 
you’ve  committed, you shouldn’t deny 
it  outright, because your bold lie will 
compound your sins if (when?) the truth 
comes out. Instead, equivocate (Rycyna 
et al., 2009). Make your response as 
truthful as possible, and don’t contra-
dict the truth. A crafty strategy is to con-
fess to a less serious offense; a partial 
confession often seems more trustwor-
thy than a claim of complete innocence, 
and it avoids the harsher consequences 
of admitting the more serious wrong 
(Peer et al., 2014).
I’m not encouraging you either to 
betray or to deceive your partners. If 
you follow the guidelines presented 
here, you will be behaving disreputa-
bly. And you may not be doing your-
self a favor. We continue to maintain 
guilty secrets when we offer only partial 
confessions, and we may end up feel-
ing worse than we would have if we’d 
made a full confession. In the end, “true 
guilt relief requires people to fully come 
clean” (Peer et al., 2014, p. 215). Seems 
to me, though, the best thing to do is to 
not misbehave in the fi rst place.

336 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
mean that you regain positive feelings toward the offender—getting past your 
negative feelings and letting go of your ire and antipathy is the key (Fincham 
& Beach, 2013)—but it does make reconciliation more likely. 
 It’s not always easy to forgive someone, and it comes more readily to some 
of us than to others. Attachment style matters: Anxiety about abandonment 
and avoidance of intimacy both make people less forgiving (Kachadourian et 
al., 2004). In particular, secure people are more forgiving because they engage 
in less angry rumination that keeps an injury fresh in their minds (Burnette et 
al., 2007). Those who are high in agreeableness also forgive others relatively 
easily (Riek & Mania, 2012), in part because they are better than other peo-
ple at separating blame from anger; they can hold wrongdoers responsible for 
their misbehavior without getting angry and hostile toward them, and that is 
hard for less agreeable people to do (Meier & Robinson, 2004). Neuroticism 
impedes forgiveness; people who are prone to negative emotions can some-
times maintain grudges for years (Maltby et al., 2008). And finally, self-control 
promotes forgiveness (Burnette et al., 2014). Those of us who are better able to 
manage our motives and control our impulses find it easier to set aside a desire 
for retribution. 
 Still, no matter who we are, forgiveness comes more readily when some 
important ingredients exist. The first is genuine, sincere  contrition. Victims are 
more likely to forgive those who betray them when the offenders acknowledge 
their wrongs, accept responsibility for their actions, offer genuine atonement by 
expressing shame, regret, and remorse for their misbehavior, and promise better 
conduct in the future (Ebesu Hubbard et al., 2013; Tabak et al., 2012). Forgive-
ness is less likely to occur when excuses are given or when an apology seems 
insincere (Pansera & La Guardia, 2012). If you have misbehaved and a relation-
ship is suffering, you might do well to recognize that your behavior was harm-
ful, and apologize—but only if you really mean it (Zechmeister et al., 2004).  
 A second component to forgiveness is  empathy on the part of the victim 
(Riek & Mania, 2012). People who can take their partners’ perspectives and 
imagine why they behaved the way they did—and in particular, those who can 
admit that they’re not perfect, either (Exline et al., 2008)—are much more likely 
to forgive them than are those in whom empathy is lacking.  
 Finally, forgiveness is less likely to occur when victims brood about their 
partners’ transgressions and remain preoccupied with the damage done by 
their misbehavior (McCullough et al., 2007). We let go of anger and resentment 
when we forgive someone, but rumination about our hurt or our partners’ 
flaws tends to keep our umbrage alive, and that makes forgiveness harder to 
attain (Ysseldyk et al., 2007). 
 Fortunately, around the world, forgiveness is more likely to occur in close, 
committed relationships than in those that are less committed (Karremans et al., 
2011), because empathy occurs more easily and because the betrayers are more 
likely to apologize (Ferrara & Levine, 2009). Partners in (what were) satisfying 
relationships are also more likely to employ lenient, sympathetic attributions 
that explain the offenders’ misconduct as benevolently as possible, and that, 
too, make forgiveness more feasible (Friesen et al., 2005). 

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 337
 And importantly, forgiveness can protect the relationships in which it 
occurs. Retribution rarely gets our partners to reform and behave better, but 
forgiveness can; when people are forgiven, they often become more repentant 
and even less likely to repeat the offense (Wallace et al., 2008). Forgiveness also 
reduces conflict and encourages communication that can decrease declines in 
satisfaction and commitment (Braithwaite et al., 2011). 
 But perhaps even more significantly, people who are able to forgive their inti-
mate partners usually enjoy more personal well-being—that is, more self-esteem, 
less hostility, less distress and tension, and more satisfaction with life—than do 
those from whom forgiveness is less forthcoming (Hojjat & Ayotte, 2013). They 
also enjoy better physical health (Lawler-Row et al., 2011). Forgiveness reduces 
our hurt and pain, replacing anger with equanimity, whereas vengefulness 
increases our blood pressure, forgiveness reduces it (Hannon et al., 2012). There’s 
no question that, within intimate relationships, forgiveness is more desirable and 
beneficial to those who wield it than is vengeance. 
 Forgiveness has its limits. It won’t transform a selfish scoundrel into a 
worthy partner, and no one is suggesting that you doggedly continue to for-
give a faithless partner who repeatedly takes advantage of you. Forgiveness 
that is offered in the absence of genuine contrition may be perceived to be 
a license to offend again; after all, why should I behave better if I’m certain 
to be forgiven no matter what I do? Forgiveness is advantageous when a 
partner misbehaves rarely and deserves to be forgiven, but it can actually 
be detrimental, eroding your self-respect (Luchies et al., 2011) and delaying 
any resolution to your problems (McNulty, 2011) when your partner is unre-
pentant. In one study, forgiveness was associated with higher marital satis-
faction when spouses rarely misbehaved, but it was associated with lower 
satisfaction when one’s spouse was frequently disrespectful (McNulty & 
Fincham, 2012).
So, forgiveness is good for us and our relationships—when our partners 
and our relationships are worthy of it. When in doubt, choose forgiveness. The 
stakes are higher in intimate partnerships. It’s more painful when our partners 
misbehave, but there’s more reason to work to repair any damage that is done. 
Intimacy does open the door to excruciating costs, but it also offers the poten-
tial for invaluable, irreplaceable rewards. 
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 When Ann returned from her business trip, she described her weekend as 
pretty dull and uneventful, so Paul was surprised when he found pictures on 
her phone of a raucous dinner at which she and some guys had obviously been 
drinking and carrying on. A selfie of her sitting at a table beaming with plea-
sure as two good-looking men hugged her and kissed her cheeks really rattled 
him. Stung and unhappy, he became sullen and distant. He started giving her 
the cold shoulder and began to ponder how to “pay her back.” Ann knew that 
she had been too flirtatious, but she was secretly titillated by one of the guys 

338 
CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains
in the picture who was now e-mailing her with veiled suggestions about their 
next meeting. In addition, Ann wasn’t sure what Paul knew or suspected, but 
she was beginning to resent his petulance. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for Ann and 
Paul? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 Hazards are surprisingly common in close relationships.  
 Perceived Relational Value 
 We encounter various amounts of acceptance and rejection from others 
that inform us of our  relational value  to them. Our perception that they value 
their relationships with us less than we want them to is a core ingredient of the 
stresses and strains covered in this chapter.  
 Hurt Feelings 
 Drops in perceived relational value cause hurt feelings that leave us psycho-
logically wounded and despondent. The hurt caused by social rejection has 
much in common with physical pain. 
 Ostracism 
 People sometimes ignore their partners in order to achieve some goal, but 
the recipients of such ostracism often resent it. People with high self-esteem 
tend not to put up with such treatment. 
 Jealousy 
 People experience the fear, anger, and hurt of  jealousy when they face the 
potential loss of a valued relationship to a real or imagined rival. 
 Two Types of Jealousy.  Reactive jealousy  occurs when people get jealous in 
response to a real threat, whereas  suspicious jealousy occurs when one’s partner 
has not misbehaved and one’s suspicions do not fit the facts at hand. 
 Who’s Prone to Jealousy? Needing someone but worrying that you’re not 
good enough to keep that person is a recipe for jealousy. Personality traits and 
attachment styles influence jealousy, too. 
 Who Gets Us Jealous? Rivals who are attractive to our partners are par-
ticularly threatening.  
 What Gets Us Jealous? Men are more likely than women to consider sex-
ual infidelity to be more distressing than emotional infidelity. This finding has 
engendered criticism, but it has also been replicated around the world.  

CHAPTER 10: Stresses and Strains 339
 Responses to Jealousy. Attachment styles influence responses to jealousy, 
and men and women often differ in their responses, too. 
 Coping Constructively with Jealousy. People who succeed in reducing 
unwanted jealousy often practice self-reliance and self-bolstering.  
 Deception and Lying 
 Deception is intentional behavior that creates an impression in the recipient 
that the deceiver knows to be untrue. 
 Lying in Close and Casual Relationships. There’s a lot of lying in every-
day life.  Lies engender  deceiver’s distrust, which leads liars to perceive the recip-
ients of their lies as untrustworthy.  
 Lies and Liars. No single cue always indicates that people are lying. 
Instead, discrepancies in their nonverbal behavior and statements usually do.  
 So, How Well Can We Detect a Partner’s Deception? Intimate partners 
have detailed knowledge of each other, but they also exhibit a  truth bias that 
leads them to assume that their partners are being honest with them. Most lies 
are not detected at the time they’re proffered.  
 Betrayal 
 Betrayals are hurtful actions by people we trusted and from whom we did 
not expect such misbehavior. 
 Individual Differences in Betrayal. Frequent betrayers tend to be 
unhappy and maladjusted people who are resentful, vengeful, and suspicious 
of others. 
 The Two Sides to Every Betrayal. Betrayers often consider their behavior 
to be inconsequential and innocuous, but their victims rarely share those views. 
 Why Revenge Isn’t Such a Good Idea. Revenge is usually less satisfying 
than people think it will be, and it usually seems excessive to its targets, thus 
engendering further dispute. 
 Forgiveness 
 Forgiveness entails giving up the right to retaliate for others’ wrongdo-
ing. It occurs more readily when the betrayers apologize and the victims are 
empathic. Forgiveness usually improves the relationships in which it occurs 
when one’s partner is repentant. 

340
 C H A P T E R  1 1 
 Conflict 
 T he N ature of C onflict   ◆ T he C ourse of C onflict 
 ◆ T he O utcomes of  C onflict ◆  F or Y our C onsideration 
◆ C hapter S ummary 
 Do your friends and lovers always do everything you want, when you want 
it? Of course not. There’s no such thing as an intimate relationship that does 
not involve occasional friction and incompatibility in the desires, opinions, 
and actions of the two partners. No matter how much two people care for each 
other, no matter how well-suited they are to each other, dispute and disagree-
ment will occur (Canary & Lakey, 2013). And the more interdependent they 
are—the more time they spend together and the wider the variety of activities 
and tasks they try to coordinate––the more likely occasional conflict becomes 
(Miller, 1997b). Conflict is inevitable in close relationships. 
 It’s also very influential. Over time, the manner in which two partners 
manage their conflicts may either enhance or erode their love and regard for 
each other. In this chapter, then, we’ll examine the nature and sources of this 
sometimes frustrating, sometimes fulfilling, but ultimately unavoidable aspect 
of intimate relationships. We’ll look at how conflicts unfold, how they esca-
late, and how people can respond to them more effectively. We’ll also consider 
whether conflict can be beneficial to relationships. (What do you think the 
answer will be? Can conflict be advantageous? )
 THE NATURE OF CONFLICT 
 What Is Conflict? 
 Interpersonal conflict occurs whenever one person’s motives, goals, beliefs, opin-
ions, or behavior interfere with, or are incompatible with, those of another. Con-
flict is born of dissimilarity, which may be passing in the form of moods, or lasting 
in the form of beliefs and personality. Two people always differ in important 
ways, but I’ll employ a definition of conflict that involves active interference with 
another’s goals: Conflict occurs when one’s wishes or actions actually obstruct 
or impede those of someone else. When two partners are both able to do as they 
wish, no conflict exists. On the other hand, if one or both of them have to give up 
something that they want because of the other’s influence, conflict occurs. Anger 

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 341
and hostility aren’t necessary; we make some sacrifices to accommodate our part-
ners generously and happily. And not all conflicts are overt; we are sometimes 
unaware of the difficulties we are causing our partners (Fincham & Beach, 1999). 
It’s enough that someone knowingly or unknowingly prevents another from get-
ting or doing everything he or she wants. 
 Conflict is inescapable for two reasons. First, the moods and preferences of 
any two people will occasionally differ. Intermittent incompatibilities between 
two partners’ goals and behaviors will inevitably arise. For instance, even if 
both members of a couple are extraverted, hard-partying social animals, one 
of them will occasionally be disappointed by the other’s wish to leave a party 
before it’s over; a case of the flu or an upcoming exam in a close relationships 
class will make one of them, but not the other, unwilling to stay late. 
 Second, conflict is unavoidable because there are certain tensions that are 
woven into the fabric of close relationships that will, sooner or later, always 
cause some strain. When they devote themselves to an intimate relationship, 
people often experience opposing motivations called  dialectics that can never 
be entirely satisfied because they contradict each other (Baxter, 2004). Fulfilling 
one goal may endanger another, so partners must engage in a delicate balanc-
ing act that leaves them drawn in different directions at different times. And 
with each partner vacillating between the pursuit of these opposing goals, 
occasional conflict between their predominant individual motives is inescap-
able (Erbert, 2000). 
 For instance, one potent dialectic in close relationships is the continual ten-
sion between personal  autonomy and connection to others. On one hand, people 
often want to be free to do what they want, so they value their independence 
and autonomy. On the other hand, they also seek warm, close connections to 
others that can make them dependent on particu-
lar partners. So, which do they pursue? Intimacy 
or freedom? Independence or belonging? It’s rea-
sonable to assume that most people want some of 
both, but embracing one of them can mean deny-
ing the other. So people’s preferences may swing 
back and forth as they come to be more influenced 
by whichever motive has lately been less fulfilled. 
Maintaining an equilibrium between the two 
desires is a tricky balancing act (Slotter et al., 2014), 
and we can’t simultaneously maintain high  in dependence from a romantic 
partner and high  inter dependence with him or her, so something’s got to give. 
Conflict between the partners is likely to occur as they strive to fulfill opposing 
motives at different rates and at different times. 
 Another powerful dialectic is the tension between  openness and  closedness. 
Intimacy involves self-disclosure, and intimate partners are expected to share 
their thoughts and feelings with one another. However, people also like their 
privacy, and there are some things that prudent partners want to keep to 
themselves (Petronio, 2010). On the one hand, there’s candor and transparent 
authenticity, and on the other hand, there’s discretion and restraint. 
A Point to Ponder
Does your primary partner 
respond to your texts as 
quickly and consistently 
as you wish?  Might you 
be infringing on his or her 
autonomy by expecting 
too much constant contact?

342 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
 There’s also friction between  stability and change. People with pleas-
ant partnerships will want to maintain and protect them, keeping things the 
way they are. But people also relish novelty and excitement (Sheldon et al., 
2013). Too much stagnant predictability becomes mundane and monotonous 
( Harasymchuk & Fehr, 2013). So, people are attracted to both the familiar and 
the new, and occasional indecision and conflict may result. 
 Finally, there’s dialectic tension between  integration with  and separation 
from one’s social network. Would you rather go to that party with your friends 
or stay home and snuggle with your sweetheart tonight? Will you travel to 
your in-law’s home for Thanksgiving again this year or stay home and begin 
your own family tradition? One’s motive to stay involved with other people is 
sometimes at odds with the wish to devote oneself to a romantic partnership. 
People see less of their friends when they invest time and effort into a romantic 
relationship (Fehr, 1999), and finding a satisfying ratio of time spent with and 
time apart from other people can be difficult. 
 Altogether, these four dialectics––autonomy versus connection, openness 
versus closedness, stability versus change, and integration versus separation— 
accounted for more than one-third of the recent fights and arguments reported 
by married couples in one study (Erbert, 2000). And what’s important is that 
these tensions typically continue to some degree throughout the entire life of 
a relationship (Baxter, 2004). The dilemmas posed by fluctuating, opposing 
motives in close relationships never end. Sooner or later, conflict occurs.  
 The Frequency of Conflict 
 How often do partners engage in conflict? Frequently, but the answer var-
ies with the population studied and the way in which conflict is defined and 
assessed. Little children and their parents are often at odds; one study deter-
mined that some conflict occurred every 3.6 minutes in conversations between 
4-year-olds and their mothers (Eisenberg, 1992)! Adolescents encounter an aver-
age of seven disagreements per day in their various relationships (Laursen & 
Collins, 1994), and dating couples report 2.3 conflicts per week when they keep 
diaries of their interactions (Lloyd, 1987). Spouses report seven memorable 
“differences of opinion” every 2 weeks (Papp et al., 2009), and they experi-
ence one or two “unpleasant disagreements” each month (McGonagle et al., 
1992). And, importantly, many conflicts are never addressed; in one investi-
gation, Northwestern University students didn’t mention to their partners 
40 p ercent of the conflicts and irritations they identified in their dating 
r elationships ( Roloff & Cloven, 1990). Conflict not only is common in close rela-
tionships, it also probably occurs more often than we realize. 
 However, as you might expect, some people experience more conflict than 
other people do. Various influences are correlated with the amount of conflict 
we encounter: 
 Personality. People who are high in neuroticism are impulsive and irascible, 
and they have more unhappy disagreements with others than people of low 
neuroticism do (Heaven et al., 2006). In contrast, people high in agreeableness 
are good natured, cooperative, and generally easy to get along with, and they 

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 343
have fewer conflicts; if conflict does occur, they also react more constructively 
than people of low agreeableness do (Jensen-Campbell & Graziano, 2001). 
 Attachment style.  Secure people encounter less conflict—and manage it bet-
ter when it does occur—than insecure people do (Mikulincer & Shaver, 2013). In 
particular, because they fret that their partners may leave them, people who are 
anxious about abandonment nervously perceive dissension and difficulty where 
it does not exist, and then respond with greater hurt and distress than others 
would (Overall et al., 2014). A married couple comprised of an anxious wife and 
an avoidant husband is especially combustible: Her exaggerated fears chase him 
away, and his withdrawal then further fuels her worries (Barry & Lawrence, 
2013). In the lab, both members of such couples evidence elevated levels of stress 
before a discussion of a disagreement even begins (L. Beck et al., 2013). 
 Stage of life. If you’re a young adult, you may be experiencing more conflict 
with your partners than you used to. It’s typical for people to develop lasting 
romances and to begin professional careers in their mid-20s, and, according 
to a longitudinal study of young adults in New York state, these life changes 
are routinely associated with increased conflict (Chen et al., 2006). As you can 
see in  Figure 11.1 , conflict with romantic partners increases steadily from our 
late teens to our mid-20s, but things settle down somewhat thereafter. 
45
40
35
0
30
19
21
23
25
27
Age
Conflict with Romantic Partners 
FIGURE 11.1. Romantic conflict in young adulthood.
The many changes accompanying passage into adulthood—which often include gradu-
ation from college and entry into new careers—are associated with increased conflict in 
our romantic relationships. But things settle down after a while.
Source: Data from Chen et al., 2006.
Note. On the rating scale used by the researchers, a score of 0 indicated “no conflict,” a score of 
25 indicated “occasional mild disagreements,” and 50 meant “some arguing and bickering with 
infrequent flare-ups.”  

344 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
 Relationships get even more placid in our elder years. Older couples usu-
ally have fewer disagreements about children and money and other touchy top-
ics than middle-aged couples do (Levenson et al., 1993), and they tend to shy 
away from talking about the things they do disagree about (Holley et al., 2013). 
 Similarity. Conflict emerges from incompatibility, so it’s not surprising that 
the less similar dating partners are, the more conflict they experience (Surra & 
Longstreth, 1990). This pattern continues if people marry; spouses who share 
similar tastes and expectations encounter less conflict and enjoy happier mar-
riages than do those who have less in common (Huston & Houts, 1998). Indeed, 
those who really believe that “opposites attract” are likely to learn some hard 
lessons if they start living with someone who is notably different from them. 
Dissimilarity fuels friction, not smooth sailing. 
Sleep. Partners tend to sleep poorly after they quarrel, and that leaves them 
grumpy and irritable the next day (El-Sheikh et al., 2013).  As a result—and 
whenever either of them has slept poorly—romantic couples encounter more 
conflict that day (Gordon & Chen, 2014).  Sleeplessness breeds conflict, so if you 
and your partner are getting testy and tetchy, try to get a good night’s sleep.
 Alcohol. Finally, lest there be any doubt, alcohol does not make people more 
agreeable and courteous; instead, intoxication exacerbates conflict. An intrigu-
ing study of alcohol’s effects invited men who were either sober or intoxicated 
to revisit a recent romantic conflict (MacDonald et al., 2000). Drunkenness 
made the men more sour and surly; in response to events of the same average 
intensity, intoxicated men were more hostile and blaming than sober men were. 
Adding alcohol to a frustrating disagreement is a bit like adding fuel to a fire.  
 THE COURSE OF CONFLICT 
 Instigating Events 
 So, what events cause conflict? A wide-ranging review of conflict studies by 
Donald Peterson (2002, p. 367) concluded that couples may disagree about 
almost any issue: “how to spend time together, how to manage money, how to 
deal with in-laws, frequency and mode of sexual intercourse, who did which 
chores, insufficient expressions of affect (not enough affection), exaggerated 
expressions of affect (moodiness, anger), personal habits, political views, reli-
gious beliefs, jealousies toward other men and women, relatives, and the cou-
ples’ own children.” You name it, and some couple somewhere is quarreling 
over it. After David Buss (1989) asked students at the University of Michigan to 
specify things that men do that upset women (and vice versa), he grouped their 
answers into  147 distinct sources of conflict. It’s obvious that the interdepen-
dency that characterizes an intimate relationship provides “abundant opportu-
nities for dispute” (Peterson, 2002, p. 367). 
When spouses keep track of all of their disagreements over a span of 
15 days, some topics recur more often than others (Papp et al., 2009). As 
you can see in Table 11.1, those who are parents disagree more about how 

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 345
to manage, discipline, and care for their children—and when—than about 
anything else. (Remember that people who haven’t read chapter 6 sometimes 
naïvely believe that having kids will make their marriages happier—but in 
fact, the reverse is true [Wendorf et al., 2011].) The division and performance 
of household chores and responsibilities are next on the list (remember, it’s 
hard, but important, to divide them fairly [Amato et al., 2007]), and commu-
nication is third (i nvolving problems with interpersonal gaps and perceived 
partner responsiveness). It’s down in sixth place, but the most enduring, con-
tentious, and sometimes surly disagreements revolve around money: who’s 
earning and who’s spending what, and what’s being bought. Arguments 
about money are particularly potent in undermining marital satisfaction 
(Britt & Huston, 2012).
 To make sense of this variety, Peterson (2002) classified the events that 
instigate conflicts into four common categories: criticism, illegitimate demands, 
rebuffs, and cumulative annoyances.  Criticism  involves verbal or nonverbal 
acts that are judged to communicate dissatisfaction with a partner’s behavior, 
attitude, or trait (Cupach, 2007). It doesn’t matter what the actor intends by his 
or her remark or behavior; what matters is that the target interprets the action 
as being unjustly critical. A mild suggestion about how to load the dishwasher 
to fit more stuff in may injure one’s partner and engender conflict if the sugges-
tion is judged to be needless criticism. 
 Illegitimate demands  involve requests that seem unjust because they 
exceed the normal expectations that the partners hold for each other. Even 
TABLE 11.1. Issues That Produce Marital Conflict
Each night, husbands and wives made notes about any disagreements they had had 
that day. The topics they listed are presented in order of the frequency with which they 
were mentioned. Because a particular episode of conflict could—and often did—touch 
on more than one topic, the frequencies exceed 100%.
Topic
Issues
Proportion of Conflicts
Children
Care for and discipline of the kids
38%
Chores
Allocation of and performance of 
 h ousehold duties
25
Communication
Paying attention, listening, 
 misunderstandings
22
Leisure
Choice of and time spent in recreation
20
Work
Time spent at work; co-workers
19
Money
Bills, purchases, spending, wages
19
Habits
Annoying behaviors
17
Relatives
Family, in-laws, stepchildren, ex-spouses
11
Commitment
The meaning of commitment; infidelity
9
Intimacy
Displays of affection; sex
8
Friends
Time spent and activities with friends
8
Personality
A partner’s or one’s own traits
7
Source: Data from Papp et al., 2009.

346 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
when one partner is frantically completing a major project, for instance, the 
other may be upset by being asked to fix dinner  and do the dishes three nights 
in a row. 
 Rebuffs involve situations in which “one person appeals to another for a 
desired reaction, and the other person fails to respond as expected” (Peterson, 
2002, p. 371). Someone whose partner rolls over and goes to sleep after receiv-
ing an implicit invitation to have sex is likely to feel rebuffed. 
 Finally,  cumulative annoyances are relatively trivial events that become 
irritating with repetition. Such events often take the form of  social allergies: 
Through repeated exposure to small recurring nuisances, people may develop 
h ypersensitive reactions of disgust and exasperation that seem out of propor-
tion to any particular provocation. Women are especially likely to become 
annoyed with men’s uncouth habits, such as belching at the dinner table, and 
men are likely to grow irritated with women’s lack of consideration, such as 
being late for appointments and shopping too long ( Cunningham et al., 2005). 
 Evolutionary psychology makes its own intriguing predictions about 
conflict in close relationships (Buss, 2012). From an evolutionary perspective, 
some conflict in heterosexual relationships flows naturally from differences 
in the partners’ reproductive interests. Presumably, given their lower paren-
tal investment in any babies that may result, men can afford to be more inter-
ested in casual, uncommitted sex than women are; by comparison, women 
should be more prudent, offering access to sex only in return for meaningful 
commitment from a man. And in fact, the frustrations that men and women 
usually encounter early in a romantic relationship run right along these 
lines: “Women, far more than men, become angry and upset by those who 
want sex sooner, more frequently, and more persistently than they want. 
Men, far more than women, become angry and upset by those who delay sex 
or thwart their sexual advances” (Buss, 2000, p. 38). The question of whether 
to have sex is usually answered when people settle into established relation-
ships, but the question of how often to have sex may persist for decades. 
Differences in sexual desire cause conflict for  most  couples, requiring nego-
tiation, trade offs, and adjustment, and in most cases the difficulty never 
disappears completely (Elliott & Umberson, 2008). Individual differences in 
sexual tastes and drives can remain a source of distressing rebuffs as long as 
a relationship lasts. 
I can also note that the sore points routinely encountered by gay and les-
bian couples don’t differ much from those that vex heterosexuals. Gay men are 
more likely than anyone else to disagree about the rules regarding extradyadic 
sex, but otherwise, gays and lesbians are just as likely as their straight brothers 
and sisters1 to fuss about chores, communication, money, and all the rest of the 
topics in Table 11.1 (Solomon et al., 2005). When it comes to conflict, as with 
so many other aspects of intimacy, sexual orientation doesn’t have much to do 
with how (or if) close relationships work.  
1 This can be taken literally. The married heterosexual participants in Solomon et al.’s (2005) study 
were siblings of the gay and lesbian participants. Clever procedure, wasn’t it?

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 347
 Attributions 
 The differing perspectives that any two people bring to their interaction will 
often be another source of exasperating disagreement.  Actor-observer effects 
 guarantee that partners will have slightly different explanations for their actions 
than anyone else does, and  self-serving biases  lead them to judge their own 
actions more favorably than others do.  2   In particular, although people readily 
recognize self-serving attributions in others’ judgments of events, they usually 
consider their own similarly biased perceptions to be impartial and fair (Pronin 
et al., 2002). Thus, two partners’ attributions routinely differ, and this can create 
conflict in two different ways. First, frustrating misunderstandings can result if 
people fail to appreciate that their partners always have their own individual 
points of view. And second, if those differing views come to light, the partners 
may engage in  attributional conflict, fighting over whose explanation is right 
and whose account is wrong. Partners may agree entirely about what one of 
them did but simultaneously disagree completely about why that person did it. 
(“You left that there just to annoy me!” “No, I didn’t. I went to answer my phone 
and forgot about it.”) Attributional arguments are often hard to resolve because 
when people disagree with us, we tend to think they’re biased, and that’s exas-
perating (Kennedy & Pronin, 2008). Moreover, there may not be any single 
explanation for an event that is objectively and conclusively correct. People who 
may have behaved selfishly, for instance, will often have difficulty realizing that 
they were greedy, and they’ll tend to be blind to the manner in which their own 
selfishness may elicit similar thoughtlessness in return. The interactions two 
partners share may be affected by so many subtle influences that reasonable 
people can, and often will, disagree about why things turn out the way they do.
 Then, when any conflict occurs, the explanations with which intimate part-
ners account for the frustrations they encounter have a huge influence on how 
distressed they feel and how angrily they respond. (See the box, “Mastering Our 
Anger,” that begins on the next page.) If a partner’s misbehavior is construed to 
be an unintentional accident, being attributed to external and unstable causes, the 
partner will seem relatively blameless, and strong emotion (and retribution) will 
be inappropriate. In contrast, if a partner’s misdeeds are attributed to internal 
and stable sources, the misdeeds seem intentional and the partner seems mali-
cious, selfish, indecent, or inept––and in such circumstances, one’s inconvenience 
seems unjust, and one’s anger fitting (Canary & Lakey, 2013). It’s no accident 
then, that happy couples are less likely than unhappy couples to regard their 
partners as selfishly motivated and as behaving unfairly with negative intent 
(Kluwer et al., 2009). Benevolent attributions paint a partner in a favorable light 
and make it seem likely that conflicts can be resolved, and that’s one reason such 
attributions promote continued satisfaction with a relationship (Fincham 2001). 
 Specific responses to conflict are also shaped by our attributions for an 
event. When we judge that our partners can change an unwanted behavior—so 
that our efforts to resolve a conflict may pay off—we’re more likely to announce 
2 We introduced these attributional patterns on pages 114–115, back in chapter 4.

348 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
Mastering Our Anger
Some people believe that when they are 
cruelly provoked, their anger is some-
thing that just happens to them that 
is beyond their control. Even worse, 
popular notions suggest that once we 
get angry, it’s dangerous to bottle it 
up; when we get “hot” or “steamed,” 
we have to “vent,” or we’ll suffer high 
blood pressure and continuing stress. 
However, there are two huge problems 
with such beliefs: First, they’re simply 
wrong (Tice & Baumeister, 1993), and 
second, they promote behavior that 
may actually cause higher stress that 
lasts for longer periods of time (Olatunji 
et al., 2007).
Because it takes effort to control 
and manage angry emotion, people 
often “blow off steam” by directing furi-
ous, fuming behavior at their adversar-
ies (or, occasionally, at innocent third 
parties). Releasing our ire is supposed 
to make us feel better, but that simple-
minded notion ignores the interpersonal 
consequences of surly behavior. “When 
you ‘let out’ an emotion it usually lands 
on somebody else, and how you feel—
relieved, angrier, depressed—is going 
to depend on what the other person 
does” (Tavris, 1989, p. 145). Sometimes, 
the targets of our wrath accept our 
anger, apologize, and strive to remedi-
ate their sins. But in close relationships, 
where people expect generous and tol-
erant treatment from each other, aggres-
sive displays of anger often just get 
our partners angry in return. And then 
there may be two irate people fussing 
and sniping at each other in a churlish 
interaction that perpetuates, rather than 
reduces, the anger in the air.
The bottom line is that “express-
ing anger while you feel angry nearly 
always makes you feel angrier” (Tavris, 
1989, p. 223). People who lash out at their 
partners in the heat of anger often stay 
angry longer and suffer more cardio-
vascular stress than they would if they 
behaved more moderately. By compari-
son, when we gain control of our anger, 
calm down, and then voice our com-
plaints in an assertive but less heated 
fashion, we more often get understand-
ing and cooperation from our partners 
and are more likely to get what we want. 
The belief that it’s a good idea to vent and 
blow off steam when you get angry may 
seem like common sense, but it’s actually 
common nonsense (Lohr et al., 2007).
So, how can we manage our anger? 
Because irritation and resentment are 
signs that something is wrong, we 
shouldn’t ignore anger and pretend 
that it doesn’t exist. But it’s usually 
wise to reduce the venom and fury 
we dump on our partners, and there 
are several ways to do this (Tice &
Baumeister, 1993). First, we can think 
differently. Anger is infl amed by percep-
tions that our partners acted negligently 
or maliciously, so the attributions with 
which we explain some annoyance are 
key. When you feel anger coming on, 
consider why your partner may have 
behaved that way without wishing to 
injure or annoy you; rethinking the 
event may keep your indignation in 
check (Finkel et al., 2013). It’s also help-
ful to pretend that you’re a “fl y on the 
wall,” watching events unfold from a 
dispassionate, third-party perspective; 
any anger will seem more remote if 
you do (Mischkowski et al., 2012). Sec-
ond, if you do get angry, chill out. Don’t 
engage in infuriated interaction. Leave 
the room, take a walk, and count to 10 
(or 10,000). Take no more than six long, 
slow, deep breaths per minute and you 
will calm down, more quickly than you 
think, especially if you stop rehearsing 

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 349
our discontent and to constructively seek solutions than is the case when we 
believe that our partners cannot change (Kammrath & Dweck, 2006). People 
tend to just sit and stew when they think a problem is set in stone.  
 Engagement and Escalation 
 Indeed, once an instigating event occurs, partners must decide either to address 
the issue or to avoid it and let it drop. This decision is the first choice point in 
Peterson’s (2002) general model of conflict, which appears in  Figure 11.2 . (At 
first glance, you may find the figure a little daunting, but be patient; it cleverly 
illustrates several different manners in which conflict can unfold. Trace some of 
the paths and see.)  Avoidance occurs only when both partners wish to evade the 
issue, and it presumably transpires either when the event is seen as insufficient 
to warrant active dispute or when the issue seems intractable and conflict will 
do no good (Zacchilli et al., 2009). 
 Otherwise, the issue is addressed. In some cases, the couple enters into 
 negotiation and seeks to resolve the conflict through rational problem solving. 
However, in other cases,  escalation occurs and the conflict heats up. Escalation 
often involves the dysfunctional forms of communication I described in chap-
ter 5. Other issues may get dragged into the interaction, scornful disregard of 
the partner may be expressed, and belligerent demands and threats may be 
made. Angry fighting may ensue. 
 When partners say mean and nasty things to each other, they can be of two 
types (Canary & Lakey, 2013).  Direct tactics explicitly challenge one’s partner; 
they’re “in one’s face.” They include (a) accusations that criticize the partner and 
attribute negative qualities to him or her; (b) hostile commands for compliance 
that sometimes involve threats of physical or emotional harm; (c) antagonistic 
questions; and (d) surly or sarcastic put-downs that communicate disgust or 
disapproval (including argumentative interruptions and shouting down one’s 
partner).  Indirect nasty tactics manage the conflict in a less straightforward man-
ner; one’s displeasure is veiled, and one’s intentions are less explicit. Indirect 
tactics include (a) condescension or implied negativity that hints at animosity 
or arrogance; ( b) dysphoric affect, such as melancholy, dejection, or whining; 
(c) attempts to change topics preemptively, and (d) evasive remarks that fail 
the injustice in your mind. Finally, fi nd 
humor where you can. It’s impossible to 
feel jocular and angry at the same time, 
so anything that lightens your mood will 
decrease your anger (Yuan et al., 2010).
All of this is easier said than done, 
and some people will need to “prac-
tice, practice, and practice a lternative 
responses” before they can reform 
their angry habits (Notarius et al., 1997, 
p. 245). The time to rehearse is when 
small annoyances occur, and it’s very 
helpful when both partners are involved. 
And the good news is that destructive 
anger can be overcome; “if you each try 
to help the other person master a new 
way of dealing with anger, and do this 
repeatedly, you will fi nd the old pat-
terns giving way to change” (Notarius 
et al., 1997, p. 246).

350
FIGURE 11.2. The possible courses of conflict from its beginnings, through its middle stages, to its termination. Arrows indicate the likely 
sequences, ending with avoidance, separation, or any of four other possible terminations of the conflict.
Source: Kelley et al., 2002.
Beginnings
Middle Stages
Conflict of
interest,
situational
stress,
resentment
Interference
with goal-
directed
action:
criticism,
illegitimate
demand,
rebuff, or
cumulative
annoyance
Issue
perceived
as significant
but solvable;
low risk in
conflict
Avoidance
Issue
perceived as
trivial or
insolvable; high
risk in
conflict;
conflict may
end here
Escalation
Generalization
of issue,
attribution of
blame to other,
personal
attack,
coercion,
threat,
intensified
demands
Negotiation
Problem-solving
communication,
information
exchange,
search for
solution
Separation
Problem
perceived as
unmanageable,
continued
blame of other,
unwillingness
to negotiate;
conflict may
end here
Conciliation
Seriousness
of problem
reframed,
acknowledgment
of personal
responsibility,
willingness
to negotiate
Reconciliation
Conciliation
plus unusual
expressions of
affection,
commitment
to relationship
Negotiation
Problem-solving
communication,
information
exchange,
search for
solution
Termination
Structural
Improvement
Favorable changes
in causal conditions
governing
relationship;
requires strong
initial affection,
open communication,
assertion of personal
worth, allowances of
differences in other
Integrative
Agreements
Original goals of
both parties satisfied;
requires cooperation,
stubbornness
about goals,
flexibility about
means
Compromise
Aspirations of
both parties reduced;
best solution
available in many
competitive
situations; requires
cooperation
Domination
One party wins,
the other loses;
power unevenly
distributed,
reinforced
coercion
Separation
Problem
perceived as
unmanageable,
continued blame
of other,
unwillingness to
negotiate
Predisposing
Conditions
Initiating
Events
Engagement
or

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 351
to acknowledge the partner or that fail to recognize the conflict. All of these 
behaviors are obnoxious to some degree, and they tend to inflame, rather than 
to resolve, conflict. Satisfied partners engage in these behaviors less often than 
discontented, disgruntled partners do, and married couples who routinely fight 
in such a manner are much more likely to divorce than are those who rarely act 
this way (Birditt et al., 2010). 
 Surly interaction has more damaging effects when it gets under your skin. 
Cantankerous conflict that involves the abrasive elements of contempt, defen-
siveness, stonewalling, or belligerence annoys, exasperates, or infuriates most 
of us, and those emotional reactions engender physiological arousal and stress. 
Crabby, cranky interactions have real physical impact; they increase our heart 
rates and blood pressures, dump stress hormones into our bloodstreams, and 
depress our immune functions so that we are more susceptible to infection 
(Loving et al., 2006). When they are exposed to a cold virus under controlled 
conditions in a lab, people who have recently been experiencing chronic con-
flict at home are two-and-a-half times more likely to catch a cold and get sick 
(Cohen et al., 2003). Wounds even heal more slowly after hostile interactions 
with one’s spouse (Gouin et al., 2010). Worse, these effects may accumulate 
over time; a study of more than 9,000 people in England over a span of 12 years 
found that those who encountered a lot of surly conflict in their close relation-
ships were more likely to have heart attacks (De Vogli et al., 2007). 
 Ill-tempered petulance from one partner routinely gets the other (at least 
somewhat) angry, too. (Be  sure  not to skip the box on “Mastering Our Anger” 
three pages back.) But surly conflict turns especially fractious when the part-
ners fall into a pattern of  negative affect reciprocity in which the partners trade 
escalating provocations back and forth. This pattern is not often found in happy, 
well-adjusted couples (who do a better job of exiting the cycle when things start 
to heat up), but it is routinely exhibited by distressed, dissatisfied couples in 
deteriorating partnerships (Gottman et al., 1998): One person’s testiness makes 
the other partner peevish, so he or she snaps back; the first person becomes 
more aggravated, and the second exhange is more noxious. Stronger words are 
shared, both partners fan the flames of the other’s irritation, and both of them 
become increasingly angry and embittered as the interaction proceeds. 
 High emotion of this sort makes conflict particularly corrosive, so it’s reas-
suring that some of us are less likely than others to become so upset (Smith et al., 
2011). People with secure attachment styles experience milder physiological 
responses to conflict than insecure people do (Powers et al., 2006). Compared to 
those who are high in either avoidance of intimacy (Overall et al., 2013) or anxi-
ety about abandonment  (Kim, 2006), people with secure styles of attachment 
are less angry, cooler and calmer, and more collaborative and optimistic when 
conflict arises. They bounce back from conflict, putting dissension behind them 
and returning to a positive state of mind, more quickly, too (Salvatore et al., 
2011). People also tend to experience less stress during an episode of conflict 
when their partners are secure rather than insecure (Powers et al., 2006).  
 Nevertheless, for many of us, conflicts that escalate too far or too often have 
physical as well as psychological effects. And those physiological reactions may 

352 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
be very influential; newlyweds who experience stronger surges of  adrenalin 
when they discuss their conflicts are notably less likely to be happily married, 
or even married at all, 10 years later (Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2003). 
 The Demand/Withdraw Pattern 
 Another unpleasant pattern of interaction that exacerbates conflict is the 
demand/withdraw pattern, in which “one partner engages in demanding 
forms of behavior, such as complaints, criticisms, and pressures for changes, 
while the other partner engages in withdrawing forms of behavior, such as half-
hearted involvement, changing the topic, avoiding discussion, or even walk-
ing away” (Eldridge & Baucom, 2012, p. 144). The pattern is objectionable in 
part because it is self-perpetuating. Frustrated by the withdrawer’s retreat, the 
demander is likely to become more insistent that the issue be addressed —but 
this increased pressure makes the withdrawer even more resistant and close-
lipped, and the pattern continues. It’s a dysfunctional way to manage conflict 
that leaves the demander feeling disregarded and misunderstood, and over 
time, it undermines a couple’s satisfaction with their relationship (Eldridge & 
Baucom, 2012). 
 Men and women do not differ much in their other responses to conflict 
(Gayle et al., 2002), but there is a difference here: Around the world, women 
are the demanders and men the withdrawers more often than not (Christensen 
et al., 2006). Both men and women, in both heterosexual and same-sex cou-
ples, sometimes withdraw when their partners want to discuss and change 
the status quo (Holley et al., 2010), but women are generally more likely than 
men to speak up and to initiate discussion of relationship problems (Denton & 
Burleson, 2007), and that puts them in the demander role more often. (Some 
of the evidence for that conclusion comes from sex differences on the Initiator 
Style Questionnaire. You can see where you stand with  Table 11.2 .)  
 Why do women demand and men withdraw? There are various possibili-
ties. The pattern may emerge from the usual  gender differences that distinguish 
men and women (Afifi et al., 2012). Women are encouraged to be communal 
and expressive whereas men are encouraged to be independent and autono-
mous, and the demand/withdraw pattern may result from women seeking 
closeness and men defending their autonomy. Another explanation, the  social 
structure hypothesis, argues that the demand/withdraw pattern results from 
pervasive differences in the power of men and women in society and marriage 
alike (Eldridge & Baucom, 2012). As we’ll see in chapter 12, men tend to have 
more power in heterosexual relationships than women do, and if you’re getting 
your way, you’re likely to resist change. 
 In fact, both of these explanations are, in the main, correct. Researchers 
study such issues by asking couples to have two discussions, one in which the 
woman wants change and another in which the man wants change. When either 
men or women have an issue they want to discuss, they tend to demand, and 
when their partners raise a concern, both men and women sometimes withdraw. 
To some degree, then, the demand/withdraw pattern simply depends on 
who’s pressing the issue (Holley et al., 2010). The data support both the gender 

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 353
differences and the social structure points of view (Baucom et al., 2010): Women 
press for desired change in a relationship more often than men do, men tend 
to withdraw more completely, and imbalances of power affect who is and who 
isn’t going to want to change the status quo. 
 Negotiation and Accommodation 
 Not all conflicts turn heated or ugly, and those that do ultimately simmer 
down. And when loving partners are finally cool-headed,  negotiation usually 
TABLE 11.2. The Initiator Style Questionnaire
This research tool assesses one’s inclination to give voice to complaints in a relation-
ship with a particular partner. The higher your score, the more likely you are to initiate 
discussion of your concerns. Ponder your primary partnership, and consider how you 
typically respond to problems in your relationship (i.e., problems that are between you 
and your partner). Then rate each item on this scale:
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
 
Strongly  
Strongly
 
Disagree 
Agree
 1. When discussing a relationship problem, I usually try to keep the discussion going 
 until we settle the issue.
 2. I usually express my feelings about our relationship to my partner.
 3. I usually keep my feelings about our relationship private and do not share them 
 with my partner.
 4. When I become aware of a problem in our relationship, I usually do not say 
 anything about it.
 5. I am the kind of person who generally feels comfortable discussing relationship 
 problems.
 6. When my partner wants to talk about a relationship problem, I am usually ready 
 to do so as well.
 7. I usually become silent or refuse to discuss a relationship problem further if my 
 partner pressures or demands that I do so.
 8. When my partner wants to talk about a relationship problem, I usually try to get 
 out of the discussion.
 9. When I become aware of a problem in our relationship, I usually try to start a  
 discussion of that problem.
 10. I am the kind of person who generally does not feel comfortable discussing  
 relationship problems.
Source: Denton & Burleson, 2007. Reprinted by permission.
To determine your score, reverse the rating you gave items 3, 4, 7, 8, and 10. A rating of 
1 should become a 9; a 3 becomes a 7, 5 stays the same, 6 becomes a 4, 8 becomes a 2, 
etc. Then add up your ratings. In a sample of married adults from North Carolina, typi-
cal scores for women ranged from 52 to 85, and ordinary scores for men ranged from 
47 to 75. Above the usual range for your sex, you’re more likely than most people to 
initiate discussion of your concerns, and below the range, you’re less likely to do so.

354 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
occurs. The partners announce their positions and work toward a solution in 
a sensible manner. In a best-case scenario, each is responsive to the other and 
each feels validated by the other’s responses. 3 
 Dan Canary and Sandra Lakey’s (2013) analysis of conflict tactics identified 
several ways in which partners can be nice to each other during their negotia-
tions. Again, some of these are  direct, openly addressing the issue, and another 
is  indirect,  skirting the issue but defusing ill feeling. Nice direct tactics include 
(a) showing a willingness to deal with the problem by accepting responsibil-
ity or by offering concessions or a compromise; ( b) exhibiting support for the 
other’s point of view through paraphrasing; (c) offering self-disclosure with 
“I-s tatements”; and (d) providing approval and affection. An indirect tactic 
is friendly, non- sarcastic humor that lightens the mood. Snarky, aggressive 
humor that teases or ridicules others isn’t helpful, but witty good cheer that is 
respectful of others is very welcome in intimate conflict; it reduces angry emo-
tion (Howland & Simpson, 2014), and when our partners use friendly humor 
in our discussions of conflict, we feel closer to them and are more satisfied with 
the solutions we reach (Winterheld et al., 2013). Some problems are easier to 
solve than others, of course, but the use of kind tactics such as these during 
conflict helps to protect and maintain a relationship (Gottman et al., 1998). 
Here’s some more helpful advice for successful negotiation with a loved one. 
First, be optimistic. Expect that creative collaboration and your generous regard 
for each other will resolve (most of) your problem. Positive expectations will help 
you reach agreement (Liberman et al., 2010), whereas pessimism may just make 
things worse (DiPaola et al., 2010). Second, value your partner’s outcomes as well 
as your own. Problems are solved more successfully when the partners take each 
other’s perspectives, appreciate each other’s points of view (Rizkalla et al., 2008), 
and are glad when the other gets (most of ) what he or she wants (Gore & Cross, 
2011). Promote a focus on the two of you as a couple instead of on each of you as 
separate individuals by always requesting that “we” do something instead of just 
telling your partner what to do; your partner will be less resistant to your sug-
gestions when they’re always about us instead of just about him or her (Mitnick 
et al., 2009). Along those lines, don’t keep trying to resolve conflict by getting 
your partner to behave differently; instead, consider what you can do differently 
to improve things.  Your partner is likely to be more satisfied—and more will-
ing to cooperate with your efforts—when you’re visibly working to do better, 
too (Overall, 2012). Finally, take an occasional short break from your discussion, 
especially if anyone begins to get annoyed or irritated (Sanford & Grace, 2011). 
Leave the room for a few minutes and think about your disagreement “from the 
perspective of a neutral third party who wants the best for all involved; a person 
who sees things from a neutral point of view.  How might this person think about 
the disagreement?” (Finkel et al., 2013, p. 1597).  Not only will your negotiation 
go more smoothly when you return to it (Harinck & De Dreu, 2011), continued 
use of this “third party” perspective is likely to leave you with a happier relation-
ship a year later (Finkel et al., 2013).
3 For a refresher on responsiveness and validation, I invite you to look back at p. 219 in chapter 7 and 
p. 173 in chapter 5, respectively.

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 355
 Obviously, then, some responses to conflict are destructive, undermining a 
relationship, and others are constructive, helping to sustain it. Add this distinction 
to the difference between engaging a conflict and avoiding it that we encountered 
earlier, and you’ve got four different types of responses to conflict and dissat-
isfaction in a relationship that were introduced to relationship science by Caryl 
Rusbult and her colleagues (1982). Take a look at  Figure 11.3 ; the four categories 
differ in being either  active  or  passive  and in being either  constructive  or  destructive: 
 1.  Voice is behaving in an active, constructive manner by trying to improve the 
situation by discussing matters with the partner, changing one’s behavior in 
an effort to solve the problem, or obtaining advice from a friend or therapist. 
 2.  Loyalty is behaving in a passive but constructive manner by optimistically 
waiting and hoping for conditions to improve.  
 3.  Exit is behaving in an actively destructive manner by leaving the partner, 
threatening to end the relationship, or engaging in abusive acts such as 
yelling or hitting.   
 4.  Neglect is behaving in a passive but destructive manner by avoiding dis-
cussion of critical issues and reducing interdependence with the partner. 
When one is neglectful, one stands aside and just lets things get worse. 
 If a relationship has been satisfying and their investments in it are high, 
people are more likely to employ the constructive responses of voice and loy-
alty than to neglect the relationship or exit from it (Rusbult et al., 1982). We 
typically seek to maintain relationships to which we are committed. And when 
that’s the case, voice is more beneficial and productive than loyalty: Unlike 
ACTIVE
PASSIVE
DESTRUCTIVE
CONSTRUCTIVE
EXIT
VOICE
NEGLECT
LOYALTY
FIGURE 11.3. A typology of responses to dissatisfaction in close relationships.
Source: Based on Rusbult, Zembrodt, & Gunn, 1982.

356 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
voice, which communicates interest and concern and typically gets a positive, 
productive response from one’s partner, loyalty often just goes unnoticed and 
does no good (Overall et al., 2010b). Exit is even worse, of course, and it’s more 
frequently employed when attractive alternative partners are available; people 
are more likely to bail out of a struggling relationship than to work to sustain it 
when tempting alternatives exist (Rusbult et al., 1982). 
 When both partners choose destructive responses to conflict, a relationship 
is at risk (Rusbult et al., 1986), so the ability to remain constructive in the face 
of a lover’s temporary disregard, which I identified as  accommodation back in 
 chapter 6 (on page 209), is a valuable gift. When partners behave destructively, 
accommodation involves inhibiting the impulse to fight fire with fire and striv-
ing to react instead with calm forbearance. I’ll mention accommodation again 
in chapter 14; for now, I’ll simply note that couples who are able to swallow 
occasional provocation from each other without responding in kind tend to be 
happier than are those who are less tolerant and who always bite back (Rusbult 
et al., 1998).  
 Dealing with Conflict: Four Types of Couples 
 Does the desirability of accommodation mean that you and your partner 
should avoid arguing with each other? Not at all. Even heated arguments can 
be constructive, and some couples who engage in forceful, robust arguments 
have stable, satisfying marriages. Arguments support or erode a couple’s satis-
faction depending on the manner in which they are conducted. 
 Marriage researcher John Gottman (1993, 1994a, 1999) studied conflict for 
years. In a typical procedure, he had couples discuss a continuing disagree-
ment and then carefully inspected recordings of the resulting interactions. 
His results led him to suggest that there are three discrete approaches to con-
flict that can lead to stable and enduring marriages. (Does one of them fit you 
well? Before you read further, I invite you to assess your own conflict type 
using the box on the next page. Really, stop here, and head over to the box.) 
 Volatile couples have frequent and passionate arguments. They plunge 
into fiery efforts to persuade and influence each other, and they often display 
high levels of negative affect, but they temper their anger with plenty of wit 
and evident fondness for each other. 
 Validators fight more politely. They tend to be calmer than volatile couples 
are, and they behave more like collaborators than like antagonists as they work 
through their problems. Their discussions may become heated, but they fre-
quently validate each other by expressing empathy for, and understanding of, 
the other’s point of view. 
 In contrast to volatiles and validators,  avoiders rarely argue. They avoid 
confrontation, and if they do discuss their conflicts, they do so mildly and gin-
gerly. As Gottman (1993, p. 10) reported: 
 The interviewer had a great deal of difficulty setting up the conflict 
 discussion. . . . Once each person has stated his or her case, they tend to see 
the discussion as close to an end. They consider accepting these differences as 

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 357
Assessing Your Couple Conflict Type
Following are descriptions of how peo-
ple in four different types of relation-
ships handle conflict. Which type most 
closely describes how you and your 
partner deal with conflict in your rela-
tionship? For each description, indicate 
how often it applies to your conflicts 
to see which overall category fits you 
best:
 A. In our relationship, conflicts may be 
fought on a grand scale, and that is 
okay, since our making up is even 
grander. We have volcanic argu-
ments, but they are just a small part 
of a warm and loving relationship. 
Although we argue, we are still able 
to resolve our differences. In fact, 
our passion and zest for fighting 
actually leads to a better relation-
ship with a lot of making up, laugh-
ing, and affection.
 
1 5 Never
 
2 5 Rarely
 
3 5 Sometimes
 
4 5 Often
 
5 5 Very Often
 B. In our relationship, when we are 
having conflict, we let each other 
know the other’s opinions are val-
ued and their emotions valid, even 
if we disagree with each other. 
Even when discussing a hot topic, 
we display a lot of self-control 
and are calm. When fighting we 
spend a lot of time validating each 
other as well as trying to persuade 
our partner or trying to find a 
compromise.
 
1 5 Never
 
2 5 Rarely
 
3 5 Sometimes
 
4 5 Often
 
5 5 Very Often
 C. In our relationship, conflict is 
minimized. We think it is better to 
“agree to disagree” rather than end 
up in discussions that will result in 
a deadlock. We don’t think there 
is much to be gained from getting 
openly angry with each other. In 
fact, a lot of talking about disagree-
ments seems to make matters 
worse. We feel that if you just relax 
about problems, they will have a 
way of working themselves out.
 
1 5 Never
 
2 5 Rarely
 
3 5 Sometimes
 
4 5 Often
 
5 5 Very Often
 D. We argue often and hotly. There 
are a lot of insults back and forth, 
name-calling, put-downs, and sar-
casm. We don’t really listen to what 
the other is saying, nor do we look 
at each other very much. One or the 
other of us can be quite detached 
and emotionally uninvolved, even 
though there may be brief episodes 
of attack and defensiveness. There 
are clearly more negatives than 
positives in our relationship.
 
1 5 Never
 
2 5 Rarely
 
3 5 Sometimes
 
4 5 Often
 
5 5 Very Often
Source: Holman & Jarvis, 2000. Reprinted with 
permission.
In terms of Gottman’s couple types, scenario A 
reflects a volatile approach, B a validating approach, 
C an avoiding approach, and D a hostile approach.

358 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
a complete discussion. Once they understand their differences, they feel that 
the common ground and values they share overwhelm these differences and 
make them unimportant and easy to accept. Hence, there is very little give 
and take and little attempt to persuade one another. The discussion has very 
little emotion, either positive or negative. Often the proposed solutions to 
issues are quite nonspecific. 
Rather than discuss a conflict with their partners, avoiders often just try to fix it 
on their own or wait it out, hoping that the passage of time will solve the problem. 
 Although they are very different, Gottman asserted that all three types of 
couples can last because they all maintain a high ratio of rewards to costs in 
their approaches to conflict. Volatile couples exchange a lot of negative emo-
tion, but they balance the scales with even more affection and humor. Avoiders 
aren’t particularly effusive or amiable, but they don’t have a lot of negative 
vibes to overcome. As long as the positive, accepting components of their 
interactions substantially outnumber the negative, quarrelsome ones––you 
may recall from chapter 6 that an acceptable ratio is a minimum of 5 positive 
exchanges for every 1 negative––couples can fight loudly and do little damage 
to their relationship. 
 In some couples, however, arguments are harmful, caustic events. For 
Gottman,  hostiles are couples who fail to maintain a 5-to-1 ratio of nice behav-
ior to nasty conduct. Their discussions are sprinkled with too much criticism, 
contempt, defensiveness, and withdrawal, and the longer they last, the more 
oppressive they become. Some hostile couples actively address their disagree-
ments but do so badly whereas others remain more detached and uninvolved 
but snipe at each other in brief salvos of distaste. But whether or not they are 
actively arguing, hostiles are simply meaner to each other than other couples 
are, and that’s why their conflicts are dangerous for their relationships. 
Do the data support Gottman’s assertions? A sizable survey of almost 2,000 
married couples found that in 24 percent of them, at least one of the spouses 
fought with a hostile style, and sure enough, those couples were less satisfied 
and had more problems than anyone else (Busby & Holman, 2009). The most 
common pattern, occurring in 25 percent of the marriages, was for both spouses 
to have validating styles, and they were the most content of the bunch. In fact, 
the calm, empathic, and respectful approach of validators was always advan-
tageous; in another third of the couples, a validator was paired with someone 
who was volatile or avoidant, and those couples were pretty happy, too. Cou-
ples in which both spouses were avoiders (2 percent of the sample) or vola-
tile (5 percent) were rather rare, and that’s probably a good thing: They were 
less satisfied with their marriages than the couples in which (at least some) 
validation occurred. So, Gottman’s analysis is fairly sound. Heated arguments 
do not necessarily do harm to intimate relationships, especially when they are 
conducted with some empathy and respect. Real passion is not to be feared as 
long as it’s leavened with regard for one’s partner; a big conflict might lead to 
a big problem getting fixed (Sanford, 2014). But under no circumstances should 
you allow a conflict discussion to become sour, sarcastic, and surly. Conflict is 
corrosive when it becomes venomous and acidic (Woodin, 2011).  

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 359
 THE OUTCOMES OF CONFLICT 
 Ending Conflict 
 Eventually, conflicts end. Peterson (2002) described five ways in which conflicts 
can end, and I’ll consider them in an order that ranges roughly from the most 
destructive and damaging to the most constructive and beneficial. (They’re 
charted for you back in Figure 11.2.) 
 Separation occurs when one or both partners withdraw without resolving 
the conflict. Separation that ends a heated encounter may prevent irreparable 
harm to the relationship, and time apart may give combatants time to cool off 
and to think about their situation more constructively. It offers no solutions to a 
couple’s problem, however, and may simply delay further discord. 
 Other conflicts end in conquest. In  domination, one partner gets his or her 
way when the other capitulates. This happens routinely when one person is 
more powerful than the other, and the more powerful partner will typically be 
pleased with the outcome. Domination is aversive for the loser, however, often 
breeding ill will and resentment (Zacchilli et al., 2009). 
 Compromise  occurs when both parties reduce their aspirations so that a 
mutually acceptable alternative can be found. As Peterson suggested (2002,
p. 380), the partners’ “interests are diluted rather than reconciled”; neither part-
ner gets everything he or she wants, but neither goes empty handed. This may be 
the best outcome available when one person’s gain can come only at the expense 
of the other, but in other situations, better solutions are usually available. 
 Integrative agreements satisfy both partners’ original goals and aspira-
tions, usually through creativity and flexibility. They’re not easy to reach and 
typically take some work; partners may need to refine and prioritize their 
wishes, make selective concessions, and invent new ways of attaining their 
goals that do not impose upon their partners. Nevertheless, through determi-
nation, ingenuity, imagination, and generous cooperation, partners can often 
get the things they really want. 
 Finally, on occasion, the partners not only get what they want but also learn 
and grow and make desirable changes to their relationship. This pleasant out-
come,  structural improvement, isn’t frequent, and when it occurs, it may result 
from significant turmoil and upheaval. Partners may have encountered perilous 
stress and serious conflict to reach a point that leads them to rethink their hab-
its and to muster both the courage and the will to change them. Still, structual 
improvement leaves a couple better off. As Peterson (2002, p. 382) wrote :
 Some change will take place in one or more of the causal conditions govern-
ing the relationship. Each person will know more about the other than before. 
Each person may attribute more highly valued qualities to the other than before. 
 Having weathered the storm of previous conflict, each person may trust the other 
and their relationship more than before, and thus be willing to approach other 
previously avoided issues in a more hopeful and productive way. With these 
changes, the quality of the relationship will be improved over many situations 
and beyond the time of the immediate conflict with which the process began.  

360 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
 Can Fighting Be Good for a Relationship? 
 Is Peterson right? Can fighting sometimes yield beneficial results? Perhaps. 
As we near the end of this chapter, you may still feel that it would be bet-
ter not to have quarrels, disagreements, and arguments in your intimate 
relationships. Some people certainly feel that way, believing that “disagree-
ment is destructive” and that an argument is a sure sign that one’s love is 
flawed (Eidelson & Epstein, 1982). But (as we noted back in chapter 4) that’s 
a  dys functional belief that is correlated with  dis satisfaction, and relationship 
scientists generally take a different view. They recognize that the more unex-
pressed nuisances and irritants partners have, the less satisfied with their 
relationships they tend to be. Newlyweds who withdraw from conflict with-
out resolving their disagreements tend to be less happy years later (Noller 
2012). And even more remarkably, middle-aged women who fail to speak up 
when something about their marriages is bothering them are four times more 
likely than their more vocal neighbors to  die within the next 10 years (Eaker 
et al., 2007). Conflict is inevitable and it should not be ignored. 
 Indeed, the prevailing view among conflict researchers is that, for all the 
dilemmas it creates, conflict is an essential tool with which to promote intimacy. 
(John Gottman [1994b, p. 159] counseled, “The most important advice I can 
give to men who want their marriages to work is to try not to avoid conflict.”) 
Conflict brings problematic issues and incompatibilities into the open, allowing 
solutions to be sought. Romantic illusions that idealize a relationship and mini-
mize its flaws help us stay happy when the partnership is sound and its prob-
lems are minor—but they’re treacherous when a relationship has major defects 
and they keep us from understanding the truth (McNulty, 2010). Indeed, rec-
ognizing real problems and being critical of them is the right thing to do when 
the problems are severe (McNulty & R ussell, 2010). Handled well, conflict can 
defuse situations that would only fester and cause bigger problems later on. If 
you confront conflict head-on, there’s no guarantee that your difficulties will be 
resolved and that contentment will follow (Fincham & Beach, 1999). Neverthe-
less, it is usually the deft and skillful management of conflict—not the absence 
of  conflict—that allows relationships to grow and prosper ( Fincham, 2003). 
 Of course, for many of us, this is easier said than done. We tend to bring the 
lessons we learned at home as teenagers with us into our adult romances ( Whitton 
et al., 2008), and people clearly differ in the sensitivity and dexterity with which 
they manage conflict (Zeidner & Kloda, 2013). In particular, boys who witness 
violent conflict between their parents tend to become men who handle conflict 
poorly, being more surly and sarcastic than their peers (Halford et al., 2000). 
 However, couples who are fighting badly do sometimes clean up their 
act. A study that followed couples as they became parents found that most of 
them maintained the same style of conflict over a span of 2 years; about half of 
them fought constructively, using plenty of validation and positive affect, and 
a quarter of them fought poorly, wallowing in antagonism and sour dissen-
sion for the full 24 months. In most cases, once you and your partner develop 
a style for managing conflict, it’s likely to last (Kamp Dush & Taylor, 2012). 
Still, about 20 percent of the young  parents who had been fighting destructively 

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 361
 changed  their styles and became less  cantankerous—and more satisfied with 
their  relationships—over that span of time (Houts et al., 2008). 
 If you’re fighting unpleasantly now, you can probably change, too, and I 
have some suggestions in this regard. First, for most of us, successful conflict 
management involves  self-control.  To the extent that you work at remaining opti-
mistic, avoiding blaming attributions, and mastering your anger, you’re more 
likely to be tolerant, flexible, and creative, and integrative agreements are more 
likely to be reached (Canary & Lakey, 2013). Self-control may also be required for 
you to successfully execute this list of  don’ts drawn from Gottman’s (1994b) work:
 •  Don’t  withdraw when your partner raises a concern or complaint. Defensively 
avoiding a discussion of conflict is obnoxious and it doesn’t fix anything. It’s 
fair to ask that a difficult discussion be rescheduled for a more convenient 
time, but you should then feel obligated to honor that appointment.  
 •  Don’t go negative. Stifle your sarcasm, contain your contempt, and discard 
your disgust. Churlish, surly, and sour behavior has very corrosive effects 
on close relationships because (as you’ll recall from chapter 6)  4 bad is stron-
ger than good.
 •  Don’t get caught in a loop of negative affect 
reciprocity. This is essential. Pay attention, 
and when you realize that you and your part-
ner are hurling stronger and stronger insults 
and accusations back and forth,  stop. Take a 
10-minute break, gather yourself, calm down, 
and return to your discussion with an apology 
for the last disagreeable thing you said. 
 A very good way to steer clear of bad- tempered, 
ill-mannered interaction is to employ a technique 
that’s taught by marriage therapists to help cou-
ples manage conflict constructively (Markman et al., 1994). The  speaker-listener 
 technique  provides a structure for calm, clear communication about contentious 
issues that promotes the use of active listening skills and increases the chances 
that partners will understand and validate each other despite their disagree-
ment. In particular, the speaker-listener technique is designed to interrupt the 
cycle of misperception that too often occurs when partners respond quickly to 
one another without checking their understanding of the other’s intent. 
 To use the technique, the partners designate a small object as the  floor. (See 
 Table 11.3 .) Whoever has the floor is the speaker. That partner’s job is to con-
cisely describe his or her feelings using “I-statements”; the listener’s job is to lis-
ten without interrupting and then to paraphrase the speaker’s message. When 
the speaker is satisfied that his or her feelings have been understood, the floor 
changes hands and the partners switch roles. This patient pattern of careful 
communication allows the partners to demonstrate their concern and respect 
for each other’s feelings without falling into a noxious cycle of self-justification, 
 mind reading, interruption, and defensiveness (Cornelius & Alessi, 2007). 
4 Page 185.
A Point to Ponder
What’s the meanest and 
most venomous thing 
you’ve ever said to a 
romantic partner when 
you were angry?  Will you 
ever say anything like that 
to him or her again? Why 
or why not?

362 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
 If you strive to follow these suggestions, you’ll probably manage conflict 
well. And when a conflict discussion is complete, you can grade your collabo-
ration using a scorecard developed by George Bach and Peter Wyden (1983) 
known as the “Fight Effects Profile.” (See  Table 11.4 .) If you have a “good” 
fight that has the positive effects listed in the table, your fight is likely to be 
good for your relationship.  
 I’m not underestimating how hard it is to fight fair and to have a “good” 
fight. It requires self-discipline and genuine caring about one’s partner. But the 
positive outcomes are usually worth the effort. From this perspective, instead 
of being a dreadful problem, conflict is a challenging opportunity—a chance to 
learn about one’s partner and oneself, and a possibility for one’s relationship to 
become more satisfying and more intimate. Strive to fight fairly, and consider 
using the Fight Effects Profile to grade your efforts the next time conflict puts 
your communication skills to the test. 
TABLE 11.3. The Speaker-Listener Technique
Want to stay cool when a discussion gets heated? Consider following these rules:
Rules for Both of You
 1.  The Speaker has the floor. Use a real object, such as a book or TV remote control, as 
the floor. Whoever holds the floor is the only person who gets to say anything 
until he or she is done.
 2.  Share the floor. When you’re Speaker, don’t go on and on. Keep each turn brief, 
and switch roles often as the floor changes hands.
 3.  No problem solving. The point of the technique is to delineate a disagreement, not 
to solve it. Collaborative brainstorming to solve the problem comes later.
Rules for the Speaker
 4.  Speak for yourself. Don’t try to be a mind reader. Use “I” statements to describe your 
own thoughts, feelings, and concerns. Do not talk about your perceptions of 
your partner’s motives or point of view.
 5.  Stop and let the Listener paraphrase. After a short time, stop and allow the Listener to 
paraphrase what you’ve just said. If he or she is not quite accurate, politely restate 
any points of confusion. The goal is to help the Listener really understand you.
Rules for the Listener
 6.  Paraphrase what you hear. Show the Speaker that you are listening by repeating 
back in your own words what you heard him or her say. The point is to make 
sure that you understood what was said.
 7.  Focus on the Speaker’s message. Don’t rebut. You should not offer your thoughts 
and opinions on the issue until you have the floor. Your job as Listener is to 
speak only in the service of understanding your partner.
Source: Adapted from Markman et al., 1994.
Does this sound awkward? Perhaps, but it has its uses. As its creators suggest, the 
speaker-listener technique “isn’t a normal way to communicate, but it is a relatively 
safe way to communicate on a difficult issue. Each person will get to talk, each will 
be heard, and both will show their commitment to discussing the problems construc-
tively” (Markman et al., 1994, p. 67).

CHAPTER 11: Confl ict 363
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 John’s wife, Tina, is a bit hot headed. When something bothers her, she wants 
to drop everything else and work on the problem, but she tends to do so with 
high emotion. She has a volatile temper; she gets angry easily, but she cools off 
just as fast. John is more placid, and he dislikes conflict. When he gets angry, 
he does so slowly, and he simmers rather than erupts. When there’s something 
bothering him, he prefers to just go off by himself and play video games instead 
of beginning a discussion that could turn into a fight. 
 Lately, Tina has become very frustrated because John is close-lipped and 
unresponsive when she brings up a complaint. His reluctance to discuss her 
grievances is just making her annoyance and dissatisfaction worse. Having 
read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for Tina and John? Why?  
TABLE 11.4. The Fight Effects Profile
Each fight is scored by each person from his or her point of view. In a good fight, both 
partners win. That is, both partners have considerably more positive outcomes than 
negative ones.
Category
Positive Outcome
Negative Outcome
Hurt
You feel less hurt, weak, or offended.
You feel more hurt, weak, or 
offended.
Information
You gain more information about 
your partner’s feelings.
You learn nothing new.
Resolution
The issue is now more likely to be 
resolved.
Possibility of a solution 
is now less likely.
Control
You have gained more mutually 
acceptable influence over your 
p artner’s behavior.
You now have less mutually 
acceptable influence over 
your partner.
Fear
Fear of fighting and/or your partner 
is reduced.
Fear has increased.
Trust
You have more confidence that your 
partner will deal with you with good-
will and with positive regard.
You have less confidence in 
your partner’s goodwill.
Revenge
Vengeful intentions are not created 
by the fight.
Vengeful intentions are cre-
ated by the fight.
Reconciliation
You make active efforts to undo any 
harm you have caused.
You do not attempt or 
encourage reconciliation.
Relational 
Evaluation
You feel you are more central to the 
other’s concern and interest.
You feel you “count less” 
with your partner.
Self-Evaluation
You feel better about yourself: more 
confidence and more self-esteem.
You feel worse about 
yourself.
Cohesion-
Affection
Closeness with and attraction to your 
partner have increased.
Closeness with and 
attraction to your partner 
have decreased.
Source: Adapted from Bach & Wyden, 1983.

364 
CHAPTER 11: Confl ict
 CHAPTER SUMMARY  
 The Nature of Conflict 
 What Is Conflict?  Interpersonal conflict  occurs when people have to give up 
something that they want because of their partners’ influence. Conflict is ines-
capable. There are tensions known as  dialectics that are woven into the fabric of 
close relationships that will, sooner or later, always cause some strain. 
 The Frequency of Conflict. Conflict occurs often. Its frequency is associ-
ated with neuroticism and agreeableness, attachment styles, one’s stage of life, 
incompatibility between partners, poor sleep, and alcohol use.  
 The Course of Conflict 
 Instigating Events. Four different categories of events cause most con-
flicts; these are  criticism,  illegitimate demands,  rebuffs, and  cumulative annoyances.  
 Attributions. Actor-observer effects and self-serving biases contribute to 
 attributional conflict, with partners fighting over whose explanation is right. 
 Engagement and Escalation. Once an instigating event occurs, partners 
must decide either to engage in conflict or to avoid the issue and let it drop. If 
escalation occurs and the conflict heats up, the nasty things that partners say to 
each other may be either direct or indirect. Surly interaction becomes especially 
fractious when the partners fall into a pattern of  negative affect reciprocity. 
 The Demand/Withdraw Pattern. A frustrating demand/withdraw cycle 
occurs when one person approaches the other about a problem, and the partner 
responds by avoiding the issue. Women tend to be the demanders and men the 
withdrawers more often than not.  
 Negotiation and Accommodation. Negotiation finally occurs when a 
 couple works toward a solution in a sensible manner. Voice, loyalty, exit, and 
neglect are other responses to dissatisfaction in close relationships.  Accommoda-
tion  occurs when partners react with calm forbearance to the other’s provocation. 
 Dealing with Conflict: Four Types of Couples.  Volatile couples have fre-
quent and passionate arguments.  Validators have calmer, more relaxed discus-
sions, and avoiders avoid confrontation. In contrast, the conflicts of  hostiles are 
marked by negativity, and their marriages are relatively fragile.  
 The Outcomes of Conflict 
 Ending Conflict. There are five ways conflicts can end:  separation,  domination,  
 compromise,  integrative agreement, and  structural improvement. 
 Can Fighting Be Good for a Relationship? Yes. Deft management of 
 conflict allows relationships to grow and prosper. The  speaker-listener technique 
provides a structure for calm, clear communication about touchy  topics. 

365
 C H A P T E R  1 2 
 Power and Violence 
       Power and Interdependence   
 ◆ Violence in Relationships  ◆ For Your Consideration 
 ◆ Chapter Summary 
 Who calls the shots in your relationship? Do you usually get your way? 
Or do you and your partner trade the lead with each of you getting some of 
what you want? Most people say that an ideal relationship would be an equal 
partnership, with both partners sharing the ability to make important deci-
sions and to influence one another; at the turn of the century, for instance, 
90  percent of young women and 87 percent of young men said they believed 
that dating partners should have “exactly equal say” in the relationship 
( Thornton & Young-DeMarco, 2001). In addition, people clearly prefer friend-
ships in which the partners share similar amounts of power to friendships 
in which one of the partners is typically the boss (Veniegas & Peplau, 1997). 
This may not seem surprising, but this preference for sharing power is an 
enormous departure from the traditional model endorsed by previous gen-
erations, in which men were the dominant partners in heterosexual relation-
ships, making all the important decisions and calling all the shots. These days, 
few people explicitly announce that they want to emulate this old-fashioned 
model, but figuring out how to achieve equality in a relationship can be much 
more complicated than it sounds. How should decision making work in an 
egalitarian relationship? Should the partners make all decisions together? Or 
does each partner take responsibility for making exactly half the decisions? 
Does it matter which decisions are important and which ones aren’t? Endors-
ing equality in a relationship is a simple matter, but making it a reality is a 
much greater challenge. 
 This chapter will explore the ways in which social power operates in 
intimate relationships. Social  power is the ability to influence the behavior 
of others and to resist their influence on us (Huston, 2002). I’ll identify some of 
the influences on power in relationships and consider the  consequences of 
power for individuals and couples. Some of them, unfortunately, can be 
unpleasant.  

366 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
 POWER AND INTERDEPENDENCE 
 There are different ways to analyze social power, but the most widely adopted 
perspective is that of interdependence theory (Thibaut & Kelley, 1959), which 
we examined in chapter 6. In this first half of the chapter, I’ll use interdepen-
dency ideas to describe the bases on which power is built, the processes by 
which power is wielded, and the outcomes that are produced by its use. 
 Sources of Power 
 From an interdependency perspective, power is based on the control of valu-
able resources. If I control access to something you want, you’ll probably be 
motivated to comply with my wishes (within reason) so that I’ll let you get it. 
I’ll then have power over you; I’ll be able to get you to do what  I want, at least 
for a while. This is a simple idea, but (as you might expect) there are various 
subtleties involved in this view of social power. 
 First, the person who has power does not have to possess the desired 
resources; it is enough that he or she controls access to them. Imagine that 
you’re shopping with a friend at a flea market and you discover the rare 
imported bootleg concert DVD that you’ve wanted for months, but that you 
keep losing to higher bidders on eBay. Better yet, it’s cheap, but you don’t have 
enough cash with you, and you need a loan from your friend to buy the elu-
sive disc. Your friend doesn’t have the object you desire, but his or her power 
in this situation will come from controlling your ability to get it. In a similar 
fashion, relationship partners can control our access to valuable interpersonal 
rewards—such as physical affection—and thereby have power over us. 
 Of course, one derives power from controlling a resource only if other peo-
ple want it, and the greater their need or desire, the greater one’s power. The 
example of the rare DVD is an illustration of this: If you have only a mild inter-
est in the disc, a friend with the money to buy it has only a little power over 
you. But if you want the disc desperately, your friend has more power and 
will be able to ask for a sizable favor in return. Whenever we want something 
badly (be it a rare DVD or interpersonal intimacy) and believe we cannot get it 
elsewhere, the person who has what we want is able to exert control over us. 
 We encountered an example of one person’s desire fueling another person’s 
power back in the box on page 183. The  principle of lesser interest holds that 
in any partnership, the person who has less interest in continuing and maintain-
ing the relationship has more power in that partnership (Waller & Hill, 1951). If 
your partner loves and needs you more than you love him or her, you’ll get to 
do what you want more often than not. This sounds cold blooded, but it’s true; 
in romantic relationships, the partner who is less committed to the relationship 
usually has more power (Lennon et al., 2013). I mentioned another example of 
this pattern in chapter 9 when I noted that men desire more sex, on average, than 
women do. Men’s greater interest in sex gives women power; it’s quite unro-
mantic but rather enlightening to think of sex as a valuable resource that women 
can exchange for various benefits from men (Kruger, 2008). This arrangement 

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 367
is explicit in the case of prostitution when women trade sex for money, but it 
often also operates in more subtle ways in many romantic relationships. It’s not 
uncommon, for instance, for a woman to wait for a declaration of affection and 
emerging commitment from a man before allowing him access to sex. 
 Of course, if something we want is readily available elsewhere, we can just 
go there to get it, and the availability of alternative sources of desired resources 
is another critical factor in an interdependency perspective on power. If there 
is another friend at the flea market who can lend you the money you need, the 
first friend has less power over you. And if there are many people who would 
loan you the money, then you are not very dependent on any one of them, and 
not one of them has much power over you at all. 
 In the same fashion, the availability of alternatives influences the balance of 
power in an intimate relationship. Those with few alternatives to their existing 
partnerships (who therefore have low CL alt s) will be more dependent on their 
relationships than will those with many other other potential partners (who 
thereby have high CL alt s). And as we have just seen, being more dependent 
means having less power. If one partner has few alternatives and the other has 
many, there will be a larger imbalance of power than would be the case if they 
needed each other to similar degrees (Lennon et al., 2013). 
 In fact, differences in available alternatives may be one reason that men are 
typically more powerful than women in traditional marriages. When husbands 
work outside the home and their wives do not, they often have higher CL alt s 
for at least two important reasons. First, they may encounter larger numbers of 
other potential partners, and second, they’re more likely to have the money to 
pursue them if they wish. In contrast, stay-at-home wives may not meet many 
other interesting men, and even if they do, they’re likely to be economically 
dependent on their husbands, having little money of their own. Thus, the bal-
ance of power in a marriage sometimes changes when a wife enters the work 
force and gains new friends and money of her own (Fitch & Ruggles, 2000). 
 There are two more points to make about the interdependence perspective 
on power. First, interdependence theory recognizes two different broad types 
of power. On occasion, one can control a partner’s outcomes no matter what 
the partner does; in such cases, one has a form of power known as  fate control: 
One can autocratically determine what outcomes a partner receives, thereby 
controlling the other’s fate. When she is his only option, a woman who refuses 
to have sex with her husband is exercising fate control; she can unilaterally 
determine whether or not sex occurs. A second, more subtle, type of power 
is  behavior control. This occurs when, by changing one’s own behavior, one 
encourages a partner to alter his or her actions in a desirable direction, too. If 
a woman offers to provide a special backrub if her partner cleans the garage, 
she’s engaging in behavior control. 
 Of course, in almost all relationships,  both partners have power over each 
other, and the last, and perhaps most essential, point of an interdependency 
perspective is that the interactions of two partners emerge from their mutual 
influence on one another. One partner’s power over the other may be matched 
by the other’s  counterpower over the one, so that both partners are able to get 

368 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
each other to do what they want some of the time. For instance, a woman may 
have fate control over whether or not her husband has sex, but he probably 
has some behavior control over her in return; by cajoling her, pleasing her, or 
worse, threatening her, he may be able to get her to do what he wants. Two 
partners’ abilities to influence one another may be diverse and variable, being 
strong in some situations and weak in others, but both of them will routinely 
have some control over what the other does.  
 Types of Resources 
 So, power is based on the resources we control—but what kinds of resources 
are involved?  Table 12.1  lists six bases of power first identified by French and 
Raven (1959); this scheme has been applied to all kinds of interactions, including 
those that occur in intimate relationships. The first two types,  reward power and 
 coercive power, refer to a person’s ability to bestow various rewards and punish-
ments on someone else. The benefits and costs involved can be physical or mate-
rial goods, such as a pleasant gift or a painful slap, or intangible, interpersonal 
gains and losses, such as reassuring approval or hurtful disdain (Raven, 2001). For 
example, if a husband craves a shoulder massage from his wife, she has reward 
power over him: She can rub his back or not, supplying or withholding a physical 
reward. But in return, he may have coercion power over her: If he doesn’t get his 
massage, he may sulk and be less affectionate, imposing intangible costs. 
TABLE 12.1.  Resources that Grant One Power
Type of Power
Resource
Gets People to Do What You 
Want Because
Reward power
Rewards
You can give them something they 
like or take away something they 
don’t like.
Coercive power
Punishments
You can do something to them 
they don’t like or take away some-
thing they do like.
Legitimate power
Authority or 
norms of equity, 
reciprocity, or social 
responsibility
They recognize your authority to 
tell them what to do.
Referent power
Respect and/or love
They identify with you, feeling 
attracted and wanting to remain 
close.
Expert power
Expertise
You have the broad understanding 
they desire.
Informational power
Information
You possess some specific 
 knowledge they desire.
Source: Based on Raven, 2001.

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 369
 The capabilities to provide desired benefits or to impose aversive costs on 
our partners are very important and very influential, but there are other ways to 
influence people, too.  Legitimate power exists when our partners believe that 
we have a reasonable right to tell them what to do, and they have an obligation 
to comply. In some cultures, for instance, a husband really is thought to be the 
boss, and a wife is supposed not only to love and honor him, but to  obey him as 
well, doing whatever he asks. This form of legitimate power comes from being 
in a position of authority, but potent social norms can also impart  legitimate 
power to requests that come from anyone (Raven, 2001). For instance, the norm 
of  reciprocity encourages us to do unto others as they have done unto us, and if 
someone who has already done you a favor asks for some kindness in return, 
the norm obligates you to repay the good deed.  Equity is also normative, and if 
your partner has done extra housework lately, an invitation to fold some laun-
dry might be difficult to decline. Finally, a norm of  social responsibility urges 
us to be generous to those who depend on us—to help those who cannot help 
themselves—and if your partner is sick in bed with the flu, a request for some 
juice may be hard to turn down. Any of these norms can impart power to a 
partner’s desires, making them very influential, at least temporarily. 
 We have  referent power over our partners when they adore us and wish 
to do what we want because they feel connected to us. Our wishes may change 
our partners’ preferences about what they want to do when they love us and 
want to stay close to us.  Expert power  exists when our partners recognize our 
superior knowledge and experience and are influenced by us because we know 
more than they do. When a wife is a better cook than her husband, for instance, 
he’ll often follow her advice and instructions without question when it’s his 
turn to prepare dinner. Finally, we have  informational power when we have 
specific pieces of information that influence our partners’ behavior; our part-
ners may do what we want if we offer to share a juicy bit of gossip with them. 
 Men, Women, and the Control of Resources 
 How are these resources used in your relationships? What goes on between 
you and your partner is largely up to both of you, but you may be influenced 
to a greater extent than you realize by the broad cultural patterns that sur-
round you. Many of us applaud the notion of equal partnerships but still con-
duct  relationships in which “there is an imbalance of power, with one person 
making more decisions, controlling more of the joint activities and resources, 
winning more arguments and, in general, being in a position of dominance” 
(Impett & Peplau, 2006, p. 283). And in most heterosexual relationships, the 
dominant partner is the man. Indeed, this isn’t good news for most of us (but 
perhaps it really isn’t news at all): “In no known societies do women domi-
nate men. In all societies that accumulate wealth, men, on average, enjoy more 
power than women, on average, and this appears to have been true throughout 
human history” (Pratto & Walker, 2004, p. 242). Heterosexual couples who seek 
to share power equally are swimming upstream against long-standing tradi-
tion, and there are three reasons for this. 

370 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
 First, men and women generally face a disparity in  relative resources. Men get 
paid more than women for the work they do (even when it’s the same work): In 
the United States, women with full-time jobs presently earn only 84 percent as 
much as men do (Pew Research, 2014b). Men are also far more likely to hold the 
reins of governmental, judicial, and corporate power; in 2014, for instance, only 
19 percent of the members of the U.S. Congress were women ( Manning, 2014), 
and, even worse, only 5 percent of the chief executive officers of  America’s 
500 largest companies were women (“Women CEOs,” 2014). Money and status 
confer reward power and legitimate power on those who possess them, and 
men often have more of both than women do. Indeed, it’s much more common 
for wives to earn more than their husbands than it used to be, but in about 
two-thirds of American marriages, he still makes more money than she does 
(Pew Research Center, 2013a). And money is a source of power that can be used 
more flexibly than most other resources. Theorists describe some resources 
(such as money) as  universalistic and others (such as love) as  particularistic (Foa 
et al., 1993). Universalistic resources can be exchanged with almost anyone in 
a wide variety of situations, and whoever controls them has considerable free-
dom in deciding what to do with them (and with whom to do it). Particularistic 
resources are valuable in some situations but not in others, and they may confer 
power to their owner only with particular partners. A partner’s love for you 
may give you referent power over him or her and no one else whereas a large 
pile of cash may provide you reward power over almost everyone you meet. 
 The second reason equality is hard to attain is related to the first:  Social 
norms support and maintain male dominance. Worldwide, most cultures are 
still  governed by a norm of patriarchy that confers higher levels of expert and 
legitimate power on men than on women (Carli, 2001). Americans actually tend 
to think that women have skills that should make them more effective leaders 
than men; women are thought to be more honest, intelligent, compassionate, 
and creative and just as ambitious and hardworking as men (“Men or Women,” 
2008). But legitimate power still seems “unladylike” to some people, and when 
a woman seeks political office, the fact that she’s seeking power undermines 
her appeal to voters; a man seeking office pays no such penalty (Okimoto & 
Brescoll, 2010). And if a woman does attain a position of leadership, she’s likely 
to be evaluated more harshly than a man would be when she straightforwardly 
tells others what to do (Rudman et al., 2012). Cultural norms still keep women 
in their place, so Americans tend to prefer that their surgeons, lawyers, and 
airline pilots be men rather than women (Morin & Cohn, 2008). Women are 
preferred as elementary school teachers. 
Thus, cultural tradition suggests that it’s ordinary and natural for men to 
make more money and to be in charge most of the time.  And that underlies the 
third reason equality is elusive: We’re not sure what it looks like. Women usually 
get their way when it comes to decisions regarding household matters and the 
kids, and they get to pick the things the couple does on the weekend more often 
than men do (Shu et al., 2012). So, women can rightly feel that they’re influential 
at home. But just how much? Married Americans still report that wives buy most 
of the groceries, fix most of the meals, and wash most of the dishes; they also do 

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 371
most of the laundry and clean more of the house ( Newport, 2008). Husbands do 
yard work and take care of the cars, but—and here’s my point—that division of 
labor cannot possibly value wives’ and husbands’ time equally: The wives’ duties 
are constant, and the husbands’ are intermittent (Lachance-Grzela & Bouchard, 
2010). Dinner gets eaten every night, but the cars’ oil gets changed only every 
now and then. So, whereas an American woman does 18 hours of housework 
each week, on average, a man does only 10 (Parker & Wang, 2013). And when it 
comes to fundamental, central decisions regarding the relationship—such 
as “are we going to get married or just keep 
cohabiting?”—men usually get to call the shots 
(Sassler & Miller, 2011). Wives do control most 
household routines, but because their husbands are 
more likely to get their way when it really matters, 
the husbands are more powerful. This still tends to 
be true, although to a lesser extent, even when 
women’s disadvantage in relative resources is 
erased—that is, when they earn more than their 
husbands. For instance, wives with higher incomes do a smaller proportion of 
the household chores, but they still do most of them (Lam et al., 2012).
So, despite their expressed interests in equal partnerships, most heterosex-
ual couples still tolerate substantial inequality (Askari et al., 2010)—and they 
may not realize just how one-sided their partnerships are. In a culture that takes 
male dominance for granted, genuine equality that honors both parties’ inter-
ests equally is certainly unfamiliar, and it may even seem peculiar or excessive. 
But, if you’re interested, Table 12.2 may help you judge your own partnerships 
more evenhandedly; it offers several considerations that may be eye-opening.
Finally, I’ll also note that men often have a lot of coercive power due to their 
typically larger size and greater strength. But coercion is a clumsy, corrosive way 
to get what one wants. Fear and punishment are aversive, and they breed dis-
content. They also foster resistance, so partners who are coerced are actually  less 
compromising than they would have been had gentler power been employed 
(Oriña et al., 2002). I’ll return to this point later in the chapter when we examine 
violence in close relationships, but for now I’ll simply note that coercion is usu-
ally an inept, counterproductive way to influence an intimate partner. 
 The Process of Power 
 Power feels good. Powerful people are used to getting what they want, so they 
experience a lot of positive moods and feelings of well-being (Kifer et al., 2013). 
They feel in control of things. In fact, compared to the rest of us, they tend to 
think that they can control events that are uncontrollable, such as the outcome 
of a roll of some dice (Fast et al., 2009). They also tend to do what they want 
(Guinote et al., 2012); if there’s just one cookie left on the plate, they’ll take it 
without asking if anyone else wants it (Keltner et al., 2010). Indeed, they are 
relatively unlikely to realize that someone else was hoping to share the cookie 
because they’re not very good at  comprehending others’ points of view. If you 
A Point to Ponder
It’s 3:23 a.m., the baby’s 
hungry, and nobody’s had 
much sleep lately. Who’s 
going to get up and give 
the baby her bottle, you or 
your partner? Why?

372 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
TABLE 12.2. Elements of Equality in Close Relationships
These are four dimensions with which to judge how close you’re coming to true equality in 
your relationships. They are suggested for your consideration by Anne Rankin Mahoney, a 
sociologist, and Carmen Knudson-Martin, a marital and family therapist (2009).
Relative Status
Whose interests matter more?
Who defines what’s important to the two of you?
How are low-status chores around the house handled?
Attention to the Other
Who is more likely to notice and attend to the feelings of his or her partner?
Who is more likely to notice and attend to the needs of his or her partner?
Do both of you give and receive care and concern?
Patterns of Accommodation
Whose accommodations are noticed and acknowledged, and whose are taken for granted?
Who arranges more of his or her daily activities around the other’s life?
Well-Being
Whose economic success is valued more?
Who’s better off psychologically and physically?
Does one person’s well-being come at the expense of the other’s good health?
ask powerful people to quickly draw an “E” on their foreheads, they are much 
more likely than people of low power to draw the letter as if they were reading 
it, which makes it backward and illegible for anyone else—like this:  (Galinsky 
et al., 2006). 
 The self-importance of powerful people is also evident in their self- 
perceptions of their mate value.1 People who are randomly assigned to lead 
work groups in lab studies expect that their subordinates will find them sexu-
ally interesting, and if they approve of casual sex, they both judge their sub-
ordinates to be more sexually available and stage more flirtatious interactions 
with them than those of lesser power do (Kunstman & Maner, 2011). Those 
perceptions apparently persist in the workplace: Compared to mid-level man-
agers, more powerful professionals are more adulterous, being 25 percent more 
likely to cheat on their current partners (Lammers et al., 2011). And they may 
not think they’re misbehaving; powerful people judge others’ moral transgres-
sions more harshly than their own, so that, compared to less powerful people, 
they’re more strict in condemning others’ cheating while cheating more often 
themselves (Lammers et al., 2010).
By comparison, being powerless isn’t so great. Those who find themselves 
in positions of low power suffer more depression, behave more cautiously, and 
timidly fear more punishment than powerful people do (Keltner et al., 2010). 
1 We first encountered mate value back on page 89.

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 373
And, in keeping with these patterns, power differentials affect the behavior of 
people toward their intimate partners too. Let’s inspect some of the ways in 
which power is expressed. 
 Conversation 
The conversations two people share are likely to be influenced by the bal-
ance of power between them, and, for better or worse, women tend not to speak 
to men with the same implicit strength and power that they display toward 
other women. In particular, they allow themselves to be interrupted by men 
more often than they interrupt men in return. 
In one of the first studies of this pattern, researchers surreptitiously recorded 
conversations of college students in public places (obtaining permission to ana-
lyze the recordings after the conversations were done) and then  compared the 
conversations of same-sex dyads to those in which men and women conversed 
(Zimmerman & West, 1975). Women and men behaved  similarly when they 
were talking to others of the same sex, but  distinctive  patterns emerged in inter-
actions with the other sex. Men interrupted their female partners much more 
often than their female partners interrupted them (and they did most of the 
talking, too). That’s important because people who get interrupted are judged 
to have lower status and to be less powerful than those who do the interrupting 
(Farley, 2008).
Now, fast-forward to this century and imagine that you and your lover 
have to decide how to spend a gift of $1,000. You each develop a personal list 
of your top five priorities and then get together to negotiate your options. If 
one of you frequently succeeds in interrupting the other, both of you are likely 
to judge him or her to be the more powerful partner (see  Figure 12.1 ). And 
men still complete more of these interruptions than women do (Dunbar & 
Burgoon, 2005). 
FIGURE 12.1. Interruptions and perceived power.
During discussions of personal priorities, the more often someone successfully 
 interrupted his or her partner, the more powerful he or she was perceived to be.
0
2
4
6
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
Completed Interruptions
by One’s Partner
Perceptions of the Partner’s Power
Source: Dunbar & Burgoon, 2005.

374 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
 Nonverbal Behavior 
Power is also communicated to others nonverbally, and powerful people use 
larger interpersonal distances, display more intense facial expressions, and assume 
postures that are less symmetrical and take up more space than those of people 
who are less powerful (Hall et al., 2005). Take a look at the two poses in Figure 12.2. 
They exemplify my postural point: The one on the right typifies someone of higher 
status. (That’s obvious, isn’t it?) Indeed, when people are posed in these positions 
by researchers, those who assume more space feel more powerful; moreover, male 
or female, their testosterone levels rise, and they take bolder risks in a gambling 
game (Carney et al., 2010). The pose on the right is clearly more powerful—and 
interestingly, it’s more masculine, too. Men tend to take up more space with their 
postures than women do—one certainly ought not assume the pose on the right 
if one is wearing a dress—and they use distances and postures that are typical of 
high-status people more often than women do (Kalbfleisch & Herold, 2006).  
 Nonverbal Sensitivity 
Remember, too, from chapter 5, that women are generally more accurate 
judges of others’ emotions and meaning than men are. Women decode others’ 
nonverbal communications more accurately than men do, and they are usually 
more aware of what others are feeling (Hall & Mast, 2008). This skill is a tremen-
dous asset because the sensitivity and accuracy with which a couple commu-
nicates nonverbally predicts how satisfied with each other they are likely to be 
(Määttä & Uusiautti, 2013). 
FIGURE 12.2. Low- and high-power postures. 
People of high status and power assume postures that are asymmetric and that take up 
a lot of space. It’s a safe bet that someone who assumes the posture on the right feels 
(or will soon feel) more powerful than someone who assumes the posture on the left. 
By the way, if you were told that one of these silhouettes is a man and the other is a 
woman, which would you say is which?
Source: Adapted from Frieze et al., 1978.

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 375
 On the other hand, a person’s nonverbal sensitivity also has something 
to do with how powerful and dominant he or she is (Moeller et al., 2011). 
When two people differ in status, it’s typically the job of the subordinate to 
keep track of what the boss is feeling, not the other way around. Powerful 
bosses don’t have to care much about what their subordinates are feeling; 
underlings are supposed to do what a boss wants whether they like it or not. 
In contrast, subordinates can increase their own (limited) power when they 
carefully monitor their supervisors’ moods; if they make requests when their 
bosses are in good moods (and stay out of sight when the bosses are cranky), 
they’re more likely to get what they want. 
 Thus, in being adept users of nonverbal communication, women gain 
valuable information that can make them more pleasing partners and that can 
increase their influence over men. On the other hand, they also behave as sub-
ordinates do when they are dealing with people of higher status. Ironically, 
a useful and desirable talent may perpetuate a stereotypical pattern in which 
women sometimes behave as if they are the minions of men. 
  Styles of Power 
Just what strategies, then, do men and women use in their efforts to influ-
ence each other? Toni Falbo and Anne Peplau (1980) addressed this question in 
a classic study that asked 50 lesbians, 50 gay men, 50 heterosexual women, and 
50 heterosexual men to describe “how I get [my partner] to do what I want.” 
Two themes characterized the participants’ replies. First, they sometimes 
explicitly asked for what they wanted, straightforwardly announcing their 
wishes or making unambiguous requests. Their efforts to influence their part-
ners were overt and  direct, and their preferences were plain. On other occasions, 
however, people’s actions were more  indirect; they hinted at what they wanted 
or pouted when their wishes were unfulfilled, but they never came right out 
and said what they wanted. Importantly, the more satisfied people were with 
their relationships, the more likely they were to use direct strategies. This could 
mean that when people have rewarding partnerships, they feel safe enough to 
be honest and forthright with their  partners; on the other hand, it could also 
mean that people whose desires are expressed indirectly and ambiguously are 
less adept at getting what they want, and they’re likely to be dissatisfied as a 
result. What’s your guess? Does indirectness lead to dissatisfaction or follow 
from it? (Remember, it could be both.) 
 The second theme that distinguished different strategies described the 
extent to which people sought their goals through interaction with their 
 partners (as opposed to doing what they wanted by themselves). Sometimes 
people reasoned or bargained with their partners in efforts to persuade them 
to provide some desired outcome; in such cases, people sought cooperation or 
collaboration from their partners, and their strategies were  bilateral,  involving 
both members of the couple. In contrast, on other occasions, people took inde-
pendent  unilateral action, doing what they wanted without involving their part-
ners.  Importantly, people who reported that they were more powerful than 
their partners said that they frequently used bilateral strategies whereas those 

376 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
who were less powerful were more likely to use unilateral strategies. Thus, 
people who were able to influence their partners successfully did just that, rea-
soning and negotiating with them to gain their compliance. In contrast, those 
possessing low power were less likely to seek their partners’ cooperation; they 
just went off and did their own thing. 
 Falbo and Peplau (1980) found that, overall, gays and lesbians employed 
similar strategies, but there were differences in the strategies used by hetero-
sexual men and women. On average, heterosexual men reported more exten-
sive use of direct and bilateral styles whereas heterosexual women used more 
indirect and unilateral strategies. Thus, when they were dealing with their 
romantic partners, heterosexual men tended to use styles of influence that 
are characteristic of people who are satisfied and powerful whereas women 
adopted styles typically used by those who are powerless and discontent. 
 Wow. Do heterosexual men typically behave in a mature and assertive fash-
ion in their romantic partnerships, asking for what they want and  reasoning 
Influencing a Partner to Use a Condom
You’d think that it’d be taken for granted 
these days that people would expect to 
have safe sex when they begin  having 
sex in a new relationship.  Unfortunately, 
too often, one partner still needs to con-
vince the other to use a condom. How 
do such negotiations proceed? The most 
common strategy is a direct one: People 
straightforwardly announce their wish 
to use a condom (Lam et al., 2004) and 
then back up the request with reward 
power, coercive power, or  informational 
power (De Bro et al., 1994). Promised 
rewards often include the increased 
respect and closeness that compliance 
will bring, threatened costs include the 
discontent or withholding of sex that 
resistance will produce, and persuasive 
information often describes the risks 
that will be avoided by making the 
smart choice to employ a condom.
In most cases, the partner who is 
less committed to the relationship gets 
what he or she wants; it’s another exam-
ple of the principle of lesser interest at 
work (VanderDrift et al., 2013a). So, if 
you’re the less powerful partner, you 
may want to make your wishes known 
through other more indirect means that 
do not involve explicit discussion (Lam 
et al., 2004). One effective tactic is to 
simply produce a condom and begin 
putting it on. Without saying a word, 
one can demonstrate that condom use 
is expected and appreciated. The reluc-
tant partner may protest that such pre-
cautions aren’t needed, but his or her 
objections probably won’t last long if the 
proactive partner persists.
Indeed, when people don’t want to 
use a condom, they usually don’t men-
tion their preference. Instead, they typi-
cally try to seduce their partners, getting 
them so turned on that sex proceeds 
without a pause for protection (De Bro 
et al., 1994). Thus, it may be useful, if 
you seek safe sex, to keep your wits 
about you and to remember that, with 
the force of supportive social norms 
behind you, you should be able to get 
what you want. Don’t fall into the trap 
of thinking that your partner has more 
control over the situation than you do; 
that will make it harder for you to do 
the right thing and get what you want 
(Woolf & Maisto, 2008).

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 377
logically with their lovers while their partners pout and get moody without 
ever saying what they want? Well, yes, to a degree. That statement is obviously 
too sweeping, but in heterosexual relationships, men do tend to be more openly 
assertive than women. Moreover, this tends to be true from the moment a rela-
tionship begins. When they want to start a relationship, men use more direct 
strategies, such as asking a woman for a date, whereas women more often use 
indirect strategies, such as trying to seem friendly and waiting to be asked 
(Clark et al., 1999). 
 Importantly, however, this pattern isn’t really a sex difference; it’s a  gender 
difference that’s wrapped up with the sexes’ relative resources. 2 Whether they 
are male or female, people who are high in instrumentality—who are, after all, 
assertive, self-confident people—tend to use direct, bilateral styles of power. 
By comparison, people who are low in instrumentality (and that includes most 
women) tend to use indirect, unilateral styles (Falbo, 1982).
 Still, the strategies a person selects are influenced more by his or her  status 
in a particular interaction than by his or her gender (Sagrestano et al., 2006). No 
matter who people are, they are unlikely to behave authoritatively and asser-
tively in situations in which they have lower status than those they are trying 
to influence. Lynda Sagrestano (1992) demonstrated this when she asked men 
and women to respond to scenarios in which they were either experts with 
more knowledge than their partners or novices with lower expertise; both 
men and women used direct strategies of power when they were experts but 
indirect strategies when they were novices, and the sexes did not differ in the 
styles they selected. In addition, recall that there are no differences between the 
sexes in the ways that gays and lesbians try to influence their partners (Falbo & 
P eplau, 1980). 
 Add all this up, and it appears that the different styles of influence exhib-
ited by heterosexual men and women in their romantic relationships are 
 products of the routine differences in relative resources in those partnerships. 
Men and women do not differ in their power preferences in their same-sex 
partnerships, and women can be just as direct as men when that style pays 
off for them (Carothers & Allen, 1999), but men have traditionally held more 
power than women, both in and out of the home. This is changing. These days, 
each new generation of American women is higher in instrumentality than the 
one before (Twenge, 2009), and women are gaining more control over political 
and economic resources all the time. Both men and women are also becoming 
more egalitarian in their views of marriage (Bryant, 2003). Men probably have 
less automatic authority in their intimate relationships than they used to, and—
here comes an important point—that may be a good thing: Disparities in power 
are linked to dissatisfaction in close relationships (Amato et al., 2007). People 
who have to hint and pout to get (some of) what they want tend to be less con-
tent than are those who can come right out and ask for what they desire. 
 2  Here’s another opportunity to consider a difference between men and women with the sophistica-
tion I hoped to foster back in chapter 1. Sex differences are distinguished from gender differences 
on pages 22–23.  

378 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
 The Outcome of Power 
 Altogether, then, most of us say we want to have equal partnerships with 
our lovers, but we’re surrounded by a culture that takes male dominance for 
granted, and we often unwittingly perpetuate gender inequalities through our 
day-to-day interactions. The outcome of these influences in many cases is sub-
tle asymmetry in partners’ influence on one another, with a partnership seem-
ing fair or even entirely equal when in reality he has more influence than she 
does. Here’s an example. When spouses are interviewed together about their 
political opinions, wives agree more with their husbands’ answers, if the men 
answer the questions first, than husbands agree with their wives when their 
wives go first—and this occurs even when the wives earn higher salaries and 
are more expert on the issues (Zipp et al., 2004). Male autonomy and assertion 
and female conformity and compliance seem so natural to many people that 
imbalances of power that fit this pattern can be hard to detect. 
 Nevertheless, the latest data on marital equality suggest that we should 
strive to create romantic partnerships in which both partners’ wishes and 
preferences are given equal weight (Stanik et al., 2013). Things have changed 
in the last quarter  century. Spouses are much more likely to share decision-
making than they used to be, and those who do enjoy marriages that are hap-
pier, less contentious, and less prone to divorce than those in which one of the 
partners calls most of the shots (Amato et al., 2007). Take a look at  Figure 12.3 . 
The results portrayed there combine the outcomes experienced by husbands 
and wives, but the differences between equal and unequal partnerships are in 
the same direction for both men and women: Women are a lot happier when 
they’re as powerful as their husbands, and notably, their husbands are a little 
happier, too. Everybody wins when power is shared. The bottom line is that 
our modern relationships appear to be more stable and happier on the whole 
when both partners matter to the same extent (Stanik et al., 2013). These days, 
husbands and wives who adhere to traditional divisions of labor and power 
are less satisfied with their marriages than are those who construct more equal 
partnerships (DeMaris et al., 2012).  
 The Two Faces of Power 
 Our discussion thus far may have left you with the impression that power has 
caustic effects on close relationships, but if that’s the case, it’s time to correct that 
view. Imbalances of power can be problematic, but power itself is not inherently 
undesirable at all. It does not always lead to the greedy  exploitation of one’s 
partners. Indeed, when people adopt communal orientations  3 in  committed 
romantic relationships, they typically use their power for the benefit of their 
partners and their relationships, not for selfish ends (Gardner &  Seeley, 2001). 
When people care for each other and want to maintain a rewarding relation-
 3  Need a refresher on the distinction between communal and exchange orientations? Take a look 
back at page 198 in chapter 6.  

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 379
ship, they‘re benevolent; they display concern for the welfare of their partners, 
and they use their influence to enhance the other’s well-being as well as their 
own (Chen et al., 2001). Moreover, people with interdependent self- construals, 4 
who emphasize interdependency with others, are routinely  generous when 
they resolve disputes with others of lower power (Howard et al., 2007). 
 An old cliché asserts that “power corrupts,” implying that people inevi-
tably become greedy and selfish when they are able to get others to do what 
they want. But in interdependent, intimate relationships in which both part-
ners want the desirable outcomes the other can provide, power need not be a 
corrosive, deleterious thing. Instead, committed, happy lovers often use their 
influence to benefit their partners and to enhance, rather than undermine, their 
mutual contentment. Kind, loving people use their power charitably and mag-
nanimously (Côté et al., 2011). 
 There is also, however, a dark side to power. Some people, most of them 
men, actively seek to be the top dogs in their relationships, and they tend to 
be controlling, domineering people who have unhappy partners. Power is 
 important to them, and when they are unable to get what they want through 
more legtimate influence, they may use violence in a sad but sometimes 
 4 Page 232 in chapter 7. 
FIGURE 12.3. Marital outcomes and the balance of power.
Modern couples are happier, and they have less conflict, fewer problems, and are less 
prone to divorce when they share their decision-making equally. Much less advanta-
geous outcomes occur when one of the partners calls most of the shots. Compared to 
those with equalitarian marriages, couples are less happy, and they experience more 
conflict, have more problems, and are more prone to divorce when one partner is more 
powerful than the other.
Happiness
Conflict
Problems
Divorce-
Proneness
Unequal
Equal
−0.3
−0.2
−0.1
0
0.1
0.2
Marital Quality
(standardized scores)
Source: Data from Amato et al., 2007.

380 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
 effective effort to exert control (Vescio et al., 2010). It is to this grimmest aspect 
of intimacy, the potential for intimate violence, to which we now turn.  
 VIOLENCE IN RELATIONSHIPS 
 We commit  violence  when we behave in a manner that is intended to do physi-
cal harm to others (Spitzberg, 2013). The harm we intend may be rather minor or 
quite severe (Regan et al., 2006), a point that a leading research tool, the  Conflict 
Tactics Scale , takes into consideration (Straus et al., 1996). With the scale, people 
describe their use of psychological and physical aggression against their roman-
tic partners, responding to such items as “I insulted or swore at my partner,” 
“I slapped my partner,” and “I used a knife or gun on my partner.” Violent 
actions range from those that do little harm, such as grabbing or pushing, to oth-
ers that inflict atrocious injury, such as beatings and burnings (see  Figure 12.4 ). 
And sadly, intimate violence of all types is more common than most people think.  
 The Prevalence of Violence 
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention are conducting a multi-year 
study of relationship violence in the United States, and the first wave of results 
(Black et al., 2011) is pretty grim. Almost one of every four women (24 percent) 
FIGURE 12.4.  Comparative ratings of physical violence from items on the Conflict 
Tactics Scale
Degree of violence
Relatively low
Extremely high
1. Pushed or shoved
2. Grabbed in anger
3. Slapped
4. Slammed against a wall
5. Punched
6. Beat up
7. Hit with something that could hurt 
8. Used gun or knife 
Source: Data from Regan et al., 2006.

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 381
and one in seven men (14 percent) in America have encountered severe physi-
cal violence—being beaten, kicked, choked, burned, and more—by an intimate 
partner. And the rates of such violence are even higher elsewhere in the world. 
The World Health Organization (2013) reports that 30 percent of the world’s 
women have been assaulted by a domestic partner, with the highest rates of 
such victimization—37 percent—occurring in Africa, the Middle East, and 
Southeast Asia.
When a couple has a history of angry disputes, rates of violence are higher 
still. Of several hundred cases of divorcing couples in Tucson, Arizona, who 
were referred to court-ordered mediation to resolve child-custody disputes, 
75 percent had involved some form of physical abuse (C. Beck et al., 2013). 
And psychological aggression—such as screaming, ridicule, and threats—had 
occurred in almost all (95 percent) of those couples.
Psychological aggression is no small matter. It occurs at one time or another 
in most relationships (Fergusson et al., 2005), and it is clearly detrimental to 
marital satisfaction (Yoon & Lawrence, 2013). But as bad as it is, verbal aggres-
sion  seems less worrisome to most of us than physical violence does (Capezza 
& Arriaga, 2008), so I’ll focus on violence here. And concern about intimate 
partner violence (or IPV) is warranted; in the United States, the Centers for 
 Disease Control and Prevention (2012) estimate that IPV will cost nearly $9 bil-
lion in medical care, psychological services, and lost time from work this year.  
 Types of Couple Violence 
 It’s one thing to describe the specific acts of violence that occur in close 
 relationships, and another to explain why they occur. Michael Johnson (2008) 
has suggested that there are three major, distinct types of violence in  romantic 
couples, and they spring from different sources. The most familiar type is 
 situational couple violence (or SCV), which typically erupts from heated con-
flicts that get out of hand. It occurs when both partners are angry and is tied to 
specific arguments, so it is only occasional and is usually mild, being unlikely 
to escalate into serious, life-threatening forms of aggression. Often, it is also 
mutual, with both partners angrily and impulsively flying out of control. 
 A notably different kind of violence is  intimate terrorism (or IT) in 
which one partner uses violence as a tool to control and oppress the other. 
The  physical force and coercion that occurs in intimate terrorism may be just 
one tactic in a general pattern of threats, isolation, and economic subordi-
nation (see  Figure 12.5 and the box on page 383), and when it is present in 
a relationship, it occurs more often than situational couple violence does. 
Indeed, compared to SCV, intimate terrorism is more likely to be one-sided, 
to escalate over time, and to involve serious injury to its target. It’s also the 
form of IPV that’s most likely to get a battered spouse to seek shelter else-
where (Johnson, 2008).  
 The third type of couple violence is  violent resistance, in which a part-
ner forcibly fights back against intimate terrorism. Violent resistance occurs in 
some, but not all, cases of intimate terrorism, so it is the least common of the 

382 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
three. When IPV occurs, it is usually situational couple violence,  occasionally 
intimate terrorism, and only sometimes violent resistance ( Johnson, 2008). 
 The distinctions among these three types are important. For one thing, 
men and women are equally likely to engage in hotheaded, impulsive situ-
ational couple violence, but intimate terrorism is disproportionately authored 
by men. Women do engage in intimate terrorism, but much less often than 
men do (C. Beck et al., 2013). (And as a result of this asymmetry, violent resis-
tance is much more common in women than in men.) Does this mean that men 
are more violent toward their intimate partners than women are? That’s actu-
ally a thorny question.  
Using
Intimidation
Making her afraid by using 
looks, actions, gestures
• smashing things
• destroying her property
• abusing pets
• displaying
weapons.
Using
Emotional
Abuse
Putting her down
• making her feel bad about 
herself • calling her names
• making her think she's crazy
• playing mind games • humiliating her
• making her feel guilty.
Using
Children
Making her feel 
guilty about the 
children • using
the children to relay 
messages • using 
visitation to harass her •
threatening to take the children 
away.
Using
Coercion
and Threats
Making and/or carrying out 
threats to do something to hurt 
her • threatening to
leave her, to commit
suicide, to report her
to welfare • making
her drop charges
• making her
do illegal
things.
  Using Isolation
Controlling what she does, who she
sees and talks to, what she reads, 
where she goes • limiting her 
outside involvement
• using jealousy to
justify actions.
Mini-
mizing,
Denying,
and 
Blaming
Making light of the 
abuse and not taking 
her concerns about it 
seriously • saying the
abuse didn't happen
• shifting responsibility for 
abusive behavior • 
saying she
caused it.
Using Male Privilege
Treating her like a servant
• making all the big decisions
• acting like the “master of 
the castle” • being the 
one to define men’s
and women’s
roles.
Using
Economic
Abuse
Preventing her from 
getting or keeping a job
• making her ask for money
• giving her an allowance • taking 
her money • not letting her know about 
or have access to family income.
Power
and
Control
PH
YS
IC
AL
VI
OL
EN
CE
PH
YS
IC
AL
VI
OL
EN
CE
FIGURE 12.5. The many facets of intimate terrorism.
The variety of ways in which an intimate terrorist may attempt to influence a partner 
are portrayed as spokes in a wheel, and violence is the rim that unites them all. Women 
can be intimate terrorists, too, but the victim is portrayed as a woman here because 
eight out of nine intimate terrorists are men.
Source: Pence & Paymar, 1993.

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 383
 Gender Differences in Intimate Violence 
 Stereotypes may suggest that women engage in less intimate violence than 
men do, but if anything, it’s the other way around; women are actually slightly 
more likely to engage in physical violence against their partners than men are 
( Desmarais et al., 2012).  That sounds like a straightforward (if surprising) con-
clusion, but it has been the subject of considerable controversy and discussion 
among relationship scientists (e.g., Dragiewicz & DeKeseredy, 2012). For one 
thing,  men and women tend to exhibit violent behavior of different severity. 
Women are more likely to throw something, kick, bite, scratch, or punch their 
 partners, whereas men are more likely to choke, strangle, or beat up theirs 
(Tanha et al., 2010). Thus, there’s no question that men are more likely to do 
some damage; when couple violence occurs, most of the injuries (62 percent) 
are suffered by women (Archer, 2000). Men are also much more likely than 
women to rape or murder their partners (World Health Organization, 2013). 
These brutal acts are often not included in studies of couple violence, but if they 
are, men are clearly more aggressive than women (Buss & Duntley, 2006). 
Violence and Mate-Guarding
Evolutionary 
theorists 
suggest 
that 
there’s value in doing what we can to 
induce our mates to be faithful to us. 
Everything else being equal, sexual selec-
tion favors those whose mates repro-
duce with them and no one else. It’s a 
challenge to which many of us respond 
by striving to provide our partners with 
excellent rewards that would make it 
foolish and pointless for them to cheat on 
us. But that’s hard to do if we’re people 
of modest means and middling mate 
value (Miner et al., 2009), so some of us 
also engage in mate-g uarding; we work 
to regulate and control our partners’ 
access to potential rivals, and vice versa.
Some 
tactics 
of 
mate-guarding 
involve monopolization of a partner’s 
time so that there’s little opportunity 
to stray. Vigilance and surveillance—
dropping by unexpectedly or calling at 
random—may also occur ( Kaighobadi 
et al., 2010). But the point of this box is 
that, sadly, violence can also be used to 
enforce a mate’s fi delity (Buss &  Duntley, 
2006). The ability to do harm to one’s 
partner is a form of coercive power, and 
jealous people sometimes use the threat 
of (more) physical punishment to control 
their partner’s behavior.
In such relationships, violence is 
just one element in a web of control. For 
instance, men who threaten their part-
ners into remaining faithful also tend 
to engage in verbal abuse, frequently 
insulting their partners’ looks, intel-
ligence, and general worth (McKib-
bin et al., 2007). In turn, those insults, 
the surveillance, and the threats are all 
positively correlated with actual vio-
lence infl icted on their mates (Shack-
elford et al., 2005) that becomes more 
likely when they worry—usually with-
out good cause—that their mates have 
been unfaithful (Kaighobadi et al., 
2009). Thus, we should be on our guard 
if a partner’s possessiveness turns surly; 
violence may not be far behind.

384 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
 Sampling is also an issue. Surveys of young adults tend to detect more 
 violence from women than from men—because there is, after all, a lot of it 
(Straus, 2008)—but studies focusing on distressed couples, such as those in 
marital therapy or those in court, usually find the husbands to be more violent 
than their wives (C. Beck et al., 2013). Women are more likely to engage in indi-
rect aggression—by trying to ruin someone’s reputation by spreading rumors 
or gossip (Hess & Hagen, 2006), for example—but that isn’t violence. Add all 
this up, and it appears that women can be just as violent as men (Cho, 2012), 
but they are less likely to cause severe injuries and less likely to use violence 
as a tool in an ongoing pattern of domination and influence. The sexes behave 
similarly in episodes of SCV (Langhinrichsen-Rohling et al., 2012), but a siz-
able majority of intimate terrorists—89 percent—are men (J ohnson, 2008). And 
when they are victims of intimate terrorism, women typically face persistent 
violence that often does them harm. Why do men sometimes resort to physical 
force to hold sway over their female partners?  
 Correlates of Violence 
 Careful consideration of intimate partner violence recognizes the distinction 
between situational couple violence and intimate terrorism (C. Beck et al., 2013). 
Most acts of violence in close relationships result from impetuous, impulsive 
failures of self-control (that’s SCV), but some violence is part of a program of 
ruthless subjugation of one’s partner (and that’s IT). And importantly, SCV and 
IT seem to spring from somewhat different sources. 
 Situational Couple Violence 
Both types of intimate partner violence are complex, emerging from various 
overlapping influences. A useful model of situational couple violence, the I3 (or 
“I-cubed”) model created by Eli Finkel (2014), organizes influences on SCV into 
 instigating triggers that cause one or both partners to be frustrated or on edge, 
 impelling influences  that make it more likely that the partners will experience 
violent impulses, and  inhibiting influences that encourage the partners to refrain 
from acting on those impulses. When we’ve been angry, most of us have expe-
rienced  violent impulses, but most of us didn’t act on them (Finkel et al., 2009), 
and Finkel‘s model suggests that we refrained from violence either because the 
impelling influences stimulating us to lash out were too weak or because the 
inhibiting forces dissuading us from physical action were too strong. 
 What sort of influences are these? Finkel (2008) suggested that both 
impelling and inhibitory influences could be distal, dispositional, relational, 
or situational.  Distal influences include background factors such as cultural 
norms, economic conditions, and family experiences.  Dispositional influences 
include personality traits and long-standing beliefs.  Relational influences involve 
the current state of the couple’s relationship, and  situational influences include 
the immediate circumstances. These are all listed with some examples in 
 Figure 12.6 . The figure may seem intimidating at first, but don’t fret; I’ll walk 
you through it.  

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 385
Instigating Triggers. The path to situational couple violence begins with 
instigating infl uences that cause one or both of the partners to become cantan-
kerous or angry. Anything about a couple’s interaction that causes frustration 
or aggravation can set the model in motion: Jealousy-evoking events, remem-
bered or discovered betrayals, real or imagined rejection (Giordano et al., 2010), 
or any of the exasperating events that exacerbate confl ict5 will suffi ce. A partic-
ularly potent instigator, though, is verbal or physical abuse from one’s partner: 
People are especially likely to become antagonistic when their partners curse or 
hit them fi rst (Stith et al., 2004).
Impelling Influences. Then, when someone’s fi red up, the impelling infl u-
ences that are at work become important. Some of the infl uences that predispose 
one to violence are events from much earlier in life. For instance, people who 
5 Pages 344–346 in chapter 11.
Examples of 
Instigating Triggers
Examples of 
Impelling Influences
Examples of
Inhibiting Influences
Conflict
Betrayal
Rejection
Aggression
Are there
strong
instigating
triggers?
Are there
strong
impelling
factors?
Yes
Yes
Yes
No
No
No
Are the
inhibiting
influences
 weak?
High Risk
of situational
couple
violence
Low risk
of situational
couple
violence
Distal:
 Violent family
 of origin
Dispositional:
 Neuroticism
Relational:
 Mismatched
 attachment styles
Situational:
 Heat and noise
Distal:
 Egalitarian
 cultural norms
Dispositional:
 Conscientiousness
Relational:
 Satisfaction and
 commitment
Situational:
 Sobriety
FIGURE 12.6. The I3 model of SCV perpetration.
If the answers to the three questions posed in the model are all “yes,” situational 
couple violence is likely to occur. If any of the answers is “no,” violence is unlikely. 
Examples of the influences that bear on each question are provided, but they are illus-
trative rather than exhaustive. Violence is the result of many sources, and the examples 
provided were chosen because of their relevance to relationship science.
Source: Adapted from Finkel, 2008.

386 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
witnessed violence between their parents (Capaldi et al., 2012) or were abused 
when they were children (Edwards et al., 2014), and those who consumed a lot 
of aggressive media (such as violent movies and video games) over the years 
(Coyne et al., 2010) are more likely than others to engage in IPV. Other impel-
ling infl uences are enduring personal characteristics. People with sour disposi-
tions who are prone to anger (Dutton, 2010) or who are high in neuroticism 
(Hellmuth & McNulty, 2008) are also prone to intimate violence. So are men 
with traditional, sex-typed gender roles (Golden et al., 2013) and those with atti-
tudes that condone a little force now and then as a normal way of doing things 
(Woodin et al., 2013). (Thus, here’s a bit of good news in this grim landscape: 
Some of the personal characteristics that predispose people to violence are 
attitudes that may be comparatively easy to change [Neighbors et al., 2010].) Still 
other impelling infl uences emerge from the p artners’ patterns of interaction; 
for example, couples with poor communication skills (L. Simpson et al., 2007) 
or mismatched attachment styles (Doumas et al., 2008) engage in more IPV 
than others do.6 (The most troublesome mismatch pairs a man who’s high in 
avoidance of intimacy with a woman who is anxious about abandonment; they 
probably both push all of the other’s buttons because both men and women are 
more violent in such couples.) And fi nally, the particular circumstances matter: 
Recent stress at work or school (Gormley & Lopez, 2010) or a hot, noisy, uncom-
fortable environment (Larrick et al., 2011) can also make one touchy.
Inhibiting Influences. All of the infl uences I’ve mentioned thus far are 
presumed to fuel one’s violent impulses, but inhibiting infl uences counteract 
aggressive urges. Once again, these infl uences are of diverse types. Violence is 
less likely in cultures that promote gender equality (Archer, 2006), and consci-
entious people are less likely than others to aggress when they’re angry (Jensen-
Campbell et al., 2007), so both cultural and individual differences are involved. 
A particularly important personal characteristic is one’s dispositional capac-
ity for self-control. People who are generally able to control their impulses are 
less violent when they’re provoked; in one study, teenagers in North  Carolina 
who were low in self-control perpetrated seven-and-a-half times more violent 
acts against their dating partners than those who were high in self-control 
6 The I3 model’s distinction between distal, dispositional, relational, and situational influences is a 
helpful way to organize the variety of influences that shape IPV, but don’t take it too seriously. The 
categories overlap, and to some degree, the placement of a particular influence in a specific cat-
egory is arbitrary. For example, kids who grow up in violent homes are more likely than the rest of 
us to have insecure attachment styles, and certain combinations of insecure styles in a  marriage—
such as an anxious wife paired with an avoidant husband—are tricky (Godbout et al., 2009). So, 
the distal influence of a violent childhood home produces a dispositional characteristic, attachment 
insecurity, that becomes particularly problematic when it’s combined with a partner’s style in a 
way that produces a trying relationship that’s full of annoying vexations. All four types of influ-
ences are involved in this sequence of events, and there’s no need for you to fuss too much about 
what influences on IPV belong in which category. Instead, just note the wide variety of experiences 
and traits that are associated with violence in intimate relationships. IPV has complex origins. It 
results from multiple influences.

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 387
(Finkel et al., 2009).7 In addition, couples with good problem-solving skills 
( Hellmuth & McNulty, 2008) and who are satisfi ed with their relationship 
(Fournier et al., 2011) are less likely to lash out, and sober people are more 
peaceable, too; lest there be any doubt, alcohol use does fuel IPV (Stuart et al., 
2013). The role of relationship commitment in SCV is also noteworthy: Commit-
ment to one’s partner makes violence less likely (Slotter et al., 2012), so spouses 
are less violent, on average, than cohabiting couples are (Brownridge, 2010). 
Otherwise, the various infl uences we’ve touched on here appear to operate 
similarly in both marriages and dating relationships (e.g., Gover et al., 2008).
Thus, the I3 model holds that instigating triggers and impelling influences 
work together to create urges to be aggressive—but that people will nevertheless 
behave nonviolently when inhibiting influences are strong. However, if inhib-
iting influences are weak, violence may occur, and if inhibiting influences are 
very weak, relatively small provocations may be enough to elicit intimate vio-
lence. What’s more, situational couple violence originates in circumstances that 
are shaped both by temporary passing influences and by dispositional and distal 
influences that are stable and lasting. Couples may have some bouts of SCV when 
tempers run high even when neither partner is particularly prone to violence.
But here’s a key question: If IPV happens once, will it happen again? Regret-
tably, the smartest answer to that question is “yes.” In a large national study in 
the United States, only 30 percent of those who had been violent in one roman-
tic relationship were violent again within the next 5 years in a different, second 
relationship; most people who engaged in SCV—sometimes because they were 
fighting back after their partners threw the first punch—did not continue to be 
violent once they changed partners (Whitaker et al., 2010). On the other hand, 
once violence starts in a particular relationship, it tends to recur. In one study 
involving newlyweds, 76 percent of the men who were physically aggressive 
when they were engaged perpetrated violence again in the first 30 months after 
the wedding—and much of their violence was severe (Lorber & O’Leary, 2004). 
Intimate violence is occasionally an isolated event—but more often it continues, 
at least sporadically, once it starts. This is especially true of the more chronic, 
even more dangerous form of IPV: intimate terrorism. 
Intimate Terrorism
The I3 model also helps to explain intimate terrorism (Finkel, 2014), but the 
mix of influences is different. Intimate terrorism seems to be rooted in influ-
ences that are more enduring than those that may trigger SCV, with people 
who terrorize their partners coming from two camps (Holtzworth-Munroe & 
Meehan, 2005). Some of them may resort to violence because they are rather 
clumsy and pathetic, and threats of harm are their wretched efforts to keep 
their partners from leaving. Others seem to be more malevolent; they are anti-
social or narcissistic, and violence is just another tool with which to get what 
they want (Fowler & Westen, 2011).
7 Make a mental note about the value of self-control, will you? I’ll have more to say about it in 
 chapter 14.

388 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
 Men who are intimate terrorists do not become brutal overnight. They have 
often witnessed violent conflict between their parents and have been sexually 
abused themselves (Afifi et al., 2009), growing up in homes that taught them 
traditional  gender roles and rather hostile, misogynistic attitudes (Liebold & 
 McConnell, 2004); they are much more likely than 
other men to think of women as adversaries to be 
used for one’s satisfaction and pleasure. As a 
result, they engage in more surveillance and vio-
lence than most men even when a relationship has 
just begun (Williams & Frieze, 2005), and they 
may be generally aggressive, abusing their pets as well as their partners 
( Simmons & Lehmann, 2007). The signs that suggest that a man may be an 
abuser are often evident from the start. 
 This set of surly attitudes is often combined with feelings of inadequacy 
that make violence seem to be one of the terrorist’s few resources of power 
(Bosson & Vandello, 2011). Terrorists often feel intellectually inferior to their 
partners (Moore et al., 2008) and have low self-esteem (Cowan & Mills, 2004), 
often because they are plagued by poverty; violence is much more common in 
homes with low annual incomes than in homes that are affluent (Golden et al., 
2013). Certainly, some spouse abusers are well-to-do people with plenty of self-
respect who are just flat out mean; nevertheless, on average, intimate terrorists 
are not well off, and they appear to turn to coercive power because they control 
few other resources. 
 One of the most dreadful aspects of all this is the manner in which intimate 
aggression is transmitted from one generation to the next, with children who 
are raised in violent homes being more likely to be violent themselves (C. Smith 
et al., 2011). However, this cycle is not inevitable. Indeed, none of the contrib-
uting risk factors I’ve described here guarantee that violence will occur. Sons 
of the most violent American parents are 10 times more likely than the sons 
of nonviolent parents to beat their wives. Yet even in this extreme group, only 
20 percent of those studied had committed severe acts of violence in the past 
12 months; the other 80 percent had not recently engaged in any severe v iolence 
in their intimate relationships (Johnson, 2008). Thus, children from violent 
homes are more likely than others to misbehave, but many never do. Still, their 
increased risk for such behavior is disturbing; in the cycle of family violence, 
the evil that people do may, in fact, outlive them.  
 The Rationales of Violence 
 Overall, then, men who engage in intimate terrorism often subscribe to mascu-
line codes that promote a man’s authority over women, but many of them feel 
inadequate to the task; they “often feel, or fear, that they do not measure up to 
those codes. Attempting to shore up their masculine self-concept, they may try 
to control others, particularly those who are physically weaker than they are” 
(Wood, 2004, p. 558). Do such men even realize that they are being abusive, or 
do they consider their use of force to be customary treatment of women by men? 
A Point to Ponder
What will you do if your 
lover ever slaps, hits, or 
kicks you? Why?

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 389
Stalking
Unwanted Intrusion
Another undesirable behavior that occ urs 
in some relationships is intrusive pursuit 
of someone—often an ex- partner—who 
does not wish to be pursued. Legal defi-
nitions of stalking in most of the United 
States involve repeated, malicious fol-
lowing and harassing of an unwilling tar-
get that may include (depending on the 
state) unwanted phone calls, letters, and 
text messages, surveillance, and other 
invasions of privacy (Shannon, 2009).
All of the United States have laws 
against stalking, and with good reason: 
16 percent of American women and 
5  percent of men have been targets of 
a frightening stalker (Black et al., 2011). 
And studies that focus more broadly on 
unwanted communications and other 
intrusions converge on the estimate 
that almost two-fi fths of all women, 
and one-seventh of all men, have expe-
rienced unwelcome harassment from a 
persistent pursuer. Most of the victims 
of stalking (75 percent) are women, and 
their stalkers are usually male (Spitz-
berg et al., 2010).
Why do people pursue others who 
want nothing to do with them? There are 
several reasons because there are various 
kinds of stalkers; as Finch (2001) color-
fully put it, stalkers may be bad, mad, or 
sad. They may be motivated by desires 
for revenge or jealous possessiveness and 
may wish either to intimidate or to exert 
control over their targets (Davis et al., 
2012). Indeed, about half of all stalkers 
are people who pursue an ex-partner 
after the end of a romantic relationship, 
and they generally tend to be insecure, 
disagreeable, hostile men with low self-
esteem who are very sensitive to rejection 
(Kamphuis et al., 2004). Alternatively, 
stalkers may be a little crazy (McEwan 
et al., 2009), being obsessed with someone 
who is a mere acquaintanace or whom 
they don’t even know; stalkers are com-
plete strangers to their targets about one-
fi fth of the time. Or, fi nally, they may be 
lonely and possessed of poor social skills 
and may be seeking to form a relationship 
in an inept and hopeless way (Duntley & 
Buss, 2012). One-quarter of all stalkers are 
neighbors, co-workers, or other acquain-
tances such as teachers, bank tellers, or 
car mechanics, and they often wrongly 
believe that their victims are interested in 
them in return, even when they’re told to 
“get lost” (Sinclair & Frieze, 2005).
Stalking is no trivial matter. Escape 
can be diffi cult, especially if modern 
technology is involved; in one case, a 
stalker hid a global positioning unit in 
a victim’s car so he always knew where 
she was (Southworth et al., 2007). Vic-
tims are also often harassed on Facebook 
(Lyndon et al., 2011). Faced with such 
persecution, victims often become anx-
ious and fearful, and, even worse, some 
form of physical violence occurs in about 
one-third of all cases. The police are con-
sulted half of the time (Spitzberg et al., 
2010). Thus, another dark cost of some 
relationships is that they don’t fully end 
when one partner tries to exit them.
 Julia Wood (2004) provided insight into the minds of such men when she 
interviewed 22 incarcerated men who had abused their female partners. All of 
the men felt that their behavior had been a legitimate response to the disrespect 
they had faced from their partners, and all mentioned their partners’ provocation 
as the genesis of their abuse. They also felt that men were supposed to be domi-
nant and superior to women and so were entitled to use violence to  control 

390 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
and discipline them. On the other hand, most believed that they were not 
“real” wife abusers because they did not enjoy hurting women and they had 
limited their level of abuse, doing less harm than they could have. One man 
had stabbed his wife only once, and another had brutally beaten his wife but 
argued that he hadn’t hit her as hard as he could. Perhaps as a result of these 
rationalizations, only about half of the men expressed regret and remorse about 
their actions. They understood that their actions were illegal, but they didn’t 
necessarily believe that their actions were wrong. 
 What do women feel in response to such treatment? In a broad review of 
the intimate violence literature, Sally Lloyd and Beth Emery (2000) noted that 
women are ordinarily surprised when they encounter intimate aggression, and 
they often struggle to make sense of it. They are influenced by romantic norms 
that encourage them to “forgive and forget” and they labor under cultural 
norms that blame victims for their difficulties, so they “consistently ask them-
selves why they went out with the wrong kind of man, why they made him 
angry when they knew he had a violent temper, or why they were in the wrong 
place at the wrong time” (Lloyd & Emery, 2000, p. 508). As a result of these 
influences, women feel betrayed, but they sometimes also blame themselves for 
their partners’ aggression and, due to shame, naïveté, or ignorance, they often 
remain silent about their plight. 
 Overall, intimate terrorism exacts a fearsome toll on its victims.  Physical 
injuries are bad enough, but victims may also suffer negative psychological con-
sequences ranging from lowered self-esteem and mistrust of men to depression 
and post-traumatic stress disorder (Lawrence et al., 2012). There are also substan-
tial social costs; battered women are often absent from work, and some become 
homeless when violence forces them to flee their homes. And at its most basic 
level, intimate violence makes a partnership much less desirable than it otherwise 
might be. The end of the relationship may  follow (Lawrence & Bradbury, 2007).  
 Why Don’t They All Leave? 
 Indeed, intimate violence causes many people to leave their partners. One study 
(Campbell et al., 1994) that followed battered women over two-and-a-half years 
found that at the end of that period,  
 43 percent of the participants had left their original partners, either remaining 
unattached (20 percent) or entering new, nonabusive relationships (23 percent),  
 23 percent remained with their partners but had successfully ended the violence 
for at least a year, and  
 33 percent were still in an abusive relationship, either as victims (25 percent) or 
as both victims and perpetrators of violence (8 percent).  
 Thus, in this sample, only one-third of the women stayed in an abusive 
partnership for an extended period. Perseverance and determination are often 
required to escape an abusive relationship, but most people do, one way or the 
other. But why don’t all victims run from their persecutors? 

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 391
 There’s a simple answer to that question. They don’t leave because, despite 
the abuse, they don’t think they’ll be better off if they go (Edwards et al., 2011) . 8 
They’re often wrong in thinking so: People are usually happier when they get 
away from an abusive partner than they think they will be (Arriaga et al., 2013). 
But a decision to leave is complex. Some violent partners are sweet and loving 
part of the time, and intermittent violence may be one’s only complaint about 
the relationship (Marshall et al., 2000). The costs of leaving may also seem too 
high; whatever investments one has made in the relationship will be lost, and 
one’s alternatives may seem bleak (Young & Furman, 2013). One’s economic 
status is crucial in this regard; the financial expense of departing one’s home 
may be too momentous to overcome if one is unemployed. Finally, unfortu-
nately,  the fear of even greater violence can also prevent the victims of intimate 
terrorism from exiting the relationship. Some aggressive, controlling partners 
may react with extreme anger against their lovers if they try to leave (Tanha 
et al., 2010)—and the threat of such retaliation suggests that we should do all 
we can to assist and protect those who are trying to escape the coercive power 
of an abusive partner. 
 Finally, I need to acknowledge the unfortunate truth that some people 
don’t leave because they don’t want to go. Women who have high anxiety 
about abandonment are drawn to possessive, controlling men. A man’s intru-
sive jealousy and surveillance reassures an anxious partner that he still cares, 
and, perversely, the more psychological abuse a woman has encountered in 
the past, the stronger her preference for abusive men (Zayas & Shoda, 2007). 
Moreover, such men prefer anxious women in return, probably because they’re 
willing to tolerate their abuse. Thus, an arrangement in which a man is clearly 
controlling and dominant to a subservient partner, which would be intoler-
able to most of us, suits some couples. It’s likely, however, that if the women 
involved in such relationships come to value themselves more, they will find 
their partners’ harsh, inequitable behavior toward them to be less acceptable. 
Power is all about getting what one wants, but violence should not be part of 
that equation. 
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 During their first year of marriage, Britni and Jonathon fell into a pattern in which 
he kept track of their debit account and paid all their bills each month. She was 
still a senior in college and didn’t have a job, but he was working and earning just 
enough money for them to live on each month if they were careful. He took pride 
in his prudent management of money, but both of them were glad when she grad-
uated and got a great job that actually paid her a little more than Jonathon’s did. 
 He was surprised, however, when she announced that she wanted to main-
tain her own checking and savings accounts. She suggested that they each put 
 8  This is an excellent example of the influence of our judgments of the outcomes awaiting us outside 
our current relationships, which we labeled as our  comparison level for alternatives  back in chapter 6. 
I invite you to look back at pages 178–183 for more discussion of these ideas. 

392 
CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence
half of their earnings into a joint account that would pay the bills and then keep 
the rest of their money for their own use. He was hurt that she did not want to 
merge their monies and join financial forces, and he was annoyed when he real-
ized that, if they each kept half their money, she would have a lot more money 
than he would after a few years. But she argued that she wanted to be allowed 
to do what she wanted with her extra earnings, spending or investing them as 
she saw fit, and she thought that separate accounts would actually avoid dis-
agreements and conflict. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for Britni and 
Jonathon? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 Power is the ability to influence the behavior of others and to resist their influ-
ence on us. 
 Power and Interdependence 
 Sources of Power. From an interdependency perspective, power is based 
on the control of valuable resources that are desired by others.   The  principle of 
lesser interest states that the partner who is less interested in continuing a rela-
tionship has more power in it. 
 There are two different broad types of power,  fate control and  behavior con-
trol. In almost all relationships, both partners have some power over each other, 
with each being able to influence the other some of the time.  
 Types of Resources. There are six resources that provide people power. 
 Reward power and  coercive power refer to one’s ability to bestow rewards and 
punishments, respectively, on someone else.  Legitimate power exists when one 
partner has a reasonable right—by dint of authority, reciprocity, equity, or 
social responsibility—to tell the other what to do. A partner’s love and affection 
provides the other  referent power, knowledge and expertise creates  expert power, 
and specifi c pieces of information lend one  informational power. 
 Men, Women, and the Control of Resources. Men tend to control 
more resources than women do, in part because social norms maintain male 
 dominance.  The balance of power in close relationships is also affected by the 
universalistic or particularistic nature of the resources one controls.  
 The Process of Power. Powerful people interrupt others and tend to be 
unaware of others’ feelings. The specifi c infl uence tactics people use may be 
direct or indirect and bilateral or unilateral.   
 The Outcome of Power. Spouses are much more likely to share  decision 
making than they used to be, and those who do enjoy happier marriages than 
those who have marriages in which one partner is dominant.  

CHAPTER 12: Power and Violence 393
 The Two Faces of Power. When they are committed to a relationship, 
many people use power benevolently, generously enhancing their partners’ 
well-being as well as their own.  Unfortunately, this does not always occur. 
 Violence in Relationships 
 Violence is behavior that is intended to hurt someone else. 
 The Prevalence of Violence. Violence among intimates is common around 
the world, and it occurs in one of every four couples in the United States.  
 Types of Couple Violence. There are three distinct types of violence 
in romantic couples:  situational couple violence,  intimate terrorism, and  violent 
 resistance. Men and women are equally likely to engage in situational couple 
violence, but a huge majority of those who employ intimate terrorism are men.  
 Gender Differences in Intimate Violence. Women are violent as often as 
men, but men are more likely to infl ict injury. 
 Correlates of Violence. Situational couple violence springs from impelling 
and inhibiting infl uences that are distal, dispositional, relational, or situational. 
Intimate terrorism is committed by men who are hostile toward women and 
who are plagued by feelings of inadequacy. 
 The Rationales of Violence. Wife-abusing men feel superior to women 
and believe that their aggression is a legitimate response to their wives’ disre-
spect. Women sometimes blame themselves for their abuse. 
 Why Don’t They All Leave? Most victims of abuse leave their relation-
ships, but they stay when they don’t believe they’ll be better off if they go. A 
few don’t leave because they don’t want to go. 

394
 C H A P T E R  1 3 
 The Dissolution and Loss 
of Relationships 
 T he C hanging R ate of D ivorce  ◆ The Predictors of 
Divorce  ◆ B reaking U p  ◆ The Aftermath of B reakups 
 ◆ For Your Consideration  ◆ Chapter Summary 
 Sometimes the stresses and strains two partners experience catch up with 
them. Perhaps their conflict is too constant and too intense. Perhaps their part-
nership is inequitable, with one of them exploiting the other. Perhaps their 
passion has waned, and new attractions are distracting them. Or perhaps they 
are merely contented with each other, instead of delighted, so they are disap-
pointed that the “magic” has died. 
 There are myriad reasons why relationships may fail, and the deterioration 
of any particular partnership may involve events and processes that are unique 
to that couple. On the other hand, there are also personal and cultural influ-
ences that can have generic, widespread effects on the stability of intimate rela-
tionships, and relationship scientists have been identifying and studying them 
for years. In this chapter, we’ll consider the correlates and consequences of the 
decline and fall of satisfaction and intimacy. I’ll have a lot to say about divorce 
because a decision to end a marriage is often more deliberate and weighty, and 
the consequences more complicated, than those that emerge from less formal 
partnerships. There’s also been much more research on divorce than on non-
marital breakups. Nevertheless, the dissolution of any intimate relationship—
such as a cohabiting partnership, dating relationship, or friendship—can be 
momentous, so we’ll examine how people adjust to the end of those partner-
ships, too. Let’s start with a reminder that the cultural landscape we face today 
is quite different from the one our grandparents knew. 
 THE CHANGING RATE OF DIVORCE 
 The Prevalence of Divorce 
 As you recall, current divorce rates are much higher than they were when your 
grandparents married. In the United States, there are currently half as many 

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 395
divorces as marriages each year (Cruz, 2013), so the chance that a recent mar-
riage will ultimately end in separation or divorce still hovers around 50  percent. 
This is remarkable because it suggests that despite all the good intentions and 
warm feelings with which people marry, the chances that they will succeed 
in living out their lives together are about the same as the chance of getting 
“heads” when you flip a coin. 
 Indeed, a typical American marriage won’t last nearly as long as peo-
ple think it will. Only about two-thirds (64 percent) of married couples stay 
together for 10 years, and fewer than half reach their twenty-first wedding 
anniversary, so the average length of a marriage in the United States is just over 
18 years (Elliott & Simmons, 2011). That figure counts all marriages, including 
those that end with the death of a spouse, but the leading cause of death of a 
marriage in its first 20 years is, of course, divorce. Lots of people don’t turn 30 
without having been divorced; the median age at which men encounter their 
(first) divorce is 31.8, and for women, it’s 29.4 (Cohn, 2010). 
 Two other patterns that result, in part, from the high divorce rate are 
noteworthy. First, only about half (51 percent) of the adult U.S. population is 
presently married (Fry, 2012). That’s an all-time low. Second, 25 percent of 
American children—1 out of every 4 people under the age of 18—now live in 
single-parent homes, most of them run by their mothers (Wilcox & Marquardt, 
2010). That rate is 3 times higher than it was in 1960. 
 Any way you look at it, divorce is now commonplace in America. Divorce 
rates have also increased in other countries over the last 50 years, but the United 
States has had the dubious distinction of leading the pack. The divorce rate in 
the United States is noticeably higher than in all of Europe, Canada, or Japan 
(U.S. Census Bureau, 2012). Marriages are less likely to end than other romantic 
relationships are—see the box on the next page—but they’re also less likely to 
last than they used to be. 
 Why Has the Divorce Rate Increased? 
 There are no certain reasons why the second half of the twentieth century saw 
such a huge increase in U.S. rates of divorce. But there are several possibilities, 
and all of them may (or may not) be contributing influences. 
 One possibility is that we hold different, more demanding expectations for 
marriage than people used to. Our great-grandparents generally believed that if 
you wanted to live with a romantic partner, if you wanted to have children, and if 
you wanted to pay the bills and live well, you had to get  married. Nowadays, how-
ever, cohabitation is widespread, there are lots of single  parents, and most women 
have entered the workforce. As a result, marriage is no longer the practical neces-
sity it used to be. Instead, in the opinion of some observers, people are more likely 
than ever before to pursue marriage as a path to personal fulfillment (Finkel, Hui, 
et al., 2014). Marriage is supposed to be play, not work; it’s supposed to be excit-
ing, not routine, and passionate, not warm (Amato, 2009). Thus, our expectations 
for marriage may be too high. A happy, warm, rewarding partnership may seem 
insufficient if it is measured against over-glorified and unrealistic expectations. 

396 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
The Staying Power of Formal Commitment
 Here are the percentages of couples of various types who broke up 
during the course of three different studies. Each of these investigations 
has its strengths and weaknesses, but together they tell an interesting 
tale. Divorce may be commonplace, but across various spans of time, 
married heterosexuals are still less likely to break up than unmarried 
people are. It doesn’t  matter whether the unmarried couples are cohab-
iting heterosexuals or gays or lesbians—people who are just living 
together break up more often than spouses do. Furthermore, when gays 
and lesbians obtain legal recognition of their relationships, they, too, are 
less likely to separate than are those who have not made a formal com-
mitment to each other. 
There are two take-home messages here. First, legal commitments 
such as marriages or civil unions up the ante on relationships. They’re 
harder to dissolve than less formal agreements are, and people who 
make such commitments are relatively likely to stand by them. Second, 
the romances of same-sex couples are just as stable as those of heterosex-
uals when they are afforded similar institutional support. We’ll see stud-
ies of full-fledged marriages between gays and lesbians in the years to 
come, and they will probably demonstrate that when gays and lesbians 
are provided similar opportunities to establish fulfilling legal partner-
ships, their romances function just like those of heterosexuals. Should 
formal commitments of this sort for gays and lesbians be against the 
law? Why?
Note. “Heteros” refers to heterosexuals and “G & Ls” refers to gays and lesbians. All of these studies were con-
ducted in the United States. Blumstein and Schwartz (1983) recruited a national sample (n 5 2,082) through 
media publicity. Kurdek (2004) recruited newlyweds from Dayton, Ohio, and gays and lesbians through word 
of mouth and ads in gay magazines (n 5 359). Balsam and her colleagues (2008) used records of civil unions in 
Vermont to find and contact newly joined gays and lesbians; they were asked to invite a married heterosexual 
sibling and a gay or lesbian friend who was not in a civil union to participate in the study with them. Altogether, 
the study tracked 798 people over 3 years. The figures for same-sex couples in the Balsam study include both gays 
and lesbians.
Separation Rates in Different Types of Relationships
Legally Committed
Cohabiting
Study
Time Span
Heteros
G & Ls
Heteros
Gays
Lesbians
Blumstein & 
Schwartz, 1983
1½ yrs
4%
14%
13%
18%
Balsam et al., 2008
3 yrs
3%
4%
9%
Kurdek, 2004
12 yrs
15%
19%
24%

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 397
 For instance, decades ago, Slater (1968, p. 99) warned  :
 Spouses are now asked to be lovers, friends, and mutual therapists in a soci-
ety which is forcing the marriage bond to become the closest, deepest, most 
important and most enduring relationship of one’s life. Paradoxically, then, 
it is increasingly likely to fall short of the emotional demands placed upon it 
and be dissolved. 
 We marry for love and passion and think that they won’t change, and we expect 
our spouses to be soulmates who will never disappoint us. But these are lofty, 
perhaps impossibly high standards, and indeed, recent cultural history suggests 
that “no sooner had the ideal of the love match and lifelong intimacy taken hold 
than people began to demand the right to divorce” (Coontz, 2005, p. 8). 
 People may simply be expecting too much of marriage. The percentage of 
U.S. spouses who report that their marriages are “very happy” is lower now than 
it was 25 years ago (Wilcox & Marquardt, 2010), and the number of conflicts and 
problems that spouses report are higher (Hostetler et al., 2012). On the whole, the 
average perceived quality of American marriages has declined since 1970. 
 But the broader culture has changed, too, and several societal influences 
may be affecting not only the expectations with which we begin our mar-
riages but also the situations we encounter once we are wed. For instance, most 
women in the United States now work outside the home, and their entry into the 
workforce has had several effects. First, spouses report more conflict between 
work and family than they used to, and the more hours a wife works during the 
week, the lower the quality of her marriage tends to be (Hostetler et al., 2012). 
Car repairs, child care, and the scheduling and cooking of meals (to name just a 
few examples) are more problematic when both spouses are employed, and the 
amount of time spouses spend together tends to decline. Both spouses are also 
affected by their problems at work, so that decreases in job satisfaction are asso-
ciated with increases in marital discord (Amato et al., 2007). Participation in the 
labor force also increases spouses’ access to interesting, desirable, alternative 
partners, and divorce is more frequent when women work in occupations that 
surround them with men (McKinnish, 2007). 
 Furthermore, women earn more money than they used to, and, around the 
world, divorce rates are higher when women are financially independent of 
men (Barber, 2003). People who are able to support themselves have more free-
dom to choose divorce when a marriage deteriorates, and in the United States 
there is a straightforward, positive correlation between a woman’s income 
and her odds of divorce: The more money she makes, the more likely it is that 
she will someday be divorced (Mundy, 2012). But don’t think that your mar-
riage will be more stable if you just do without money; poverty has even more 
impact on marital quality. In general, couples with money troubles are less 
content with their marriages than are those who are better off; in particular, 
couples with rather low incomes (under $25,000 per year) are twice as likely to 
divorce as are couples with higher incomes (over $50,000 per year) (Wilcox & 
Marquardt, 2010). Having money may make it easier to divorce, but being poor 
can cause stress that undermines a marriage, too. 

398 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
Overall, then, women’s increased participation in the labor force has plau-
sibly increased conflict at home, made alluring, new romantic partners more 
available, and decreased wives’ economic dependence on their husbands. Per-
haps for all of these reasons, the trend is clear: As the proportion of American 
women employed outside the home increased during the twentieth century, so, 
too, did the divorce rate (Fitch & Ruggles, 2000). 1 
 Our gender roles, the behaviors we expect from men and women, are 
changing, too. Women are gradually becoming more assertive and self-reliant 
(Twenge, 2009), and the partners in many marriages are dividing household 
responsibilities more equitably (Amato et al., 2007). Over the last 25 years, less 
traditional gender roles and increases in the equality of family decision making 
have been associated with higher marital quality for both husbands and wives 
(DeMaris et al., 2012). However, the new division of household labor has had 
different effects on men than on women; husbands are less happy now that 
they’re doing more household chores, but their wives are much more content 
(see  Figure 13.1 ) .
 By some accounts, Western culture is also becoming more individualistic, 
with people being less connected to the others around them than they used to 
be (Amato, 2009). Indeed, most of us are less tied to our communities than our 
grandparents were (Ren, 2011). We’re less likely to live near our extended fami-
lies and less likely to know our neighbors; we participate in fewer clubs and 
social organizations, entertain at home less frequently, and move more often. 
As a result, we receive less social support and companionship from friends 
and acquaintances than our grandparents did (Oishi, 2010), and we rely on our 
spouses for more (Campbell et al., 2012), and this may affect divorce rates in 
two different ways. First, as I’ve already noted, we ask more of our spouses 
than ever before. We expect them to fulfill a wider variety of interpersonal 
needs, and that increases the probability that they will disappoint us in some 
manner. In addition, people who are less connected to their communities are 
less affected by community norms that might discourage them from divorc-
ing. And as it turns out, people who move often from place to place really are 
more prone to divorce than are those who stay in one place and put down roots 
(Magdol & Bessel, 2003). 
 Our shared perceptions of divorce are also less negative than they used 
to be. In many circles, a divorce used to be considered a shameful failure, 
and the event itself was often a messy, lurid, embarrassing spectacle in which 
blame had to be assigned to someone. The advent of no-fault divorce laws in 
the United States during the 1970s made a divorce much easier to obtain; for 
the first time in most jurisdictions, once they had agreed on the division of 
1 As I describe these various patterns, do remember, please, that all of these links between social 
changes and divorce rates are correlations that allow diverse possibilities to exist. A connection 
between women’s working and divorce does not necessarily mean that employment undermines 
women’s commitment to their marriages. To the contrary, women are more likely to seek employ-
ment when there is preexisting discord and strife in their marriages, so it is just as likely that marital 
dissatisfaction causes women to find work as it is that women’s work causes marital dissatisfaction 
(Rogers, 1999). Keep an open mind as you consider the implications of societal change.

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 399
property and childcare, spouses merely had to certify that they faced “irrecon-
cilable differences,” and their marriage was dissolved. No-fault laws helped 
make the procedure more socially acceptable (Wolfers, 2006). On average, we 
feel that a divorce is a more reasonable and more desirable response to a bad 
marriage than our parents did, and more favorable attitudes toward divorce 
appear to reduce the quality of our marriages as time goes by (Amato & Rog-
ers, 1999). We may be less likely to work hard to rescue a faltering relationship 
when divorce seems an expedient alternative (Whitton et al., 2013). 
 Most couples also cohabit before they marry these days, and as we saw in 
chapter 1, people who cohabit encounter an increased risk of divorce later on. 
Despite the widespread belief that cohabitation is a valuable trial run that allows 
people to avoid later problems, cohabitation is  positively associated with the 
probability of divorce (Rhoades et al., 2009). The good news is that couples who 
start living together after they become engaged to marry and who cohabit for a 
shorter, rather than longer, period of time do not divorce much more frequently 
than do those who marry without living together (Willoughby et al., 2012). Brief 
cohabitation that is limited to one’s fiancé does not seem to put a subsequent 
marriage at much risk. On the other hand, people who cohabit before they 
FIGURE 13.1.  Happiness and housework.
The graph shows the average levels of marital happiness experienced by wives and 
husbands as the men do larger proportions of the household chores. Husbands grow 
less content, but their wives become more satisfied as the husbands do more house-
work. Two other facts are interesting: Somebody is always really unhappy when men 
do either most of the housework or none at all, and the only time both partners have 
above average happiness is when the housework is split 50–50. Is there news you can 
use here?
Most
Half
Some
None
0.4
0.2
0
−0.2
−0.4
−0.6
Husbands’ share of housework
Husbands’ reports
Wives’ reports
Marital happiness
(standardized scores)
Source: Data from Amato et al., 2007.

400 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
become engaged (or who ever cohabit with more than one partner) are more 
likely to later divorce (Tach & Halpern-Meekin, 2012), probably because cohabi-
tation changes their beliefs and expectations about marriage. Casual cohabitation 
seems to lead to (a) less respect for the institution of marriage, (b) less favorable 
expectations about the outcomes of marriage, and (c) increased willingness to 
divorce (Rhoades et al., 2009), and all of these make divorce more likely. 
 In addition, as more parents divorce, more children witness family conflict 
and grow up in broken homes. Common sense may suggest that youngsters 
who suffer family disruption might be especially determined to avoid making 
the same mistakes, but, in reality, divorce is passed down from one generation 
to the next: Children who experience the divorce of their parents are more likely 
to be divorced themselves when they become adults (Mustonen et al., 2011). 
Various processes may underlie this pattern. For one thing, children from 
divorced homes have less favorable views of marriage, and they report less 
trust in their partners when they begin their own romantic relationships; thus, 
compared to children from intact homes, they have less faith that their mar-
riages will last (Cui & Fincham, 2010). Furthermore, to some degree, children 
learn how to behave in intimate relationships from the lessons provided by 
their parents, and those who remember a childhood home full of strife and dis-
cord tend to have more acrimonious marriages of poorer quality themselves 
(Rhoades et al., 2012b). Thus, as divorce becomes more commonplace, more 
children become susceptible to divorce later on. 
Finally, because divorce is now so commonplace, more of us have friends 
who will someday divorce—and remarkably, that will mean that we face an 
increased risk of divorcing, too. For over 60 years, an extraordinary investi-
gation, the Framingham Heart Study, has been tracking the health of more 
than 10,000 individuals—two generations of people—in a large town in 
 Massachusetts. Compared to the average participant in the study, those who 
had a friend or family member (that is, a parent, child, or sibling) who divorced 
were 75  percent more likely—that’s much more likely—to divorce as well. If 
a friend of a friend or relative divorced, people were 33 percent more likely 
to divorce (McDermott et al., 2013). (And that’s where the effect stopped. If 
someone with three degrees of separation—for 
instance, the friend of a friend of a friend—
divorced, people were at no greater risk of them-
selves also divorcing.) This provocative pattern 
may spring from several sources—and it makes a 
fine point to  ponder—but the end result is clear: 
We’re more likely to divorce when others in our 
social network do (Hogerbrugge et al., 2012).
 So, why has the divorce rate increased? There are reasons to believe that, 
compared to our grandparents’ day:
 • We expect more out of marriage, holding it to higher standards. 
   • Working women have more financial freedom and better access to attractive 
alternatives, and they experience corrosive conflict between work and family. 
A Point to Ponder
People are more likely to 
divorce when others in 
their close social network 
do. Why?

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 401
 • Creeping individualism and social mobility leave us less tied to, and less 
affected by, community norms that discourage divorce. 
 • New laws have made divorce more socially acceptable and easier to obtain. 
 • Casual cohabitation weakens commitment to marriage. 
 • Children of divorce are more likely to divorce when they become adults.
 • More of us have friends who are divorced.
 All of these possible influences are merely correlated with the increasing preva-
lence of divorce in the United States, so they all may be symptoms rather than 
causes of the social changes that have promoted divorce. It’s a rather long list of 
possibilities, however, and it provides another good example of the manner in 
which cultural influences shape intimate relationships. Arguably, our culture 
supports lasting marriages less effectively than it did 40 or 50 years ago. But 
even with such changes, at least half of the marriages that begin this year will 
not end in divorce. (Not all of them will be happy, but at least they won’t end 
in divorce.) What individual and relational characteristics predict who will and 
who will not ultimately separate? Let’s turn to those next.  
 THE PREDICTORS OF DIVORCE 
 Whatever the cultural context, some marriages succeed and others fail, and as 
you’d expect, the differences between marital winners and losers have long 
been of interest to relationship scientists. Diverse models that explicate some of 
the sources of divorce have been proposed, and impressive studies have now 
tracked some marriages for decades. In this section, we’ll inspect both theories 
and research results that identify some of the predictors of divorce.  
 Levinger’s Barrier Model 
 George Levinger (1976), a proponent of interdependence theory, used concepts 
like those I described in chapter 6 in a model that identified three types of fac-
tors that influence the breakup of relationships. The first of these is  attraction. 
For Levinger, attraction is enhanced by the rewards a relationship offers (such 
as enjoyable companionship, sexual fulfillment, security, and social status), and 
it is diminished by its costs (such as irritating incompatibility and the invest-
ment of time and energy). The second key influence on breakups is the  alter-
natives one possesses. The most obvious of these are other partners, but any 
alternative to a current relationship, such as being single or achieving occupa-
tional success, may lure someone away from an existing partnership. Finally, 
there are the  barriers around the relationship that make it hard to leave; these 
include the legal and social pressures to remain married, religious and moral 
constraints, and the financial costs of obtaining a divorce and maintaining two 
households. 
 A major contribution of Levinger’s approach was to highlight the fact that 
unhappy partners who would like to break up may stay together because it 

402 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
would cost them too much to leave. He also persuasively argued that many 
barriers to divorce are psychological rather than material; distressed spouses 
may certainly stay married because they do not have enough money to divorce, 
but they may also stay together (even when they have sufficient resources to 
leave) because of the guilt or embarrassment they would feel—or cause others, 
especially their children (Poortman & Seltzer, 2007)—if they divorced. 
 Indeed, spouses report that there are several meaningful costs that would 
deter them from seeking a divorce (Previti & Amato, 2003). A survey of people 
married for 12 years demonstrated that the worry that their children would 
suffer, the threat of losing their children, religious norms, dependence on their 
spouses, and the fear of financial ruin were all perceived to be influential barriers 
that discouraged divorce (Knoester & Booth, 2000). However, over that 12-year 
span, once other risk factors such as low education and parental divorce were 
taken into account, only two of those perceived barriers, dependence on one’s 
spouse and religious beliefs, actually distinguished couples who divorced from 
those who did not. And if people had grown genuinely dissatisfied with their 
marriages, even those two barriers seemed insignificant: Once they wanted out 
of their marriages, there was no stopping them (Knoester & Booth, 2000). 
 Thus, people are usually aware of several obstacles that they would have to 
overcome in order to divorce, but once a marriage is on the rocks, those barriers 
may not keep people from leaving. Levinger’s model helpfully reminds us of 
deterrents to divorce that run through people’s minds, but it may not fully rec-
ognize how ineffective those deterrents may become once marital misery sets in. 
 Karney and Bradbury’s Vulnerability-Stress-Adaptation Model 
 Benjamin Karney and Thomas Bradbury (1995) developed a general model of 
marital instability that highlights another three influences that can contribute 
to divorce. According to this view, some people enter marriage with  endur-
ing vulnerabilities that increase their risk of divorce. Such vulnerabilities might 
include adverse experiences in one’s family of origin, poor education, maladap-
tive personality traits, bad social skills, or dysfunctional attitudes toward mar-
riage. None of these characteristics makes divorce inevitable, but all of them can 
shape the circumstances a couple encounters, and all of them influence the  adap-
tive processes with which people respond to stress (e.g., Maisel & Karney, 2012). 
If a couple gets lucky and encounters only infrequent and mild difficulties, even 
those with poor coping and communication skills may live happily ever after. 
 However, almost every marriage must face occasional  stressful events that 
require the partners to provide support to one another and to adjust to new 
circumstances. Some stressors (such as a period of unemployment or a major 
illness) befall some marriages and not others, whereas other stressors (such 
as pregnancy, childbirth, and parenting) are commonplace. The little ups and 
downs of daily life can combine to be surprisingly stressful, too (Totenhagen 
et al., 2012b). When stressful events occur, a couple must cope and adapt, but, 
depending on their vulnerabilities, some people are better able to do that than 
are others ( Williamson et al., 2013). Failure to cope successfully can make the 

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 403
stresses worse, and if poor coping causes marital quality to decline, a couple’s 
coping may be further impaired (Karney & Neff, 2013). And ultimately, extended 
periods of dissatisfaction are presumed to lead to marital instability and divorce. 
 Take a look at  Figure 13.2 , and start tracing the paths from the bottom. Our 
inborn traits and past experiences equip all of us with strengths and weaknesses 
as relationship partners, and some of the weaknesses are “vulnerabilities” that 
undermine our abilities to cope effectively with stress and change (Stroud et al., 
2010). Some vulnerabilities also make life more stressful, increasing the difficul-
ties with which we have to deal. But no matter who we are, stress happens.  In 
addition to the intermittent confl icts that occur at home, any frustrations and dif-
fi culties we experience individually at work or school can cause stress  spillover 
in which we bring surly moods home and interact irascibly with our innocent 
partners (Buck & Neff, 2012). Then, our coping skills and other “adaptive pro-
cesses” determine whether our stress grows or is managed and reduced. And 
ultimately, each partner’s ability to adapt successfully influences the  quality of 
their marriage at the same time that marital quality is influencing the partners’ 
abilities to adapt. 
 There are feedback loops and overlapping influences in the vulnerability-
stress-adaptation model, and when it comes to stress, what doesn’t kill us may 
make us stronger. Couples with good communication skills who have already 
encountered moderate stress in their relationships are likely to be more resil-
ient and to adjust better to new stressors—such as becoming parents, a change 
that’s always stressful—than other couples who have similar skills but who 
haven’t yet been tested by having to deal with stress (Neff & Broady, 2011). 
Successfully coping with our diffi culties can improve our abilities to adapt to 
FIGURE 13.2. The Vulnerability-Stress-Adaptation Model of marriage.
The model posits that partners bring vulnerabilities with them when they enter a mar-
riage, and those vulnerabilities interact with both the stresses they encounter and their 
coping skills to determine how well their marriages function.
Changing
Circumstances
STRESSFUL
EVENTS
ADAPTIVE
PROCESSES
MARITAL
QUALITY
Marital
Stability
ENDURING
VULNERABILITIES
Inborn Traits
Past Experiences
Source: Adapted from Karney & Bradbury, 1995.

404 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
new nuisances. But the bottom line is that the quality of our marriages emerges 
from the interplay of who we are, the circumstances we encounter, and the 
manner in which we respond to those circumstances, and, to some degree, 
these three important influences affect each other. It’s possible for the roots of 
divorce to begin in childhood in an insecure attachment style or the lessons 
learned in a home filled with conflict. But if life treats us well, or we work hard 
and well with our spouses to overcome life’s difficulties (or perhaps just take a 
good college course on close relationships!), divorce need not occur.  
 Results from the PAIR Project 
 For almost 30 years, Ted Huston (2009) and his colleagues (Caughlin & Huston, 
2006) kept track of 168 couples who married in 1981. The project focused on 
the manner in which spouses adapted to their lives together (or failed to do so) 
and was known as the Processes of Adaptation in Intimate Relationships (or 
PAIR) Project. There’s enormous value in long-lasting studies like this, but their 
results can be a little sobering. Indeed, in the PAIR Project, after only 13 years, 
35 percent of the couples had divorced and another 20 percent weren’t happy; 
What If Nobody Wanted You to Marry?
A marriage is usually a cause for celebra-
tion. Families gather, friends convene, 
and the loving couple is feted with cer-
emony, gifts, and festivities—if the new 
spouses are heterosexual. Even where 
their marriages are legal, gays and les-
bians sometimes face a burden that is 
rarely imposed on heterosexuals who 
decide to marry: social disapproval.
This is no small matter. Gay or 
straight, people and their relationships 
suffer when they have to swim upstream 
against the disapproval of their friends 
and community; it’s a major stressor 
that affects both physical and psycho-
logical health (Lehmiller, 2012). And 
fortunately for most of us, if we don’t 
pause to refl ect and let our imaginations 
run wild, we’ll have no clue of what it 
must be like to have our romances sin-
gled out for censure by our neighbors. 
But that is, of course, what gays and les-
bians often face (Herek, 2011).
When they envision the prospect 
of formal legal recognition of their 
partnerships, gays and lesbians experi-
ence a sense of security and well-being—
and an expectation that their partnerships 
will be permanent—that hetero sexuals 
probably take for granted (Shulman 
et al., 2012). Public ceremonies celebrat-
ing their commitment increase their satis-
faction with their relationship, and legal 
recognition increases their investment—
and both, as we know, are associated 
with relationship stability (Fingerhut & 
Maisel, 2010). A positive social climate 
for gay and lesbian partnerships also 
promotes the well-being of their children 
(Lick et al., 2012). And the bottom line 
from relationship science is that there is 
simply no scientifi c basis, none whatso-
ever, for denying gays and lesbians legal 
recognition of their loving commitment 
to one another (Myers, 2013).
So, it’s an interesting and poten-
tially important point to ponder: What 
unjust and unwarranted hardships 
would you face, and how would you 
feel, if nobody wanted you to marry?

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 405
only 45 percent of the couples could be said to be happily married, and even 
they were less satisfied and less loving than they had been when they wed. And 
these, I should remind you, are typical results. Take a look back at Figure 6.7 on 
p. 194: Marital satisfaction routinely declines in most couples as time goes by. 
 Why? Huston and his colleagues examined three different explanations for 
why marriages go awry. One possibility is that spouses who are destined to be 
discontent begin their marriages being less in love and more at odds with each 
other than are those whose marriages ultimately succeed. This possibility, the 
 enduring dynamics model, suggests that spouses bring to their marriages prob-
lems, incompatibilities, and enduring vulnerabilities that surface during their 
courtship; indeed, the partners may be well aware of these frustrations and 
shortcomings before they even wed (Lavner et al., 2012a). According to this 
model, then, marriages that are headed for divorce are weaker than others from 
the very beginning. 
 In contrast, a second possibility known as the  emergent distress model sug-
gests that the problematic behavior that ultimately destroys a couple begins after 
they marry. As time goes by, some couples fall into a rut of increasing conflict and 
negativity that did not exist when the marriage began. Thus, unlike the endur-
ing dynamics model, the emergent distress perspective suggests that, when they 
begin, there is no discernible difference between marriages that will succeed and 
those that will fail; the difficulties that ruin some marriages usually develop later. 
 Finally, a third possibility is the  disillusionment model. This approach sug-
gests that couples typically begin their marriages with rosy, romanticized views 
of their relationship that are unrealistically positive. Then, as time goes by and 
the spouses stop working as hard to be adorable and charming to each other, 
reality slowly erodes these pleasant fictions. But there may be more disillusion-
ment in some couples than in others; romance may fade and some disappoint-
ment may occur in any marriage as people realize that their partnership is less 
wonderful than it originally seemed, but in some couples, “the ink is barely dry 
on the marriage license when doubts and disillusionment about marriage and 
the partner can begin to set in” (Kayser & Rao, 2006, p. 206). 
 The particulars of the three models are meaningful because each suggests a 
different way to improve marriages and to reduce the risk of divorce. Accord-
ing to the enduring dynamics model, rocky courtships lead to bad marriages, 
and premarital interventions that keep ambivalent couples from ever marrying 
should prevent many subsequent divorces. By comparison, the emergent dis-
tress model argues that couples need to guard against slow slides into disagree-
ableness and negativity, and interventions that encourage spouses to remain 
cheerful, generous, attentive, and kind should keep divorce from their door. 
And finally, the disillusionment model suggests that dispassionate and accu-
rate perceptions of one’s lover and one’s relationship that preclude subsequent 
disappointment and disenchantment should also prevent divorce. 
 All of these are reasonable possibilities, but Huston and his colleagues found 
that only two of the three seemed to be at work in the marriages they followed. 
(Let’s pause a moment. Which two models do you think were the winners?) First, 
consistent with the enduring dynamics model, the PAIR Project determined that, 

406 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
compared to couples who were still happy after several years, spouses who were 
unhappy had been less loving and affectionate and more ambivalent and negative 
toward each other when their marriages began. Couples who were destined to be 
distressed were less generous and less tender and more uncertain and more tem-
peramental from the very start. Thus, any doubts or difficulties that people faced 
when they were engaged did not disappear once they were married. To the con-
trary, any indecision or incompatibilities were simply imported into their marital 
relationship, so that they remained less content over the years that followed. 
 So, the enduring dynamics model predicted how happy marriages would 
be. However, the best predictor of which couples would actually divorce was 
the disillusionment model. The drop in marital satisfaction during the first 
years of marriage was sharper and more pronounced in some couples than in 
others, and they were the spouses who were most at risk for divorce. They did 
not necessarily grow cantankerous or spiteful as the emergent distress model 
would expect; instead, they simply experienced the greatest change in their 
romantic feelings for each other. Their love faded more, and more rapidly, than 
did the romances of other couples. 
 In addition, a striking feature of the disillusionment that Huston and his col-
leagues observed was that many of the couples who were destined to divorce 
were more affectionate than most when their marriages began, and it took some 
time for their disappointment to develop. Couples whose marriages were short-
lived—who were divorced within 6 (or fewer) years—usually began their mar-
riages with less love and more ambivalence than did couples whose marriages 
would succeed. (Thus, you can see why, when disillusionment set in, they were 
divorced relatively quickly.) However, couples who ultimately divorced after 
longer periods—after 7 or more years of marriage—were especially affectionate 
and romantic when their marriages began. They were more adoring than other 
couples, on average, and thus had further to fall (and, perhaps, were more sur-
prised than most) when the usual drop in affectionate behavior following the 
honeymoon began. They ended up no less sentimental toward each other than 
other couples, but they experienced the biggest changes—that is, the steepest 
declines—in romantic behavior, and those changes predicted a delayed divorce. 
Overall, then, the PAIR Project made two conclusions seem sound. First, 
the size and speed of changes in romance best predict which couples will 
divorce, and second, the problems couples bring to their marriage determine 
how quickly a divorce will occur. Similar results have been obtained from other 
studies (e.g., Lavner et al., 2012b; Niehuis et al., 2014), so we can safely conclude 
that both the  level of satisfaction a couple experiences and the  change in that sat-
isfaction over time are key players in relational outcomes. Importantly, couples 
that are doomed to divorce do not always turn surly and spiteful, but they do 
tend to lose the joy they once experienced (Gottman & Levenson, 2000). 2 
2 I encourage you to take a moment to consider how this pattern maps onto people’s approach 
and avoidance motivations, which we encountered on p. 188 back in chapter 6. Evidently, some 
marriages fail not because they are aversive and unpleasant but because they are not pleasant and 
delightful enough.

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 407
 Results from the Early Years of Marriage Project 
 Another impressive long-term study, the Early Years of Marriage (EYM) 
Project directed by Terri Orbuch, has been following 174 white couples and 
199 black couples in and around Detroit, Michigan, since they married in 1986 
(Orbuch et al., 2013). The EYM researchers have been particularly interested in 
the manner in which the social conditions that couples encounter may affect 
marital outcomes. And some sociological variables are important. In 2002, 
16 years after the project began, 46 percent of the couples had already divorced, 
but the couples’ race seemed to make a big difference: Just over a third 
(36 percent) of the white couples had divorced, but more than half (55 percent) 
of the black couples had dissolved their marriages. 
 Why were black couples more prone to divorce? There could be several 
reasons. On average, the black couples had cohabitated for a longer period and 
were more likely to have had children before getting married. They also had 
lower incomes and were more likely to come from broken homes, and all of 
these influences are positively correlated with one’s risk of divorce (Wilcox & 
Marquardt, 2010). Overall, the EYM project is demonstrating, as other studies 
have (Wickrama et al., 2010), that the social context in which couples conduct 
their relationships may have substantial effects on the outcomes they encoun-
ter. Economic hardship can put any couple at risk for divorce no matter how 
much they respect and value marriage (Williamson et al., 2013). 
 People’s Personal Perceptions of Their Problems 
 The various models and data we have encountered suggest that there are three 
general types of influences on our marital outcomes (Levinger & Levinger, 
2003). At the broadest level are cultural norms and other variables that set the 
national stage for marriage. No-fault divorce laws and discrimination that con-
strains economic opportunity are examples of the ways in which the  cultural 
context may either support or undermine marital success. 
 More idiosyncratic are our  personal contexts, the social networks of fam-
ily and friends and the physical neighborhoods we inhabit. For instance, as I 
noted earlier, women who work with a wide variety of interesting male col-
leagues are more prone to divorce than are women who do not work outside 
their homes (McKinnish, 2007). Finally, there is a  relational context that describes 
the intimate environment couples create through their own perceptions of, and 
interactions with, each other. The individual characteristics that lead us to react 
to our partners with either chronic good humor or pessimistic caution are some 
of the building blocks of the particular atmosphere that pervades a partnership. 
 I mention these three levels of analysis because people tend to focus on 
only one of them when they generate explanations for their marital problems. 
Yet another impressive long-term study, the Marital Instability Over the Life 
Course project conducted by Alan Booth and his colleagues, conducted phone 
interviews with a random sample of 1,078 Americans every few years from 1980 
to 2000. When those who divorced were asked what caused their divorces, the 

408 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
TABLE 13.1.  “What Caused Your Divorce?”
Reason
Total Cases (%) Cases for Men (%) Cases for Women (%)
Infidelity
22
16
25
Incompatibility
19
19
19
Drinking or substance use
11
5
14
Grew apart
10
9
10
Personality problems
9
10
8
Communication difficulties
9
13
6
Physical or mental abuse
6
0
9
Love was lost
4
7
3
Don’t know
3
9
0
Source: Adapted from Amato & Previti, 2003.
The table values reflect the responses of 208 members of a random sample of spouses 
in the United States who were asked what had caused their divorces. Other causes 
such as financial problems or interference from family were mentioned on occasion, 
but the nine most frequent reasons are listed here.
most frequently reported reasons all involved some characteristic of their marital 
relationships, as  Table 13.1 shows. Women complained of infidelity, substance 
use, or abuse more often than men, whereas men were more likely to complain 
of poor communication or to announce that they did not know what had gone 
wrong. Ex-wives also had more complaints than ex-husbands did, on average, 
but very few accounts from either sex acknowledged the possible influences of 
the cultural or personal contexts in which they conducted their relationships. 
 Nevertheless, those broader contexts may have been important. The higher 
a couple’s income had been, the less often abuse was mentioned as a cause of 
divorce and the more often personality clashes were mentioned. The more edu-
cation the respondents had, the more often they complained of incompatibility 
with their ex-spouses. Thus, a couple’s socioeconomic status (which includes 
education and income) helped to predict the problems they would encounter. 
The age at which they married mattered, too; people who married at younger 
ages were more likely to report that they had grown apart or that alcohol and 
drug use had been a problem. 
 When they grow discontent, people always complain about the particu-
lars of their partnerships (and think that their partners are more to blame than 
they are; Scott et al., 2013). But broader influences may be important, too. The 
various factors that shape a couple’s likelihood of divorce include not only the 
day-to-day interactions that may cause them pleasure or pain; the surrounding 
circumstances and culture can either promote or undermine their marriage, as 
well (Williamson et al., 2013). 
 Specific Predictors of Divorce 
 I have touched on a variety of variables that may put people at risk for divorce, 
and I’m about to list them and several more in the big table that begins on the next 
page. However, let me offer this caveat: Statements of general trends sometimes 

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 409
TABLE 13.2.  Predictors of Divorce: A Synthesis of the Literature
Predictor
Findings
Socioeconomic 
 status
People with low-status occupations, less education, and lower 
incomes are more likely to divorce than are those with higher 
socioeconomic status. In particular, women with good educations 
are much less likely to divorce than women with poor educations 
(Wilcox & Marquardt, 2010).
Race
Due to their greater exposure to other risk factors such as low income, 
premarital birth, parental divorce, and cohabitation—and despite their 
greater respect for marriage (Trail & Karney, 2012)—black Americans 
are more likely to divorce than white Americans are (Johnson, 2012).
Sex ratios
Around the world, divorce rates are higher when women 
outnumber men and the sex ratio is low (Barber, 2003).
Social mobility
People who move often from place to place are more prone to 
divorce than are those who stay in one place and put down roots 
(Magdol & Bessel, 2003).
No-fault 
 legislation
Laws that make a divorce easier to obtain make divorce more likely 
(Wolfers, 2006).
Working women Divorce rates increase when higher proportions of women enter the 
workforce (Fitch & Ruggles, 2000).
Age at marriage
People who marry as teenagers are more likely to divorce than are 
those who marry after age 25 (Glenn et al., 2010).
Prior marriage
Second marriages are more likely to end in divorce than first 
marriages are (Poortman & Lyngstad, 2007).
Parental divorce
Parents who divorce increase the chances that their children will 
divorce. However, as divorce becomes commonplace, this effect is 
declining (Mustonen et al., 2011).
Religion
Attendance at religious services is correlated with a lower risk of 
divorce, especially when both spouses attend regularly (Vaaler 
et al., 2009).
Teenage sex
First intercourse that is unwanted or that occurs before the age of 
16 is associated with an increased risk of divorce (Paik, 2011). 
gloss over important qualifications. No one generalization will apply to every 
marriage, predictors may hold for some groups or stages of marriage but not oth-
ers, and the apparent influence of a particular variable may reflect the other factors 
to which it was compared in a given study. For instance, some classic correlates 
of divorce (such as low income) may be more influential in young marriages than 
in older marriages that have already stood the test of time (Booth et al., 1986). To 
some degree, marriages that survive the initial effects of certain stressors may be 
less susceptible to their influences many years later. It may also be important to 
recognize that when several risks are combined, each may have stronger effects 
than it would have had by itself; being poor and poorly educated, for instance, can 
be much worse than facing either diffi culty by itself (Cutrona et al., 2011). Please 
keep these nuances in mind while inspecting  Table 13.2 , which presents a sum-
mary of key predictors of marital stability identified by modern research. These 

410 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
Premarital 
 cohabitation
Premarital cohabitation is associated with higher divorce rates, 
but the effect is slight if the couple is engaged to be married when 
cohabitation begins (Willoughby et al., 2012).
Premarital birth
Having a baby before marriage is associated with a higher risk of 
divorce for both the mother and the father (Heaton, 2002).
Children
Spouses who have no children are more likely to divorce, but the 
risk-reducing effect of children is most noticeable when the chil-
dren are very young (Lyngstad & Jalovaara, 2010).
Stepchildren
Women who bring children with them into a second marriage are 
more likely to divorce, but that’s not true of men; evidently, women 
may find it easier to be a stepparent than men do  (Teachman, 2008).
Similarity
Spouses with lots in common are less likely to divorce (Clarkwest, 
2007).
Personality 
 attributes
The higher one’s neuroticism, the more likely one is to divorce 
(Karney & Bradbury, 1995).
Attachment 
 styles
People who are high in avoidance of intimacy are more likely to 
divorce (Ceglian & Gardner, 1999).
Genetics
A person who has an identical twin who gets divorced is about 
5 times more likely to divorce than he or she would have been if the 
twin had not divorced, even if the two twins were separated at birth 
and have never met (Lykken, 2002).
Stress hormones
During their first year of marriage, couples who are destined to 
divorce have chronically higher amounts of the stress hormones 
epinephrine and norepinephrine in their blood than do couples 
who will not be divorced 10 years later (Kiecolt-Glaser et al., 2003).
Stressful life 
 events
The occurrence of stressful life events (other than parenthood) 
increases the likelihood of divorce (Randall & Bodenmann, 2009).
Time together
Couples who share more time together are less likely to divorce 
(Poortman, 2005).
Alcohol and 
 drug abuse
Drug dependency increases the likelihood of divorce (Amato & 
Previti, 2003).
Infidelity
Extradyadic sex increases the likelihood of divorce (DeMaris, 2013).
Attitudes toward 
 marriage
People who are pessimistic about marriage are more likely to 
divorce (Segrin et al., 2005).
Marital 
 interactions
Positive interactions predict stability, and negative interaction pre-
dicts divorce (Lavner & Bradbury, 2012). Couples that fail to main-
tain a 5-to-1 ratio of positive to negative behaviors are more likely 
to divorce (Gottman et al., 1998).
Sexual 
 satisfaction
Greater satisfaction with one’s sex life is associated with a lower 
likelihood of divorce (Karney & Bradbury, 1995).
Marital 
 satisfaction
“Marital satisfaction has larger effects on marital stability than do 
most other variables” (Karney & Bradbury, 1995, p. 20). Individu-
als who are more satisfied with their marriages are less likely to 
divorce. Even so, satisfaction is far from being a perfect predictor of 
divorce.

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 411
aren’t passing influences; the effects of most of them haven’t changed much for 
several decades (Amato, 2010). Most of them probably have similar effects on the 
satisfaction and stability gays and lesbians experience in their relationships, as 
well (Gottman et al., 2003).  
 BREAKING UP 
 I’ve spent some time describing who gets divorced, and now it’s time to inspect 
 how breakups happen. How do partners proceed when they want to dissolve 
their relationship? The first thing to note is that people do not lightly end rela-
tionships to which they were once committed. Most divorces, for instance, are 
characterized by multiple complaints that result in a long period of discontent, 
but there are also things that the partners like about each other. So, some ambiv-
alence ordinarily occurs.   Recall, too, from our discussion of interdependence 
theory in chapter 6, that people do not usually depart their partnerships just 
because they are dissatisfied. Although a long period of unhappiness and dis-
tress precedes most divorces, people typically initiate divorce only when they 
finally come to believe that they will be better off without their spouses (that 
is, only when their CL alt s promise better outcomes than they are experiencing 
now). The decision to divorce results from complex calculations of distress and 
delight involving alternative, sometimes uncertain, possibilities. 
 Then, when that global decision is made, more choices await. Let’s inspect 
what people do when they want to pull the plug on a failing partnership. 
 Breaking Up with Premarital Partners 
 The next time you want to end a romantic relationship, what do you think 
you’ll do? Will you break the news to your partner straightforwardly, or will 
you simply start ignoring your partner’s texts, change your status on Facebook, 
and start avoiding him or her? When she analyzed college students’ accounts of 
their breakups, Leslie Baxter (1984) found that a major distinction between dif-
ferent trajectories of relationship dissolution involved the question of whether 
someone who wished to depart ever announced that intention to the partner 
who was to be left behind! In some instances, the effort to disengage was  direct, 
or explicitly stated; however, in most cases, people used  indirect strategies in 
which they tried to end the relationship without ever saying so. 
 A second key distinction, according to Baxter (1984), was whether one’s effort 
to depart was  other-oriented, trying to protect the partner’s feelings, or  self-oriented, 
being more selfish at the expense of the partner’s feelings. On occasion, for 
instance, people announced their intention to end the relationship in a manner 
that allowed their partners a chance to respond and to save face; one direct, 
other-oriented strategy was to announce one’s dissatisfaction but to talk things 
over and to negotiate, rather than demand, an end to the partnership. In contrast, 
when they were direct but more selfish, they sometimes simply announced that 
the relationship was over and ducked any further contact with their ex-partners. 

412 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
 A more indirect but rather selfish ploy was to behave badly, increasing the 
partner’s costs so much that the partner decided to end the relationship. People 
were more considerate when they claimed that they wanted to be “just friends,” 
but if they did so when they really wanted to end the relationship altogether, this, 
too, was an indirect approach, with them misrepresenting their desire to depart. 
 Obviously, people made various moves when they wanted to end their 
relationships, and the differences between direct and indirect and other-ori-
ented and self-oriented strategies were just two of the distinctions that Baxter 
(1984) observed. Other distinctions included:
 • the gradual versus sudden onset of one’s discontent. Only about a quarter of the 
time was there some critical incident that suddenly changed a partner’s feelings 
about his or her relationship; more often, people gradually grew dissatisfied.  
The Rules of Relationships
Leslie Baxter (1986) once asked col-
lege students in Oregon to write essays 
describing why they had ended a pre-
marital romantic relationship. In all 
cases, the respondents had initiated the 
breakup, and their narratives (a term we 
explore further in the box on page 416) 
provided intriguing insights into the 
standards with which they judged their 
relationships. Eight themes appeared 
in at least 10 percent of the essays, and 
they appear to be specific prescrip-
tions that take the form of relationship 
rules: They describe standards that are 
expected of us and our relationships, 
and our partners may leave us if we 
consistently break them. Here they are, 
listed in order of the frequency with 
which they were mentioned:
 • Autonomy: Allow your partner to 
have friends and interests outside 
your relationship; don’t be too 
possessive. (Problems with 
possessiveness were mentioned 
37 percent of the time.)
 • Similarity: You and your partner 
should share similar attitudes, values, 
and interests; don’t be too different. 
(Mentioned 30 percent of the time.)
 • Supportiveness: Enhance your 
 partner’s self-worth and self-esteem; 
don’t be thoughtless or inconsider-
ate. (27 percent)
 • Openness: Self-disclose, genuinely 
and authentically; don’t be close-
lipped. (22 percent)
 • Fidelity: Be loyal and faithful to your 
partner; don’t cheat. (17 percent)
 • Togetherness: Share plenty of time 
together; don’t take a night shift or 
move out of town and don’t spend 
too much time elsewhere. 
(16 percent)
 • Equity: Be fair; don’t exploit your 
 partner. (12 percent)
 • Magic: Be romantic; don’t be 
 ordinary. (10 percent)
Various other reasons were men-
tioned, but none as frequently as these. 
Men and women also differed somewhat 
in the frequency of their complaints; 
women were troubled by problems with 
autonomy, openness, and equity more 
often than men, whereas men complained 
about lost magic more often than women. 
As usual, women tended to be more 
pragmatic than men when they evalu-
ated their relationships. But as we noted 
on page 408, both sexes typically focus 
on their relationship and ignore their per-
sonal and cultural contexts when they 
explain the failure of their partnerships.

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 413
 • an individual versus shared desire to end the partnership. Two-thirds of the 
time, only one partner wanted the relationship to end. 
 • the rapid versus protracted nature of one’s exit. More often than not, people made 
several disguised efforts to end their relationships before they succeeded.  
 • the presence or absence of repair attempts. Most of the time, no formal effort to 
repair the relationship was made. 
 Add all this up, and the single most common manner in which premarital 
relationships ended involved gradual dissatisfaction that led one of the two 
partners to make repeated efforts to dissolve the relationship without ever 
announcing that intention and without engaging in any attempts to improve 
or repair the partnership. But even this most frequent pattern, which Baxter 
(1984) labeled  persevering indirectness,  occurred only one-third of the time, so 
a variety of other specific trajectories were commonplace, too. 
People differ in the strategies they prefer, as well. Attachment style is 
influential: Those who are high in avoidance of intimacy dislike drama and 
are especially likely to employ indirect strategies that reduce the chances of 
an emotional confrontation with their (ex-)partners (Collins & Gillath, 2012). If 
they do straightforwardly announce their wish to break up, they’re more likely 
than others are to do it from a distance, with a text, an e-mail, or a Facebook 
message (Weisskirch & Delevi, 2012).
Nevertheless, despite such idiosyncrasies,  people generally agree about 
the typical elements, if not the specific strategies, of partners’ efforts to end 
their relationships (Battaglia et al., 1998). Surveys of young adults find that the 
end of a close relationship routinely involves several familiar elements that are 
listed in  Table 13.3 . The process usually begins when one partner grows bored 
with the relationship and begins noticing other people. That partner grows 
distant and less involved emotionally, but this often leads to an initial effort 
to restore the relationship and put things back the way they were. The part-
ners spend less time together, however, and when a lack of interest resurfaces, 
thoughts of breaking up begin. Discussion of the relationship ensues, and the 
couple agrees to try again to work things out, but they continue to notice other 
people, and they become more withdrawn. They see others, but that engenders 
a short-lived desire to reunite that is followed by more contemplation of calling 
it quits. They prepare themselves psychologically and then break up. 
 Steps to Divorce 
 Obtaining a divorce is usually more complicated than breaking up with a pre-
marital partner, but the ambivalence and vacillation that is evident in the typi-
cal sequence of events in  Table 13.3 characterizes divorces, too. And marriages 
don’t end overnight. Whereas someone’s efforts to end a premarital romantic 
relationship can last several weeks, the process of ending a marriage can take 
several years. In one study of couples who stayed married for about a dozen 
years, the dissatisfied spouses typically spent the last 5 years of their marriages 
thinking about separating (Stewart et al., 1997)! 

414 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
 Over such a span of time, many idiosyncratic events may occur, but Steve 
Duck (Rollie & Duck, 2006) suggested that five general stages occur during the 
dissolution of most relationships. In an initial  personal phase, a partner grows 
dissatisfied, often feeling frustration and disgruntlement. Then, in a subsequent 
 dyadic phase, the unhappy partner reveals his or her discontent. Long periods 
of negotiation, confrontation, or attempts at accommodation may follow, and 
common feelings include shock, anger, hurt, and, sometimes, relief. But if the 
end of the relationship nears, a  social phase begins. The partners publicize their 
distress, explaining their side of the story to family and friends and seeking sup-
port and understanding. As the relationship ends, a  grave-dressing phase begins. 
Mourning decreases, and the partners begin to get over their loss by doing 
whatever cognitive work is required to put their past partnership behind them. 
Memories are revised and tidied up, and an acceptable story—a narrative—for 
the course of the relationship is created. Rationalization and reassessment are 
likely to occur. Finally, in a  resurrection phase, the ex-partners re-enter social life 
as singles, often telling others that their experiences have changed them and 
that they’re smarter and wiser now. 
TABLE 13.3.  A Typical Script for the End of a Close Relationship
The next time one of your relationships ends, you may find it following this general 
sequence of events. The mixed feelings that partners often experience when they con-
template a breakup are apparent in this generic script:
 
Step 1
One of the partners begins to lose interest in the relationship.
 
Step 2
The disinterested partner begins to notice other people.
 
Step 3
The disinterested partner withdraws and acts more distant.
 
Step 4
The partners try to work things out and resolve the problem.
 
Step 5
The partners spend less time together.
 
Step 6
Lack of interest resurfaces.
 
Step 7
Someone considers breaking up.
 
Step 8
They communicate their feelings in a “meeting of the minds.”
 
Step 9
The partners again try to work things out.
 
Step 10
One or both partners again notice other people.
 
Step 11
They again spend less time together.
 
Step 12
They go out with other potential partners.
 
Step 13
They try to get back together.
 
Step 14
One or both again consider breaking up.
 
Step 15
They emotionally detach, with a sense of “moving on.”
 
Step 16
They break up, and the relationship is dissolved.
Source: Data from Battaglia et al., 1998.
Actual breakups are often very idiosyncratic, of course, but it’s clear from this shared 
script that people generally expect the end of a close relationship to be characterized 
by ambivalence and twists and turns before the partnership finally ends.

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 415
 Within this general framework, the manner in which people dissolve their 
partnerships is likely to affect their feelings about each other afterward. In 
 general, couples who do not identify and discuss the sources of their dissat-
isfaction have less positive feelings toward each other and are less likely to 
stay in touch than are those who do discuss their difficulties. Furthermore, for 
some couples, a breakup is just a transition to another form of a continuing 
 relationship (Dailey et al., 2013). Various outcomes are possible when intimate 
relationships end. Let’s turn to those next.  
 THE AFTERMATH OF BREAKUPS 
 When people are asked how much stress and change various events would 
cause in their lives, the death of a spouse and a divorce consistently show up at 
the top of the list (Miller & Rahe, 1997).  The ends of our romantic  partnerships 
are often momentous events—and although divorces are usually more compli-
cated, the end of nonmarital romances can be powerfully affecting, too (Simon 
& Barrett, 2010). But when a couple breaks up, is that really the end of their 
relationship? Not necessarily.  
 Postdissolution Relationships 
There’s an impressive amount of churning in romantic relationships that occurs 
when partners break up but then reconcile and get back together (in some cases, 
doing so several times). Half of us experienced that unsettled pattern when we 
were dating as teenagers (Halpern-Meekin et al., 2012), and, more notably, over 
a third (37 percent) of those who are currently cohabiting and almost a quar-
ter (23 percent) of those who are presently married in the United States have 
cycled through an on/off/on again experience of breakup and renewal some-
time in their past (Vennum et al., 2014).3 Churning is usually disadvantageous 
in relationships that continue, as it is associated with stress and uncertainty and 
generally lower satisfaction (Dailey et al., 2012)—but it does clearly indicate 
that the end of a relationship is sometimes temporary. Breakups are sometimes 
just a transitional phase in an enduring relationship (Dailey et al., 2013).
When a breakup is (finally) permanent, partners may remain friends, at 
least for a while, but in most cases their commitment to each other gradu-
ally fades away entirely. This occurs because  most of the pivotal events they 
encounter after their breakup are setbacks that undermine their commitment 
to a friendly postdissolution relationship (Kellas et al., 2008). They may have 
awkward, uncomfortable interactions, become jealous of the other’s new love, 
or have their sexual advances rebuffed. Or they may finally find it easier to 
avoid each other, screening their calls or moving away. Certainly, ex-lovers 
3 What’s more, a quarter of us have had “sex with an ex” after a breakup, and in most of those 
cases—63 percent—either we or our ex-partners had already begun having sex with someone else 
when those booty calls occurred (Halper-Meekin et al., 2012). With that in mind, I invite you to 
revisit our insightful discussion of “Safe, Sensible Sex” back on pages 294–298.

416 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
Narratives: Our Stories of Our Pasts
Before you read this box, I encourage you 
to try a short exercise proposed by Ann 
Weber and John Harvey (1994, p. 294):
 1. Think of a difficult or troublesome 
experience you have had in a close 
relationship.
 2. What do you remember about this 
event? What happened? What did 
you do? How did you feel?
 3. Why did this event occur in your 
relationship?
 4. Have you ever told anyone 
about this experience and why it 
happened?
In answering these questions, you 
are creating a narrative, a story that 
explains your experience. Narratives 
are awash with descriptions, expecta-
tions,  feelings, interpretations of peo-
ple’s actions, and accounts of how and 
why events occurred, and they tend to 
bring order and a plot sequence to life’s 
complex, messy events (Custer et al., 
2008). When a relationship is ongoing, 
the positive or negative emotional tone 
of the narratives people construct about 
major events in their partnership pro-
vides an indication of how healthy and 
happy the relationship is; when their 
stories have unhappy endings, partners 
are much less likely to still be together a 
year later (Frost, 2012).
Then, when a relationship is over, 
narratives about its end may provide a 
history of the relationship’s beginning, 
identifi cation of a partner’s fl aws, under-
standing of the relationship’s problems, 
reactions to the separation, and one’s 
coping afterward. They are personal 
stories that spring from the narrator’s 
perceptions, and they aren’t necessarily 
“true.” Indeed, depending on their past 
complaints, ex-partners routinely con-
struct quite different accounts of a failed 
relationship (Harvey & Fine, 2006).
Narratives can serve several func-
tions (Harvey & Fine, 2006). We often 
paint ourselves in a favorable light to 
justify our behaviors and to help main-
tain self-esteem. We can use narratives 
to infl uence the way others think of us, 
and in sharing them with others, we get 
a chance to express and work through 
our emotions. Formulating narratives 
helps us fi nd meaning in what has hap-
pened in our lives, and people who 
keep journals that express their feel-
ings usually cope better, enjoying bet-
ter mental and physical health, than do 
those who do not introspect as deeply 
(Lepore & Greenberg, 2002). And the 
more complete our narratives are—the 
more coherence and detail we bring 
to the characters, feelings, sequence of 
events, and causes that constructed our 
relationships—the better our adjustment 
is likely to be (Kellas & Manusov, 2003). 
Thoughtful stories about what happened 
facilitate personal well-being, empathy 
for others, and a sense of growth (Lilgen-
dahl & McAdams, 2011), so they are key 
elements in our recoveries from loss.
do sometimes hook up, provide needed support, and find forgiveness after a 
breakup occurs, and some maintain a worthy friendship. Gays and lesbians, in 
particular, are more likely than heterosexuals to remain connected to ex-lovers 
after a romance ends (Harkless & Fowers, 2005). But in most cases, the task we 
face when a breakup occurs is ultimately to get on with our lives without our 
ex-partners. What’s that adjustment like? 

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 417
 Getting Over It 
Some relationships are richer than others, of course, and it’s especially difficult 
to lose a partnership that’s been characterized by high degrees of mutuality 
and self-expansion. 4 Our self-concepts have to change when we lose a relation-
ship that has been a rewarding, central part of our self-definition (Mason et al., 
2012), and that can be a wrenching process. Strong emotions often occur. But 
they are usually not as intense as we think they will be, and they don’t last for-
ever. People do heal.
 An intriguing event-sampling study (Sbarra & Emery, 2005) obtained 
daily reports of the emotions experienced by young adults at the University 
of Virginia in the month after they ended a meaningful romantic relation-
ship (that had been at least 4 months long). Participants carried beepers that 
prompted them to record their feelings at random times each day. Four emo-
tional reactions were monitored (see  Figure 13.3 ), and they demonstrated 
that, as you’d expect, breakups were painful. Compared to another group of 
students whose  relationships were continuing, the ex-lovers were angry and 
sad, and their feelings of courage and strength (that is, “relief”) were erod-
ing. Two weeks later, as their romantic love for their ex-partners continued 
to recede, their anger was reduced and their sadness was ebbing, but their 
relief was lower, too. Their adjustment continued, however, and after another 
2 weeks, they were no sadder than their peers and their relief had rebounded. 
A month into the process, they were noticeably less in love and their courage 
and strength were returning. 
 And importantly, all of this was less awful than they thought it would 
be. Every 2 weeks, another study asked young adults what they expected to 
feel if their current romances ended—and it then started tracking the actual 
responses of those whose relationships  did end (Eastwick et al., 2008). In 
advance of a breakup, the participants correctly predicted the rate with which 
their distress would fade with time—they knew that time would heal their 
wounds—but they overestimated the initial pain they would feel when the 
breakup occurred. This sort of mistake is common. Our forecasts of our emo-
tional responses to events are often in error (Hartnett &  Skowronski, 2010). 
In this case, though, the wrongful predictions offer some hopeful news: As 
awful as they often are, the average breakup doesn’t hurt as much as we 
think it will. 
 Of course, some breakups are worse than others. It’s generally harder 
to be rejected than to do the rejecting (Perilloux & Buss, 2008), and anyone 
who mopes and dwells on what they’ve lost and how lousy they feel during 
a breakup is likely to have a hard time; rumination prolongs our distress, 
whereas reflection—seeking meaning in our experiences and looking to learn 
from them—is associated with positive adjustment and recovery (Saffrey 
& Ehrenberg, 2007). But people with insecure styles of attachment who are 
anxious about abandonment are particularly likely to have trouble mentally 
4 These two concepts were introduced on pages 3 and 191, respectively.

418 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
letting go. They remain preoccupied with the ex-partner (and are especially 
upset at the thought of him or her with someone new), so they remain sadder 
longer than others do (Sbarra, 2006). (To get their minds off their ex-partners, 
they should start browsing dating sites to see who else is out there; anxious 
people detach more easily from a failed relationship when they set their 
sights on someone new [Spielmann et al., 2009]. But neither they nor any-
one else should haunt an ex-partner’s Facebook page; the more time people 
spend examining an ex’s page, the longer it takes them to heal and move on 
[Marshall, 2012].) People with secure attachment styles fare better after break-
ups. They brood less, so they’re less likely to stay angry. They’re also more 
likely to accept the finality of the relationship’s end, so they start healing and 
recover from sadness sooner (Sbarra, 2006).  
ANGER
20
30
35
25
40
0
5
10
15
20
25
Day
Percentage of Total Anger
Percentage of Total Sadness
40
50
60
0
5
10
15
20
25
Day
Percentage of Total Love
LOVE
20
40
30
50
0
5
10
15
20
25
Day
SADNESS
Percentage of Total Relief
40
45
50
55
0
5
10
15
20
25
Day
RELIEF
FIGURE 13.3. Adjusting to breakups.
Young adults were sad and angry when they broke up with their romantic partners, 
but those negative emotions became less intense with time. A month after the breakup, 
they were more detached from their old relationships and bouncing back.
Source: Sbarra & Emery, 2005.

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 419
 Divorce Is Different 
 The end of a marriage is usually much more complex. Estates must be divided, 
children provided for, and laws followed, and the event changes one’s life, 
sometimes for better but sometimes for worse. 
 Adjustment 
Let’s start with the good news. People are better off when they exit a miser-
able marriage, especially if they are leaving a hostile, abusive partner (Amato 
& Hohmann-Marriott, 2007). Spouses who are depressed and who have hit 
bottom when a marriage ends tend to feel better, rather than worse, after the 
divorce (Cohen et al., 2007). Making a change is desirable when a marriage is 
desolate and unsalvageable. 
 On the whole, however, divorces are complex, often difficult journeys 
that can leave people less well off for years afterward.  Figure 13.4 displays 
the results of a remarkable investigation, the German Socio-Economic Panel 
Study, which monitored the outcomes experienced by more than 30,000 
people over a span of 18 years (Lucas, 2005). Several hundreds of them were 
FIGURE 13.4.  Marriage, divorce, widowhood, and satisfaction with life.
Here’s what happened to thousands of people who got married, divorced, or were 
widowed in Germany. These are average trajectories, and individual outcomes were 
idiosyncratic. But on the whole, getting married did make people happier for a while, 
but a few years later they were no happier than they had been before they wed. Being 
widowed was dreadful, and despite substantial healing, it had lasting negative effects. 
And most divorces ended a long period of declining happiness—but years later, 
divorced people remained less happy than those whose marriages were intact.
Satisfaction with Life
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.0
7.5
8.0
Years
−5
−4
−3
−2
−1
1
0
2
3
4
5
6
7
Event
Marriage
Widowhood
Divorce
Source: Lucas, 2007.

420 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
divorced or widowed during the study, and on average, both events were 
dreadful, causing big drops in people’s satisfaction with their lives. This is 
evident in the figure, but there are three other patterns of note there, too. 
First, people who were destined to divorce were less happy years earlier; 
they even entered their marriages being less content. Second, their divorces 
typically halted a painful pattern of eroding  contentment, and once they 
exited their distressed marriages, life started getting better. But third, years 
later, they still weren’t as happy as they had been before the decline and fall of 
their marriages. There was a lot of idiosyncrasy in people’s well-being after a 
divorce, and the average trajectory pictured here makes divorce look meaner 
than it turns out to be for most people, who carry on resiliently after their 
marriages end. And some people (9 percent) are much happier after a divorce 
than they had been before. For others, however, a decrease in well-being that 
accompanies divorce is long-lasting; years later, 19 percent of divorcees are 
less happy than they had been before their marriages failed (Mancini et al., 
2011). Divorces are often monumental events in people’s lives, and although 
time heals, it may not do so completely. 
 While  Figure 13.4 is fresh in our minds, let’s also acknowledge the devas-
tating losses suffered by people who are widowed. The magnitude of the loss 
is hard for outsiders to comprehend.  Twenty years later, widows and widow-
ers still hold imaginary conversations with their lost loves about once a month 
(Carnelley et al., 2006), and as you can see in the figure, their satisfaction with 
life is diminished for a very long time, on average. Occasional bouts of grief 
may still occur a decade later, especially when the survivor is high in anxiety 
about abandonment (Meier et al., 2013) or the spouse’s death was sudden and 
unexpected (Stroebe et al., 2012). So, like the loss of a child, this isn’t a hurt that 
is ever forgotten, and generous, supportive friends will respect that. This is not 
a loss that people easily put behind them. 
 Back to divorce. Only two-thirds (68 percent) of those who get divorced 
after their mid-20s ever remarry, but those who do have usually taken the 
plunge for the second time within 4 years, on average (Elliott & Simmons, 
2011). Remarrying is often a turning point for divorced singles that is  associated 
with a boost in well-being (Blekesaune, 2008); 
indeed, if they stay unmarried, divorced people 
are 55 percent more likely than their remarried 
peers to die sometime during the next 40 years 
(Sbarra & Nietert, 2009). But whether or not they 
remarry, over three-fourths of those who divorce 
will report, 6 years later, that their divorce was a 
good thing (Hetherington, 2003). 
 So, outcomes vary. It can take years to adjust to the end of a marriage, but 
most people gradually bounce back. However, others end up defeated by their 
divorces, suffering distress and difficulty in their lives and their relationships 
for years thereafter (Sbarra & Mason, 2013). And almost everyone finds that 
the stresses don’t end when the divorce is final; divorce changes one’s social 
network and finances as well as one’s intimate life.  
A Point to Ponder
After all the difficulties 
divorce often entails, men 
are more likely to remarry 
than women are (Shafer & 
James, 2013). Why?

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 421
 Social Networks
 People turn to their friends and family for support during a divorce, and 
the time they spend with friends increases, especially in the first year ( Hanson 
et al., 1998). However, people usually lose about half of the members of their 
social networks (such as some friends and most of the in-laws) when their mar-
riages end, and in many cases, ex-spouses never make enough new friends 
to replace the ones they’ve lost (Terhell et al., 2004). So, people typically have 
smaller social networks for years following a divorce.
Morever, not all of the remaining members of one’s social network are 
likely to be supportive. About 50 percent of divorced people have interactions 
with their estranged spouses that are hostile or tense, and half of them also 
report that they have relatives who disapprove of their separation (Stewart 
et al., 1997). Not everyone who is close to a divorced person will offer desirable 
support.
 Economic Resources 
Women’s finances usually deteriorate when they leave their marriages. 
National surveys in the United States find that their household incomes drop 
substantially, by about 27 percent, and this pattern has existed for decades 
(Emery et al., 2012). Men’s  household incomes tend to drop, too, but they’re more 
likely than women to live by themselves after they divorce; the women are much 
more likely to have children in their households. So, if you count the number of 
mouths ex-spouses have to feed, men’s per capita income goes  up  34 percent in 
the year after they divorce whereas mothers’ incomes drop 36 percent (Sayer, 
2006). Men actually have more money to spend on their own needs and interests 
whereas women ordinarily have less. On average, then, a woman’s standard of 
living decreases after she divorces, whereas a man’s improves.  
 Relationships Between Ex-Spouses 
When a couple has children, a divorce doesn’t mean they’re done deal-
ing with each other. Parents usually have continued contact, and antagonism, 
Want to Protect the Planet? Don’t Get Divorced
Here’s another reason to feel lousy when 
you get divorced: Because you and your 
ex are no longer sharing the same living 
space—and you’re certainly not taking 
showers together—you’re consuming a 
lot more energy and other resources per 
person than you would have had you 
stayed together. Couples consume fewer 
resources per capita—lights, air condi-
tioning, water for cooking and cleaning; 
you name it—than singles do. Careful 
estimates suggest that if all the divorced 
people in the United States used the 
same resources per person as those who 
stayed married, the country would save 
73 billion kilowatt-hours of electricity, 
627 billion gallons of water, and 38 million 
rooms of living space each year (Yu & Liu, 
2007). Yow. Feel free, when you break up 
and move out, to get a roommate.

422 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
ambivalence, nostalgia, or regrets may all shape their ongoing interactions 
( Halford & Sweeper, 2013). Emerging from these conflicting feelings appear 
to be four broad types of postmarital relationships (Ahrons, 1994): Fiery Foes, 
Angry Associates, Cooperative Colleagues, and Perfect Pals. For both Fiery Foes 
and Angry Associates, the spouses’ animosity toward each other still defines 
their relationship. Despite their open disrespect for each other, Angry Associ-
ates have some capacity to work together in co-parenting their children, but 
Fiery Foes have very little; their bitterness keeps them at constant odds. Coop-
erative Colleagues aren’t good friends, but they are civil and pleasant to each 
other and they are able to cooperate successfully in parenting tasks. Finally, 
Perfect Pals maintain “a strong friendship with mutual respect that did not get 
eroded by their decision to live separate lives” (Ahrons, p. 116). In a sample 
of divorced parents in the midwestern United States, half the ex-spouses had 
amicable relationships (38% Cooperative Colleagues, 12% Perfect Pals) and half 
had distressed relationships (25% Angry Associates and 25% Fiery Foes) a year 
after their divorces.  
 The Children of Divorce 
 The verdict is in. Decades of research involving hundreds of thousands of 
people converge on the conclusion that, compared to those whose parents stay 
married, children whose parents divorce exhibit lower levels of well-being both 
as adolescents and as young adults. Their psychological adjustment is poorer; 
they experience more depression and anxiety and less satisfaction with life. 
Their behavior is more problematic; they use more drugs, break more laws, 
make more unwanted babies, and get poorer grades. And, as we’ve already 
seen, their adult relationships are more fragile; the children of divorce are more 
What do you think? Are these ex-spouses Fiery Foes, Angry Associates, 
or Cooperative Colleagues? (They don’t appear to be Perfect Pals!)

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 423
likely than others to divorce themselves. These effects are usually not large, and 
many children experience their parents’ divorce without much difficulty. Still, 
the global impact of a parental divorce, although modest, is routinely negative 
(Amato, 2010; Sbarra & Beck, 2013). 
 Why are the children of divorce less well off? The outcomes I just noted 
are merely correlated with parental divorce, and there may be several reasons 
why these patterns exist. Spouses and families that experience a divorce may 
differ in several meaningful ways from those who don’t, and a number of influ-
ences may be at work. For one thing, children of divorce  inherit some of their 
greater risk for unstable marriages, so the stresses of their parents’ divorce 
aren’t entirely to blame (D’Onofrio et al., 2007). The same traits that make their 
parents poor partners—neuroticism or impulsivity, perhaps—may be passed 
on to the children when they’re born, making the transmission of divorce from 
one generation to the next genetic instead of just experiential. Still, with due 
respect to the complexities involved, the divorce of one’s parents often brings 
on several stresses that may also be very influential: the loss of a parent, paren-
tal stress, economic hardship, and family conflict (Lansford, 2009). 
 According to a  parental loss view, children are presumed to benefit from 
having two parents who are devoted to their care, and children who lose a 
parent for any reason, including divorce, are likely to be less well off (Barber, 
2000). Indeed, if a divorce does occur, children fare better when they spend 
time with both parents (Fabricius, 2003), and they do worse if one of their 
parents moves some distance away (Braver et al., 2003). 
 In contrast, a  parental stress model holds that the quality, not the quantity, 
of the parenting a child receives is key, and any stressor (including divorce) that 
distracts or debilitates one’s parents can have detrimental effects. According 
to this view, children’s outcomes depend on how well a custodial parent adjusts 
to a divorce, and, consistent with this perspective, children of divorce usually 
start doing more poorly in school when their parents grow dissatisfied, long 
before they actually break up (Sun, 2001). Of course, one major stressor is  eco-
nomic hardship,  and it may be the impoverished circumstances that sometimes 
follow divorce, not just the divorce per se, that adds to children’s burdens. Any 
difficulties faced by the children are reduced if the custodial parent has sufficient 
resources to support them well (Sun & Li, 2002). (Indeed, you may be person-
ally familiar with one of the unfortunate outcomes routinely faced by children of 
divorce: Compared to parents who stay married, those who divorce contribute 
less money toward their children’s college educations [Turley & Desmond, 2011].) 
 All of these factors are influential, but the most potent influence of them all 
is  parental conflict (Lansford, 2009). Acrimonious interactions between par-
ents appear to be hard on children, and whether or not a divorce occurs, con-
flict in the home is associated with more anxiety (Riggio, 2004), poorer health 
(Miller & Chen, 2010), and more problematic behavior (Musick & Meier, 2010) 
in children. Remarkably, even when babies are sleeping, the regions of their 
brains that regulate emotion and stress respond strongly to the sound of angry 
voices—if the babies live in high-conflict homes (Graham et al., 2013). So, take a 
look at  Figure 13.5 : As you might expect, children are happiest when they live in 

424 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
an intact family in which little conflict or discord occurs, and their well-being is 
much lower when divorce occurs in a low-conflict home. But if they live amidst 
constant conflict, children are worse off when the parents  don’t divorce; when 
a divorce breaks up an angry, embattled household, there’s almost no decrease 
in the children’s well-being at all (Amato, 2003). Thus, the question of whether 
unhappy spouses should “stay together for the sake of the children” seems to 
depend on whether they can be civil toward each other; children suffer when a 
peaceable marriage is disrupted, but they are better off going through a divorce 
if their homes are full of conflict (Musick & Meier, 2010). 
 There are two more points to make. First, there’s no question that chil-
dren are less affected by divorce if they are able to maintain high-quality 
FIGURE 13.5.   Parents’ marital discord, divorce, and children’s psychological 
well-being.
The figure takes note of family discord and conflict and compares the outcomes of chil-
dren whose parents divorced to those of children who stayed in intact homes. When 
divorce occurred in low-conflict families, children fared poorly, but they were even 
worse off when there was a lot of discord at home and the parents did not divorce. 
Spouses who ponder “staying together for the sake of the children” should consider 
whether they can provide their children a peaceable home.
No Divorce
Divorce
–0.4
Very Low
Low
Parents' Marital Discord
Average
–0.2
0
0.2
0.4
Children's Well-Being (Z score)
0.6
High
Very High
Source: Amato, 2003.

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 425
relationships with their parents thereafter. Whatever their sources, the poorer 
outcomes often experienced by children of divorce are greatly reduced when 
the children continue to have meaningful, loving contact with their parents 
and grandparents (Henderson et al., 2009). When parents cooperate to become 
attentive, devoted co-parents, their children grow up having better relation-
ships with them and with the rest of their extended families (Ahrons, 2007). 
Second, many of the poorer outcomes experienced by children of divorce grad-
ually fade with time (Sun & Li, 2002). People are resilient, and children heal if 
they are provided sufficient love and support (Emery et al., 2012).  Divorcing 
or remarrying parents may find it helpful to remember that their children will 
probably be just fine if they enjoy freedom from poverty and receive loving, 
reliable, consistent parenting that is free of parental conflict. 
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
 Connie and Bobby married during their senior year in high school when she 
became pregnant with their first child. They didn’t have much money, and the 
baby demanded a lot of attention, so neither of them went to college, and after 
There are lots of reasons divorce is stressful for children. But given plenty of love 
and support, most kids are resilient, and some parents should divorce to protect their 
children.
© Christopher Weyant/The New Yorker Collection/The Cartoon Bank.

426 
CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships
a few years and another child, it appeared that neither of them would. Bobby 
now works as a long-haul trucker, so he is gone for several days at a time. 
Connie is a cashier at a grocery store, and she is increasingly disgruntled. She 
has always felt that she deserved more than the modest life she leads, and she 
has started viewing Bobby with hidden disrespect. He is a cheerful, friendly 
man who is very warm to his children, but he lacks ambition, and Connie is 
beginning to think that he’ll never “move up in the world.” So, she feels very 
flattered by the flirtatious regional manager of the grocery store chain who asks 
her out for drinks and dinner when Bobby is on the road. She fantasizes about 
how much more exciting her life would be if she were married to the manager, 
and she has decided to sleep with him to see what that’s like. 
 In your opinion, having read this chapter, what should Connie do? What 
does the future hold for Connie and Bobby? Why?  
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 The Changing Rate of Divorce 
 The Prevalence of Divorce. Divorce became much more common during 
the twentieth century, particularly in the United States.  
 Why Has the Divorce Rate Increased? High expectations for marriage, 
women working, changing gender roles, creeping individualism, no-fault 
divorce legislation, and premarital cohabitation may all have played a part. 
Children are also more likely to come from broken homes, and many of us have 
divorced friends.  
 The Predictors of Divorce 
 Levinger’s Barrier Model. When attraction and barriers are low but alter-
native attractions are high, divorce is likely.  
 Karney and Bradbury’s Vulnerability-Stress-Adaptation Model. Endu-
ring  personal vulnerabilities, stressful events, and the  adaptive processes with which 
people cope with their difficulties combine to influence marital quality.  
 Results from the PAIR Project.  Enduring dynamics predict how happy 
marriages will be, but  disillusionment best predicts which couples will actually 
divorce. 
 Results from the Early Years of Marriage Project. The social context in 
which couples conduct their relationships is important.  
 People’s Personal Perceptions of Their Problems. Divorced spouses iden-
tify infidelity, incompatibility, and drug use as the three most common reasons 
why they sought a divorce. 
Specific Predictors of Divorce. A variety of societal, demographic, rela-
tional, and personal influences are related to an increased risk of divorce.

CHAPTER 13: The Dissolution and Loss of Relationships 427
Breaking Up
Breaking Up with Premarital Partners. Persevering indirectness is the most 
common strategy for breaking up.
Steps to Divorce. When spouses divorce, they often go through personal, 
dyadic, social, and grave-dressing phases that are followed by a resurrection 
phase.
The Aftermath of Breakups
Postdissolution Relationships. Some couples continue a friendship after a 
romantic breakup, but most partnerships fade away completely. Some churning 
may occur before a relationship finally ends.
Getting Over It. Strong emotions often occur, but they’re usually not as 
intense as we expect, and they don’t last forever.
Divorce Is Different. Divorces are often monumental events, and the con-
sequences can last for years.
The Children of Divorce. Children of divorce exhibit reduced well-being, 
but they can prosper if their parents stay involved with them and are civil to 
each other. Children fare better if surly, hostile parents do divorce than if they 
do not because parental conflict is deleterious to children.

428
 C H A P T E R  1 4  
 Maintaining and Repairing 
Relationships 
 M aintaining and E nhancing R elationships 
 ◆ R epairing R elationships  ◆ I n C onclusion 
 ◆ F or Y our C onsideration  ◆ C hapter S ummary 
 This is our last chapter, and we’re nearing the end of the book. So, it’s time to 
take stock. What do you know now that you didn’t know before we started? 
Only you know for sure, but here are some possibilities:
 • The styles of behavior that are often expected of men—the styles that 
encourage them to be assertive and self-reliant but that do not encourage 
them to be warm and tender—do not train them to be very desirable part-
ners in long-term intimate relationships.  
 • People with low self-esteem sometimes sabotage their own relationships 
by making mountains out of molehills and perceiving rejection where none 
exists.  
 • Proximity, familiarity, and convenience are influential in determining 
whether or not rewarding relationships ever begin. There may be lots of 
people with whom we could have wonderful relationships that we’ll sim-
ply never meet. 
 • Looks matter, and if you’re not physically attractive, a lot of people will 
pass you by instead of wanting to get to know you. 
 • We don’t know or understand our romantic partners as well as we think 
we do; a lot of misperception persists even in successful relationships.  
 • People try hard to make good impressions on us when we’re getting to 
know them, but they put less effort into being polite, decorous, and delight-
ful once we like or love them. 
 • Men generally do not do as well at nonverbal communication as women 
do, and deficiencies in nonverbal communication are correlated with dis-
satisfaction in close relationships.  
 • More often than we realize, our partners do not receive the messages we 
intend to send when we talk with them. 
 • Bad is stronger than good, and the occasional sour or critical interactions 
we have with our partners are more influential than the nice things we do 
for them. 

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 429
 • Over the long haul, intimate relationships are much more costly than we 
usually expect them to be. 
 • Romantic, passionate love is one of the primary reasons we choose to 
marry, but it tends to decline over time. 
 • About one-third of us are not comfortable and relaxed with interdependent 
intimacy; we either worry that our partners don’t love us enough, or we are 
ill at ease when they get too close.  
 • Men tend to want more sex than women do, and frustration often results. 
 • Sooner or later, it’s likely that our partners will betray us in some manner 
that causes us hurt and pain. 
 • Conflict is unavoidable. 
 • Marriages are less happy, on average, than they used to be, and divorce is 
more common. 
 Yikes. That’s quite a list. And it’s just a sampling of the unfortunate facts we’ve 
encountered; several other influences, such as the personality traits of neuroti-
cism and narcissism or the states of jealousy or loneliness create difficulties in 
close relationships, too. 
 Altogether, these patterns may paint a gloomy picture, and, indeed, the sur-
prisingly low success rates of modern marriages suggest that many partnerships 
are not as wonderful as we hope they will be. On the other hand, there are also a 
lot of optimistic facts among the topics we’ve encountered. Here are a few:
 • A lot of men, about one-third of them, are just as warm and tender and 
 sensitive and kind as women routinely are. And those that aren’t can prob-
ably learn to be warmer and more expressive than they are now. 
 • Happy lovers perceive their partners and explain their behavior in  generous 
ways that give the partners the benefit of any doubt and portray them as 
kind and caring even when they occasionally misbehave. 
 • Most people seek and are comfortable in an interdependent and intimate 
relationship with a romantic partner.  
Relationships are complex, and they are usually more costly than we expect them to be. 
But now that you’ve read this book, you shouldn’t be as pessimistic as this comic strip 
character is.
Shoe-New Business © 2003 MacNelly–Dist. by King Features.

430 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
   • In happy relationships, when passion decreases, it is replaced by a deep, affec-
tionate friendship that is rich, warm, and satisfying to those who experience it.  
 • Authentic forgiveness benefits both the recipient and the giver, and it is easi-
est to attain in those close, satisfying relationships that are most worth saving. 
 • Perhaps most importantly, almost all of us can be more thoughtful, more 
charming, and more rewarding romantic partners if we try to be. Men do 
better at nonverbal communication when they are motivated to get it right. 
We can reduce or eliminate verbal misunderstandings when we take the 
time to check the accuracy of our interpretations. And with attentive effort, 
we can be more polite, less selfish, more considerate, and less critical toward 
our partners than we would otherwise be.   
 There are lots of reasons to hope that, with wisdom and work, we can live 
happily ever after. Indeed, I don’t think there’s any question that “knowledge 
is power”: With better understanding of close relationships, we are better 
equipped to prevent some problems and to readily overcome others. And the 
best news of all may be that when we’re committed to our partnerships, we 
engage in a variety of actions that help to protect and maintain the satisfaction 
we enjoy. Furthermore, if they occur, many problems can be fixed, and many 
wounds can be healed. When we encounter  disappointments in our relation-
ships, we are often able to fully surmount our difficulties if we wish. 
 In this concluding chapter, then, we’ll survey both the mechanisms with 
which partners protect and perpetuate their satisfaction and the interventions 
with which faltering contentment can be restored. Despite the hurdles that 
must be overcome, many relationships not only survive, they thrive. 
 MAINTAINING AND ENHANCING RELATIONSHIPS 
 I introduced the idea that people often behave in various ways that protect and 
maintain desirable relationships back in chapter 6 (on pages 209–210).  R elationship 
maintenance mechanisms, the strategic actions people take to sustain their part-
nerships, have been studied by researchers from two different scholarly camps. 
Social psychologists schooled in Caryl Rusbult’s  investment model 1 have identified 
several behaviors that follow from commitment to a relationship, and commu-
nication scholars have noted other actions that distinguish happy partners from 
those who are less content. Let’s examine both sets of findings.  
 Staying Committed 
 People who are committed to a partnership, who want and expect it to con-
tinue, think and behave differently than less committed partners do (Leo et al., 
2012). They perceive themselves, their partners, and their relationship in ways 
that help to sustain the partnership, and they act in ways that avoid or defuse 
conflict and that enrich the relationship. 
 1 I suspect a look back at page 207 will come in handy.  

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 431
 Cognitive Maintenance Mechanisms 
People’s perspectives change in several important ways when they are 
committed to their relationships. First, they think of themselves not as sepa-
rate individuals but as part of a greater whole that includes them  and their 
partners. They perceive greater overlap between their partners’ lives and their 
own, and they use more plural pronouns, with  we, us, and  ours replacing  I, me, 
and  mine  (Agnew et al., 1998). This change in self-definition is referred to as 
 cognitive interdependence, and it probably makes some of the other mainte-
nance mechanisms I mention below more likely to occur (Fitzsimons & Kay, 
2004). I may be even more motivated to take care of us than I would be to take 
care of just you. 
 Second, committed partners think of each other with  positive illusions, 
idealizing each other and perceiving their relationship in the best possible light 
(Luo et al., 2010). A partner’s faults are judged to be relatively trivial, the relation-
ship’s deficiencies are considered to be relatively unimportant, and a partner’s 
misbehavior is dismissed as an unintentional or temporary aberration (Neff & 
Karney, 2003). A characteristic that makes these positive illusions interesting is 
that people are often well aware of the specific obnoxious and thoughtless things 
their partners sometimes do, but by misremembering them and explaining them 
away, they are able to maintain global evaluations of their partners that are more 
positive than the sum of their parts (Karney et al., 2001). And as long as they are 
not too unrealistic, these rose- colored perceptions help protect people’s happi-
ness by taking the sting out of a partner’s occasional missteps. 
 A specific type of positive illusion can be said to be a third cognitive main-
tenance mechanism. Committed partners tend to think that their relationships 
are better than most, and the happier they are, the more exceptional they con-
sider their relationships to be (Reis et al., 2011). This  perceived superiority 
makes one’s partnership seem even more special (Buunk & Ybema, 2003) and 
really does make a relationship more likely to last (Rusbult et al., 2000). 
 Satisfied partners are also less likely to be on the prowl, looking for other 
lovers. Attractive rivals can distract our partners and lure them away from 
us only when our partners know they exist, but contented lovers display 
an  inattention to alternatives that leaves them relatively uninterested and 
unaware of how well they could be doing in alternative relationships (Miller, 
2008). People who are not very committed to their current partnerships 
 monitor their other options with more inquisitiveness and eagerness than do 
those who are more content with what they’ve already got; given the chance 
in a lab procedure, for instance, they linger longer and more carefully inspect 
photos of  attractive members of the other sex (Miller, 1997a). Uncommitted 
 lovers  continue to shop around for better  partners, and that puts their current 
 relationships at risk: Young adults who are alert to their other options at the 
beginning of a college semester are less likely to still be with the same roman-
tic partner when the semester is done (Miller, 1997a). In contrast, committed 
lovers are relatively heedless of how well they could be doing in other 
relationships—they’re not paying much attention to such possibilities—and 
that helps to protect and maintain their current partnerships. 

432 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
 In addition, when committed partners do notice attractive rivals to their 
relationships, they judge them to be less desirable than others think them to 
be. Commitment leads people to disparage those who could lure them away 
from their existing relationships (Lydon et al., 2003), and this  derogation of 
tempting alternatives allows people to feel that other potential partners are 
less attractive than the ones they already have. One of the things that makes 
this perceptual bias interesting is that it is strongest when the alternatives 
are most tempting and thereby pose the greatest threat to one’s relationship. 
For instance, committed partners do not derogate images of attractive mem-
bers of the other sex when they are said to be professional models in another 
city far away, but they do find them less attractive when they are said to be 
fellow students on one’s own campus (Simpson et al., 1990). What’s more, 
whereas single men find women who are not on birth control pills to be 
more attractive when the women are fertile than when they are not each 
month, committed men judge a potential alternative to be less attractive 
when she is fertile than when she is not (Miller & Maner, 2010). To protect 
their relationships, happy lovers tend to underestimate the desirability of 
other potential partners.  
 Behavioral Maintenance Mechanisms 
As you can see, the cognitive things people do to maintain their relation-
ships generally involve subtle changes in perception or judgment of others, 
their relationships, and themselves. Other maintenance mechanisms involve 
changes in the things people do. 
 For one thing, committed people are often willing to make various  personal 
sacrifices, such as doing things they would prefer not to do, or not doing things 
that they would like to do, in order to promote the well-being of their partners 
or their relationships (Totenhagen et al., 2013). This  willingness to sacrifice 
often involves trivial costs (such as seeing a movie that doesn’t interest you 
because your partner wants to go), and contented partners frequently make 
such small sacrifices (Ruppel & Curran, 2012). But sacrifice can also involve 
substantial costs in which people endure rather long periods of deprivation in 
order to preserve or enrich their partnerships. If you’re already married, for 
instance, your spouse may be having to go to a lot of trouble to help you go to 
school; but, if he or she is committed to your future together, that’s a price that 
your spouse may be willing to pay. 
Prayer is helpful in this regard. Controlled studies found that those who 
begin praying for the success and well-being of their partners become more 
 satisfied with the sacrifices they make (Lambert 
et  al.,  2012a), and more forgiving, too (Lambert 
et al., 2013a). And in general, those who pray for 
their partners tend to be more satisfied with, and 
more committed to, their relationships. Notably, 
however, prayer that is focused on one’s own needs 
and desires doesn’t have such effects (Fincham & 
Beach, 2014).
A Point to Ponder
What is it about prayer for 
the well-being of our part-
ners that makes us more 
forgiving and more gener-
ous toward them?

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 433
 Relationships are also likely to prosper when our partners behave toward 
us in ways that encourage us to gradually become the people that we want to 
be. When our partners encourage us to be all that we can be—supporting the 
development of skills we want to learn, endorsing our acceptance of promis-
ing new roles and responsibilities, and promoting the self-growth we seek—
both our relationships and our personal well-being are enhanced (Overall et al., 
2010a). This is the  Michelangelo phenomenon,  named for the famous sculptor 
who created uplifting works of art from ordinary blocks of stone (Rusbult et al., 
2009). People have rarely finished growing and changing when their partner-
ships begin, and committed partners help each other become who they wish to 
be when those desires enhance the health of their relationship (Hui et al., 2014). 
 Committed lovers also tend to swallow minor mistreatment from their 
partners without biting back. This is  accommodation, the willingness to con-
trol the impulse to respond in kind to a partner’s provocation and to instead 
respond constructively (Häfner & IJzerman, 2011). Accommodation occurs 
when people tolerate a partner’s bad mood, pointless criticism, thoughtless-
ness, and other nuisances with placidity and poise. It does not involve mar-
tyrdom; to the contrary, as long as a partner’s offenses are only occasional or 
temporary, accommodation provides an effective means of avoiding useless 
conflict that might merely perpetuate an aversive interaction. And when both 
partners are inclined to “stay cool” instead of “fighting fire with fire,” they tend 
to have a happy relationship (Rusbult et al., 2001). 
I should note, however, that accommodation takes work. It requires us to 
bite our tongues and hold our tempers, so it involves active self-restraint—
and in fact, self-control (the ability to manage one’s impulses, control one’s 
thoughts, persevere in pursuit of desired goals, and curb unwanted behavior) 
is generally good for our relationships. In general, self-control helps us do the 
right things and not to do the wrong things (de Ridder et al., 2012)—and in 
particular, it enables us to refrain from lashing out in response to provocation, 
so people high in self-control rarely, if ever, engage in intimate partner vio-
lence (Finkel et al., 2009). To the contrary, people who are high in self-control 
make more sacrifices that benefit their partners (Pronk & Karremans, 2014). 
And forgiveness requires us to stop nursing a grudge, so self-control makes 
forgiveness more likely, too (Pronk et al., 2010). Finally, we use self-control 
to withstand temptation, so it aids our efforts to resist the lure of attractive 
alternatives; when they’re already in relationships, people say it’s easier for 
them to remain f aithful—and they actually are less flirtatious toward new 
acquaintances—the more self-control they have (Pronk et al., 2011).
In fact, people differ in their dispositional levels of self-control (that is, 
their usual abilities to regulate their impulses) and, if you have any sense, 
you’ll seek a partner with ample ability to persevere and refrain, as needed. 
That’s because the more self-control two partners possess—that is, the greater 
the sum of their combined abilities to make good decisions and to do the 
right thing—the smoother and more satisfying their relationship will rou-
tinely be (Vohs et al., 2011). No matter who we are, though, self-control is 
reduced when we are stressed, distracted, or fatigued (Buck & Neff, 2012), so 

434 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
people are less accommodating, less forgiving, and more tempted by alterna-
tives when they are temporarily spent (Luchies et al., 2011). We tend to be 
at our worst when we are tired and taxed. It’s good news, then, that feeling 
connected to family and friends bolsters self-control; acceptance by a loving 
partner enhances our abilities to behave in ways that protect our relationships 
(Blackhart et al., 2011).2
Self-control can be difficult, but there’s another behavioral maintenance 
mechanism that is easier to enact:  play. Couples are usually content when 
2 Here’s another benefit of self-control in close relationships: It shows that we care. We rarely 
improve our relationships by trying to change our partners—that usually just annoys them—but 
our efforts do pay off when we try to change ourselves. Our partners are typically pleased when they 
realize that we are striving to behave better—for instance, trying to communicate more clearly and 
to manage conflict more reasonably—and they’re more satisfied when we successfully exert some 
self-control (Overall & Simpson, 2013). Think of the benefits to be gained when both partners do this.
The Most Obvious Box in the Book:
Don’t Cheat
Obviously, if you want to protect and 
maintain a valued relationship, you 
shouldn’t subject it to potentially lethal 
stress and strain. So, don’t cheat on your 
partner. Nearly all of us (91 percent) 
think that adultery is “morally wrong” 
(Newport & Himelfarb, 2013), and 
most of us (62 percent) think that if we 
found out that our spouses were hav-
ing affairs, we’d leave and get a divorce 
( Jones, 2008). And sure enough, infidelity 
greatly increases the chances that a mar-
riage (Allen & Atkins, 2012) or any other 
romantic relationship (Negash et al., 2014) 
will fail. It’s the leading reason marriages 
end (Amato & Previti, 2003). For most of 
us, faithlessness is an awful betrayal that 
ruins trust and damages a relationship 
more than other problems do; if they seek 
therapy, for instance, spouses who are 
grappling with infidelity are  noticeably 
more distressed and depressed than other 
therapy couples typically are (Atkins  et 
al., 2010). Nevertheless, therapy usually 
helps. On average, infidelity couples 
are much improved—being much less 
unhappy—after they complete a program 
of marital therapy like those coming up in 
a few pages (Atkins et al., 2010).
Thus, here are two bits of good 
advice. First, if you discover that your 
partner in (what had been) a worthy 
relationship has been unfaithful, try not 
to act in haste. Calm counsel can assist 
you in understanding what happened 
and in reaching an informed, profi table 
decision about how best to put your pain 
behind you (Snyder et al., 2007). You 
may fi nd that the relationship is repa-
rable, so “couples should never throw 
away a marriage in the midst of a cri-
sis of infi delity; you never know when 
you’re going to need it later” ( Pittman & 
Wagers, 2005, p. 1419). Second, do your 
part to protect your partnership by steer-
ing clear of temptation. Seek a social net-
work that will support your faithfulness 
instead of undermining your monog-
amy, and handle attractive alternatives 
(including co-workers, Facebook confi -
dants, and, especially, former lovers) 
with care (Glass & Staeheli, 2003). 

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 435
they find ways to engage in novel, challenging, exciting, and pleasant activi-
ties together (Sheldon et al., 2013). In short, those who play together tend to 
stay together. In formal studies of this simple truth, couples have been tied 
together on one side at the wrists and ankles and invited to crawl through an 
obstacle course while pushing a foam cylinder with their heads (Aron et al., 
2000). Prizes could be won if they completed the course quickly enough, 
so the task was exciting, goofy fun. Compared to couples who engaged in 
a more mundane activity, those that played like this felt that their relation-
ships were of higher quality when the day was done. And sure enough, out 
in the real world, spouses who get up and go out to hike, bike, dance, or to 
attend concerts, lectures, and shows feel that their marriages are of higher 
quality than do those who just stay home and watch television (Strong & 
Aron, 2006). Finding time to play in inventive and creative ways is beneficial 
in close relationships, so you may want to make a point of it.  Consider this 
approach, pioneered by Kimberley Coulter and John Malouff (2013):  Collab-
orate with your partner in creating a list of engaging and interesting things 
to do together.  Then develop definite plans to do them, making time each 
week for one of the items on your list. What sorts of activities should you 
choose?  The specifics are up to you, but try to pursue entertainments that are 
novel, exciting, playful, and passionate.  Go somewhere you’ve never been.  
Be adventurous.  Meet your partner at a bar and pretend that you’ve just met. 
Take turns massaging each other without having sex.3 Coulter and Malouff 
found that intentionally spending 90 minutes doing something fun and excit-
ing each week left couples happier and more satisfied with their relationship 
months later.
 Finally, those who are committed to a partnership are more likely to 
offer  forgiveness after a partner’s betrayal (Karremans et al., 2011). Forgive-
ness quickens the healing of both the relationship and the partner who was 
wronged—it is less stressful to forgive an intimate partner than to nurse a 
grudge—so forgiveness promotes good health both in relationships and in 
those who give it (Hojjat & Ayotte, 2013).  
 Staying Content 
 A second collection of maintenance activities has been identified by com-
munication scholars Dan Canary and Laura Stafford (2001), who gathered 
hundreds of reports from people (including 500 term papers from college stu-
dents) describing what they did to maintain their relationships. Canary and 
Stafford then distilled the strategies into the manageable number of  categories 
that appear in  Table 14.1 . As you can see, contented partners try to foster 
 positivity, being polite, staying cheerful, and remaining upbeat; they encour-
age  openness and relationship talk, sharing their own thoughts and feelings and 
inviting their partners to do the same; they provide  assurances that announce 
3 These and other ideas to get you started are available to you at http://blog.une.edu.au/
usingpsychology/2013/04/21/spice-up-your-romantic-relationship/

436 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
their love, commitment, and regard for each other; they share a  social network, 
having friends in common and spending time with their partner’s family; they 
 share tasks  around the home in an equitable fashion, handling their fair share of 
household responsibilities; and they spend time together, sharing joint activities 
(Girme et al., 2014; Ogolsky & Bowers, 2013). 
 Similar activities are used to maintain close friendships (Oswald et al., 
2004), and that should be no surprise. If you take a look (way back on p. 2) 
at the components of intimacy in chapter 1, you’ll see that most of the 
maintenance mechanisms identified by Canary and Stafford promote and 
encourage intimacy between friends and lovers. Knowledge, caring, interde-
pendence, mutuality, trust, and commitment are all likely to be enhanced by 
maintenance strategies that involve openness, assurances of one’s love and 
commitment, and plenty of shared friends and activities. The actions  people 
take to stay happy in close relationships seem to involve the  creation and 
 preservation of rewarding intimacy with their partners. 
 Furthermore, these various actions seem to work. Partners who routinely 
do the things listed in  Table 14.1 enjoy greater fondness for each other and 
greater commitment to their relationships than do those who work less hard to 
maintain their partnerships (Stafford, 2003)—and this is especially true when 
 both partners behave this way (Oswald & Clark, 2006). Don’t fret if you find 
the long list of activities in  Table 14.1  a little daunting; three of them are more 
important than the others, and they’re easy to remember. Of the bunch, the best 
predictors of how happy a marriage will be are positivity, assurances, and shar-
ing tasks (Canary et al., 2002). Spouses who do their fair share of housework, 
TABLE 14.1.  Canary and Stafford’s Relational Maintenance Strategies
Strategy
Examples: “I . . .”
Positivity
Strive to make our interactions enjoyable
Try to be cheerful and upbeat when we’re together
Openness
Encourage my partner to disclose his/her thoughts and 
feelings to me
Relationship Talk
Encourage my partner to tell me what he/she wants 
from our relationship
Assurances
Try to show my partner how much he/she means to me 
Talk about our plans for the future
Understanding
Apologize when I’m wrong
Strive to be patient and forgiving
Sharing Tasks
Help equally with tasks that need to be done
Help my partner complete his/her projects
Social Networks
Do things with his/her friends and family
Include our friends in our activities
Joint Activities
Share time together
Do things together
Source: Adapted from Stafford (2011) and Marmo & Canary (2013).

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 437
A Prescription for Contentment:
1. Appreciate your partner. 2. Express your gratitude. 
3. Repeat.
People adapt to pleasant circumstances, 
and if you’re lucky (and wise and dili-
gent) enough to have a great relation-
ship, there’s a danger that you’ll come 
to take it for granted. (In the language 
of interdependence theory, your com-
parison level will creep upward.) But 
if you grow lazily accustomed to your 
good fortune, you won’t be as delighted 
with it as you should be. That would be 
wasteful, so I have a specific prescription 
for how you can savor your satisfaction, 
maintain your relationship, and be hap-
pier and healthier all at the same time.
Tune in. Feel obligated to take notice 
of the thoughtful acts of affection, benev-
olence, and generosity your partner pro-
vides you (Dew & Wilcox, 2013). Then, 
each week, make a point of telling your 
partner which three kindnesses, large or 
small, you enjoyed the most.
Happy people are naturally adept at 
noticing their blessings (Fagley, 2012), but 
any of us can learn to pay better attention 
to them, and it’s likely that our moods—
and even our physical health (Hill et al., 
2013)—will improve when we do. Indeed, 
people who start “gratitude journals” in 
which they keep track of their joys and 
good fortune become genuinely happier 
(Lyubomirsky & Layous, 2013).
Then, when we express our grati-
tude to our partners, we provide them 
powerfully rewarding acknowledgment 
and affection (Gordon et al., 2011). Our 
evident appreciation reduces the costs 
of the favors they do us so that their 
small sacrifi ces are easier for them to 
bear—and the result is that they take 
more pleasure in continuing their efforts 
on our behalf (Kubacka et al., 2011).
In our journey through this book, 
we’ve found that bad is stronger than 
good, and that couples are less affec-
tionate toward each other as time goes 
by. But we know that now, so we’re 
equipped to avoid the creeping disillu-
sionment that erodes too many partner-
ships. Your assignment is clear: Take 
conscious note of the good things in 
your relationship, celebrate them, and 
communicate your recognition and 
appreciation of them to your partner. 
Both of you will be happier if you appre-
ciate your partner, express your grati-
tude, and repeat (Algoe et al., 2013).
who are typically in good spirits, and who regularly express their love and 
regard for their partners are especially likely to be happily wed. 
 I do have a cautionary note, however: Kindnesses done for a partner on 
 Valentine’s Day are unlikely to still be keeping him or her satisfied on the 
Fourth of July. Canary and his colleagues (2002) found that the beneficial effects 
of these maintenance mechanisms were short lived: If these desirable activities 
stopped, contentment soon began to decline. The clear implication is that in 
order to maintain happy relationships, we have to  keep at it. And here’s where 
self-control is pertinent again (Kammrath & Peetz, 2011); over the long haul, 
we need to continue to strive to be routinely cheerful, loving, and fair. Those 
of us who take occasional breaks from being generous, jovial, and affectionate 
toward our partners do so at our peril. 

438 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
 REPAIRING RELATIONSHIPS 
 The maintenance mechanisms that protect and preserve relationships have 
something in common with taking good care of your car. If you shopped wisely 
and made a good buy, you’re likely to be a happy driver if you conscientiously 
engage in a consistent program of thoughtful maintenance, regularly changing 
the oil, adding antifreeze, and generally taking care of business. Still, sooner or 
later, despite your efforts, things may break, and a repair rather than a tune-up 
will be in order. If the repair is simple, you may want to do it yourself, but there 
may also be occasions in which you’ll need professional help. Happily, when 
relationships break, as with cars, help is available.  
 Do It Yourself 
One way to solve the problems we encounter in our relationships is to fix them 
ourselves. Our perceptions of our own behavior tend to be contaminated by 
self-serving biases, and it’s often hard for us to recognize how we are contrib-
uting to the relational difficulties we face. Third-party observers can usually 
be more dispassionate and fair in their perceptions of our relationships than 
we can. Nevertheless, if you want to do it yourself, there’s plenty of advice 
available. Television shows, self-help books, websites, and podcasts are full 
of suggestions that may help you improve your relationships. And  consumers 
of this material often feel that the advice has been helpful; people who read 
self-help books, for instance, usually feel that the books were beneficial to 
them (Ellis, 1993).
 There are often problems, however, with the popular advice the media 
provide. For one thing, the backgrounds of people who sell their advice are 
sometimes as bogus as the advice itself; there are well-known authors who 
boast of their “Ph.D.” degrees who either did not graduate from an  accredited 
university or did not study a helping profession or behavioral science in 
graduate school. According to Wikipedia, John Gray, the best-selling author 
of  Men Are from Mars, Women Are from Venus (1992), received his Ph.D. from 
Columbia Pacific University, an unaccredited distance-learning place you 
have never heard of (because it was shut down by the state of California). 
Dr. Laura Schlessinger, best-selling author of  The Proper Care and Feeding of 
Marriage (2007), has a Ph.D. in physiology, not psychology. In addition, some 
advisers do not base their counsel on sound research; instead, they give voice 
to their personal opinions, which are sometimes at odds with the facts.  
 Indeed, too often, lay advice is simply wrong—with its popularity having 
nothing to do with its accuracy. Back in chapter 1, I asserted that relationship 
scientists disagree strongly with the simpleminded notion that men come from 
Mars and women come from Venus; now that you’ve read this book, what do 
you think? 
 Here’s another example. A book entitled  The Rules: Time-Tested Secrets for 
Capturing the Heart of Mr. Right  was a number one “nonfiction” bestseller a while 
back. According to its authors (Fein & Schneider, 1995),  The Rules described 

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 439
“a simple way of acting around men that can help any woman win the heart of 
the man of her dreams” (p. 5). If readers followed the advice provided, “he will 
not just marry you, but feel crazy about you forever! What we’re promising 
you is ‘happily ever after’” (p. 6). Sounds great, doesn’t it? Unfortunately, the 
rules were wrong. In order to enhance their desirability, readers were advised 
to stay aloof and mysterious and to avoid seeming too eager to develop a new 
relationship. As the authors admitted, “in plain language, we’re talking about 
playing hard to get” (p. 6). But playing hard-to-get doesn’t work, and relation-
ship science has known that for 40 years. Men are not particularly attracted to 
women who artificially delay the progress of a developing relationship; what’s 
attractive to a man is a desirable woman who plays hard-to-get for everyone 
 but him (Walster et al., 1973). Specifically,  The Rules  instructed women to avoid 
seeing a man more than twice a week, to avoid much self-disclosure early on, 
and to avoid telling him what they did when they were apart, and these and 
other rules are  negatively correlated with men’s interest in (Jonason & Li, 2013), 
and commitment to (Agnew & Gephart, 2000) a new partner. On the whole, 
women who followed  The Rules probably had more trouble attracting and 
keeping men than did other women. That’s not very useful advice. (Indeed, 
one of the authors filed for divorce a few years after the book came out.) 
 Of course, not all popular advice is flawed, and some of it is very 
credible. Some self-help books and websites, for instance, are written or run by 
reputable, well-respected scientists (e.g., Christensen et al., 2014; Gottman, 2011; 
Orbuch, 2009). And on the positive side, such help is inexpensive. Readers or 
visitors can refer to them repeatedly, absorbing material at their own pace. 
Credible books and self-help sites may also be particularly valuable to people 
who are too embarrassed to seek formal therapy; on average, doing it yourself 
isn’t nearly as effective as face-to-face education and therapy are, but people 
can still learn skills and perspectives that facilitate their efforts to address their 
problems (McAllister et al., 2012).  
 Along those lines, let me acknowledge that I’m glad you read  this book. It’s 
not designed as a self-help book, but I hope that the information I gathered here 
has been useful to you. I believe that there is enormous value in the scientific 
study of close relationships, and I hope that I’ve provided you material that 
will help you understand your own relationships with more sophistication. I 
bet that there’s a lot here that you can apply to your own circumstances to enjoy 
even richer, more rewarding partnerships. 
 Preventive Maintenance 
 There are also occasions, when you’re taking care of your car, when the smart 
thing to do is to invest in major maintenance  before anything goes wrong. After 
a few years, for instance, you should replace your timing belt (if you have one); 
it’s a part inside a gasoline engine that, at best, will leave you stranded, or, at 
worse, will destroy your engine if it breaks. It’s an expensive change to make, 
and when your engine is running fine, it’s easy to put off. But there’s no ques-
tion that it’s a wise choice. 

440 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
 Similarly, couples who are engaged to be married usually feel that they’re 
sailing along just fine, and there’s no need to prepare for the new phase of their 
relationship that wedlock will bring. However, some preventive maintenance 
may be valuable then, too. Before problems begin, fine-tuning a couple’s expec-
tations and communication skills may pay big dividends. 
 Premarital counseling is available in various forms ranging from informal 
visits with a pastor, priest, or rabbi to structured training under the guidance of 
psychologists or marriage and family therapists. (Halford [2011] provides a review 
of these programs.) Computer-based instruction that people access at home is also 
available (Braithwaite & Fincham, 2011). To keep things simple here, I’ll touch on 
the PREP program, which is one of the best-known relationship skills courses. 
 The Prevention and Relationship Enhancement Program, or PREP, typically 
involves about 12 hours of training spread across five sessions ( Markman et al., 
1994). Meetings focus on several topics that may be familiar by now to  readers 
of this book:
 • The power of commitment to change partners’ outlooks and behavior. Couples are 
encouraged to take a long-range view of the future they are striving to cre-
ate together. 
 • The importance of having fun together. Couples are urged to make a point of 
playing together on a regular basis. 
 • The value of open communication about sex. Couples are advised to express their 
desires clearly and openly and to try something new every now and then.  
 • The consequences of inappropriate expectations. Couples are encouraged to be 
aware of their expectations, to be reasonable in what they expect, and to 
communicate their expectations clearly.  
 Participants are also taught the speaker-listener technique, which I described back 
on pages 361–362. 
 Does PREP work? In general, the answer seems to be yes: PREP and other pro-
grams like it are usually beneficial, at least for a while, particularly for high-risk 
couples who need them the most (Halford & Bodenmann, 2013). Engaged and 
newlywed couples who participate in a premarital prevention program are less 
than half as likely to separate over the next 3 years as are couples who do not 
receive such education (Rogge et al., 2013). The long-term effects of such train-
ing are still uncertain, and over time the effects of any one program may not be 
much different from those of another (Markman et al., 2013). Nevertheless, some 
premarital preventive maintenance appears to facilitate a few years of smooth 
sailing when marriages begin. It’s likely that fewer marriages would fail if such 
education were more widespread (Hawkins, 2012).  
 Marital Therapy 
 Once real problems emerge, more intensive interventions may be needed. Pro-
fessional helpers may use  a variety of therapeutic approaches, and three dif-
ferent broad types of therapies appear to be helpful for most people most of 
the time. As we’ll see, they differ with regard to (a) their focus on problematic 

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 441
behavior, thoughts, or feelings; (b) their focus on individual vulnerabilities or 
the couple’s interaction as the source of dysfunction; and (c) their emphasis on 
past events or present difficulties as the source of distress (Baucom et al., 2006). 
Therapy that involves both members of a couple is most common, but people 
in troubled relationships often profit from individual therapy even when their 
partners refuse to seek help with them. 
 Behavioral Approaches 
Most of the time, unhappy spouses aren’t very nice to each other, and a clas-
sic intervention,  traditional behavioral couple therapy  (or TBCT), encourages 
them to be more pleasant and rewarding partners. TBCT focuses on the couple’s 
present interactions and seeks to replace any negative and punishing behavior 
with more gracious and generous actions. Couples are taught communication 
skills that help them express affection and manage conflict coolly, and they are 
specifically encouraged to do things that benefit and please their partners. 
 Desirable behavior is elicited in several ways. Therapists may schedule 
“love days” (Weiss et al., 1973) in which one partner deliberately sets out to 
do favors and kindnesses that are requested by the other. Alternatively, the 
couple may enter into agreements to reward positive behavior from their part-
ners with desirable behavior of their own. In one such agreement, a  quid pro 
quo contract, 4  behavior change from one partner is directly linked to behavior 
change by the other (Jacobson & Margolin, 1979). For instance, she may agree to 
do the laundry every Sunday if he cleans the bathroom on Saturday, and he’ll 
clean the bathroom if she did the laundry on the previous Sunday. This sort 
of contract fails to increase positive exchanges if either partner falters, so  good 
faith contracts, parallel agreements in which behavior change is rewarded with 
special privileges, are also used (Weiss et al., 1974). In a good faith contract, he 
may agree to clean the bathroom every Saturday, and when he does, he gets 
to choose the activity for that evening; she may agree to do the laundry every 
Sunday, and when she does, he assumes all the responsibility for bathing the 
children and putting them to bed that night. 
 Getting partners to behave more generously is important, but it doesn’t 
always change the grudging disregard that distressed couples often feel for 
each other by the time they seek therapy. For that reason, a descendant of TBCT 
focuses on partners’ cognitions and judgments of their relationship as well as 
their conduct (Epstein & Baucom, 2002). In addition to encouraging desirable 
behavior,  cognitive-behavioral couple therapy (or CBCT) seeks to change vari-
ous aspects of the ways partners think about and appraise their partnership. 
The therapy addresses spouses’  selective attention, their tendency to notice some 
things and to ignore others, and tries to instill more reasonable  expectations, more 
forgiving  attributions, and more adaptive  relationship beliefs  in each  partner. Par-
ticipants are taught to track and test their thoughts, actively considering various 
attributions for any negative behavior, recognizing and challenging unrealistic 
beliefs, and generating lists of the pros and cons of the expectations they hold. 
 4 Quid pro quo is Latin that means “something for something.” 

442 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
CBCT acknowledges that people often import into their marriages problematic 
habits of thinking that they have learned in past relationships, but it still focuses 
mainly on current patterns in a couple’s interaction; the idea is that, no matter 
where maladaptive cognition came from, a couple will be more content when 
they are able to perceive and judge each other fairly, kindly, and reasonably. 
 An even more recent descendant of TBCT is  integrative behavioral  couple 
therapy (IBCT), an approach that seeks both to encourage more desirable behav-
ior and to teach the partners to tolerantly accept the incompatibilities that they 
cannot change (Gurman, 2013). IBCT teaches the communication skills and 
employs the behavior modification techniques of TBCT, but it also assumes that 
even when two partners behave desirably and well, some frustrating incompat-
ibilities will always remain; for that reason, an important goal of therapy is to 
teach spouses adaptive emotional reactions to the nuisances they will  inevitably 
face. Acceptance of one’s own and one’s partner’s imperfections is promoted 
through three techniques (Wheeler & Christensen, 2002). With  empathic join-
ing,  spouses are taught to express their pain and vulnerabilities without any 
blame or resentment that will make their partners defensive; the point is to 
engender empathy by helping each spouse understand the other’s feelings. 
Spouses are also taught to view their problems with  unified detachment, an intel-
lectual perspective that defuses emotion and helps the couple  understand their 
p roblematic patterns of interaction with cool dispassion. The couple is invited 
to describe the events that cause frustration and to identify the triggers that set 
them in motion while avoiding the negative emotion that usually results from 
such events. Finally, in  tolerance building, spouses are taught to become less sen-
sitive and to react less intensely when problematic behavior occurs; negative 
patterns of interaction are rehearsed and analyzed in therapy sessions, and the 
partners are actually encouraged to give up their efforts to change everything 
they dislike in each other. The focus of IBCT is on the couple’s present patterns 
of interaction, whatever their origins, and it seeks collaborative change in both 
their interactive behavior and their individual emotional reactions to it. 
 Thus, the three behavioral approaches share a focus on the partners’ actions 
toward each other, but they differ in their additional elements. TBCT seeks to 
change spouses’ behavior, whereas CBCT seeks to change their behavior and 
their cognitions, and IBCT seeks to change their behavior and their emotions 
(see  Table 14.2 ). Each approach may appeal to some couples more than others, 
but, importantly, they all work. Between 60 and 70 percent of the couples who 
seriously undertake any of these therapies achieve notable reductions in their 
dissatisfaction and distress that lasts for years (Christensen et al., 2010). And 
thanks to Brian Doss and his colleagues (2013), you can try a version of IBCT 
online at www.OurRelationship.com.  
 Emotionally Focused Therapy 
Another relatively recent innovation, emotionally focused therapy (or 
EFT), is derived from attachment theory (S. Johnson, 2008). Throughout this 
book, we’ve seen that people who are securely attached to their partners are 
more content and comfortable in intimate relationships, and EFT strives to 

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 443
TABLE 14.2. Core Features of Marital Therapies
Primary Focus on
Therapeutic Approach
Behavior, 
Cognitions, 
or Emotions
Individual 
or Couple
Present or 
Past
Behavioral Couple Therapy
Behavior
Couple
Present
Cognitive-Behavioral Couple Therapy
Cognitions
Both
Present
Integrative Behavioral Couple Therapy
Emotions
Both
Present
Emotionally Focused Therapy
Emotions
Both
Present
Insight-Oriented Couple Therapy
Emotions & 
Cognitions
Individual
Past
Source: Adapted from Baucom et al., 2006.
improve relationships by increasing the partners’ attachment security. Like the 
behavioral approaches, EFT seeks to reestablish desirable patterns of interac-
tion between spouses, but its primary focus is on the emotions the partners 
experience as they seek to fulfill their attachment needs. People are thought 
to need emotional security, and they seek it from their spouses, but frustra-
tion and distress can result when one spouse seeks reassurance and acceptance 
 ineffectively and the other spouse responds in a negative manner. In one com-
mon pattern, a partner who wants more attention and affection will pursue it 
in a way that seems critical and blaming to the other, who then responds by 
retreating to an even greater distance. No one is soothed and no one is happy, 
and the cycle of obnoxious pursuit and withdrawal may intensify. 
 EFT tries to identify such maladaptive cycles of emotional communication 
and to replace them with restructured interactions that allow the partners to feel 
safe, loved, and securely connected to one another. Three stages are involved 
(Johnson, 2004). In the first, problematic patterns of communication or conflict 
are identified, and the couple is encouraged to think of themselves as collabora-
tors united in a fight against a common foe; the therapist also helps the spouses 
explore the unmet needs for acceptance and security that fuel their conflict. In 
the second stage, the partners begin to establish constructive new patterns of 
interaction that acknowledge the other’s needs and that provide more reassur-
ance and comfort. Finally, in the third stage, the partners rehearse and reinforce 
their responsiveness to each other, and they rely on their newfound security to 
fearlessly seek new solutions to old problems. The entire process covers nine 
steps, which are listed in  Table 14.3 , during 10–20 sessions of treatment. 
 The focus of therapy is a couple’s present interaction, but the partners are 
encouraged to consider how their individual needs contribute to their joint out-
comes, so both individual and interactive sources of dysfunction are examined. 
And EFT is quite effective with couples who are moderately distressed; about 
70 percent of them overcome their dissatisfaction by the time treatment is com-
plete (Greenman & Johnson, 2013). 

444 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
TABLE 14.3.  Specific Steps in Emotionally Focused Therapy
With the help of a therapist, couples who complete EFT will encounter each of the 
following phases of treatment:
Stage One: Assessment of the Problem
 Step 1:  Partners describe their problems, often describing a recent fight in 
detail.
 Step 2:  Partners identify the emotional fears and needs that underlie their 
arguments.
 Step 3:  Partners put their emotions into words so that the other understands.
 Step 4:  Partners realize that they’re both hurting and that neither of them 
is individually to blame.
Stage Two: Promoting New Styles of Interaction That Foster Bonding
 Step 5:  Partners identify and admit their deepest feelings, including their 
needs for reassurance, acceptance, and comfort.
 Step 6:  Partners acknowledge and begin to accept the other’s feelings; they 
also explore their own new responses to what they have learned.
 Step 7:  Partners begin new patterns of interaction based on openness and 
understanding; they once again become allies rather than adversaries.
Stage Three: Rehearsal and Maintenance of Desirable New Styles of Interaction
 Step 8: Partners collaboratively invent new solutions to old problems.
 Step 9:  Partners thoughtfully rehearse and consolidate their new, more 
accepting behavior toward each other.
Source: Adapted from Johnson, 2004.
 Insight-Oriented Therapy 
A final family of therapies has descended from the psychodynamic traditions 
of Sigmund Freud, who assumed that people often carried unconscious injuries 
and scars from their past relationships that could, without their knowledge, 
complicate and contaminate their present partnerships. (See the box on the next 
page.) Various interventions seek to  promote partners’ insights into such prob-
lematic “baggage” (e.g., Scharff & de Varela, 2005), but a prototypical example of 
this approach is  Douglas Snyder’s (2002) insight-oriented couple therapy (IOCT). 
IOCT  emphasizes individual vulnerabilities to a greater extent than the other 
therapies I have mentioned (see  Table 14.2 ); it strives to help people comprehend 
how the personal habits and assumptions they developed in other relationships 
may be creating difficulty with their present partners. Thus, it also examines past 
events to a fuller extent than other therapies do; IOCT assumes that the origins 
of marital dissatisfaction often lie in difficulties the spouses encountered in prior 
relationships. 
 A primary tool of IOCT is  affective reconstruction, the process through which 
a spouse re-imagines and revisits past relationships in an effort to identify 
the themes and coping styles that characterized conflicts with past partners 

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 445
( Snyder & Schneider, 2002). A person is guided through close inspection 
of his or her relational history, and careful attention is given to the patterns of 
any  interpersonal injuries. The therapist then helps the client understand the 
 connections that may exist between the themes of the person’s past relation-
ships and his or her present problems. 
 The insight that emerges from affective reconstruction helps the partners 
adopt more benign judgments of the other’s behavior. Each spouse becomes 
more aware of his or her vulnerabilities, and the joint expression of fears and 
needs builds empathy between the partners. The therapist is also likely to por-
tray both spouses as doing the best that they can, given their personal histo-
ries, so that blaming and acrimony are reduced. Then, because (as we’ve seen 
before) knowledge is power, the spouses slowly construct new, more reward-
ing patterns of interaction that avoid the pitfalls of the past. 
 All of this typically takes 15–20 sessions with a therapist. Like the emotion-
ally focused and behavioral approaches to therapy, IOCT appears to help most 
couples, and in at least one study (Snyder et al., 1991), it had substantial staying 
power, leaving spouses better adjusted 4 years later than TBCT did.  
 Common Features of Marital Therapy 
There are several other varieties of marital therapy available in the market-
place, but I focused on just the behavioral approaches, EFT, and IOCT because 
careful studies suggest that they work for most couples (Baucom et al., 2006). 
Most people who seriously participate in any of these therapies are likely to be 
better off afterward, and (as a rough average) about two-thirds of them will no 
longer be dissatisfied with their marriages (Lebow et al., 2012; Snyder et al., 
2006). There are no guarantees, and success in therapy is likely to depend on 
the sincerity of one’s investment in, and the amount of effort one devotes to, 
the process. But  marital therapy helps  most couples. If you ever wish to repair a 
faltering intimate relationship, help is available. 
 So, which of these therapies is for you? Over the years, this question has 
aroused a lot of competition and occasional argument among  professional 
Central Tenets of Insight-Oriented Therapy
Most marital therapists who use a psycho-
dynamic orientation stress three funda-
mental propositions:
 1. In the ways they choose a mate 
and behave toward their partners, 
people are frequently influenced 
by hidden tensions and unresolved 
needs of which they are unaware.
 2. Many of these unconscious 
conflicts stem from events that 
took place either in one’s  family 
of origin or in prior romantic 
relationships.
 3. The major therapeutic goal is 
for the clients to gain insight 
into their unconscious conflicts—
to understand why they feel 
and act the way they do—so 
that they have the freedom 
to choose to feel and act 
differently.

446 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
 helpers, but I have a very simple answer: Pick the therapy—and the  therapist—
that appeal to you the most. This is not an idle suggestion. The best therapy for 
you is very likely to be the one that sounded most interesting as you read these 
last few pages, and there are three reasons why. 
 First, despite their different labels and different emphases, the therapies I 
have introduced all share some common features, and that may be why they 
all work (Benson et al., 2012). Each provides a reasonable explanation of why 
a couple has been experiencing difficulty, and each provides a hopeful new 
perspective on how such difficulties can be overcome. Toward that end, each 
provides a means of changing patterns of interaction that have been causing 
distress, and each increases a couple’s repertoire of more effective, more desir-
able behavior. They pursue these ends with different rationales, but all of these 
therapies equip couples with more constructive and more satisfying ways of 
relating to each other. So, these various approaches all share some core ele-
ments that make them more similar than they may superficially seem. 
 Second, given this, the  therapist you select may be just as important as 
the therapy you choose. Marital therapy is much more likely to be successful 
when both members of the couple respect and trust their therapist (Summers & 
Barber, 2003), so you should seek an accomplished therapist who seems cred-
ible and persuasive to you. A professional helper who espouses a therapeutic 
approach you find plausible is likely to seem more skilled and knowledgeable 
than is one who uses an approach you find less compelling. 
 Finally, a therapeutic approach that interests you may be more likely to 
offer hope that real change is possible, and such optimism can be very influ-
ential (Snyder et al., 2006). Positive expectations make therapy more effective. 
Compared to those who are pessimistic about the outcome of therapy, spouses 
who believe that benefits will result from their efforts are likely to work harder 
and to maintain higher spirits, and both increase the chances that the therapy 
will succeed. 
 Along those lines, let me remind you of the dangers in believing, as 
some people do, that “great relationships just happen” and “partners cannot 
change.” We encountered these and other dysfunctional relationship beliefs 
back in chapter 4, and I hope that the disadvantages of such beliefs now seem 
even clearer. People who hold such views are less likely to seek therapy when 
problems arise in their marriages, and if they do enter therapy, they tend to do 
so halfheartedly. As a result, their situations are less likely to improve. You can 
lead a horse to water, but you can’t make him drink. 
 Indeed, that old cliché suggests one last thing that all these marital therapies 
have in common: They are all underutilized. Most people who divorce do so 
without ever consulting a marital therapist, and 
the minority who do usually wait to seek help until 
their problems are severe (Doss et al., 2004). This is 
particularly true of men; they’re slower to recog-
nize that problems exist, less likely to believe that 
therapy will help, and slower to seek therapy when 
it’s warranted than women are (Doss et al., 2003). 
A Point to Ponder
What would keep you 
from seeking help for your 
relationship if you ever 
need it?  Why?

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 447
Given the effectiveness of marital therapy, this is regrettable. I hope that, now 
that you know that you’ll probably get your money’s worth, you’ll not delay in 
contacting a therapist if the need arises.  
 Indeed, time usually counts. The sooner marital problems are addressed, 
the easier they are to solve. The greater a couple’s distress, the harder it is to 
reverse (Snyder et al., 2006). Why wait? Consider the possibilities: Therapy 
doesn’t always work, and there is always the chance, once a couple’s problems 
are understood, that a therapist will recommend dissolving the marriage. But if 
that’s the case, a great deal of distressing uncertainty and pain may be avoided. 
Alternatively, if a relationship is salvageable and therapy can be helpful, a 
couple can reduce their discomfort and return to profitable partnership sooner 
when therapy is sought promptly. Either way, there’s little point in waiting to 
address the inevitable difficulties intimate partners will face.  
 IN CONCLUSION 
 Overall, then, just like cars, relationships can get preventive maintenance that 
can keep them from breaking down, and they can often be fixed when they do 
falter. I think that this is a clever analogy (which is why I used it), but I need to 
point out that there’s one way in which it is quite misleading: Sooner or later, 
no matter how you take care of them, cars wear out and must be replaced, and 
that’s not necessarily true of intimate relationships at all. Sure, there are some 
people who regularly trade in their lovers, like their cars, for newer, flashier 
models (Campbell & Foster, 2002), but most of you out there hope that you will 
ultimately construct an intimate relationship with a particular partner that you 
will find fulfilling for the rest of your life. 
 And you may. I hope that, having studied the modern science of close rela-
tionships, you are now better equipped to create, understand, and manage suc-
cessful, happy, rewarding relationships that last. Hold sensible expectations, so 
that you’re not disappointed when frustrations arise (Neff & Geers, 2013).  But 
know, too, that our relationships are more resilient, being better able to with-
stand the inevitable difficulties of interdependency, when they are nurtured 
and nourished with plenty of shared affection (Horan, 2012), shared activities 
and pleasures (Feeney & Lemay, 2012), and shared expressions of devotion and 
commitment (Weigel & Ballard-Reisch, 2014).  So, by shopping wisely and then 
making attentive and thoughtful investments in the care and feeding of your 
partnerships, you may very well be able to develop and maintain relationships 
that remain gratifying to you forever. After all, some people do. When 100 cou-
ples who had been contentedly married for 45 years were asked to explain their 
success (Lauer et al., 1990), they replied that:
 • They valued marriage and considered it a long-term commitment. 
 • A sense of humor was a big help. 
 • They were similar enough that they agreed about most things. 
 • They genuinely liked their spouses and enjoyed spending time with them. 
I hope that you’re able to do the same.  

448 
CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships
 FOR YOUR CONSIDERATION 
  When she reached the end of this book, Leslie decided to talk with her  husband 
about her increasing discontent with him and their marriage. He had been con-
siderate and charming when they were engaged, but she had come to feel that 
he had stopped trying to please her, and she felt lonely and hurt. She felt that 
she was constantly changing to accommodate his wishes but that he was doing 
little to satisfy her in return. He never asked her how her day had been. It was a 
little thing, but it nettled her, and it was just one example of his self-absorption 
and apparent lack of care. However, when she suggested that they seek therapy, 
he resolutely refused. So, she decided to go by herself; she went to the website of 
the American Association for Marriage and Family Therapy at  www.aamft.org , 
found a therapist, and made an individual appointment. 
 Having read this chapter, what do you think the future holds for Leslie and 
her husband? Why? 
 CHAPTER SUMMARY 
 With better understanding of close relationships, people are better equipped to 
prevent some problems and to overcome others.  
 Maintaining and Enhancing Relationships 
 Relationship maintenance mechanisms  are strategic actions people take to sus-
tain their partnerships. 
 Staying Committed. People who want a relationship to continue think 
and behave differently than less committed partners do. Cognitive mainte-
nance mechanisms include  cognitive interdependence, positive illusions, perceived 
superiority, inattention to alternatives, and  derogation of alternatives. 
 Behavioral maintenance mechanisms include  willingness to sacrifice, prayer, 
the  Michelangelo phenomenon, accommodation, self-control, play, and  forgiveness. 
 Staying Content. Communication scholars have identifi ed several more 
activities that seem to help partners stay content. These include  positivity, open-
ness, relationship talk, assurances, understanding, a shared  social network, the  shar-
ing of  tasks, and joint activities. 
 Partners who routinely engage in these activities are happier than are those 
who work less hard to maintain their relationships. However, people need to 
 keep doing them in order for them to be beneficial. 
 Repairing Relationships 
Regular maintenance helps keep relationships in good condition, but they 
may still break down and need repair.  

CHAPTER 14: Maintaining and Repairing Relationships 449
 Do It Yourself. There’s plenty of advice available but some of it is faulty. 
However, some self-help information is provided by reputable scientists, and it 
may be very benefi cial to its consumers. 
 Preventive Maintenance. Premarital counseling comes in various forms. 
One example, the Prevention and Relationship Enhancement  Program, results 
in increased satisfaction during the fi rst years of marriage. 
 Marital Therapy. Professional helpers may use several different therapies. 
 Traditional behavioral couple therapy seeks to establish less punishing and more 
 pleasant patterns of interaction between partners.  Cognitive-behavioral couple 
therapy focuses on maladaptive cognitions.  Integrative behavioral couple therapy 
tries to teach troubled spouses to accept the incompatibilities that they cannot 
change.  Emotionally focused therapy seeks to make partners more secure.  Insight-
oriented couple therapy seeks to free spouses from the emotional baggage they 
carry from prior relationships.
 All of these therapeutic approaches share certain core features. Couples 
who trust their therapists and enter therapy with positive expectations are 
likely to derive real benefit from any of them.  
 In Conclusion 
My hope is that, having studied the modern science of close relationships, 
you are better equipped to create, understand, and manage successful, happy, 
rewarding relationships that last. I wish you the very best in the interpersonal 
journey that awaits you.      

R
 References 
 Abbey, A. (1982). Sex differences in attributions for friendly behavior: Do males misperceive 
females’ friendliness?  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 42, 830–838. 
 Abel, E. L., & Kruger, M. L. (2010). Smile intensity in photographs predicts longevity.  Psychological 
Science, 21, 542–544. 
 Acevedo, B. P., & Aron, A. (2009). Does a long-term relationship kill romantic love?  Review of 
General Psychology, 13, 59–65. 
 Acevedo, B. P., & Aron, A. P. (2014). Romantic love, pair-bonding, and the dopaminergic reward 
system. In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Mechanisms of social connection: From brain to 
group (pp. 55–69). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Acevedo, B. P., Aron, A., Fisher, H. E., & Brown, L. L. (2012). Neural correlates of long-term intense 
romantic love.  Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience, 7, 145–159. 
 Ackerman, D. (1994).  A natural history of love. New York: Random House. 
 Ackerman, J. M., Griskevicius, V., & Li, N. P. (2011). Let’s get serious: Communicating commitment 
in romantic relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 1079–1094. 
 Ackerman, J. M., & Kenrick, D. T. (2009). Cooperative courtship: Helping friends raise and raze 
relationship barriers.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 1285–1300. 
 Afifi, T., Caughlin, J., & Afifi, W. (2007). The dark side (and light side) of avoidance and secrets. 
In B. H. Spitzberg & W. R. Cupach (Eds.),  The dark side of interpersonal communication  (2nd ed., 
pp. 61–92). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Afifi, T. D., Joseph, A., & Aldeis, D. (2012). The “standards for openness hypothesis”: Why women 
find (conflict) avoidance more dissatisfying than men.  Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 29, 102–125. 
 Afifi, T. D., Olson, L. N., & Armstrong, C. (2005). The chilling effect and family secrets: Examining 
the role of self-protection, other protection, and communication efficacy.  Human Communica-
tion Research, 31, 564–598. 
 Afifi, T. O., MacMillan, H., Cox, B. J., Asmundson, G. J. G., Stein, M. B., & Sareen, J. (2009). Mental 
health correlates of intimate partner violence in marital relationships in a nationally represen-
tative sample of males and females.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 24, 1398–1417. 
 Afifi, W. A., & Metts, S. (1998). Characteristics and consequences of expectation violations in close 
relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 15, 365–392. 
 Afifi, W. A., Falato, W. L., & Weiner, J. L. (2001). Identity concerns following a severe relational 
transgression: The role of discovery method for the relational outcomes of infidelity.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 18, 291–308. 
 Agnew, C. R., & Gephart, J. M. (2000). Testing  The Rules of commitment enhancement: Separating 
fact from fiction.  Representative Research in Social Psychology, 24, 41–47. 

References R-1
 Agnew, C. R., Van Lange, P. A. M., Rusbult, C. E., & Langston, C. A. (1998). Cognitive interdepen-
dence: Commitment and the mental representation of close relationships.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 74, 939–954. 
 Ahmetoglu, G., Swami, V., & Chamorro-Premuzic, T. (2010). The relationship between dimensions 
of love, personality, and relationship length.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 1181–1190. 
 Ahrons, C. (1994).  The good divorce. New York: HarperCollins. 
 Ahrons, C. R. (2007). Family ties after divorce: Long-term implications for children.  Family Process, 
46, 53–65. 
 Aicken, C. R. H., Gray, M., Clifton, S., et al. (2013). Improving questions on sexual partnerships: 
Lessons learned from cognitive interviews for Britain’s third National Survey of Sexual Atti-
tudes and Lifestyles (“Natsal-3”).  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 173–185. 
 Ainsworth, M. D. S., Blehar, M. C., Waters, E., & Wall, S. (1978).  Patterns of attachment: A psychologi-
cal study of the strange situation. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Aitken, S. J., Lyons, M., & Jonason, P. K. (2013). Dads or cads? Women’s strategic decisions in the 
mating game.  Personality and Individual Differences, 55, 118–122. 
 Aizer, A. A., Chen, M. H., McCarthy, E. P., et al. (2013). Marital status and survival in patients with 
cancer.  Journal of Clinical Oncology, 31, 3869–3876. 
 Albrecht, S. L., & Kunz, P. R. (1980). The decision to divorce: A social exchange perspective.  Journal 
of Divorce, 3, 319–337. 
 Albright, L., Cohen, A. I., Malloy, T. E., Christ, T., & Bromgard, G. (2004). Judgments of communi-
cative intent in conversation.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 290–302. 
 Algoe, S. B., Fredrickson, B. L., & Gable, S. L. (2013). The social functions of the emotion of gratitude 
via expression.  Emotion, 13, 605–609. 
 Allen, A. B., & Leary, M. R. (2010). Reactions to others’ selfish actions in the absence of tangible 
consequences.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 32, 26–34. 
 Allen, E. S., & Atkins, D. C. (2012). The association of divorce and extramarital sex in a representa-
tive U.S. sample.  Journal of Family Issues, 33, 1477–1493. 
 Allen, K., Blascovich, J., & Mendes, W. B. (2002). Cardiovascular reactivity in the presence of pets, 
friends, and spouses: The truth about cats and dogs.  Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 727–739. 
 Allen, K., Shykoff, B. E., & Izzo, J. L., Jr. (2001). Pet ownership, but not ACE inhibitor therapy, 
blunts home blood pressure responses to mental stress.  Hypertension, 38, 815–820. 
 Allendorf, K. (2013). Schemas of marital change: From arranged marriages to eloping for love. 
 Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 453–469. 
 Allik, J., Realo, A., Mõttus, R., Borkenau, P., Kuppens, P., & Hrebícková, M. (2010). How people 
see others is different from how people see themselves: A replicable pattern across cultures. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 870–882. 
 Allison, R., & Risman, B. J. (2013). A double standard for “hooking up”: How far have we come 
toward gender equality?  Social Science Research, 42, 1191–1206. 
 Alterovitz, S. S., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2011). Partner preferences across the life span: Online dating 
by older adults.  Psychology of Popular Media Culture, 1, 89–95. 
 Altman, I., & Taylor, D. A. (1973).  Social penetration: The development of interpersonal relationships. 
New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
 Alvergne, A., & Lummaa, V. (2010). Does the contraceptive pill alter mate choice in humans?  Trends 
in Ecology & Evolution, 25, 171–179. 
 Amato, P. R. (2003). Reconciling divergent perspectives: Judith Wallerstein, quantitative family 
research, and children of divorce.  Family Relations, 52, 332–339. 
 Amato, P. R. (2009). Institutional, companionate, and individualistic marriage: A social psychologi-
cal perspective on marital change. In H. Peters & C. Kamp Dush (Eds.),  Marriage and family: 
Perspectives and complexities (pp. 75–90). New York: Columbia University Press. 
 Amato, P. R. (2010). Research on divorce: Continuing trends and new developments.  Journal of 
Marriage and Family, 72, 650–666. 
 Amato, P. R., Booth, A., Johnson, D. R., & Rogers, S. J. (2007).  Alone together: How marriage in America 
is changing. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Amato, P. R., & Hohmann-Marriott, B. (2007). A comparison of high- and low-distress marriages 
that end in divorce.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 69, 621–638. 

R-2 
References
 Amato, P. R., & Previti, D. (2003). People’s reasons for divorcing: Gender, social class, the life 
course, and adjustment.  Journal of Family Issues, 24, 602–626. 
 Amato, P. R., & Rogers, S. J. (1999). Do attitudes toward divorce affect marital quality?  Journal of 
Family Issues, 20, 69–86. 
 Ambadar, Z., Cohn, J. F., & Reed, L. I. (2009). All smiles are not created equal: Morphology and 
timing of smiles perceived as amused, polite, and embarrassed/nervous.  Journal of Nonverbal 
Behavior, 33, 17–34. 
 Ambady, N., Hallahan, M., & Conner, B. (1999). Accuracy of judgments of sexual orientation from 
thin slices of behavior.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 77, 538–547. 
 American Society of Plastic Surgeons. (2013).  2012 cosmetic surgery gender distribution. Retrieved 
from 
 http://www.plasticsurgery.org/Documents/news-resources/statistics/2012-Plastic-
Surgery-Statistics/cosmetic-surgery-females.pdf 
 Ames, D. R., Kammrath, L. K., Suppes, A., & Bolger, N. (2010). Not so fast: The (not-quite-complete) 
dissociation between accuracy and confidence in thin-slice impressions.  Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 36, 264–277. 
 Andersen, P. A., Guerrero, L. K., & Jones, S. M. (2006). Nonverbal behavior in intimate interactions 
and intimate relationships. In V. Manusov & M. L. Patterson (Eds.),  The Sage handbook of non-
verbal communication (pp. 259–277). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Anderson, J. R., Van Ryzin, M. J., & Doherty, W. J. (2010). Developmental trajectories of marital 
happiness in continuously married individuals: A group-based modeling approach.  Journal of 
Family Psychology, 24, 587–596. 
 Anderson, K. G. (2006). How well does paternity confidence match actual paternity? Evidence from 
worldwide nonpaternity rates.  Current Anthropology, 47, 513–520. 
 Anderson, K. J., Kanner, M., & Elsayegh, N. (2009). Are feminists man haters? Feminists’ and non-
feminists’ attitudes toward men.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 33, 216–224. 
 Anderson, M., Kunkel, A., & Dennis, M. R. (2011). “Let’s (not) talk about that”: Bridging the past sex-
ual experiences taboo to build healthy romantic relationships.  Journal of Sex Research, 48, 381–391. 
 Andrews, P. W., Gangestad, S. W., Miller, G. F., Haselton, M. G., Thornhill, R., & Neale, M. C. 
(2008). Sex differences in detecting sexual infidelity: Results of a maximum likelihood method 
for analyzing the sensitivity of sex differences to underreporting.  Human Nature, 19, 347–373. 
 Angulo, S., Brooks, M. L., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (2011). Swimming serenely in a sea of words: Sexism, 
communication, and precarious couples.  Personal Relationships, 18, 604–616. 
 Apostolou, M. (2009). Parent-offspring conflict over mating: The case of short-term mating strate-
gies.  Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 895–899. 
 Archer, J. (2000). Sex differences in aggression between heterosexual partners: A meta-analytic 
review.  Psychological Bulletin, 126, 651–680. 
 Archer, J. (2006). Cross-cultural differences in physical aggression between partners: A social-role 
analysis.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10, 133–153. 
 Argyle, M., & Henderson, M. (1984). The rules of friendship.  Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 1, 211–237. 
 Ariely, D., & Loewenstein, G. (2006). The heat of the moment: The effect of sexual arousal on sexual 
decision making.  Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 19, 87–98. 
 Aron, A., Aron, E. N., & Allen, J. (1998). Motivations for unreciprocated love.  Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 24, 787–796. 
Aron, A., Aron, E. N., & Smollan, D. (1992). Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale and the structure of 
interpersonal closeness. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 596–612.
 Aron, A., Lewandowski, G. W., Jr., Mashek, D., & Aron, E. N. (2013). The self-expansion model of 
motivation and cognition in close relationships. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The 
Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 90–115). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Aron, A., Mashek, D. J., & Aron, E. N. (2004). Closeness as including the other in the self. In D. J. 
Mashek & A. Aron (Eds.),  Handbook of closeness and intimacy (pp. 27–41). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.  
 Aron, A., Norman, C. C., Aron, E. N., McKenna, C., & Heyman, R. E. (2000). Couples’ shared par-
ticipation in novel and arousing activities and experienced relationship quality.  Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 78, 273–284. 
 Aron, A., Paris, M., & Aron, E. N. (1995). Falling in love: Prospective studies of self-concept change. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 1102–1112. 

References R-3
 Aron, A., Steele, J. L., Kashdan, T. B., & Perez, M. (2006). When similars do not attract: Tests of a 
prediction from the self-expansion model.  Personal Relationships, 13, 387–396. 
 Aron, A., & Westbay, L. (1996). Dimensions of the prototype of love.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 70, 535–551. 
 Aronson, E., & Cope, V. (1968). My enemy’s enemy is my friend.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 8, 8–12. 
 Arriaga, X. B., & Agnew, C. R. (2001). Being committed: Affective, cognitive, and conative 
components of relationship commitment.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 
1190–1203. 
 Arriaga, X. B., Capezza, N. M., Goodfriend, W., Rayl, E. S., & Sands, K. J. (2013). Individual well-
being and relationship maintenance at odds: The unexpected perils of maintaining a relation-
ship with an aggressive partner.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 676–684. 
 Arriaga, X. B., Kumashiro, M., Finkel, E. J., VanderDrift, L. E., & Luchies, L. B. (2014). Filling the 
void: Bolstering attachment security in committed relationships.  Social Psychological and 
Personality Science, 5, 398–406.  
 Arriaga, X. B., & Rusbult, C. E. (1998). Standing in my partner’s shoes: Partner perspective 
taking and reactions to accommodative dilemmas.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
24, 927–948. 
 Arriaga, X. B., Slaughterbeck, E. S., Capezza, N. M., & Hmurovic, J. L. (2007). From bad to worse: 
Relationship commitment and vulnerability to partner imperfections.  Personal Relationships, 
14, 389–409. 
 Arroyo, A., & Harwood, J. (2011). Communication competence mediates the link between shyness 
and relationship quality.  Personality and Individual Differences, 50, 264–267. 
 Arroyo, J., Payne, K. K., Brown, S. L., & Manning, W. D. (2013).  Crossover in median age at first mar-
riage and first birth: Thirty years of change. National Center for Family & Marriage Research. 
Retrieved from  http://ncfmr.bgsu.edu/pdf/family_profiles/file129368.pdf 
 Asch, S. E. (1946). Forming impressions of personality.  Journal of Abnormal and Social Psychology, 41, 
258–290. 
Asendorpf, J. B., & Wilpers, S. (1998). Personality effects on social relationships. Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 74, 1531–1544.
 Asendorpf, J. B., Penke, L., & Back, M. D. (2011). From dating to mating and relating: Predictors of 
initial and long-term outcomes of speed-dating in a community sample.  European Journal of 
Personality, 25, 16–30. 
 Ash, J., & Gallup, G. G., Jr. (2008). Brain size, intelligence, and paleoclimatic variation. In G. Geher 
& G. Miller (Eds.),  Mating intelligence: Sex, relationships, and the mind’s reproductive system 
(pp. 313–335). New York: Erlbaum. 
 Askari, S. F., Miriam, L., Erchull, M. J., Staebell, S. E., & Axelson, S. J. (2010). Men want equality, but 
women don’t expect it: Young adults’ expectations for participation in household and child 
care chores.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 34, 243–252. 
 Assad, K. K., Donnellan, M. B., & Conger, R. D. (2007). Optimism: An enduring resource for roman-
tic relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 285–297. 
 Atkins, D. C., Marín, R. A., Lo, T. T. Y., Klann, N., & Hahlweg, K. (2010). Outcomes of couples with 
infidelity in a community-based sample of couple therapy.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 
212–216. 
 Aubé, J., Norcliffe, H., Craig, J., & Koestner, R. (1995). Gender characteristics and adjustment-
related outcomes: Questioning the masculinity model.  Personality and Social Psychology Bul-
letin, 21, 284–295. 
 Aubrey, J. S., & Rill, L. (2013). Investigating relations between Facebook use and social capital 
among college undergraduates.  Communication Quarterly, 61, 479–496. 
 Averill, J. R. (1982).  Anger and aggression: An essay on emotion. New York: Springer. 
 Aydin, N., Krueger, J. I., Fischer, J., et al. (2012). “Man’s best friend”: How the presence of a dog 
reduces mental distress after social exclusion.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 
446–449. 
 Ayduk, Ö., Gyurak, A., Akinola, M., & Mendes, W. B. (2013). Consistency over flattery: Self-
verification processes revealed in implicit and behavioral responses to feedback.  Psychological 
Science, 4, 538–545. 

R-4 
References
 Aylor, B., & Dainton, M. (2001). Antecedents in romantic jealousy experience, expression, and 
goals.  Western Journal of Communication, 65, 370–391. 
 Bach, G. R., & Wyden, P. (1983).  The intimate enemy: How to fight fair in love and marriage.  New York: 
Avon Books. 
 Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B. (2008a). Becoming friends by chance.  Psychological Science, 
 19, 439–440. 
 Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B. (2008b). How extraverted is honey.bunny77@hotmail.de? 
Inferring personality from e-mail addresses.  Journal of Research in Personality, 42, 1116–1122. 
 Back, M. D., Schmukle, S. C., & Egloff, B. (2010). Why are narcissists so charming at first sight? 
Decoding the narcissism–popularity link at zero acquaintance.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 98, 132–145. 
 Baddeley, J. L., Pennebaker, J. W., & Beevers, C. G. (2013). Everyday social behavior during a major 
depressive episode.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 445–452. 
 Bailenson, J. N., & Yee, N. (2005). Digital chameleons: Automatic assimilation of nonverbal gestures 
in immersive virtual environments.  Psychological Science, 16, 814–819. 
 Bale, C., & Archer, J. (2013). Self-perceived attractiveness, romantic desirability and self-esteem: 
A mating sociometer perspective.  Evolutionary Psychology, 11, 68–84. 
 Balsam, K. F., Beauchaine, T. P., Rothblum, E. D., & Solomon, S. E. (2008). Three-year follow-up of 
same-sex couples who had civil unions in Vermont, same-sex couples not in civil unions, and 
heterosexual married couples.  Developmental Psychology, 44, 102–116. 
 Balzarini, R., Aron, A., & Chelberg, M. (2014, February).  Examining definitions of a romantic relation-
ship with a prototype analysis. Poster presented at the meeting of the Society for Personality and 
Social Psychology, Austin, TX. 
 Bank, B. J., & Hansford, S. L. (2000). Gender and friendship: Why are men’s best same-sex friend-
ships less intimate and supportive?  Personal Relationships, 7, 63–78. 
 Bar, M., Neta, M., & Linz, H. (2006). Very first impressions.  Emotion, 6, 269–278. 
 Barber, N. (2000).  Why parents matter: Parental investment and child outcomes. Westport, CT: Bergin 
and Garvey. 
 Barber, N. (2003). Divorce and reduced economic and emotional interdependence: A cross-national 
study.  Journal of Divorce and Remarriage, 39, 113–124. 
 Bar-Kalifa, E., & Rafaeli, E. (2013). Disappointment’s sting is greater than help’s balm: Quasi-signal 
detection of daily support matching.  Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 956–967. 
 Barr, A. B., & Simons, R. L. (2012). Marriage expectations among African American couples in early 
adulthood: A dyadic analysis.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 74, 726–742. 
 Barriger, M., & Vélez-Blasini, C. J. (2013). Descriptive and injunctive social norm overestimation in 
hooking up and their role as predictors of hook-up activity in a college student sample.  Journal 
of Sex Research, 50, 84–94. 
 Barry, R. A., Bunde, M., Brock, R. L., & Lawrence, E. (2009). Validity and utility of a multidi-
mensional model of received support in intimate relationships.  Journal of Family Psychology, 
23,  48–57. 
 Barry, R. A., & Lawrence, E. (2013). “Don’t stand so close to me”: An attachment perspective of 
disengagement and avoidance in marriage.  Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 484–494. 
 Barthes, J., Godelle, B., & Raymond, M. (2013). Human social stratification and hypergyny: Toward 
an understanding of male homosexual preference.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 34, 155–163. 
 Bartholomew, K. (1990). Avoidance of intimacy: An attachment perspective.  Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, 7, 147–178. 
 Bartz, J. A., & Lydon, J. E. (2008). Relationship-specific attachment, risk regulation, and communal 
norm adherence in close relationships.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 655–663. 
 Basow, S. A., & Minieri, A. (2011). “You owe me”: Effects of date cost, who pays, participant 
gender, and rape myth beliefs on perceptions of rape.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 26, 
479 –497. 
 Bastian, B., & Haslam, N. (2010). Excluded from humanity: The dehumanizing effects of social 
ostracism.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 107–113. 
 Battaglia, D. M., Richard, F. D., Datteri, D. L., & Lord, C. G. (1998). Breaking up is (relatively) easy 
to do: A script for the dissolution of close relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 15, 829–845. 

References R-5
 Baucom, B. R., McFarland, P. T., & Christensen, A. (2010). Gender, topic, and time in observed 
demand-withdraw interaction in cross- and same-sex couples.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 
233–242. 
 Baucom, D. H., Epstein, N., & Stanton, S. (2006). The treatment of relationship distress: Theoretical 
perspectives and empirical findings. In A. Vangelisti & D. Perlman (Eds.),  The Cambridge hand-
book of personal relationships (pp. 745–769). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Baumeister, R. F., & Bratslavsky, E. (1999). Passion, intimacy, and time: Passionate love as a func-
tion of change in intimacy.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 3, 49–67. 
 Baumeister, R. F., Bratslavsky, E., Finkenauer, C., & Vohs, K. D. (2001). Bad is stronger than good. 
 Review of General Psychology, 5, 323–370. 
 Baumeister, R. F., & Leary, M. R. (1995). The need to belong: Desire for interpersonal attachments as 
a fundamental human motivation.  Psychological Bulletin, 117, 497–529. 
 Baumeister, R. F., & Vohs, K. D. (2004). Sexual economics: Sex as a female resource for social 
exchange in heterosexual interactions.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 339–363. 
 Baumeister, R. F., & Wotman, S. R. (1992).  Breaking hearts: The two sides of unrequited love. New York: 
Guilford Press. 
 Baumeister, R. F., Wotman, S. R., & Stillwell, A. M. (1993). Unrequited love: On heartbreak, anger, 
guilt, scriptlessness, and humiliation.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 64, 377–394. 
 Baxter, L. A. (1984). Trajectories of relationship disengagement.  Journal of Social and Personal Rela-
tionships, 1, 29–48. 
 Baxter, L. A. (1986). Gender differences in the heterosexual relationship rules embedded in break-
up accounts.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 3, 289–306. 
 Baxter, L. A. (2004). Relationships as dialogues.  Personal Relationships, 11, 1–22. 
 Baxter, L. A., Mazanec, M., Nicholson, J., Pittman, G., Smith, K., & West, L. (1997). Everyday loyalties 
and betrayals in personal relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 14, 655–678. 
 Baxter, L. A., & West, L. (2003). Couple perceptions of their similarities and differences: A dialecti-
cal perspective.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 20, 491–514. 
 Baxter, L. A., & Wilmot, W. W. (1984). “Secret tests”: Social strategies for acquiring information 
about the state of the relationship.  Human Communication Research, 11, 171–201. 
 Baxter, L. A., & Wilmot, W. W. (1985). Taboo topics in close relationships.  Journal of Social and Per-
sonal Relationships, 2, 253–269. 
 Beach, S. R. H., Whitaker, D. J., Jones, D. J., & Tesser, A. (2001). When does performance feedback 
prompt complementarity in romantic relationships?  Personal Relationships, 8, 231–248. 
 Beall, A. T., & Tracy, J. L. (2013). Women are more likely to wear red or pink at peak fertility.  Psy-
chological Science, 24, 1837–1841. 
 Beck, C. J. A., Anderson, E. R., O’Hara, K. L., & Benjamin, G. A. H. (2013). Patterns of intimate 
partner violence in a large, epidemiological sample of divorcing couples.  Journal of Family 
Psychology, 27, 743–753. 
 Beck, L. A., & Clark, M. S. (2009). Offering more support than we seek.  Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 45, 267–270. 
 Beck, L. A., & Clark, M. S. (2010a). Looking a gift horse in the mouth as a defense against increasing 
intimacy.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 676–679. 
 Beck, L. A., & Clark, M. S. (2010b). What constitutes a healthy communal marriage and why rela-
tionship stage matters.  Journal of Family Theory & Review, 2, 299–315. 
 Beck, L. A., Pietromonaco, P. R., DeBuse, C. J., Powers, S. I., & Sayer, A. G. (2013). Spouses’ attach-
ment pairings predict neuroendocrine, behavioral, and psychological responses to marital 
conflict.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 105, 388–424. 
 Becker, O. A. (2013). Effects of similarity of life goals, values, and personality on relationship satis-
faction and stability: Findings from a two-wave panel study.  Personal Relationships, 20, 443–461. 
 Becker, O. A., & Lois, D. (2010). Selection, alignment, and their interplay: Origins of lifestyle 
homogamy in couple relationships.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 1234–1248. 
 Bednarczyk, R. A., Davis, R., Ault, K., Orenstein, W., & Omer, S. B. (2012). Sexual activity-related out-
comes after human papillomavirus vaccination of 11- to 12-year-olds.  Pediatrics, 130, 798–805. 
 Bélisle, J., Bodur, H. O., & Nantel, J. (2008, February).  Perception in virtual worlds: Personality impres-
sions based on avatars in the virtual world Second Life. Poster presented at the meeting of the 
Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Albuquerque, NM. 

R-6 
References
 Belkin, A., Ender, M. G., Frank, N., et al. (2013). Readiness and DADT repeal: Has the new policy of 
open service undermined the military?  Armed Forces & Society, 39, 587–601. 
 Bem, S. L. (1993).  The lenses of gender: Transforming the debate on sexual inequality. New Haven, 
CT: Yale University Press. 
 Ben-Ari, A., & Lavee, Y. (2007). Dyadic closeness in marriage: From the inside story to a conceptual 
model.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 24, 627–644. 
 Bensman, L. (2012). Two people just make it better: The psychological differences between part-
nered orgasms and solitary orgasms.  Dissertation Abstracts International, 72 (11-B), 7107. 
 Benson, L. A., McGinn, M. M., & Christensen, A. (2012). Common principles of couple therapy. 
 Behavior Therapy, 43, 25–35. 
 Bente, G., Leuschner, H., Al Issa, A., & Blascovich, J. J. (2010). The others: Universals and cultural 
specificities in the perception of status and dominance from nonverbal behavior.  Consciousness 
and Cognition, 19, 762–777. 
 Berant, E., Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2008). Mothers’ attachment style, their mental health, 
and their children’s emotional vulnerabilities: A 7-year study of children with congenital 
heart disease.  Journal of Personality, 76, 31–65. 
 Berenson, K. R., & Andersen, S. M. (2006). Childhood physical and emotional abuse by a parent: 
Transference effects in adult interpersonal relations.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
32, 1509–1522. 
 Berkman, L. F., & Glass, T. A. (2000). Social integration, social networks, social support and health. 
In L. F. Berkman & I. Kawachi (Eds.),  Social epidemiology (pp. 137–174). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Bernstein, W. M., Stephenson, B. O., Snyder, M. L., & Wicklund, R. A. (1983). Causal ambiguity and 
heterosexual affiliation.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 19, 78–92. 
 Berscheid, E. (2010). Love in the fourth dimension.  Annual Review of Psychology, 61, 1–25. 
 Berscheid, E., & Lopes, J. (1997). A temporal model of relationship satisfaction and stability. In 
R. J. Sternberg & M. Hojjat (Eds.),  Satisfaction in close relationships (pp. 129–159). New York: 
Guilford Press. 
 Berscheid, E., Snyder, M., & Omoto, A. M. (1989). Issues in studying close relationships: Conceptu-
alizing and measuring closeness. In C. Hendrick (Ed.),  Review of personality and social psychol-
ogy: Vol. 10. Close relationships (pp. 63–91). Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 
 Berscheid, E., Snyder, M., & Omoto, A. M. (2004). Measuring closeness: The Relationship Closeness 
Inventory (RCI) revisited. In D. J. Mashek & A. Aron (Eds.),  Handbook of closeness and intimacy 
(pp. 81–101). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. (1974). A little bit about love. In T. Huston (Ed.),  Foundations of interper-
sonal attraction (pp. 355–381). New York: Academic Press. 
 Birditt, K. S., Brown, E., Orbuch, T. L., & McIlvane, J. M. (2010). Marital conflict behaviors and 
implications for divorce over 16 years.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 1188–1204. 
 Birditt, K. S., Hope, S., Brown, E., & Orbuch, T. (2012). Developmental trajectories of marital happi-
ness over 16 years.  Research in Human Development, 9, 126–144. 
 Birnbaum, G. E. (2010). Bound to interact: The divergent goals and complex interplay of 
attachment and sex within romantic relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
27, 245–252. 
 Birnie, C., McClure, M. J., Lydon, J. E., & Holmberg, D. (2009). Attachment avoidance and commit-
ment aversion: A script for relationship failure.  Personal Relationships, 16, 79–97. 
 Black, M. C., Basile, K. C., Breiding, M. J., et al. (2011).  The National Intimate Partner and Sexual 
Violence Survey: 2010 summary report. Atlanta: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 
 Blackhart, G. C., Nelson, B. C., Winter, A., & Rockney, A. (2011). Self-control in relation to feelings 
of belonging and acceptance.  Self and Identity, 10, 152–165. 
 Blanch-Hartigan, D., Andrzejewski, S. A., & Hill, K. M. (2012). The effectiveness of training to 
improve person perception accuracy: A meta-analysis.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 34, 
483–498. 
 Blascovich, J., & Bailenson, J. (2011).  Infinite reality: Avatars, eternal life, new worlds and the dawn of the 
virtual revolution. New York: Morrow. 
 Bleakley, A., Hennessy, M., & Fishbein, M. (2010). Predicting preferences for types of sex education 
in U.S. Schools.  Sexuality Research and Social Policy, 7, 50–57. 

References R-7
 Blekesaune, M. (2008). Partnership transitions and mental distress: Investigating temporal order. 
 Journal of Marriage and Family, 70, 879–890. 
 Bleske, A. L., & Shackelford, T. K. (2001). Poaching, promiscuity, and deceit: Combating mating 
rivalry in same-sex friendships.  Personal Relationships, 8, 407–424. 
 Bleske-Rechek, A., Somers, E., Micke, E., et al. (2012). Benefit or burden: Attraction in cross-sex 
friendship.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 29, 569–596. 
 Blickstein, I. (2005). Superfecundation and superfetation. In I. Blickstein & L. G. Keith (Eds.), 
 Multiple pregnancy: Epidemiology, gestation, and perinatal outcome (2nd ed., pp. 102–107). 
London: Taylor and Francis. 
 Bloch, L., Haase, C. M., & Levenson, R. W. (2014). Emotion regulation predicts marital satisfaction: 
More than a wives’ tale.  Emotion, 14, 130–144. 
 Blumstein, P., & Schwartz, P. (1983).  American couples: Money, work, sex. New York: William 
Morrow. 
 Bobst, C., & Lobmaier, J. S. (2012). Men’s preference for the ovulating female is triggered by subtle 
face shape differences.  Hormones and Behavior, 62, 413–417. 
 Bodenmann, G., Atkins, D. C., Schär, M., & Poffet, V. (2010). The association between daily stress 
and sexual activity.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 271–279. 
 Bohns, V. K., & Flynn, F. J. (2010). “Why didn’t you just ask?”: Underestimating the discomfort of 
help-seeking.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 402–409. 
 Bohns, V. K., Lucas, G. M., Molden, D. C., et al. (2013). Opposites fit: Regulatory focus complemen-
tarity and relationship well-being.  Social Cognition, 31, 1–14. 
 Bolger, N., Zuckerman, A., & Kessler, R. C. (2000). Invisible support and adjustment to stress. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 953–961. 
 Bond, C. F., Jr., & DePaulo, B. M. (2006). Accuracy of deception judgments.  Personality and Social 
Psychology Review, 10, 214–234. 
 Boomsma, D. I., Willemsen, G., Dolan, C. V., Hawkley, L. C., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2005). Genetic 
and environmental contributions to loneliness in adults: The Netherlands twin register study. 
 Behavior Genetics, 35, 745–752. 
 Booth, A., Johnson, D. R., White, L. K., & Edwards, J. N. (1986). Divorce and marital instability over 
the life course.  Journal of Family Issues, 7, 421–442. 
 Boothroyd, L. G., Cross, C. P., Gray, A. W., Coombes, C., & Gregson-Curtis, K. (2011). Perceiving 
the facial correlates of sociosexuality: Further evidence.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
50, 422–425. 
 Boothroyd, L. G., Jones, B. C., Burt, D. M., DeBruine, L. M., & Perrett, D. I. (2008). Facial correlates 
of sociosexuality.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 29, 211–218. 
 Boothroyd, L. G., Jones, B. C., Burt, D. M., & Perrett, D. I. (2007). Partner characteristics associated 
with masculinity, health, and maturity in male faces.  Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 
1161–1173. 
 Bosson, J. K., Johnson, A. B., Niederhoffer, K., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (2006). Interpersonal chemistry 
through negativity: Bonding by sharing negative attitudes about others.  Personal Relationships, 
13, 135–150. 
 Bosson, J. K., & Vandello, J. A. (2011). Precarious manhood and its links to action and aggression. 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 82–86. 
 Bowlby, J. (1969).  Attachment and loss: Vol. 1. Attachment. New York: Basic Books. 
 Boyes, A. D., & Fletcher, G. J. O. (2007). Metaperceptions of bias in intimate relationships.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 286–306. 
 Boynton, M. (2008, February).  What Rapunzel and Lady Godiva have in common: Using hair length as 
a cue for sexual availability. Poster presented at the meeting of the Society for Personality and 
Social Psychology, Albuquerque, NM. 
 Brackett, M. A., Warner, R. M., & Bosco, J. S. (2005). Emotional intelligence and relationship quality 
among couples.  Personal Relationships, 12, 197–212. 
 Bradford, S. A., Feeney, J. A., & Campbell, L. (2002). Links between attachment orientations and 
dispositional and diary-based measures of disclosure in dating couples: A study of actor and 
partner effects.  Personal Relationships, 9, 491–506. 
 Bradshaw, C., Kahn, A. S., & Saville, B. K. (2010). To hook up or date: Which gender benefits? 
 Sex Roles, 62, 661–669. 

R-8 
References
 Bradshaw, S. D. (2006). Shyness and difficult relationships: Formation is just the beginning. In 
D. C. Kirkpatrick, S. Duck, & M. K. Foley (Eds.),  Relating difficulty: The processes of constructing 
and managing difficult interaction (pp. 15–41). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Braithwaite, S. R., & Fincham, F. D. (2011). Computer-based dissemination: A randomized clinical 
trial of ePREP using the actor partner interdependence model.  Behaviour Research and Therapy, 
49, 126–131. 
 Braithwaite, S. R., Selby, E. A., & Fincham, F. D. (2011). Forgiveness and relationship satisfaction: 
Mediating mechanisms.  Journal of Family Psychology, 25, 551–559. 
 Brakefield, T. A., Mednick, S. C., Wilson, H. W., De Neve, J., Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. 
(2014). Same-sex sexual attraction does not spread in adolescent social networks.  Archives of 
Sexual Behavior, 43, 335–344. 
 Brassard, A., Shaver, P. R., & Lussier, Y. (2007). Attachment, sexual experience, and sexual pressure 
in romantic relationships: A dyadic approach.  Personal Relationships, 14, 475–493. 
 Braver, S. L., Ellman, I. M., & Fabricius, W. V. (2003). Relocation of children after divorce and 
children’s best interests: New evidence and legal considerations.  Journal of Family Psychology, 
17, 206–219. 
 Braver, S. L., Shapiro, J. R., & Goodman, M. R. (2006). Consequences of divorce for parents. In M. 
A. Fine & J. H. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of divorce and relationship dissolution (pp. 313–337). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Brehm, S. S., & Brehm, J. W. (1981).  Psychological reactance: A theory of freedom and control. New York: 
Academic Press. 
 Brennan, K. A., Clark, C. L., & Shaver, P. R. (1998). Self-report measurement of adult attachment: 
An integrative overview. In J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.),  Attachment theory and close 
relationships (pp. 46–76). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Brewer, D. D., Potterat, J. J., Garrett, S. B., et al. (2000). Prostitution and the sex discrepancy in reported 
number of sexual partners.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Science, 97, 12385–12388. 
 Brewer, G., & Archer, J. (2007). What do people infer from facial attractiveness?  Journal of Evolution-
ary Psychology, 5, 39–49. 
 Brewer, G., & Hendrie, C. A. (2011). Evidence to suggest that copulatory vocalizations in women 
are not a reflexive consequence of orgasm.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 559–564. 
 Brewis, A., & Meyer, M. (2005). Demographic evidence that human ovulation is undetectable 
(at least in pair bonds).  Current Anthropology, 46, 465–471. 
 Bridges, A. J., Senn, C. Y., & Andrews, A. R., III. (2013). Women, erotica, and pornography. In 
D. Castañeda (Ed.),  The essential handbook of women’s sexuality (Vol. 1, pp. 253–271). Santa 
Barbara, CA: Praeger. 
 Britt, S. L., & Huston, S. J. (2012). The role of money arguments in marriage.  Journal of Family and 
Economic Issues, 33, 464–476. 
 Britt, S. L., & Roy, R. R. N. (2014). Relationship quality among young couples from an economic 
and gender perspective.  Journal of Family and Economic Issues. doi: 10.1007/s10834-013-9368-x 
 Brock, R. L., & Lawrence, E. (2009). Too much of a good thing: Underprovision versus overprovi-
sion of partner support.  Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 181–192. 
 Brock, R. L., & Lawrence, E. (2010). Support adequacy in marriage: Observing the platinum rule. In 
K. Sullivan & J. Davila (Eds.),  Support processes in intimate relationships (pp. 3–25). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Brody, L. R., & Hall, J. A. (2010). Gender, emotion, and socialization. In J. Chrisler & D. McCreary 
(Eds.),  Handbook of gender research in psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 429–454). New York: Springer. 
 Brody, S., & Weiss, P. (2013). Slimmer women’s waist is associated with better erectile function in 
men independent of age.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 1191–1198. 
 Broemer, P., & Diehl, M. (2003). What you think is what you get: Comparative evaluations of close 
relationships.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 1560–1569. 
 Brown, J. L., Sheffield, D., Leary, M. R., & Robinson, M. E. (2003). Social support and experimental 
pain.  Psychosomatic Medicine, 65, 276–283. 
 Brownridge, D. A. (2010). Does the situational couple violence-intimate terrorism typology 
explain cohabitors’ high risk of intimate partner violence?  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 25, 
1264–1283. 

References R-9
 Brumbaugh, C. C., & Wood, D. (2013). Mate preferences across life and across the world.  Social 
Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 100–107. 
 Brunell, A. B., Kernis, M. H., Goldman, B. M., Heppner, W., Davis, P., Cascio, E. V., & Webster, 
G. D. (2010). Dispositional authenticity and romantic relationship functioning.  Personality and 
Individual Differences, 48, 900–905. 
 Brunell, A. B., & Webster, G. D. (2013). Self-determination and sexual experience in dating relation-
ships.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 970–987. 
 Brunet, P. M., & Schmidt, L. A. (2007). Is shyness context specific? Relation between shyness and 
online self-disclosure with and without a live webcam in young adults.  Journal of Research in 
Personality, 41, 938–945. 
 Buck, A. A., & Neff, L. A. (2012). Stress spillover in early marriage: The role of self-regulatory 
depletion.  Journal of Family Psychology, 26, 698–708. 
 Buck, D. M., & Plant, E. A. (2011). Interorientation interactions and impressions: Does the timing of 
disclosure of sexual orientation matter?  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 333–342. 
 Buckley, K. E., Winkel, R. E., & Leary, M. R. (2004). Reactions to acceptance and rejection: Effects of 
level and sequence of relational evaluation.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 14–28. 
 Buhrmester, D., & Furman, W. (1986). The changing functions of friends in childhood: A neo-
Sullivanian perspective. In V. J. Derlega & B. A. Winstead (Eds.),  Friendship and social interac-
tion (pp. 41–62). New York: Springer-Verlag. 
 Buller, D. B., & Burgoon, J. K. (1994). Deception: Strategic and nonstrategic communication. In J. A. Daly 
& J. M. Wiemann (Eds.),  Strategic interpersonal communication (pp. 191–223). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Burger, J. M., & Burns, L. (1988). The illusion of unique invulnerability and use of effective contra-
ception.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 14, 264–270. 
 Burgoon, J. K., & Bacue, A. E. (2003). Nonverbal communication skills. In J. O. Greene & B. R. 
Burleson (Eds.),  Handbook of communication and social interaction skills (pp. 179–219). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Burgoon, J. K., & Levine, T. R. (2010). Advances in deception detection. In S. Smith & S. Wilson 
(Eds.),  New directions in interpersonal communication research (pp. 201–220). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
 Burleson, B. R., Kunkel, A. W., Samter, W., & Werking, K. J. (1996). Men’s and women’s evaluations 
of communication skills in personal relationships: When sex differences make a difference—
and when they don’t.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 13, 201–224. 
 Burleson, M. H., Roberts, N. A., Vincelette, T. M., & Guan, X. (2013). Marriage, affectionate touch, 
and health. In M. Newman & N. Roberts (Eds.),  Health and social relationships: The good, the bad, 
and the complicated (pp. 67–93). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Burleson, M. H., Trevathan, W. R., & Todd, M. (2007). In the mood for love or vice versa? Exploring 
the relations among sexual activity, physical affection, affect, and stress in the daily lives of 
mid-aged women.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 357–368. 
 Burnette, J. L., Davisson, E. K., Finkel, E. J., Van Tongeren, D. R., Hui, C. M., & Hoyle, R. H. (2014). 
Self-control and forgiveness: A meta-analytic review.  Social Psychological and Personality 
Science, 5, 443–450.  
 Burnette, J. L., Taylor, K. W., Worthington, E. L., & Forsyth, D. R. (2007). Attachment and trait 
forgivingness: The mediating role of angry rumination.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
42, 1585–1596. 
 Burns, G. L., & Farina, A. (1992). The role of physical attractiveness in adjustment.  Genetic, Social, 
and General Psychology Monographs, 118, 157–194. 
 Busby, D. M., & Holman, T. B. (2009). Perceived match or mismatch on the Gottman conflict styles: 
Associations with relationship outcome variables.  Family Process, 48, 531–545. 
 Buss, D. M. (1989). Sex differences in human mate preferences: Evolutionary hypotheses tested in 
37 cultures.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 12, 1–14. 
 Buss, D. M. (2000).  The dangerous passion: Why jealousy is as necessary as love and sex. New York: Free 
Press. 
 Buss, D. M. (2003).  The evolution of desire: Strategies of human mating (rev. ed.). New York: Basic 
Books. 
 Buss, D. M. (2012).  Evolutionary psychology: The new science of the mind (4th ed.). Boston: Pearson. 

R-10 
References
 Buss, D. M. (2013). Seven tools for teaching evolutionary psychology. In D. Dunn, R. Gurung, 
K. Naufel, & J. Wilson (Eds.),  Controversy in the psychology classroom: Using hot topics to foster 
critical thinking (pp. 49–64). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Buss, D. M., & Duntley, J. D. (2006). The evolution of aggression. In M. Schaller, J. A. Simpson, & 
D. T. Kenrick (Eds.),  Evolution and social psychology (pp. 263–285). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Buss, D. M., Larsen, R. J., Westen, D., & Semmelroth, J. (1992). Sex differences in jealousy: Evolu-
tion, physiology, and psychology.  Psychological Science, 3, 251–255. 
 Buss, D. M., & Schmitt, D. P. (1993). Sexual strategies theory: An evolutionary perspective on 
human mating.  Psychological Review, 100, 204–232. 
 Buss, D. M., & Shackelford, T. K. (2008). Attractive women want it all: Good genes, economic invest-
ment, parenting proclivities, and emotional commitment.  Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 134–146. 
 Buss, D. M., Shackelford, T. K., Kirkpatrick, L. A., et al. (1999). Jealousy and the nature of beliefs 
about infidelity: Tests of competing hypotheses about sex differences in the United States, 
Korea, and Japan.  Personal Relationships, 6, 125–150. 
 Buss, D. M., Shackelford, T. K., Kirkpatrick, L. A., & Larsen, R. J. (2001). A half century of mate 
preferences: The cultural evolution of values.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 63, 491–503. 
 Butzer, B., & Campbell, L. (2008). Adult attachment, sexual satisfaction, and relationship satisfac-
tion: A study of married couples.  Personal Relationships, 15, 141–154. 
 Buunk, A. P., Castro Solano, A., Zurriaga, R., & González, P. (2011). Gender differences in the 
jealousy-evoking effect of rival characteristics: A study in Spain and Argentina.  Journal of 
Cross-Cultural Psychology, 42, 323–339. 
 Buunk, A. P., Park, J. H., & Duncan, L. A. (2010). Cultural variation in parental influence on mate 
choice.  Cross-Cultural Research, 44, 23–40. 
 Buunk, A. P., & Solano, A. C. (2010). Conflicting preferences of parents and offspring over criteria 
for a mate: A study in Argentina.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 391–399. 
 Buunk, B. (1987). Conditions that promote breakups as a consequence of extra-dyadic involve-
ments.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 5, 271–284. 
 Buunk, B. P. (1995). Sex, self-esteem, dependency and extradyadic sexual experience as related to 
jealousy responses.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 12, 147–153. 
 Buunk, B. P. (1997). Personality, birth order and attachment styles as related to various types of 
jealousy.  Personality and Individual Differences, 23, 997–1006. 
 Buunk, B. P., & Dijkstra, P. (2006). Temptation and threat: Extradyadic relations and jealousy. In 
A. L. Vangelisti & D. Perlman (Eds.),  The Cambridge handbook of personal relationships (pp. 533–555). 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Buunk, B. P., Dijkstra, P., Fetchenhauer, D., & Kenrick, D. T. (2002). Age and gender differences in 
mate selection criteria for various involvement levels.  Personal Relationships, 9, 271–278. 
 Buunk, B. P., & VanYperen, N. W. (1991). Referential comparisons, relational comparisons, and 
exchange orientation: Their relation to marital satisfaction.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 17, 709–717. 
 Buunk, B. P., & Ybema, J. F. (2003). Feeling bad, but satisfied: The effects of upward and downward 
comparison upon mood and marital satisfaction.  British Journal of Social Psychology, 42, 613–628. 
 Byrne, D., & Nelson, D. (1965). Attraction as a linear function of proportion of positive reinforce-
ments.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 1, 659–663. 
 Byrne, D., Ervin, C. E., & Lamberth, J. (1970). Continuity between the experimental study of attrac-
tion and real-life computer dating.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 16, 157–165. 
 Cacioppo, J. T., Berntson, G. G., Norris, C. J., & Gollan, J. K. (2012). The evaluative space model. 
In P. Van Lange, A. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.),  Handbook of theories of social psychology 
(Vol. 1, pp. 50–72). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Cacioppo, J. T., Cacioppo, S., Gonzaga, G. C., Ogburn, E. L., & VanderWeele, T. J. (2013). Mari-
tal satisfaction and break-ups differ across on-line and off-line meeting venues.  PNAS, 110, 
10135 –10140. 
 Cacioppo, J. T., Fowler, J. H., & Christakis, N. A. (2009). Alone in the crowd: The structure and spread 
of loneliness in a large social network.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 977–991. 
 Cacioppo, J. T., & Hawkley, L. C. (2009). Loneliness. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.),  Handbook 
of individual differences in social behavior (pp. 227–240). New York: Guilford Press. 

References R-11
 Call, V., Sprecher, S., & Schwartz, P. (1995). The incidence and frequency of marital sex in a national 
sample.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 57, 639–652. 
 Callaghan, D. E., Graff, M. G., & Davies, J. (2013). Revealing all: Misleading self-disclosure rates in 
laboratory-based online research.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 16, 690–694. 
 Cameron, J. J., & Vorauer, J. D. (2008). Feeling transparent: On metaperceptions and miscommuni-
cations.  Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2, 1093–1108. 
 Campbell, A. (2010). Oxytocin and human social behavior.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 
14, 281–295. 
 Campbell, J., Miller, P., Cardwell, M., & Belknap, R. A. (1994). Relationship status of battered 
women over time.  Journal of Family Violence, 9, 99–111. 
 Campbell, K., Wright, D. W., & Flores, C. G. (2012). Newlywed women’s marital expectations: Life-
long monogamy?  Journal of Divorce & Remarriage, 53, 108–125. 
 Campbell, L., Cronk, L., Simpson, J. A., Milroy, A., Wilson, C. L., & Dunham, B. (2009). The associa-
tion between men’s ratings of women as desirable long-term mates and individual differences 
in women’s sexual attitudes and behaviors.  Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 509–513. 
 Campbell, L., Simpson, J. A., Kashy, D. A., & Rholes, W. S. (2001). Attachment orientations, depen-
dence, and behavior in a stressful situation: An application of the actor-partner interdepen-
dence model.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 18, 821–843. 
 Campbell, W. K., & Foster, C. A. (2002). Narcissism and commitment in romantic relationships: An 
investment model analysis.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 484–495. 
 Canary, D. J., & Emmers-Sommer, T. M. (1997).  Sex and gender differences in personal relationships. 
New York: Guilford Press. 
 Canary, D. J., & Lakey, S. (2013).  Strategic conflict. New York: Routledge. 
 Canary, D. J., & Stafford, L. (2001). Equity in the preservation of personal relationships. In 
J. H. Harvey & A. E. Wenzel (Eds.),  Close romantic relationships: Maintenance and enhancement 
(pp. 133–151). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Canary, D. J., Stafford, L., & Semic, B. A. (2002). A panel study of the associations between mainte-
nance strategies and relational characteristics.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 64, 395–406. 
 Canevello, A., & Crocker, J. (2010). Creating good relationships: Responsiveness, relationship qual-
ity, and interpersonal goals.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 78–106. 
 Canevello, A., Granillo, M. T., & Crocker, J. (2013). Predicting change in relationship insecurity: The 
roles of compassionate and self-image goals.  Personal Relationships, 20, 587–618. 
 Cann, A., & Baucom, T. R. (2004). Former partners and new rivals as threats to a relationship: Infi-
delity type, gender, and commitment as factors related to distress and forgiveness.  Personal 
Relationships, 11, 305–318. 
 Canterberry, M., Gillath, O., & Rosenberg, E. L. (2011, January).  The FACS of flirting: Evidence for a 
specific female flirting expression. Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Personality 
and Social Psychology, San Antonio. 
 Cantú, S. M., Simpson, J. A., Griskevicius, V., Weisberg, Y. J., Durante, K. M., & Beal, D. J. (2014). 
Fertile and selectively flirty: Women’s behavior toward men changes across the ovulatory 
cycle.  Psychological Science, 25, 431–438. 
 Capaldi, D. M., Knoble, N. B., Shortt, J. W., & Kim, H. K. (2012). A systematic review of risk factors 
for intimate partner violence.  Partner Abuse, 3, 231–280. 
 Capezza, N. M., & Arriaga, X. B. (2008). You can degrade but you can’t hit: Differences in percep-
tions of psychological versus physical aggression.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
25, 225–245. 
 Carey, B. (2010, May 23). Families’ lives, taped, analyzed and archived.  Houston Chronicle, 
p. A10. 
 Carli, L. L. (1999). Gender, interpersonal power, and social influence.  Journal of Social Issues, 55, 
81–98. 
 Carli, L. L. (2001). Gender and social influence.  Journal of Social Issues, 57, 725–741. 
 Carlsmith, K. M., Wilson, T. D., & Gilbert, D. T. (2008). The paradoxical consequences of revenge. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1316–1324. 
 Carlson, E. N., & Furr, R. M. (2013). Resolution of meta-accuracy: Should people trust their beliefs 
about how others see them?  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 419–426. 

R-12 
References
 Carnegie, D. (1936).  How to win friends and influence people. New York: Pocket Books. 
 Carnelley, K. B., Wortman, C. B., Bolger, N., & Burke, C. T. (2006). The time course of grief reactions 
to spousal loss: Evidence from a national probability sample.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 91, 476–492. 
 Carney, D. R., Colvin, C. R., & Hall, J. A. (2007). A thin slice perspective on the accuracy of first 
impressions.  Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 1054–1072. 
 Carothers, B. J., & Allen, J. B. (1999). Relationships of employment status, gender roles, insult, and 
gender with use of influence tactics.  Sex Roles, 41, 375–386. 
 Carothers, B. J., & Reis, H. T. (2013). Men and women are from earth: Examining the latent structure 
of gender . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 385–407. 
Carpenter, C. J. (2012). Meta-analyses of sex differences in responses to sexual versus emotional 
infidelity: Men and women are more similar than different. Psychology of Women Quarterly, 
36, 25–37.
 Carrère, S., & Gottman, J. M. (1999). Predicting divorce among newlyweds from the first three min-
utes of a marital conflict discussion.  Family Process, 38, 293–301. 
 Carstensen, L. L., Isaacowitz, D. M., & Charles, S. T. (1999). Taking time seriously: A theory of 
socioemotional selectivity.  American Psychologist, 54, 165–181. 
 Carter, C. S. (2014). Oxytocin pathways and the evolution of human behavior.  Annual Review of 
Psychology, 65, 17–39. 
 Carver, C. S., & Scheier, M. F. (2009). Optimism. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.),  Handbook of 
individual differences in social behavior (pp. 330–342). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Castro, F. N., & de Araújo Lopes, F. (2010). Romantic preferences in Brazilian undergraduate stu-
dents: From the short term to the long term.  Journal of Sex Research, 47, 1–7. 
 Cate, R. M., Levin, L. A., & Richmond, L. S. (2002). Premarital relationship stability: A review of 
recent research.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 19, 261–284. 
 Cate, R. M., Lloyd, S. A., & Long, E. (1988). The role of rewards and fairness in developing premari-
tal relationships.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 50, 443–452. 
 Caughlin, J. P., Afifi, W. A., Carpenter-Theune, K. E., & Miller, L. E. (2005). Reasons for, and con-
sequences of, revealing personal secrets in close relationships: A longitudinal study.  Personal 
Relationships, 12, 43–59. 
 Caughlin, J. P., & Huston, T. L. (2006). The affective structure of marriage. In A. L. Vangelisti & 
D. Perlman (Eds.),  The Cambridge handbook of personal relationships (pp. 131–155). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Caughlin, J. P., Huston, T. L., & Houts, R. M. (2000). How does personality matter in marriage? 
An examination of trait anxiety, interpersonal negativity, and marital satisfaction.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 326–336. 
 Caughlin J. P., & Vangelisti, A. L. (2009). Why people conceal or reveal secrets: A multiple goals 
theory perspective. In T. D. Afifi & W. A. Afifi (Eds.),  Uncertainty, information management, and 
disclosure decisions: Theories and applications (pp. 279–299). New York: Routledge. 
 Cavallo, J. V., Murray, S. L., & Holmes, J. G. (2014). Risk regulation in close relationships. In 
M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Mechanisms of social connection: From brain to group 
(pp. 237–254). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Ceglian, C. P., & Gardner, S. (1999). Attachment style: A risk for multiple marriages?  Journal of 
Divorce & Remarriage, 31, 125–139. 
 Çelik, P., Lammers, J., van Beest, I., Bekker, M. H. J., & Vonk, R. (2013). Not all rejections are alike: 
Competence and warmth as a fundamental distinction in social rejection.  Journal of Experimen-
tal Social Psychology, 49, 635–642. 
 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. (2012).  Understanding intimate partner violence. Wash-
ington, DC: National Center for Injury Prevention and Control. Retrieved from  http://www.
cdc.gov/violenceprevention/pdf/IPV_factsheet2012-a.pdf  
 Chabot, A. M., Harris, C. R., & Dobkins, K. R. (2013, January).  Exploring predictors of orgasm 
 knowledge. Poster presented at the meeting of the Society for Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, New Orleans. 
 Chandra, A., Mosher, W. D., Copen, C., & Sionean, C. (2011).  Sexual behavior, sexual attraction, and 
sexual identity in the United States: Data from the 2006–2008 National Survey of Family Growth. 
Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 

References R-13
 Chaplin, W. F., Phillips, J. B., Brown, J. D., Clanton, N. R., & Stein, J. L. (2000). Handshaking, 
gender, personality, and first impressions.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 79, 
110–117. 
 Chartrand, T. L., Dalton, A. N., & Fitzsimons, G. J. (2007). Nonconscious relationship reactance: When 
significant others prime opposing goals.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 719–726. 
 Chartrand, T. L., & Lakin, J. L. (2013). The antecedents and consequences of human behavioral 
mimicry.  Annual Review of Psychology, 64, 285–308. 
 Cheek, J. M., & Buss, A. H. (1981). Shyness and sociability.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 41, 330–339. 
 Chen, G. M. (2011). Tweet this: A uses and gratifications perspective on how active Twitter use 
gratifies a need to connect with others.  Computers in Human Behavior, 27, 755–762. 
 Chen, H., Cohen, P., Kasen, S., Johnson, J. G., Ehrensaft, M., & Gordon, K. (2006). Predicting conflict 
within romantic relationships during the transition to adulthood.  Personal Relationships, 13, 
411–427. 
 Chen, H., Luo, S., Yue, G., Xu, D., & Zhaoyang, R. (2009). Do birds of a feather flock together in 
China?  Personal Relationships, 16, 167–186. 
 Chen, S., Boucher, H. C., Andersen, S. M., & Saribay, S. A. (2013). Transference and the relational self. 
In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 281–305). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Chen, S., Fitzsimons, G. M., & Andersen, S. M. (2007). Automaticity in close relationships. In 
J. A. Bargh (Ed.),  Social psychology and the unconscious: The automaticity of higher mental processes 
(pp. 133–172). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Chen, S., Lee-Chai, A. Y., & Bargh, J. A. (2001). Relationship orientation as a moderator of the effects 
of social power.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 173–187. 
 Cheng, C. (2005). Processes underlying gender-role flexibility: Do androgynous individuals know 
more or know how to cope?  Journal of Personality, 73, 645–673. 
 Cherlin, A. J. (2009).  The marriage-go-round: The state of marriage and the family in America today. New 
York: Knopf. 
 Cherlin, A. J. (2010). Demographic trends in the United States: A review of research in the 2000s. 
 Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 403–419. 
Cho, H. (2012). Examining gender differences in the nature and context of intimate partner vio-
lence. Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 27, 2665–2684.
 Choi, N., Fuqua, D. R., & Newman, J. L. (2007). Hierarchical confirmatory factor analysis of the Bem 
Sex Role Inventory.  Educational and Psychological Measurement, 67, 818–832. 
 Chopik, W. J., Edelstein, R. S., & Fraley, R. C. (2013). From the cradle to the grave: Age differences 
in attachment from early adulthood to old age.  Journal of Personality, 81, 171–183. 
 Christakis, N. A., & Fowler, J. H. (2009).  Connected: The surprising power of our social networks and how 
they shape our lives. New York: Little, Brown. 
 Christensen, A., Baucom, B., Atkins, D. C., & Yi, J. (2010). Marital status and satisfaction five years 
following a randomized clinical trial comparing traditional versus integrative behavioral cou-
ple therapy.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 78, 225–235. 
 Christensen, A., Eldridge, K., Catta-Preta, A. B., Lim, V. R., & Santagata, R. (2006). Cross-cultural 
consistency of the demand/withdraw interaction pattern in couples.  Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 68, 1029–1044. 
 Christensen, A., Doss, B. D., & Jacobson, N. S. (2014).  Reconcilable differences: Rebuild your relationship 
by rediscovering the partner you love—without losing yourself. New York: Guilford Press. 
 Clark, C. L., Shaver, P. R., & Abrahams, M. F. (1999). Strategic behaviors in romantic relationship 
initiation.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 707–720. 
 Clark, M. S., & Aragón, O. R. (2013). Communal (and other) relationships: History, theory develop-
ment, recent findings, and future directions. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford 
handbook of close relationships (pp. 255–280). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Clark, M. S., & Grote, N. K. (1998). Why aren’t indices of relationship costs always negatively 
related to indices of relationship quality?  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 2, 2–17. 
 Clark, M. S., & Mills, J. R. (2012). A theory of communal (and exchange) relationships. In P. Van 
Lange, A. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.),  Handbook of theories of social psychology (Vol. 2, 
pp. 232–250). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

R-14 
References
 Clark, M. S., Lemay, E. P., Jr., Graham, S. M., Pataki, S. P., & Finkel, E. J. (2010). Ways of giving 
benefits in marriage: Norm use, relationship satisfaction, and attachment-related variability. 
 Psychological Science, 21, 944–951. 
 Clark, M. S., Pataki, S. P., & Carver, V. H. (1996). Some thoughts and findings on self-presentation 
of emotions in relationships. In G. J. O. Fletcher & J. Fitness (Eds.),  Knowledge structures in close 
relationships: A social psychological approach (pp. 247–274). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Clark, R. D., III, & Hatfield, E. (1989). Gender differences in receptivity to sexual offers.  Journal of 
Psychology and Human Sexuality, 2, 39–55. 
 Clark, R. D., III, & Hatfield, E. (2003). Love in the afternoon.  Psychological Inquiry, 14, 227–231. 
 Clarkwest, A. (2007). Spousal dissimilarity, race, and marital dissolution.  Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 69, 639–653. 
 Claxton, A., O’Rourke, N., Smith, J. Z., & DeLongis, A. (2012). Personality traits and marital satis-
faction within enduring relationships: An intra-couple discrepancy approach.  Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 29, 375–396. 
 Clayton, R. B., Nagurney, A., & Smith, J. R. (2013). Cheating, breakup, and divorce: Is Facebook use 
to blame?  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 16, 717–720. 
 Cleere, C., & Lynn, S. J. (2013). Acknowledged versus unacknowledged sexual assault among col-
lege women.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence 28, 2593–2611. 
 Cleveland, H. H., Udry, J. R., & Chantala, K. (2001). Environmental and genetic influences on sex-
typed behaviors and attitudes of male and female adolescents.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 27, 1587–1598. 
 Clore, G. L., & Byrne, D. (1974). A reinforcement-affect model of attraction. In T. L. Huston (Ed.), 
 Foundations of interpersonal attraction (pp. 143–170). New York: Academic Press. 
 Coan, J. A., Schaefer, H. S., & Davidson, R. J. (2006). Lending a hand: Social regulation of the neural 
response to threat.  Psychological Science, 17, 1032–1039. 
 Cobb, R. A., DeWall, C. N., Lambert, N. M., & Fincham, F. D. (2013). Implicit theories of relation-
ship and close relationship violence: Does believing your relationship can grow relate to lower 
perpetration of violence?  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 279–290. 
 Cohen, S., Doyle, W. J., Turner, R., Alper, C. M., & Skoner, D. P. (2003). Sociability and susceptibil-
ity to the common cold.  Psychological Science, 14, 389–395. 
 Cohen, S., Klein, D. N., & O’Leary, D. (2007). The role of separation/divorce in relapse into and 
recovery from major depression.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 24, 855–873. 
 Cohn, D. (2010, June 4). At long last, divorce.  Pew Research Center. Retrieved from  http://
pewresearch.org/pubs/1617/long-duration-marriage-end-divorce-gore 
 Cohn, E. S., Dupuis, E. C., & Brown, T. M. (2009). In the eye of the beholder: Do behavior and 
character affect victim and perpetrator responsibility for acquaintance rape?  Journal of Applied 
Social Psychology, 39, 1513–1535. 
 Collins, N. L., & Allard, L. M. (2001). Cognitive representations of attachment: The content and 
function of working models. In G. J. O. Fletcher & M. S. Clark (Eds.),  Blackwell handbook of social 
psychology: Interpersonal processes (pp. 60–85). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
 Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (2004). Working models of attachment shape perceptions of social 
support: Evidence from experimental and observational studies.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 87, 363–383. 
 Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (2010). An attachment theoretical perspective on social support 
dynamics in couples: Normative processes and individual differences. In K. Sullivan & 
J. Davila (Eds.),  Support processes in intimate relationships (pp. 89–120). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Collins, N. L., Ford, M. B., Guichard, A. C., Kane, H. S., & Feeney, B. C. (2010). Responding to need 
in intimate relationships: Social support and caregiving processes in couples. In M. Mikulincer 
& P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Prosocial motives, emotions, and behavior: The better angels of our nature 
(pp. 367–389). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Collins, N. L., Guichard, A. C., Ford, M. B., & Feeney, B. C. (2006). Responding to need in inti-
mate relationships: Normative processes and individual differences. In M. Mikulincer & 
G. S. Goodman (Eds.),  Dynamics of romantic love: Attachment, caregiving, and sex  (pp. 149–189). 
New York: Guilford Press. 

References R-15
 Collins, N. L., & Miller, L. C. (1994). Self-disclosure and liking: A meta-analytic review.  Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 116, 457–475. 
 Collins, T. J., & Gillath, O. (2012). Attachment, breakup strategies, and associated outcomes: The 
effects of security enhancement on the selection of breakup strategies.  Journal of Research in 
Personality, 46, 210–222. 
 Coltrane, S., & Shih, K. Y. (2010). Gender and the division of labor. In J. Chrisler & D. McCreary 
(Eds.),  Handbook of gender research in psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 401–422). New York: Springer. 
 Confer, J. C., Easton, J. A., Fleischman, D. S., Goetz, C. D., Lewis, D. M. G., Perilloux, C., & Buss, 
D. M. (2010). Evolutionary psychology: Controversies, questions, prospects, and limitations. 
 American Psychologist, 65, 110–126. 
 Conley, T. D. (2011). Perceived proposer personality characteristics and gender differences in 
acceptance of casual sex offers . Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 309–329. 
 Conley, T. D., Roesch, S. C., Peplau, L. A., & Gold, M. S. (2009). A test of positive illusions ver-
sus shared reality models of relationship satisfaction among gay, lesbian, and heterosexual 
couples.  Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 39, 1417–1431. 
 Conley, T. D., Ziegler, A., & Moors, A. C. (2012). Backlash from the bedroom: Stigma mediates 
gender differences in acceptance of casual sex offers.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 37, 
392–407. 
 Connelly, B. S., & Ones, D. S. (2010). An other perspective on personality: Meta-analytic integration 
of observers’ accuracy and predictive validity.  Psychological Bulletin, 136, 1092–1122. 
 Coontz, S. (2005).  Marriage, a history: From obedience to intimacy or how love conquered marriage. New 
York: Viking. 
 Coontz, S. (2013, November).  Revolution in intimate life and relationships in the past 75 years. Paper 
presented at the meeting of the National Council on Family Relations, San Antonio. 
 Cooper, M., O’Donnell, D., Caryl, P. G., Morrison, R., & Bale, C. (2007). Chat-up lines as male 
displays: Effects of content, sex, and personality.  Personality and Individual Differences, 43, 
1075–1085. 
 Cooper, M. L., Barber, L. L., Zhaoyang, R., & Talley, A. E. (2011). Motivational pursuits in the con-
text of human sexual relationships.  Journal of Personality, 79, 1031–1066. 
 Cooper, M. L., & Sheldon, M. S. (2002). Seventy years of research on personality and close 
relationships: Substantive and methodological trends over time.  Journal of Personality, 70, 
783–812. 
 Cornelius, T. L., & Alessi, G. (2007). Behavioral and physiological components of communication 
training: Does the topic affect the outcome?  Journal of Marriage and Family, 69, 608–620. 
 Côté, S., Kraus, M. W., Cheng, B. H., et al. (2011). Social power facilitates the effect of prosocial 
orientation on empathic accuracy.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 217–232. 
 Couch, L. L., & Jones, W. H. (1997). Conceptualizing levels of trust.  Journal of Research in Personality, 
31, 319–336. 
 Coughlin, P., & Wade, J. C. (2012). Masculinity ideology, income disparity, and romantic relation-
ship quality among men with higher earning female partners.  Sex Roles, 67, 311–322. 
 Coulter, K., & Malouff, J. M. (2013). Effects of an intervention designed to enhance romantic rela-
tionship excitement: A randomized-control trial.  Couple and Family Psychology: Research and 
Practice, 2, 24–44. 
 Cowan, G., & Mills, R. D. (2004). Personal inadequacy and intimacy predictors of men’s hostility 
toward women.  Sex Roles, 51, 67–78. 
 Coyne, J. C., Rohrbaugh, M. J., Shoham, V., Sonnega, J. S., Nicklas, J. M., & Cranford, J. A. (2001). 
Prognostic importance of marital quality for survival of congestive heart failure.  American 
Journal of Cardiology, 88, 526–529. 
 Coyne, S. M., Nelson, D. A., Graham-Kevan, N., Keister, E., & Grant, D. M. (2010). Mean on the 
screen: Psychopathy, relationship aggression, and aggression in the media.  Personality and 
Individual Differences, 48, 288–293. 
 Craighill, P. M., & Clement, S. (2014, March). Support for same-sex marriage hits new high; half say Con-
stitution guarantees right.  Washington Post.  Retrieved from   http://www.washingtonpost.com/
politics/support-for-same-sex-marriage-hits-new-high-half-say-constitution-guarantees-
right/2014/03/04/f737e87e-a3e5-11e3-a5fa-55f0c77bf39c_story.html   

R-16 
References
 Crane, R. D., Dollahite, D. C., Griffin, W., & Taylor, V. L. (1987). Diagnosing relationships with 
spatial distance: An empirical test of a clinical principle.  Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 
13, 307–310. 
 Crosier, B. S., Webster, G. D., & Dillon, H. M. (2012). Wired to connect: Evolutionary psychology 
and social networks.  Review of General Psychology, 16, 230–239. 
 Cross, S. E., Hardin, E. E., & Gercek-Swing, B. (2011). The what, how, why, and where of self-
construal.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15, 142–179. 
 Cross, S. E., & Morris, M. L. (2003). Getting to know you: The relational self-construal, relational 
cognition, and well-being.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 512–523. 
 Crown, L., & Roberts, L. J. (2007). Against their will: Young women’s nonagentic sexual experi-
ences.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 24, 385–405. 
 Croy, I., Bojanowski, V., & Hummel, T. (2013). Men without a sense of smell exhibit a strongly 
reduced number of sexual relationships, women exhibit reduced partnership security: 
A reanalysis of previously published data.  Biological Psychology,  92, 292–294. 
 Cruz, J. (2013).  Divorce rate in the U.S., 2011. National Center for Family & Marriage Research. 
Retrieved from  http://ncfmr.bgsu.edu/pdf/family_profiles/file131530.pdf 
 Cui, M., Conger, R. D., Bryant, C. M., & Elder, G. H. (2002). Parental behavior and the quality of 
adolescent friendships: A social contextual perspective.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 64, 
676–689. 
 Cui, M., & Fincham, F. D. (2010). The differential effects of parental divorce and marital conflict on 
young adult romantic relationships.  Personal Relationships, 17, 331–343. 
 Cunningham, G. B., & Melton, E. N. (2013). The moderating effects of contact with lesbian and gay 
friends on the relationships among religious fundamentalism, sexism, and sexual prejudice. 
 Journal of Sex Research, 50, 401–408. 
 Cunningham, M. R. (1989). Reactions to heterosexual opening gambits: Female selectivity and male 
responsiveness.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 15, 27–41. 
 Cunningham, M. R., & Barbee, A. P. (2008). Prelude to a kiss: Nonverbal flirting, opening gambits, 
and other communication dynamics in the initiation of romantic relationships. In S. Sprecher, 
A. Wenzel, & J. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of relationship initiation (pp. 97–120). New York: 
Psychology Press. 
 Cunningham, M. R., Barbee, A. P., & Philhower, C. L. (2002). Dimensions of facial physical 
attractiveness: The intersection of biology and culture. In G. Rhodes & L. A. Zebrowitz (Eds.), 
 Facial attractiveness: Evolutionary, cognitive and social perspectives (pp. 193–238). Westport, CT: 
Ablex. 
 Cunningham, M. R., Roberts, A. R., Barbee, A. P., Druen, P. B., & Wu, C. (1995). “Their ideas of 
beauty are, on the whole, the same as ours”: Consistency and variability in the cross-cultural 
perception of female physical attractiveness.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 68, 
261–279. 
 Cunningham, M. R., Shamblen, S. R., Barbee, A. P., & Ault, L. K. (2005). Social allergies in roman-
tic relationships: Behavioral repetition, emotional sensitization, and dissatisfaction in dating 
couples.  Personal Relationships, 12, 273–295. 
 Cupach, W. R. (2007). “You’re bugging me!”: Complaints and criticism from a partner. In 
B.   Spitzberg & W. Cupach (Eds.),  The dark side of interpersonal communication (2nd ed., pp. 143–
168). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Cupach, W. R., & Spitzberg, B. H. (Eds.). (2011).  The dark side of close relationships II. New York: 
Routledge. 
 Cuperman, R., & Ickes, W. (2009). Big five predictors of behavior and perceptions in initial dyadic 
interactions: Personality similarity helps extraverts and introverts, but hurts “disagreeables.” 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 667–684. 
 Curtis, R. C., & Miller, K. (1986). Believing another likes or dislikes you: Behaviors making the 
beliefs come true.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 284–290. 
 Custer, L., Holmberg, D., Blair, K., & Orbuch, T. L. (2008). “So how did you two meet?” Narratives 
of relationship initiation. In S. Sprecher, A. Wenzel, & J. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of relationship 
initiation (pp. 453–470). New York: Psychology Press. 

References R-17
 Cutrona, C. E. (1982). Transition to college: Loneliness and the process of social adjustment. In 
L. A. Peplau & D. Perlman (Eds.),  Loneliness: A sourcebook of current theory, research, and therapy 
(pp. 291–309). New York: Wiley Interscience. 
 Cutrona, C. E., Russell, D. W., Burzett, R. G., Wesner, K. A., & Bryant, C. M. (2011). Predicting rela-
tionship stability among midlife African American couples.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 79, 814–825. 
 D’Onofrio, B. M., Turkheimer, E., Harden, K. P., Slutske, W. S., Heath, A. C., Madden, P. A. F., & 
Martin, N. G. (2007). A genetically informed study of the intergenerational transmission of 
marital instability.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 69, 793–809. 
 Daigen, V., & Holmes, J. G. (2000). Don’t interrupt! A good rule for marriage?  Personal Relationships, 
7, 185–201. 
 Dailey, R. M., McCracken, A. A., Jin, B., Rossetto, K. R., & Green, E. W. (2013). Negotiating break-
ups and renewals: Types of on-again/off-again dating relationships.  Western Journal of 
 Communication, 77, 382–410. 
 Dailey, R. M., Middleton, A. V., & Green, E. W. (2012). Perceived relational stability in on-again/
off-again relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 29, 52–76. 
 Daly, J. A., Hogg, E., Sacks, D., Smith, M., & Zimring, L. (1983). Sex and relationship affect social 
self-grooming.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 7, 183–189. 
 Daneback, K., Cooper, A., & Mänsson, S. (2005). An Internet study of cybersex participants.  Archives 
of Sexual Behavior, 34, 321–328. 
 Daniels, K., Jones, J., & Abma, J. (2013). Use of emergency contraception among women aged 15–44. 
 NCHS Data Brief, no. 112. Hyattsville, MD: National Center for Health Statistics. 
 Darley, J. M., & Gross, P. H. (1983). A hypothesis-confirming bias in labeling effects.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 20–33. 
 Das, A., Waite, L. J., & Laumann, E. O. (2011). Sexual expression over the life course: Results from 
three landmark surveys. In J. DeLamater and L. Carpenter (Eds.),  Sex for life: From virginity to 
Viagra, how sexuality changes throughout our lives (pp. 236–259). New York: NYU Press. 
 Davies, A. P. C., Shackelford, T. K., & Hass, R. G. (2007). When a “poach” is not a poach: Redefining 
human mate poaching and re-estimating its frequency.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 702–716. 
 Davies, A. P. C., Shackelford, T. K., & Hass, R. G. (2010). Sex differences in perceptions of benefits 
and costs of mate poaching.  Personality and Individual Differences, 49, 441–445. 
 Davila, J., & Cobb, R. J. (2004). Predictors of change in attachment security during adulthood. In 
W. S. Rholes & J. A. Simpson (Eds.),  Adult attachment: Theory, research, and clinical implications 
(pp. 133–156). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Davila, J., & Kashy, D. A. (2009). Secure base processes in couples: Daily associations between sup-
port experiences and attachment security.  Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 76–88. 
 Davis, D., Shaver, P. R., & Vernon, M. L. (2004). Attachment style and subjective motivations for 
sex.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1076–1090. 
 Davis, D., Shaver, P. R., Widaman, K. F., Vernon, M. L., Follette, W. C., & Beitz, K. (2006). “I can’t 
get no satisfaction”: Insecure attachment, inhibited sexual communication, and sexual dissat-
isfaction.  Personal Relationships, 13, 465–483. 
 Davis, K. C., Stappenbeck, C. A., Norris, J., et al. (2014). Young men’s condom use resistance tactics: 
A latent profile analysis.  Journal of Sex Research, 51, 454–465.  
 Davis, K. E., Swan, S. C., & Gambone, L. J. (2012). Why doesn’t he just leave me alone? Persistent 
pursuit: A critical review of theories and evidence.  Sex Roles, 66, 328–339. 
 De Bro, S. C., Campbell, S. M., & Peplau, L. A. (1994). Influencing a partner to use a condom: A col-
lege student perspective.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 18, 165–182. 
 Debrot, A., Cook, W. L., Perrez, M., & Horn, A. B. (2012). Deeds matter: Daily enacted responsive-
ness and intimacy in couples’ daily lives.  Journal of Family Psychology, 26, 617–627. 
 Debrot, A., Schoebi, D., Perrez, M., & Horn, A. B. (2013). Touch as an interpersonal emotion regula-
tion process in couples’ daily lives: The mediating role of psychological intimacy.  Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 1373–1385. 
 Deckman, T., DeWall, C. N., Way, B., Gilman, R., & Richman, S. (2014). Can marijuana reduce social 
pain?  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 5, 131–139.  

R-18 
References
 de Graaf, H., Vanwesenbeeck, I., Meijer, S., Woertman, L., & Meeus, W. (2009). Sexual trajectories 
during adolescence: Relation to demographic characteristics and sexual risk.  Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 38, 276–282. 
 Deci, E. L., & Ryan, R. M. (2012). Self-determination theory. In P. Van Lange, A. Kruglanski, & 
E. T. Higgins (Eds.),  Handbook of theories of social psychology  (Vol. 1, pp. 416–436). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 De Groot, J. H. B., Smeets, M. A. M., Kaldewaij, A., Duijndam, M. J. A., & Semin, G. R. (2012). 
Chemosignals communicate human emotions.  Psychological Science, 23, 1417–1424. 
 DeGue, S., & DiLillo, D. (2005). “You would if you loved me”: Toward an improved conceptual 
and etiological understanding of nonphysical male sexual coercion.  Aggression and Violent 
 Behavior, 10, 513–532. 
 De Jong, D. C., & Reis, H. T. (2014).  Sexual kindred spirits: Actual and overperceived similarity, comple-
mentarity, and partner accuracy in heterosexual couples. Manuscript submitted for publication. 
 de Jong Gierveld, J., van Tilburg, T., & Dykstra, P. A. (2006). Loneliness and social isolation. In 
A. L. Vangelisti & D. Perlman (Eds.),  The Cambridge handbook of personal relationships (pp. 485–
499). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 De La Ronde, C., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (1998). Partner verification: Restoring shattered images of our 
intimates.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 75, 374–382. 
 Della Sala, S. (Ed.). (2010).  Forgetting. New York: Psychology Press. 
 DeLamater, J. (2012). Sexual expression in later life: A review and synthesis.  Journal of Sex Research, 
49, 125–141. 
 DelPriore, D. J., Hill, S. E., & Buss, D. M. (2012). Envy: Functional specificity and sex-differentiated 
design features.  Personality and Individual Differences, 53, 317–322. 
 DeMaris, A. (2013). Burning the candle at both ends: Extramarital sex as a precursor of marital dis-
ruption.  Journal of Family Issues, 34, 1474–1499. 
 DeMaris, A., Sanchez, L. A., & Krivickas, K. (2012). Developmental patterns in marital satisfaction: 
Another look at covenant marriage.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 74, 989–1004. 
 Denissen, J. J. A., Penke, L., Schmitt, D. P., & van Aken, M. A. G. (2008). Self-esteem reactions 
to social interactions: Evidence for sociometer mechanisms across days, people, and nations. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 181–196. 
 Denrell, J. (2005). Why most people disapprove of me: Experience sampling in impression forma-
tion.  Psychological Review, 112, 951–978. 
 Denton, W. H., & Burleson, B. R. (2007). The Initiator Style Questionnaire: A scale to assess initiator 
tendency in couples.  Personal Relationships, 14, 245–268. 
 DePaulo, B. (2011). Living single: Lightening up those dark, dopey myths. In W. Cupach & 
B.  Spitzberg (Eds.),  The dark side of close relationships II (pp. 409–438). New York: Routledge. 
 DePaulo, B. M., Ansfield, M. E., Kirkendol, S. E., & Boden, J. M. (2004). Serious lies.  Basic and Applied 
Social Psychology, 26, 147–167. 
 DePaulo, B. M., & Bell, K. L. (1996). Truth and investment: Lies are told to those who care.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 71, 703–716. 
 DePaulo, B. M., Charlton, K., Cooper, H., Lindsay, J. J., & Muhlenbruck, L. (1997). The accuracy–
confidence correlation in the detection of deception.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 
1, 346–357. 
 DePaulo, B. M., & Kashy, D. A. (1998). Everyday lies in close and casual relationships.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 63–79. 
 DePaulo, B. M., Kashy, D. A., Kirkendol, S. E., Wyer, M. M., & Epstein, J. A. (1996). Lying in every-
day life.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 979–995. 
 DePaulo, B. M., Lanier, K., & Davis, T. (1983). Detecting the deceit of the motivated liar.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 45, 1096–1103. 
 DePaulo, B. M., Morris, W. L., & Sternglanz, R. W. (2009). When the truth hurts: Deception in the 
name of kindness. In A. L. Vangelisti (Ed.),  Feeling hurt in close relationships  (pp. 167–190). New 
York: Cambridge University Press. 
 de Ridder, D. T. D., Lensvelt-Mulders, G., Finkenauer, C., Stok, F. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (2012). 
Taking stock of self-control: A meta-analysis of how trait self-control relates to a wide range of 
behaviors.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 16, 76–99. 

References R-19
 Derlega, V. J., Winstead, B. A., & Greene, K. (2008). Self-disclosure and starting a close relationship. 
In S. Sprecher, A. Wenzel, & J. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of relationship initiation (pp. 153–174). 
New York: Psychology Press. 
 Dermer, M., & Pyszczynski, T. A. (1978). Effects of erotica upon men’s loving and liking responses 
for women they love.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 1302–1309. 
 Desmarais, S. L., Reeves, K. A., Nicholls, T. L., Telford, R. P., & Fiebert, M. S. (2012). Prevalence 
of physical violence in intimate relationships, part 2: Rates of male and female perpetration. 
 Partner Abuse, 3, 170–198. 
 DeSteno, D. (2010). Mismeasuring jealousy: A cautionary comment on Levy and Kelly (2010). 
 Psychological Science, 21, 1355–1356. 
 DeSteno, D. A., & Salovey, P. (1994). Jealousy in close relationships: Multiple perspectives on the 
green-eyed monster. In A. L. Weber & J. H. Harvey (Eds.),  Perspectives on close relationships 
(pp. 217–242). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
 DeSteno, D. A., & Salovey, P. (1996). Evolutionary origins of sex differences in jealousy? Question-
ing the “fitness” of the model.  Psychological Science, 7, 367–372. 
 DeSteno, D., Valdesolo, P., & Bartlett, M. Y. (2006). Jealousy and the threatened self: Getting to the 
heart of the green-eyed monster.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 626–641. 
 Deters, F. G., & Mehl, M. R. (2013). Does posting Facebook status updates increase or decrease 
loneliness? An online social networking experiment.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 
4, 570–586. 
 De Vogli, R., Chandola, T., & Marmot, M. G. (2007). Negative aspects of close relationships and 
heart disease.  Archives of Internal Medicine, 167, 1951–1957. 
 Dew, J., & Wilcox, W. B. (2011). If Momma ain’t happy: Explaining declines in marital satisfaction 
among new mothers.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 73, 1–12. 
 Dew, J., & Wilcox, W. B. (2013). Generosity and the maintenance of marital quality.  Journal of 
 Marriage and Family, 75, 1218–1228. 
 DeWall, C. N., MacDonald, G., Webster, G. D., Masten, C. L., Baumeister, R. F., Powell, C., . . . 
Eisenberger, N. I. (2010). Acetaminophen reduces social pain: Behavioral and neural evidence. 
 Psychological Science, 21, 931–937. 
 DeWall, C. N., Twenge, J. M., Gitter, S. A., & Baumeister, R. F. (2009). It’s the thought that counts: 
The role of hostile cognition in shaping aggressive responses to social exclusion.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 45–59. 
 Dewsbury, D. A. (1981). Effects of novelty on copulatory behavior: The Coolidge effect and related 
phenomena.  Psychological Bulletin, 89, 464–482. 
 Diamond, L. M. (2013a). Links and distinctions between love and desire: Implications for same-
sex sexuality. In C. Hazan & M. I. Campa (Eds.),  Human bonding: The science of affectional ties 
(pp. 226–250). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Diamond, L. M. (2013b). Sexuality in relationships. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The 
Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 589–614). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Diamond, L. M., & Dickenson, J. A. (2012). The neuroimaging of love and desire: Review and future 
directions.  Clinical Neuropsychiatry, 9, 39–46. 
 Diamond, L. M., & Fagundes, C. P. (2010). Psychobiological research on attachment.  Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 27, 218–225. 
 Dickerson, S. S., & Zoccola, P. M. (2013). Cortisol responses to social exclusion. In C. N. DeWall 
(Ed.),  The Oxford handbook of social exclusion (pp. 143–151). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Dickson, N., van Roode, T., Cameron, C., & Paul, C. (2013). Stability and change in same-sex attrac-
tion, experience, and identity by sex and age in a New Zealand birth cohort.  Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 42, 753–763. 
 Dillow, M. R., Dunleavy, K. N., & Weber, K. D. (2009). The impact of relational characteristics and 
reasons for topic avoidance on relational closeness.  Communication Quarterly, 57, 205–223. 
 Dindia, K. (2002). Self-disclosure research: Knowledge through meta-analysis. In M. Allen, R. W. 
Preiss, B. M. Gayle, & N. A. Burrell (Eds.),  Interpersonal communication research: Advances 
through meta-analysis (pp. 169–185). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Dindia, K. (2006). Men are from North Dakota, women are from South Dakota. In K. Dindia & D. J. 
Canary (Eds.),  Sex differences and similarities in communication  (pp. 3–20). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

R-20 
References
 Dindia, K., & Timmerman, L. (2003). Accomplishing romantic relationships. In J. O. Greene & 
B.  R.  Burleson (Eds.),  Handbook of communication and social interaction skills (pp. 685–721). 
 Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Dion, K. K., Berscheid, E., & Walster, E. (1972). What is beautiful is good.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 24, 285–290. 
 DiPaola, B. M., Roloff, M. E., & Peters, K. M. (2010). College students’ expectations of conflict inten-
sity: A self-fulfilling prophecy.  Communication Quarterly, 58, 59–76. 
 Ditzen, B., Schaer, M., Gabriel, B., Bodenmann, G., Ehlert, U., & Heinrichs, M. (2009). Intranasal 
oxytocin increases positive communication and reduces cortisol levels during couple conflict. 
 Biological Psychiatry, 65, 728–731. 
 Dixson, B. J., Dixson, A. F., Bishop, P. J., & Parish, A. (2010). Human physique and sexual attractive-
ness in men and women: A New Zealand–U.S. comparative study.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 
39, 798–806. 
 Dixson, B. J., Grimshaw, G. M., Linklater, W. L., & Dixson, A. F. (2011). Eye-tracking of men’s 
preferences for waist-to-hip ratio and breast size of women.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 
43–50. 
 Donaghue, N., & Fallon, B. J. (2003). Gender-role self-stereotyping and the relationship between 
equity and satisfaction in close relationships.  Sex Roles, 48, 217–230. 
 Donnellan, M. B., Conger, R. D., & Bryant, C. M. (2004). The Big Five and enduring marriages. 
 Journal of Research in Personality, 38, 481–504. 
 Dooley, T. (2010, March 1). This is not your parents’ marriage.  Houston Chronicle, pp. D1–D2. 
 Dosmukhambetova, D., & Manstead, A. S. R. (2012). Fear attenuated and affection augmented: 
Male self-presentation in a romantic context.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 36, 135–147. 
 Doss, B. D., Atkins, D. C., & Christensen, A. (2003). Who’s dragging their feet? Husbands and wives 
seeking marital therapy.  Journal of Marital & Family Therapy, 29, 165–177. 
 Doss, B. D., Benson, L. A., Georgia, E. J., & Christensen, A. (2013). Translation of integrative behav-
ioral couple therapy to a web-based intervention.  Family Process, 52, 139–153. 
 Doss, B. D., Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S. M., & Markman, H. J. (2009). The effect of the transition to 
parenthood on relationship quality: An 8-year prospective study.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 96, 601–619. 
 Doss, B. D., Simpson, L. E., & Christensen, A. (2004). Why do couples seek marital therapy?  Profes-
sional Psychology: Research and Practice, 35, 608–614. 
 Doumas, D. M., Pearson, C. L., Elgin, J. E., & McKinley, L. L. (2008). Adult attachment as a risk fac-
tor for intimate partner violence: The “mispairing” of partners’ attachment styles.  Journal of 
Interpersonal Violence, 23, 616–634. 
 Downs, A. C., & Lyons, P. M. (1991). Natural observations of the links between attractiveness and 
initial legal judgments.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 17, 541–547. 
Dragiewicz, M., & DeKeseredy, W. S. (2012). Claims about women’s use of non-fatal force in inti-
mate relationships: A contextual review of Canadian research. Violence Against Women, 18, 
1008–1026.
 Drigotas, S. M., Rusbult, C. E., Wieselquist, J., & Whitton, S. W. (1999). Close partner as sculptor of 
the ideal self: Behavioral affirmation and the Michelangelo phenomenon.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 77, 293–323. 
 Driscoll, R., Davis, K. W., & Lipetz, M. E. (1972). Parental interference and romantic love.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 24, 1–10. 
 Dufner, M., Rauthmann, J. F., Czarna, A. Z., & Denissen, J. J. A. (2013). Are narcissists sexy? Zero-
ing in on the effect of narcissism on short-term mate appeal.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 39, 870–882. 
 Duggan, M., & Smith, A. (2014, January).  Social media update 2013. Pew Research Center. Retrieved 
from  http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Social-Media-Update.aspx 
 Dunbar, N. E., & Burgoon, J. K. (2005). Perceptions of power and interactional dominance in inter-
personal relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 22, 207–233. 
 Dunn, M. J., Brinton, S., & Clark, L. (2010). Universal sex differences in online advertisers’ age 
preferences: Comparing data from 14 cultures and 2 religious groups.  Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 31, 383–393. 

References R-21
 Duntley, J. D., & Buss, D. M. (2012). The evolution of stalking.  Sex Roles, 66, 311–327 . 
 Durante, K. M., Griskevicius, V., Simpson, J. A., Cantú, S. M., & Tybur, J. M. (2012). Sex ratio and 
women’s career choice: Does a scarcity of men lead women to choose briefcase over baby? 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 103, 121–134. 
 Durante, K. M., Li, N. P., & Haselton, M. G. (2008). Changes in women’s choice of dress across 
the ovulatory cycle: Naturalistic and laboratory task-based evidence.  Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1451–1460. 
 Dutton, D. G. (2010). Anger in intimate relationships. In M. Potegal, G. Stemmier, & C. Spielberger 
(Eds.),  International handbook of anger: Constituent and concomitant biological, psychological, and 
social processes (pp. 535–544). New York: Springer. 
 Dutton, D. G., & Aron, A. P. (1974). Some evidence for heightened sexual attraction under condi-
tions of high anxiety.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 510–517. 
 Dworkin, S. L., & O’Sullivan, L. (2005). Actual versus desired initiation patterns among a sample 
of college men: Tapping disjunctures within traditional male sexual scripts.  Journal of Sex 
Research, 42, 150–158. 
 Eagly, A. H., & Wood, W. (2013a). Feminism and evolutionary psychology: Moving forward . Sex 
Roles, 69, 549–556. 
 Eagly, A. H., & Wood, W. (2013b). The nature-nurture debates: 25 years of challenges in under-
standing the psychology of gender.  Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8, 340–357. 
 Eaker, E. D., Sullivan, L. M., Kelly-Hayes, M., D’Agostino, R. B., Sr., & Benjamin, E. J. (2007). Mari-
tal status, marital strain, and risk of coronary heart disease or total mortality: The Framing-
ham Offspring Study.  Psychosomatic Medicine, 69, 509–513. 
 Eastwick, P. W. (2009). Beyond the Pleistocene: Using phylogeny and constraint to inform the evo-
lutionary psychology of human mating.  Psychological Bulletin, 135, 794–821. 
 Eastwick, P. W. (2013). Cultural influences on attraction. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The 
Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 161–182). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Eastwick, P. W., Finkel, E. J., & Eagly, A. H. (2011). When and why do ideal partner preferences 
affect the process of initiating and maintaining romantic relationships?  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 101, 1012–1032. 
 Eastwick, P. W., Finkel, E. J., Krishnamurti, T., & Loewenstein, G. (2008). Mispredicting distress fol-
lowing romantic breakup: Revealing the time course of the affective forecasting error.  Journal 
of Experimental Social Psychology, 44, 800–807. 
 Eastwick, P. W., Finkel, E. J., Mochon, D., & Ariely, D. (2007). Selective versus unselective romantic 
desire.  Psychological Science, 18, 317–319. 
 Eastwick, P. W., Luchies, L. B., Finkel, E. J., & Hunt, L. L. (2014). The predictive validity of ideal 
partner preferences: A review and meta-analysis.  Psychological Bulletin, 140, 623–665.  
 Eastwick, P. W., Richeson, J. A., Son, D., & Finkel, E. J. (2009). Is love colorblind? Political 
orientation and interracial romantic desire.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 
1258–1268. 
 Eastwick. P. W., Saigal, S. D., & Finkel, E. J. (2010). Smooth operating: A structural analysis of social 
behavior (SASB) perspective on initial romantic encounters.  Social Psychological and Personality 
Science, 1, 344–352. 
 Eastwick, P. W., & Tidwell, N. D. (2013). To pair bond or not: The evolutionary psychological 
approach to human mating. In C. Hazan & M. I. Campa (Eds.),  Human bonding: The science of 
affectional ties (pp. 132–160). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Ebbesen, E. B., Kjos, G. L., & Konecni, V. J. (1976). Spatial ecology: Its effects on the choice of friends 
and enemies.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 12, 505–518. 
 Ebel-Lam, A. P., MacDonald, T. K., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. T. (2009). An experimental investiga-
tion of the interactive effects of alcohol and sexual arousal on intentions to have unprotected 
sex.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 31, 226–233. 
 Eberhart, N. K., & Hammen, C. L. (2006). Interpersonal predictors of onset of depression during the 
transition to adulthood.  Personal Relationships, 13, 195–206. 
 Ebesu Hubbard, A. S., Hendrickson, B., Fehrenbach, K. S., & Sur, J. (2013). Effects of timing and sin-
cerity of an apology on satisfaction and changes in negative feelings during conflicts.  Western 
Journal of Communication, 77, 305–322. 

R-22 
References
 Edlund, J. E., & Sagarin, B. J. (2010). Mate value and mate preferences: An investigation into 
decisions made with and without constraints.  Personality and Individual Differences, 49, 835–839. 
 Edwards, G. L., & Barber, B. L. (2010). Women may underestimate their partners’ desires to use 
condoms: Possible implications for behaviour.  Journal of Sex Research, 47, 59–65. 
 Edwards, K. M., Dixon, K. J., Gidycz, C. A., & Desai, A. D. (2014). Family-of-origin violence and college 
men’s reports of intimate partner violence perpetration in adolescence and young adulthood: 
The role of maladaptive interpersonal patterns.  Psychology of Men & Masculinity, 15, 234–240.  
 Edwards, K. M., Gidycz, C. A., & Murphy, M. J. (2011). College women’s stay/leave decisions 
in abusive dating relationships: A prospective analysis of an expanded investment model. 
 Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 26, 1446–1462. 
 Eidelson, R. J. (1980). Interpersonal satisfaction and level of involvement: A curvilinear relation-
ship.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 460–470. 
 Eidelson, R. J., & Epstein, N. (1982). Cognition and relationship maladjustment: Development of a 
measure of dysfunctional relationship beliefs.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 50, 
715–720. 
 Eisenberg, A. R. (1992). Conflicts between mothers and their young children.  Merrill-Palmer 
 Quarterly, 38, 21–43. 
 Eisenberger, N. I. (2013). Why rejection hurts: The neuroscience of social pain. In C. N. DeWall 
(Ed.),  The Oxford handbook of social exclusion (pp. 152–162). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Ekman, P., & Cardaro, D. (2011). What is meant by calling emotions basic.  Emotion Review, 3, 
364–370. 
 Elaad, E., Lavy, S., Cohenca, D., Berholz, E., Thee, P., & Ben-Gigi, Y. (2012). Lies, truths, and attach-
ment orientations in late adolescence.  Personality and Individual Differences, 52, 670–673. 
 Eldridge, K. A., & Baucom, B. (2012). Demand-withdraw communication in couples: Recent devel-
opments and future directions. In P. Noller & G. C. Karantzas (Eds.),  The Wiley-Blackwell hand-
book of couple and family relationships (pp. 144–158). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
Elfenbein,  H. A. (2013). Nonverbal dialects and accents in facial expressions of emotion.  Emotion 
Review, 5, 90–96. 
 Elizur, Y., & Mintzer, A. (2001). A framework for the formation of gay male identity: Processes 
associated with adult attachment style and support from family and friends.  Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 30, 143–167. 
 Elliot, A. J., Greitemeyer, T., & Pazda, A. D. (2013). Women’s use of red clothing as a sexual signal 
in intersexual interaction.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 599–602. 
 Elliot, A. J., Kayser, D. N., Greitemeyer, T., Lichtenfeld, S., Gramzow, R. H., Maier, M. A., & Liu, H. 
(2010). Red, rank, and romance in women viewing men.  Journal of Experimental Psychology: 
General, 139, 399–417. 
 Elliot, A. J., & Niesta, D. (2008). Romantic red: Red enhances men’s attraction to women.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 1150–1164. 
 Elliot, A. J., Tracy, J. L., Pazda, A. D., & Beall, A. T. (2013). Red enhances women’s attractiveness 
to men: First evidence suggesting universality.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 
165–168. 
 Elliott, D. B., & Simmons, T. (2011). Marital events of Americans: 2009.  American Community Survey 
Reports (ACS-13). Washington, DC: U. S. Census Bureau. 
 Elliott, S., & Umberson, D. (2008). The performance of desire: Gender and sexual negotiation in 
long-term marriages.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 70, 391–406. 
 Ellis, A. (1993). The advantages and disadvantages of self-help therapy materials.  Professional 
Psychology: Research & Practice, 24, 335–339. 
 Ellis, B. J., Simpson, J. A., & Campbell, L. (2002). Trait-specific dependence in romantic relation-
ships.  Journal of Personality, 70, 611–659. 
 Ellyson, S. L., Dovidio, J. F., & Brown, C. E. (1992). The look of power: Gender differences and simi-
larities in visual dominance behavior. In C. Ridgeway (Ed.),  Gender and interaction: The role of 
microstructures in inequality (pp. 50–80). New York: Springer-Verlag. 
 Elphinston, R. A., Feeney, J. A., Noller, P., Connor, J. P., & Fitzgerald, J. (2013). Romantic jealousy 
and relationship satisfaction: The cost of rumination.  Western Journal of Communication, 77, 
293–304. 

References R-23
 Else-Quest, N. M., Hyde, J. S., & DeLamater, J. D. (2005). Context counts: Long-term sequelae of 
premarital intercourse or abstinence.  Journal of Sex Research, 42, 102–112. 
 El-Sheikh, M., Kelly, R., & Rauer, A. (2013). Quick to berate, slow to sleep: Interpartner psychologi-
cal conflict, mental health, and sleep.  Health Psychology, 32, 1057–1066. 
Elwert, F., & Christakis, N. A. (2008). The effect of widowhood on mortality by the causes of death 
of both spouses.  American Journal of Public Health, 98, 2092–2098. 
 Emery, R. E., Shim, J. J., & Horn, E. (2012). Examining divorce consequences and policies and the 
question is: Is marriage more than a piece of paper? In L. Campbell & T. J. Loving (Eds.),  Inter-
disciplinary research on close relationships: The case for integration (pp. 227–250). Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 
 Enke, A. (2011, January).  The effectiveness of female date-initiation tactics. Poster presented at the meet-
ing of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, San Antonio, TX. 
 Epley, N., Akalis, S., Waytz, A., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2008). Creating social connection through infer-
ential reproduction: Loneliness and perceived agency in gadgets, gods, and greyhounds. 
 Psychological Science, 19, 114–120. 
 Epley, N., & Whitchurch, E. (2008). Mirror, mirror on the wall: Enhancement in self-recognition. 
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1159–1170. 
 Epstein, N., & Baucom, D. H. (2002).  Enhanced cognitive-behavioral therapy for couples: A contextual 
approach. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Erbert, L. A. (2000). Conflict and dialectics: Perceptions of dialectical contradictions in marital con-
flict.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 17, 638–659. 
 Erchull, M. J., Liss, M., Axelson, S. J., Staebell, S. E., & Askari, S. F. (2010). Well . . . she wants it more: 
Perceptions of social norms about desires for marriage and children and anticipated chore 
participation.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 34, 253–260. 
 Erikson, E. (1950).  Childhood and society. New York: Norton. 
 Erol, R. Y., & Orth, U. (2013). Actor and partner effects of self-esteem on relationship satisfac-
tion and the mediating role of secure attachment between the partners.  Journal of Research in 
Personality, 47, 26–35. 
 Essayli, J. H., Darby, R. S., Harris, C. R., & Larsen, B. (2010, January).  Infidelity, confessions, and rela-
tionship dissolution. Poster presented at the meeting of the Society for Personality and Social 
Psychology, Las Vegas, NV. 
 Etcheverry, P. E., & Agnew, C. R. (2004). Subjective norms and the prediction of romantic relation-
ship state and fate.  Personal Relationships, 11, 409–428. 
 Etcheverry, P. E., Le, B., & Hoffman, N. G. (2013a). Predictors of friend approval for romantic 
relationships.  Personal Relationships, 20, 69–83. 
 Etcheverry, P. E., Le, B., Wu, T., & Wei, M. (2013b). Attachment and the investment model: Predictors 
of relationship commitment, maintenance, and persistence.  Personal Relationships, 20, 546–567. 
 Exline, J. J., Baumeister, R. F., Zell, A. L., Kraft, A. J., & Witvliet, C. V. O. (2008). Not so innocent: 
Does seeing one’s own capability for wrongdoing predict forgiveness?  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 94, 495–515. 
 Fabricius, W. V. (2003). Listening to children of divorce: New findings that diverge from  Wallerstein, 
Lewis, and Blakeslee.  Family Relations, 52, 385–396. 
 Fagley, N. S. (2012). Appreciation uniquely predicts life satisfaction above demographics, the Big 5 
personality factors, and gratitude.  Personality and Individual Differences, 53, 59–63. 
 Falbo, T. (1982). PAQ types and power strategies used in intimate relationships.  Psychology of 
Women Quarterly, 6, 399–405. 
 Falbo, T., & Peplau, L. A. (1980). Power strategies in intimate relationships.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 38, 618–628. 
 Faries, M. D., & Bartholomew, J. B. (2012). The role of body fat in female attractiveness.  Evolution 
and Human Behavior, 33, 672–681. 
 Farley, S. D. (2008). Attaining status at the expense of likeability: Pilfering power through conversa-
tional interruption.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 32, 241–260. 
 Farley, S. D., Hughes, S. M., & LaFayette, J. N. (2013). People will know we are in love: Evidence 
of differences between vocal samples directed toward lovers and friends.  Journal of Nonverbal 
Behavior, 37, 123–138. 

R-24 
References
 Farris, C., Treat, T. A., Viken, R. J., & McFall, R. M. (2008). Sexual coercion and the misperception of 
sexual intent.  Clinical Psychology Review, 28, 48–66. 
 Farvid, P., & Braun, V. (2006). ’Most of us guys are raring to go anytime, anyplace, anywhere’: Male 
and female sexuality in  Cleo and  Cosmo.  Sex Roles, 55, 295–310. 
 Fast, N. J., Gruenfeld, D. H., Sivanathan, N., & Galinsky, A. D. (2009). Illusory control: A generative 
force behind power’s far-reaching effects.  Psychological Science, 20, 502–508. 
 Feeney, B. C. (2004). A secure base: Responsive support of goal strivings and exploration in adult 
intimate relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 87, 631–648. 
Feeney, B. C., & Cassidy, J. (2003). Reconstructive memory related to adolescent-parent conflict 
interactions: The influence of attachment-related representations on immediate perceptions 
and changes in perceptions over time. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 945–955.
 Feeney, B. C., & Lemay, E. P., Jr. (2012). Surviving relationship threats: The role of emotional capi-
tal.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 1004–1017. 
 Feeney, J. A. (1999). Adult attachment, emotional control, and marital satisfaction.  Personal Relation-
ships, 6, 169–185. 
 Feeney, J. A. (2002). Attachment, marital interaction, and relationship satisfaction: A diary study. 
 Personal Relationships, 9, 39–55. 
 Feeney, J. A. (2005). Hurt feelings in couple relationships: Exploring the role of attachment and 
perceptions of personal injury.  Personal Relationships, 12, 253–271. 
 Feeney, J. A., & Hill, A. (2006). Victim-perpetrator differences in reports of hurtful events.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 23, 587–608. 
 Feeney, J. A., & Noller, P. (2004). Attachment and sexuality in close relationships. In J. H. Harvey, 
A. Wenzel, & S. Sprecher (Eds.),  The handbook of sexuality in close relationships (pp. 183–201). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Feeney, J. A., Noller, P., & Roberts, N. (2000). Attachment and close relationships. In C. Hendrick 
& S. S. Hendrick (Eds.),  Close relationships: A sourcebook (pp. 185–201). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
 Fehr, B. (1996).  Friendship processes. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Fehr, B. (1999). Stability and commitment in friendships. In J. M. Adams & W. H. Jones (Eds.),  Hand-
book of interpersonal commitment and relationship stability (pp. 259–280). Dordrecht,  Netherlands: 
Kluwer. 
 Fehr, B. (2013). The social psychology of love. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford 
handbook of close relationships (pp. 201–233). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Fehr, B., & Broughton, R. (2001). Gender and personality differences in conceptions of love: An 
interpersonal theory analysis.  Personal Relationships, 8, 115–136. 
 Fehr, B., & Sprecher, S. (2013). Compassionate love: What we know so far. In M. Hojjat & D. Cramer 
(Eds.),  Positive psychology of love (pp. 106–120). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Fein, E., & Schneider, S. (1995).  The rules: Time-tested secrets for capturing the heart of Mr. Right. New 
York: Warner Books. 
 Feingold, A. (1992). Good-looking people are not what we think.  Psychological Bulletin, 111, 304–341. 
 Feldman, R., Weller, A., Zagoory-Sharon, O., & Levine, A. (2007). Evidence for a neuroendocrino-
logical foundation of human affiliation: Plasma oxytocin levels across pregnancy and post-
partum period predict mother-infant bonding.  Psychological Science, 18, 965–970. 
 Felmlee, D. H. (2001). From appealing to appalling: Disenchantment with a romantic partner. 
 Sociological Perspectives, 44, 263–280. 
 Felmlee, D., Orzechowicz, D., & Fortes, C. (2010). Fairy tales: Attraction and stereotypes in same-
gender relationships.  Sex Roles, 62, 226–240. 
 Felmlee, D., Sweet, E., & Sinclair, H. C. (2012). Gender rules: Same- and cross-gender friendships 
norms.  Sex Roles, 66, 518–529. 
 Fenigstein, A., & Preston, M. (2007). The desired number of sexual partners as a function of gender, 
sexual risks, and the meaning of “ideal.”  Journal of Sex Research, 44, 89–95. 
 Fergusson, D. M., Horwood, L. J., & Ridder, E. M. (2005). Partner violence and mental health out-
comes in a New Zealand birth cohort.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 67, 1103–1119. 
 Ferrara, M. H., & Levine, T. R. (2009). Can’t live with them or can’t live without them? The effects 
of betrayal on relational outcomes in college dating relationships.  Communication Quarterly, 
57, 187–204. 

References R-25
 Festinger, L., Schachter, S., & Back, K. W. (1950).  Social pressures in informal groups: A study of human 
factors in housing. New York: Harper & Brothers. 
 Figueredo, A. J., Sefcek, J. A., & Jones, D. N. (2006). The ideal romantic partner personality. 
 Personality and Individual Differences, 41, 431–441. 
 Finch, E. (2001).  The criminalization of stalking: Constructing the problem and evaluating the solution. 
London: Cavendish. 
 Fincham, F. D. (2001). Attributions in close relationships: From Balkanization to integration. In 
G. J. O. Fletcher & M. S. Clark (Eds.),  Blackwell handbook of social psychology: Interpersonal 
processes (pp. 3–31). Malden, MA: Blackwell. 
 Fincham, F. D. (2003). Marital conflict: Correlates, structure, and context.  Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 12, 23–27. 
 Fincham, F. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (1999). Conflict in marriage: Implications for working with 
couples.  Annual Review of Psychology, 50, 47–77. 
 Fincham, F. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (2002). Forgiveness in marriage: Implications for psychological 
aggression and constructive communication.  Personal Relationships, 9, 239–251. 
 Fincham, F. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (2010). Of memes and marriage: Toward a positive relationship 
science.  Journal of Family Theory & Review, 2, 4–24. 
 Fincham, F. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (2013). Gratitude and forgiveness in relationships. In J. A.  Simpson 
& L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 638–663). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Fincham, F. D., & Beach, S. R. H. (2014). I say a little prayer for you: Praying for partner increases 
commitment in romantic relationships.  Journal of Family Psychology. doi: 10.1037/a0034999  
 Fingerhut, A. W., & Maisel, N. C. (2010). Relationship formalization and individual and relationship 
well-being among same-sex couples.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 27, 956–969. 
 Fingerman, K. L. (2009). Consequential strangers and peripheral ties: The importance of unimport-
ant relationships.  Journal of Family Theory & Review, 1, 69–86. 
 Fingerman, K. L., & Charles, S. T. (2010). It takes two to tango: Why older people have the best 
relationships.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 19, 172–176. 
 Fink, B., Hugill, N., & Lange, B. P. (2012). Women’s body movements are a potential cue to ovula-
tion.  Personality and Individual Differences, 53, 759–763. 
 Fink, B., Neave, N., Manning, J. T., & Grammer, K. (2006). Facial symmetry and judgments of 
attractiveness, health and personality.  Personality and Individual Differences, 41, 491–499. 
 Fink, B., Weege, B. Flügge, J., Röder, S., Neave, N., & McCarty, K. (2012). Men’s personality and 
women’s perception of their dance quality.  Personality and Individual Differences, 52, 232–235. 
 Finkel, E. J. (2008). Intimate partner violence perpetration: Insights from the science of self- 
regulation. In J. P. Forgas & J. Fitness (Eds.),  Social relationships: Cognitive, affective and motiva-
tional processes (pp. 271–288). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Finkel, E. J. (2014). The I 3 model: Metatheory, theory, and evidence.  Advances in Experimental Social 
Psychology, 49, 1–104. 
 Finkel, E. J., DeWall, C. N., Slotter, E. B., Oaten, M., & Foshee, V. A. (2009). Self-regulatory failure and 
intimate partner violence perpetration.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 483–499. 
 Finkel, E. J., Eastwick, P. W., Karney, B. R., Reis, H. T., & Sprecher, S. (2012). Online dating: A 
critical analysis from the perspective of psychological science.  Psychological Science in the Public 
Interest, 13, 3–66. 
 Finkel, E. J., Hui, C. M., Carswell, K. L., & Larson, G. M. (2014a). The suffocation of marriage: 
Climbing Mount Maslow without enough oxygen.  Psychological Inquiry, 25, 1–41. 
 Finkel, E. J., Norton, M. I., Reis, H. T., et al. (2014b). When does familiarity promote versus under-
mine interpersonal attraction? A proposed integrative model from erstwhile adversaries. 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science. Manuscript accepted for publication. 
 Finkel, E. J., Slotter, E. B., Luchies, L. B., Walton, G. M., & Gross, J. J. (2013). A brief intervention 
to promote conflict reappraisal preserves marital quality over time.  Psychological Science, 24, 
1595–1601. 
 Finkenauer, C., Kubacka, K. E., Engels, R. C. M. E., & Kerkhof, P. (2009). Secrecy in close relation-
ships: Investigating its intrapersonal and interpersonal effects. In T. D. Afifi & W. A. Afifi 
(Eds.),  Uncertainty, information management, and disclosure decisions: Theories and applications 
(pp. 300–319). New York: Routledge. 

R-26 
References
 Firestone, R. W., & Catlett, J. (1999).  Fear of intimacy. Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
 Fish, J. N., Pavkov, T. W., Wetchler, J. L., & Bercik, J. (2012). Characteristics of those who partici-
pate in infidelity: The role of adult attachment and differentiation in extradyadic experiences. 
 American Journal of Family Therapy, 40, 214–229. 
 Fisher, H. (1995). The nature and evolution of romantic love. In W. Jankowiak (Ed.),  Romantic pas-
sion: A universal experience? (pp. 23–41). New York: Columbia University Press. 
 Fisher, H. (2006). The drive to love: The neural mechanism for mate selection. In R. J. Sternberg & 
K. Weis (Eds.),  The new psychology of love (pp. 87–115). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Fisher, H. (2008, November).  Similar brain responses in those in love for many years or just several 
months. Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Neuroscience, Washington, DC. 
 Fisher, T. D. (2013). Gender roles and pressure to be truthful: The bogus pipeline modifies gender 
differences in sexual but not non-sexual behavior.  Sex Roles, 68, 401–414. 
 Fisher, T. D., Moore, Z. T., & Pittenger, M. (2012). Sex on the brain? An examination of frequency 
of sexual cognitions as a function of gender, erotophilia, and social desirability.  Journal of Sex 
Research, 49, 69–77. 
 Fiske, S. T. (2004). Developing a program of research. In C. Sansone, C. C. Morf, & A. T. Panter 
(Eds.),  The Sage handbook of methods in social psychology (pp. 71–90). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Fiske, S. T., & Taylor, S. E. (2013).  Social cognition: From brains to culture (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
 Fitch, C. A., & Ruggles, S. (2000). Historical trends in marriage formation: The United States 1850–
1990. In L. J. Waite (Ed.),  The ties that bind: Perspectives on marriage and cohabitation (pp. 59–88). 
New York: Aldine de Gruyter. 
 Fitness, J. (2012). Betrayal and forgiveness in couple relationships. In P. Noller & G. C. Karantzas 
(Eds.),  The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of couple and family relationships (pp. 259–270). Hoboken, 
NJ: Wiley. 
 Fitzsimons, G. M., & Finkel, E. J. (2010). Interpersonal influences on self-regulation.  Current Direc-
tions in Psychological Science, 19, 101–105. 
 Fitzsimons, G. M., & Kay, A. C. (2004). Language and interpersonal cognition: Causal effects of 
variations in pronoun usage on perceptions of closeness.  Personality and Social Psychology 
 Bulletin, 30, 547–557. 
 Fleischmann, A. A., Spitzberg, B. H., Andersen, P. A., & Roesch, S. C. (2005). Tickling the monster: 
Jealousy induction in relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 22, 49–73. 
 Fletcher, G. J. O., Tither, J. M., O’Loughlin, C., Friesen, M., & Overall, N. (2004). Warm and homely 
or cold and beautiful? Sex differences in trading off traits in mate selection.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 659–672. 
 Fletcher, G., & Kerr, P. (2013). Love, reality, and illusion in intimate relationships. In J. A.  Simpson 
& L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 306–320). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Floyd, F. J., & Bakeman, R. (2006). Coming-out across the life course: Implications of age and his-
torical context.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 35, 287–297. 
 Floyd, K. (2006).  Communicating affection: Interpersonal behavior and social context. New York: 
 Cambridge University Press. 
 Floyd, K., Boren, J. P., Hannawa, A. F., Hesse, C., McEwan, B., & Veksler, A. E. (2009). Kissing in 
marital and cohabiting relationships: Effects of blood lipids, stress, and relationship satisfac-
tion.  Western Journal of Communication, 73, 113–133. 
 Floyd, K., Mikkelson, A. C., Hesse, C., & Pauley, P. M. (2007a). Affectionate writing reduces total 
cholesterol: Two randomized, controlled trials.  Human Communication Research, 33, 119–142. 
 Floyd, K., Mikkelson, A. C., Tafoya, M. A., et al. (2007b). Human affection exchange: XIII. Affec-
tionate communication accelerates neuroendocrine stress recovery.  Health Communication, 
22, 123–132. 
 Floyd, K., & Pauley, P. M. (2011). Affectionate communication is good, except when it isn’t: On 
the dark side of expressing affection. In W. Cupach & B. Spitzberg (Eds.),  The dark side of close 
relationships II (pp. 145–173). New York: Routledge. 
 Foa, U. G., Converse, J., Törnblom, K. Y., & Foa, E. B. (Eds.). (1993).  Resource theory: Explorations and 
applications. San Diego: Academic Press. 

References R-27
 Follingstad, D. R., & Rogers, M. J. (2013). Validity concerns in the measurement of women’s and 
men’s report of intimate partner violence . Sex Roles, 69, 149–167. 
 Ford, M. B., & Collins, N. L. (2010). Self-esteem moderates neuroendocrine and psychological 
responses to interpersonal rejection.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 405–419. 
 Forest, A. L., & Wood, J. V. (2012). When social networking is not working: Individuals with low 
self-esteem recognize but do not reap the benefits of self-disclosure on Facebook.  Psychological 
Science, 23, 295–302. 
 Forhan, S., Gottlieb, S. L., Sternberg, M., et al. (2009). Prevalence of sexually transmitted infections 
among female adolescents aged 14 to 19 in the United States.  Pediatrics,  124, 1505–1512. 
 Forrest, J. A., & Feldman, R. S. (2000). Detecting deception and judge’s involvement: Lower task 
involvement leads to better lie detection.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 118–125. 
 Forsyth, D. R., & Schlenker, B. R. (1977). Attributional egocentrism following performance of a 
competitive task.  Journal of Social Psychology, 102, 215–222. 
 Foster, J. D., & Misra, T. A. (2013). It did not mean anything (about me): Cognitive dissonance 
theory and the cognitive and affective consequences of romantic infidelity.  Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, 30, 835–857. 
 Foster, J. D., Shrira, I., & Campbell, W. K. (2004, February).  Subsequent relationships of the mate 
poached. Paper presented at the meeting of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, 
Austin, TX. 
 Foster, J. D., & Twenge, J. M. (2011). Narcissism and relationships: From light to dark. In W. Cupach 
& B. Spitzberg (Eds.),  The dark side of close relationships II (pp. 381–407). New York: Routledge. 
 Fournier, B., Brassard, A., & Shaver, P. R. (2011). Adult attachment and male aggression in couple 
relationships: The demand-withdraw communication pattern and relationship satisfaction as 
mediators.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 26, 1982–2003. 
 Fowler, K. A., & Westen, D. (2011). Subtyping male perpetrators of intimate partner violence.  Jour-
nal of Interpersonal Violence, 26, 607–639. 
 Fox, A. B., Bukatko, D., Hallahan, M., & Crawford, M. (2007). The medium makes a difference: 
Gender similarities and differences in instant messaging.  Journal of Language and Social Psychol-
ogy, 26, 389–397. 
 Fox, J., & Warber, K. M. (2013). Romantic relationship development in the age of Facebook: An 
exploratory study of emerging adults’ perceptions, motives, and behaviors.  Cyberpsychology, 
Behavior, and Social Networking, 16, 3–7. 
 Fox, J., Warber, K. M., & Makstaller, D. C. (2013). The role of Facebook in romantic relationship 
development: An exploration of Knapp’s relational stage model.  Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 30, 771–794. 
 Fraley, R. C. (2002). Attachment stability from infancy to adulthood: Meta-analysis and dynamic 
modeling of developmental mechanisms.  Personality and Social Psychology Review,  6, 123–151. 
 Fraley, R. C., & Davis, K. E. (1997). Attachment formation and transfer in young adults’ close 
friendships and romantic relationships.  Personal Relationships, 4, 131–144. 
 Fraley, R. C., Heffernan, M. E., Vicary, A. M., & Brumbaugh, C. C. (2011). The experiences in close 
relationships—Relationship structures questionnaire: A method for assessing attachment ori-
entations across relationships.  Psychological Assessment, 23, 615–625. 
 Fraley, R. C., Roisman, G. I., Booth-LaForce, C., Owen, M. T., & Holland, A. S. (2013). Interpersonal 
and genetic origins of adult attachment styles: A longitudinal study from infancy to early 
adulthood.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 817–838. 
 Fraley, R. C., & Waller, N. G. (1998). Adult attachment patterns: A test of the typological model. In 
J. A. Simpson & W. S. Rholes (Eds.),  Attachment theory and close relationships (pp. 77–114). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
 Franiuk, R., Cohen, D., & Pomerantz, E. M. (2002). Implicit theories of relationships: Implications 
for relationship satisfaction and longevity.  Personal Relationships,  9, 345–367. 
 Frank, M. G., Maroulis, A., & Griffin, D. J. (2013). The voice. In D. Matsumoto, M. Frank, & H. Hwang 
(Eds.),  Nonverbal communication: Science and applications (pp. 53–74). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Frank, M. G., & Svetieva, E. (2013). Deception. In D. Matsumoto, M. G. Frank, & H. S. Hwang (Eds.), 
 Nonverbal communication: Science and applications (pp. 121–144). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Frederick, D. A., & Haselton, M. G. (2007). Why is muscularity sexy? Tests of the fitness indicator 
hypothesis.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 1167–1183. 

R-28 
References
 Frederick, D., & IBP Project Members. (2011, January).  The International Body Project: Preferences for 
male muscularity and body fat across 10 world regions. Poster presented at the meeting of the Soci-
ety for Personality and Social Psychology, San Antonio, TX. 
 Frei, J. R., & Shaver, P. R. (2002). Respect in close relationships: Prototype definition, self-report 
assessment, and initial correlates.  Personal Relationships, 9, 121–139. 
 French, J. R. P., Jr., & Raven, B. H. (1959). The bases of social power. In D. Cartwright (Ed.),  Studies 
in social power (pp. 150–167). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press. 
 Frias-Navarro, D., Monterdi-i-Bort, H., Pascual-Soler, M., & Badenes-Ribera, L. (2014). Etiology of 
homosexuality and attitudes toward same-sex parenting: A randomized study.  Journal of Sex 
Research. doi: 10.1080/00224499.2013.802757 
 Friesen, M. D., & Fletcher, G. J. O. (2007). Exploring the lay representation of forgiveness: Conver-
gent and discriminant validity.  Personal Relationships, 14, 209–223. 
 Friesen, M. D., Fletcher, G. J. O., & Overall, N. C. (2005). A dyadic assessment of forgiveness in 
intimate relationships.  Personal Relationships, 12, 61–77. 
 Frieze, I. H., Olson, J. E., & Russell, J. (1991). Attractiveness and income for men and women in 
management.  Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 21, 1039–1057. 
 Frieze, I. H., Parsons, J. E., Johnson, P. B., Ruble, D. N., & Zellman, G. L. (1978).  Women and sex roles: 
A social psychological perspective. New York: Norton. 
 Frost, D. M. (2012). The narrative construction of intimacy and affect in relationship stories: Impli-
cations for relationship quality, stability, and mental health.  Journal of Social and Personal Rela-
tionships, 30, 247–269. 
 Fry, R. (2012, November).  No reversal in decline of marriage. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
 http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2012/11/20/no-reversal-in-decline-of-marriage/ 
 Frye, N. E., & Karney, B. R. (2004). Revision in memories of relationship development: Do biases 
persist over time?  Personal Relationships, 11, 79–97. 
 Fugère, M. A., Escoto, C., Cousins, A. J., Riggs, M. L., & Haerich, P. (2008). Sexual attitudes and 
double standards: A literature review focusing on participant gender and ethnic background. 
 Sexuality & Culture, 12, 169–182. 
 Fuglestad, P. T., & Snyder, M. (2009). Self-monitoring. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.),  Hand-
book of individual differences in social behavior (pp. 574–591). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Fuhrman, R. W., Flannagan, D., & Matamoros, M. (2009). Behavior expectations in cross-sex friend-
ships, same-sex friendships, and romantic relationships.  Personal Relationships, 16, 575–596. 
 Funder, D. C. (2012). Accurate personality judgment.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
21, 177–182. 
 Fung, H. H., & Carstensen, L. F. Carstensen, L. L. (2004). Motivational changes in response to 
blocked goals and foreshortened time: Testing alternatives to Socioemotional Selectivity The-
ory.  Psychology and Aging, 19, 68–78. 
 Fung, H. H., Carstensen, L. F. Carstensen, L. L., & Lang, F. R. (2001). Age-related patterns in social 
networks among European-Americans and African-Americans: Implications for socioemo-
tional selectivity across the life span.  International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 52, 
185–206. 
 Furnham, A., Petrides, K. V., & Constantinides, A. (2005). The effects of body mass index and waist-
to-hip ratio on ratings of female attractiveness, fecundity, and health.  Personality and Individual 
Differences, 38, 1823–1834. 
 Furnham, A., Swami, V., & Shah, K. (2006). Body weight, waist-to-hip ratio and breast size 
correlates of ratings of attractiveness and health.  Personality and Individual Differences, 41, 
443–454. 
 Gable, S. L. (2006). Approach and avoidance social motives and goals.  Journal of Personality, 74, 
175–222. 
 Gable, S. L., & Gosnell, C. L. (2013). Approach and avoidance behavior in interpersonal relation-
ships.  Emotion Review, 5, 269–274. 
 Gable, S. L., Gosnell, C. L., Maisel, N. C., & Stachman, A. (2012). Safely testing the alarm: Close 
others’ responses to personal positive events.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 103, 
963–981. 
 Gable, S. L., & Poore, J. (2008). Which thoughts count? Algorithms for evaluating satisfaction in 
relationships.  Psychological Science, 19, 1030–1036. 

References R-29
 Gable, S. L., & Reis, H. T. (2010). Good news! Capitalizing on positive events in an interpersonal 
context.  Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 195–257. 
 Gable, S. L., Reis, H. T., & Downey, G. (2003). He said, she said: A quasi-signal detection analysis of 
daily interactions between close relationship partners.  Psychological Science, 14, 100–105. 
 Gagné, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (2003). Identification and the commitment shift: Accounting for gender 
differences in relationship illusions.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 907–919. 
 Gagné, F. M., & Lydon, J. E. (2004). Bias and accuracy in close relationships: An integrative review. 
 Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 322–338. 
 Galinha, I. C., Oishi, S., Pereira, C., Wirtz, D., & Esteves, F. (2013). The role of personality traits, 
attachment style, and satisfaction with relationships in the subjective well-being of  Americans, 
Portuguese, and Mozambicans.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 44, 416–437. 
 Galinsky, A. D., Magee, J. C., Inesi, M. E., & Gruenfeld, D. H. (2006). Power and perspectives not 
taken.  Psychological Science, 17, 1068–1074. 
 Galinsky, A. M., & Sonenstein, F. L. (2013). Relationship commitment, perceived equity, and sexual 
enjoyment among young adults in the United States.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 93–104. 
 Gallrein, A. B., Carlson, E. N., Holstein, M., & Leising, D. (2013). You spy with your little eye: 
People are “blind” to some of the ways in which they are consensually seen by others.  Journal 
of Research in Personality, 47, 464–471. 
 Gallup, G. G., Jr., & Burch, R. L. (2006). The semen-displacement hypothesis: Semen hydrau-
lics and the intra-pair copulation proclivity model of female infidelity. In S. M. Platek & 
T. K.  Shackelford (Eds.),  Female infidelity and paternal uncertainty: Evolutionary perspectives on 
male anti-cuckoldry tactics (pp. 129–140). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Galperin, A., & Haselton, M. G. (2010). Predictors of how often and when people fall in love. 
 Evolutionary Psychology, 8, 5–28. 
 Galperin, A., & Haselton, M. G. (2013). Error management and the evolution of cognitive bias. In 
J. P. Forgas, K. Fiedler, & C. Sedikides (Eds.),  Social thinking and interpersonal behavior 
(pp. 45–63). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Galperin, A., Haselton, M. G., Frederick, D. A., et al. (2013). Sexual regret: Evidence for evolved sex 
differences.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 1145–1161. 
 Galupo, M. P. (2009). Cross-category friendship patterns: Comparison of heterosexual and sexual 
minority adults.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 26, 811–831. 
 Gangestad, S. W. (2012). The utility of evolutionary perspectives on romantic relationships: 
 Women’s estrus as illustration. In L. Campbell & T. J. Loving (Eds.),  Interdisciplinary research 
on close relationships: The case for integration (pp. 205–226). Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association. 
 Gangestad, S. W., & Buss, D. M. (1993). Pathogen prevalence and human mate preference.  Ethology 
and Sociobiology, 14, 89–96. 
 Gangestad, S. W., & Simpson, J. A. (2000). The evolution of human mating: Trade-offs and strategic 
pluralism.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 23, 573–644. 
 Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., & Garver-Apgar, C. E. (2010). Fertility in the cycle predicts wom-
en’s interest in sexual opportunism.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 31, 400–411. 
 Garcia, J. R., Reiber, C., Massey, S. G., & Merriwether, A. M. (2012). Sexual hookup culture: 
A review.  Review of General Psychology, 16, 161–176. 
 Garcia, L. T., & Markey, C. (2007). Matching in sexual experience for married, cohabitating, and 
dating couples.  Journal of Sex Research, 44, 250–255. 
 Gardner, W. L., & Seeley, E. A. (2001). Confucius, ’jen,’ and the benevolent use of power: The 
interdependent self as a psychological contract preventing exploitation. In A. Y. Lee-Chai & 
J. A. Bargh (Eds.),  The use and abuse of power: Multiple perspectives on the causes of corruption 
(pp. 263–280). Philadelphia: Psychology Press. 
 Garver-Apgar, C. E., Gangestad, S. W., Thornhill, R., Miller, R. D., & Olp, J. J. (2006). Major histo-
compatibility complex alleles, sexual responsivity, and unfaithfulness in romantic couples. 
 Psychological Science, 17, 830–835. 
 Gatzeva, M., & Paik, A. (2011). Emotional and physical satisfaction in noncohabitating, cohabiting, 
and marital relationships: The importance of jealous conflict.  Journal of Sex Research, 48, 29–42. 
 Gaunt, R. (2006). Couple similarity and marital satisfaction: Are similar spouses happier?  Journal of 
Personality, 74, 1401–1420. 

R-30 
References
 Gayle, B. M., Preiss, R. W., & Allen, M. (2002). A meta-analytic interpretation of intimate and non-
intimate interpersonal conflict. In M. Allen, R. W. Preiss, B. M. Gayle, & N. A. Burrell (Eds.), 
 Interpersonal communication research: Advances through meta-analysis (pp. 345–368). Mahwah, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Geary, D. C. (2000). Evolution and proximate expression of human paternal investment.  Psychologi-
cal Bulletin, 126, 55–77. 
 Geary, D. C. (2010).  Male, female: The evolution of human sex differences (2nd ed.) . Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 
 Gebauer, J. E., Leary, M. R., & Neberich, W. (2012). Big two personality and big three mate prefer-
ences: Similarity attracts, but country-level mate preferences crucially matter.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 1579–1593. 
 Gere, J., MacDonald, G., Joel, S., Spielmann, S. S., & Impett, E. A. (2013). The independent contribu-
tions of social reward and threat perceptions to romantic commitment.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 105, 961–977. 
 Gerressu, M., Mercer, C. H., Graham, C. A., Wellings, K., & Johnson, A. M. (2008). Prevalence of 
masturbation and associated factors in a British national probability survey.  Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 37, 266–278. 
 Gervais, S. J., Holland, A. M., & Dodd, M. D. (2013). My eyes are up here: The nature of the objecti-
fying gaze toward women.  Sex Roles, 69, 557–570. 
 Giancola, P. R., Josephs, R. A., Parrott, D. J., & Duke, A. A. (2010). Alcohol myopia revisited: 
Clarifying aggression and other acts of disinhibition through a distorted lens.  Perspectives on 
 Psychological Science, 5, 265–278. 
 Gibbs, L. (2013).  Working women with children in the household, 2010. National Center for Family & Mar-
riage Research. Retrieved from  http://ncfmr.bgsu.edu/pdf/family_profiles/file126959.pdf  
 Gidycz, C. A., Van Wynsberghe, A., & Edwards, K. M. (2008). Prediction of women’s utilization of 
resistance strategies in a sexual assault situation: A prospective study.  Journal of Interpersonal 
Violence, 23, 571–588. 
 Gigerenzer, G., Galesic, M., & Garcia-Retamero, R. (2014). Stereotypes about men’s and women’s 
intuitions: A study of two nations.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 45, 62–81. 
 Gildersleeve, K., DeBruine, L., Haselton, M. G., et al. (2013). Shifts in women’s mate preferences 
across the ovulatory cycle: A critique of Harris (2011) and Harris (2012).  Sex Roles, 69, 516–524. 
 Gildersleeve, K., Haselton, M. G., & Fales, M. R. (2014). Do women’s mate preferences change across 
the ovulatory cycle? A meta-analytic review.  Psychological Bulletin. http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/
a0035438  
 Gildersleeve, K. A., Haselton, M. G., Larson, C. M., & Pillsworth, E. G. (2012). Body odor attrac-
tiveness as a cue of impending ovulation in women: Evidence from a study using hormone-
confirmed ovulation.  Hormones and Behavior, 61, 157–166. 
 Gill, M. J., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (2004). On what it means to know someone: A matter of pragmatics. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 405–418. 
 Gillath, O., Bahns, A. J., Ge, F., & Crandall, C. S. (2012). Shoes as a source of first impressions. 
 Journal of Research in Personality, 46, 423–430. 
 Gillath, O., Sesko, A. K., Shaver, P. R., & Chun, D. S. (2010). Attachment, authenticity, and hon-
esty: Dispositional and experimentally induced security can reduce self- and other-deception. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 841–855. 
 Giordano, P. C., Soto, D. A., Manning, W. D., & Longmore, M. A. (2010). The characteristics of 
romantic relationships associated with teen dating violence.  Social Science Research, 39, 863–874. 
 Girme, Y. U., Overall, N. C., & Faingataa, S. (2014). “Date nights” take two: The maintenance func-
tion of shared relationship activities.  Personal Relationships, 21, 125–149. 
 Girme, Y. U., Overall, N. C., & Simpson, J. A. (2013). When visibility matters: Short-term versus 
long-term costs and benefits of visible and invisible support.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 39, 1441–1454. 
 Givertz, M., Woszidlo, A., Segrin, C., & Knutson, K. (2013). Direct and indirect effects of attach-
ment orientation on relationship quality and loneliness in married couples.  Journal of Social and 
 Personal Relationships, 30, 1096–1120. 
 Gladue, B. A., & Delaney, H. J. (1990). Gender differences in perception of attractiveness of men 
and women in bars.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 16, 378–391. 

References R-31
 Glass, S. P., & Staeheli, J. C. (2003).  Not ’just friends’: Protect your relationship from infidelity and heal the 
trauma of betrayal. New York: Free Press. 
 Glasser, C. L., Robnett, B., & Feliciano, C. (2009). Internet daters’ body type preferences: Race-
ethnic and gender differences.  Sex Roles, 61, 14–33. 
 Glenn, N. D. (2007). Marriage and modernity: Some evidence from the United States. In A. Loveless 
& T. B. Holman (Eds.),  The family in the new millennium  (Vol. 2, pp. 81–85). Westport, CT: Praeger. 
 Glenn, N. D., Uecker, J. E., & Love, R. W. B., Jr. (2010). Later first marriage and marital success. 
 Social Science Research, 39, 787–800. 
 Godbout, N., Dutton, D. G., Lussier, Y., & Sabourin, S. (2009). Early exposure to violence,  domestic 
violence, attachment representations, and marital adjustment.  Personal Relationships, 16, 
365–384. 
 Goel, S., Mason, W., & Watts, D. J. (2010). Real and perceived attitude agreement in social net-
works.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 611–621. 
 Goetz, A. T., Shackelford, T. K., Weekes-Shackelford, V. A., Euler, H. A., Hoier, S., Schmitt, D. P., 
& LaMunyon, C. W. (2005). Mate retention, semen displacement, and human sperm competi-
tion: A preliminary investigation of tactics to prevent and correct female infidelity.  Personality 
and Individual Differences, 38, 749–763. 
 Goldberg, A. E., & Smith, J. Z. (2013). Predictors of psychological adjustment in early placed 
adopted children with lesbian, gay, and heterosexual parents.  Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 
431–442. 
 Golden, S. D., Perreira, K. M., & Durrance, C. P. (2013). Troubled times, troubled relationships: 
How economic resources, gender beliefs, and neighborhood disadvantage influence intimate 
partner violence.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 28, 2134–2155. 
 Gollwitzer, M., Meder, M., & Schmitt, M. (2011). What gives victims satisfaction when they seek 
revenge?  European Journal of Social Psychology, 41, 364–374. 
 Gonsalkorale, K., & Williams, K. D. (2007). The KKK won’t let me play: Ostracism even by a 
despised outgroup hurts.  European Journal of Social Psychology, 37, 1176–1186. 
 Gonzaga, G. C., Carter, S., & Buckwalter, J. G. (2010). Assortative mating, convergence, and satis-
faction in married couples.  Personal Relationships, 17, 634–644. 
 Gonzaga, G. C., Haselton, M. G., Smurda, J., Davies, M. S., & Poore, J. C. (2008). Love, desire, and the 
suppression of thoughts of romantic alternatives.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 29, 119–126. 
 Gonzaga, G. C., Setrakian, H., & Lee, E. (2012, January).  Assortative mating, personality similarity, and 
relationship satisfaction in committed gay male and lesbian relationships. Poster presented at the 
meeting of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, San Diego. 
 Gonzaga, G. C., Turner, R. A., Keltner, D., Campos, B., & Altemus, M. (2006). Romantic love and 
sexual desire in close relationships.  Emotion, 6, 163–179. 
 Goodfriend, W., & Agnew, C. R. (2008). Sunken costs and desired plans: Examining different 
types of investments in close relationships.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 
1639–1652. 
 Goodwin, R., & Gaines, S. O., Jr. (2004). Relationship beliefs and relationship quality across cul-
tures: Country as a moderator of dysfunctional beliefs and relationship quality in three former 
Communist societies.  Personal Relationships, 11, 267–279. 
 Goodwin, S. A., Fiske, S. T., Rosen, L. D., & Rosenthal, A. M. (2002). The eye of the beholder: 
Romantic goals and impression biases.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 232–241. 
 Gordon, A. M., & Chen, S. (2014). The role of sleep in interpersonal conflict: Do sleepless nights 
mean worse fights?  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 5, 168–175. 
 Gordon, C. L., Arnette, R. A. M., & Smith, R. E. (2011). Have you thanked your spouse today? 
Felt and expressed gratitude among married couples.  Personality and Individual Differences, 50, 
339–343. 
 Gore, J. S., & Cross, S. E. (2011). Conflicts of interest: Relational self-construal and decision making 
in interpersonal contexts.  Self and Identity, 10, 185–202. 
 Gormley, B., & Lopez, F. G. (2010). Psychological abuse perpetration in college dating relationships: 
Contributions of gender, stress, and adult attachment orientations.  Journal of Interpersonal 
Violence, 25, 204–218. 
 Gorrese, A., & Ruggieri, R. (2013). Peer attachment and self-esteem: A meta-analytic review.  Person-
ality and Individual Differences, 55, 559–568. 

R-32 
References
 Gosling, S. D., Sandy, C. J., John, O. P., & Potter, J. (2010). Wired but not weird: The promise of the 
Internet in reaching more diverse samples.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 33, 94–95. 
 Gottman, J. M. (1993). The roles of conflict engagement, escalation, and avoidance in marital inter-
action: A longitudinal view of five types of couples.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 61, 6–15. 
 Gottman, J. M. (1994a).  What predicts divorce? The relationship between marital processes and marital 
outcomes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Gottman, J. M. (1994b).  Why marriages succeed or fail. New York: Simon & Schuster. 
 Gottman, J. M. (1999).  The marriage clinic: A scientifically-based marital therapy. New York: Norton. 
 Gottman, J. M. (2011).  The science of trust: Emotional attunement for couples. New York: Norton. 
 Gottman, J. M., & Carrère, S. (1994). Why can’t men and women get along? Developmental roots 
and marital inequities. In D. J. Canary & L. Stafford (Eds.),  Communication and relational main-
tenance (pp. 203–229). San Diego: Academic Press. 
 Gottman, J. M., Carrère, S., Swanson, C., & Coan, J. A. (2000). Reply to ’From basic research to inter-
ventions.’  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 265–273. 
 Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (1992). Marital processes predictive of later dissolution: Behav-
ior, physiology, and health.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, 221–233. 
 Gottman, J. M., & Levenson, R. W. (2000). The timing of divorce: Predicting when a couple will 
divorce over a 14–year period.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 737–745. 
 Gottman, J. M., Levenson, R. W., Gross, J., Frederickson, B. L., McCoy, K., Rosenthal, L., Ruef, A., 
& Yoshimoto, D. (2003). Correlates of gay and lesbian couples’ relationship satisfaction and 
relationship dissolution.  Journal of Homosexuality, 45, 23–43. 
 Gottman, J. M., Notarius, C., Gonso, J., & Markman, H. (1976).  A couple’s guide to communication. 
Champaign, IL: Research Press. 
 Gouin, J., Carter, S. C., Pournajafi-Nazarloo, H., et al. (2010). Marital behavior, oxytocin, vasopres-
sin, and wound healing.  Psychoneuroendocrinology, 35, 1082–1090. 
 Gover, A. R., Kaukinen, C., & Fox, K. A. (2008). The relationship between violence in the  family 
of origin and dating violence among college students.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 23, 
1667–1693. 
 Graber, E. C., Laurenceau, J., Miga, E., Chango, J., & Coan, J. (2011). Conflict and love: Predicting 
newlywed marital outcomes from two interaction contexts.  Journal of Family Psychology, 25, 
541–550. 
 Graham, A. M., Fisher, P. A., & Pfeifer, J. H. (2013). What sleeping babies hear: A functional MRI 
study of interparental conflict and infants’ emotion processing.  Psychological Science, 24, 
782–789. 
 Graham, J. M. (2011). Measuring love in romantic relationships: A meta-analysis.  Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 28, 748–771. 
 Gray, J. (1992).  Men are from Mars, women are from Venus. New York: HarperCollins. 
 Green, B. L., & Kenrick, D. T. (1994). The attractiveness of gender-typed traits at different relation-
ship levels: Androgynous characteristics may be desirable after all.  Personality and Social Psy-
chology Bulletin, 20, 244–253. 
 Green, M. C., & Sabini, J. (2006). Gender, socioeconomic status, age, and jealousy: Emotional 
responses to infidelity in a national sample.  Emotion, 6, 330–334. 
 Greenberg, L. S., & Goldman, R. N. (2008). Fear in couples therapy. In L. Greenberg & R. Goldman 
(Eds.),  Emotion-focused couples therapy: The dynamics of emotion, love, and power (pp. 283–313). 
Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Greenfield, P. M. (2013). The changing psychology of culture from 1800 through 2000.  Psychological 
Science, 24, 1722–1731. 
 Greenman, P. S., & Johnson, S. M. (2013). Process research on emotionally focused therapy (EFT) 
for couples: Linking theory to practice.  Family Process, 52, 46–61. 
 Greenstein, T. N., & Davis, S. N. (2006). Cross-national variation in divorce: Effects of women’s 
power, prestige and dependence.  Journal of Comparative Family Studies, 37, 253–273. 
 Greiling, H., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Women’s sexual strategies: The hidden dimension of extra-pair 
mating.  Personality and Individual Differences, 28, 929–963. 

References R-33
 Greitemeyer, T. (2010). Effects of reciprocity on attraction: The role of partner’s physical attractive-
ness.  Personal Relationships, 17, 317–330. 
 Grello, C. M., Welsh, D. P., & Harper, M. S. (2006). No strings attached: The nature of casual sex in 
college students.  Journal of Sex Research, 43, 255–267. 
 Grieve, R., & Hayes, J. (2013). Does perceived ability to deceive  5 ability to deceive? Predictive 
validity of the perceived ability to deceive (PATD) scale.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
54, 311–314. 
 Griffitt, W., & Veitch, R. (1974). Preacquaintance attitude similarity and attraction revisited: Ten 
days in a fall-out shelter.  Sociometry, 37, 163–173. 
 Griskevicius, V., Tybur, J. M., Ackerman, J. M., Delton, A. W., Robertson, T. E., & White, A. E. 
(2012). The financial consequences of too many men: Sex ratio effects on saving, borrowing, 
and spending.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 69–80. 
 Grote, N. K., & Clark, M. S. (2001). Perceiving unfairness in the family: Cause or consequence of 
marital distress?  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 281–293. 
 Grote, N. K., & Frieze, I. H. (1994). The measurement of friendship-based love in intimate relation-
ships.  Personal Relationships, 1, 275–300. 
 Grote, N. K., & Frieze, I. H. (1998). “Remembrance of things past”: Perceptions of marital love from 
its beginnings to the present.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 15, 91–109. 
 Grov, C., Gillespie, B. J., Royce, T., & Lever, J. (2011). Perceived consequences of casual online sexual 
activities on heterosexual relationships: A U.S. online survey.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 
429–439. 
 Guastella, A. J., & MacLeod, C. (2012). A critical review of the influence of oxytocin nasal spray on 
social cognition in humans: Evidence and future directions.  Hormones and Behavior, 61, 410-418. 
 Guéguen, N. (2009). Menstrual cycle phases and female receptivity to a courtship solicitation: An 
evaluation in a nightclub.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 30, 351–355. 
 Guéguen, N. (2011). Effects of solicitor sex and attractiveness on receptivity to sexual offers: A field 
study.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 915–919. 
 Guéguen, N. (2012). Makeup and menstrual cycle: Near ovulation, women use more cosmetics. 
 Psychological Record, 62, 541–548. 
 Guéguen, N., & Lamy, L. (2012). Men’s social status and attractiveness: Women’s receptivity to 
men’s date requests.  Swiss Journal of Psychology, 71, 157–160. 
 Guerrero, L. K. (1998). Attachment-style differences in the experience and expression of romantic 
jealousy.  Personal Relationships, 5, 273–291. 
 Guerrero, L. K., & Andersen, P. A. (1998). Jealousy experience and expression in romantic rela-
tionships. In P. A. Andersen & L. K. Guerrero (Eds.),  Handbook of communication and emotion 
(pp. 155–188). San Diego: Academic Press. 
 Guerrero, L. K., La Valley, A. G., & Farinelli, L. (2008). The experience and expression of anger, 
guilt, and sadness in marriage: An equity theory explanation.  Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 25, 699–724. 
 Guerrero, L. K., Trost, M. R., & Yoshimura, S. M. (2005). Romantic jealousy: Emotions and commu-
nicative responses.  Personal Relationships, 12, 233–252. 
 Guilmoto, C. Z. (2012). Skewed sex ratios at birth and future marriage squeeze in China and India, 
2005–2100.  Demography, 49, 77–100. 
 Guinote, A., Weick, M., & Cai, A. (2012). Does power magnify the expression of dispositions? 
 Psychological Science, 23, 475–482. 
 Gunnery, S. D., Hall, J. A., & Ruben, M. A. (2013). The deliberate Duchenne smile: Individual differ-
ences in expressive control.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 37, 29–141. 
 Gupta, U., & Singh, P. (1982). Exploratory study of love and liking and type of marriages.  Indian 
Journal of Applied Psychology, 19, 92–97. 
 Gurman, A. S. (2013). Behavioral couple therapy: Building a secure base for therapeutic integration. 
 Family Process, 52, 115–138. 
 Gute, G., Eshbaugh, E. M., & Wiersma, J. (2008). Sex for you, but not for me: Discontinuity in 
undergraduate emerging adults’ definitions of “having sex.”  Journal of Sex Research, 45, 
329–337. 

R-34 
References
 Guthrie, J., & Kunkel, A. (2013). Tell me sweet (and not-so-sweet) little lies: Deception in romantic 
relationships.  Communication Studies, 64, 141–157. 
 Guttentag, M., & Secord, P. F. (1983).  Too many women? The sex ratio question. Beverly Hills, 
CA: Sage. 
 Guttmacher Institute. (2012, February).  Facts on American teens’ sources if information about sex. 
Retrieved from  http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/FB-Teen-Sex-Ed.html 
 Guttmacher Institute. (2013, June).  Facts on American teens’ sexual and reproductive health. Retrieved 
from  http://www.guttmacher.org/pubs/FB-ATSRH.pdf 
 Ha, T., van den Ber, J. E. M., Engels, R. C. M. E., & Lichtwarck-Aschoff, A. (2012). Effects of attrac-
tiveness and status in dating desire in homosexual and heterosexual men and women.  Archives 
of Sexual Behavior, 41, 673–682. 
 Hadden, B. W., Smith, C. V., & Webster, G. D. (2014). Relationship duration moderates associations 
between attachment and relationship quality: Meta-analytic support for the temporal adult 
romantic attachment model.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 18, 42–58. 
 Haden, S. C., & Hojjat, M. (2006). Aggressive responses to betrayal: Type of relationship, victim’s 
sex, and nature of aggression.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 23, 101–116. 
 Haeffel, G. J., Voelz, Z. R., & Joiner, T. E., Jr. (2007). Vulnerability to depressive symptoms: Clarify-
ing the role of excessive reassurance seeking and perceived social support in an interpersonal 
model of depression.  Cognition & Emotion, 21, 681–688. 
 Hafen, C. A., Laursen, B., Burk, W. J., Kerr, M., & Stattin, H. (2011). Homophily in stable and unsta-
ble adolescent friendships: Similarity breeds constancy.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
51, 607–612. 
 Häfner, M., & IJzerman, H. (2011). The face of love: Spontaneous accommodation as social emotion 
regulation.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 1551–1563. 
 Halatsis, P., & Christakis, N. (2009). The challenge of sexual attraction within heterosexuals’ cross-
sex friendship.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 26, 919–937. 
 Hald, G. M., & Høgh-Olesen, H. (2010). Receptivity to sexual invitations from strangers of the 
opposite gender.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 31, 453–458. 
 Halevy, R., Shalvi, S., & Verschuere, B. (2014). Being honest about dishonesty: Correlating self-
reports and actual lying.  Human Communication Research, 40, 54–72. 
 Halford, W. K. (2011).  Marriage and relationship education: What works and how to provide it. New York: 
Guilford Press. 
 Halford, W. K., & Bodenmann, G. (2013). Effects of relationship education on maintenance of cou-
ple relationship satisfaction.  Clinical Psychology Review, 33, 512–525. 
 Halford, W. K., Sanders, M. R., & Behrens, B. C. (2000). Repeating the errors of our parents? Family-
of-origin spouse violence and observed conflict management in engaged couples.  Family 
Process, 39, 219–235. 
 Halford, W. K., & Sweeper, S. (2013). Trajectories of adjustment to couple relationship separation. 
 Family Process, 52, 228–243. 
 Hall, E. T. (1966).  The hidden dimension. Garden City, NY: Doubleday. 
 Hall, J. A. (2012). Friendship standards: The dimensions of ideal expectations.  Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, 29, 884–907. 
 Hall, J. A., Andrzejewski, S. A., & Yopchick, J. E. (2009). Psychosocial correlates of interpersonal 
sensitivity: A meta-analysis.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 33, 149–180. 
 Hall, J. A., Coats, E. J., & LeBeau, L. S. (2005). Nonverbal behavior and the vertical dimension of 
social relations: A meta-analysis.  Psychological Bulletin, 131, 898–924. 
 Hall, J. A., & Mast, M. S. (2008). Are women always more interpersonally sensitive than men? 
Impact of goals and content domain.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 144–155. 
 Hall, J. A., Park, N., Song, H., & Cody, M. J. (2010). Strategic misrepresentation in online dating: The 
effects of gender, self-monitoring, and personality traits.  Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 27, 117–135. 
 Hall, J. K., Hutton, S. B., & Morgan, M. J. (2010). Sex differences in scanning faces: Does attention 
to the eyes explain female superiority in facial expression recognition?  Cognition & Emotion, 
24, 629–637. 

References R-35
 Halpern, C. T., & Kaestle, C. E. (2014). Sexuality in emerging adulthood. In D. L. Tolman, 
L.   Diamond, J. Bauermeister et al. (Eds.),  APA handbook of sexuality and psychology (Vol. 1, 
pp. 487–522). Washington, DC:  American Psychological Association. 
 Halpern-Meekin, S., Manning, W. D., Giordano, P. C. & Longmore, M. A. (2012). Relationship 
churning in emerging adulthood: On/off relationships and sex with an ex.  Journal of Adoles-
cent Research, 28, 166–188. 
 Halpern-Meekin, S., & Tach, L. (2013). Discordance in couples’ reporting of courtship stages: Impli-
cations for measurement and marital quality.  Social Science Research, 42, 1143–1155. 
 Hamermesh, D. (2013).  Beauty pays: Why attractive people are more successful. Princeton, NJ: Princeton 
University Press. 
 Hamermesh, D. S., & Parker, A. M. (2005). Beauty in the classroom: Instructors’ pulchritude and 
putative pedagogical productivity.  Economics of Education Review, 24, 369–376. 
 Hamilton, B. E., Martin, J. A., & Ventura, S. J. (2013). Births: Preliminary data for 2012.  National Vital 
Statistics Reports, 62 (3), 1–20. 
 Hampel, A. D., & Vangelisti, A. L. (2008). Commitment expectations in romantic relationships: 
Application of a prototype interaction-pattern model.  Personal Relationships, 15, 81–102. 
 Hampson, E., van Anders, S. M., & Mullin, L. I. (2006). A female advantage in the recognition of 
emotional facial expressions: Test of an evolutionary hypothesis.  Evolution and Human Behav-
ior, 27, 401–416. 
 Hannon, P. A., Finkel, E. J., Kumashiro, M., & Rusbult, C. E. (2012). The soothing effects of forgive-
ness on victims’ and perpetrators’ blood pressure.  Personal Relationships, 19, 279–289. 
 Hanson, T. L., McLanahan, S. S., & Thomson, E. (1998). Windows on divorce: Before and after. 
 Social Science Research, 27, 329–349. 
 Harasymchuk, C., & Fehr, B. (2012). Development of a prototype-based measure of relational bore-
dom.  Personal Relationships, 19, 162–181. 
 Harasymchuk, C., & Fehr, B. (2013). A prototype analysis of relational boredom.  Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, 30, 627–646. 
 Harden, K. P. (2014). Genetic influences on adolescent sexual behavior: Why genes matter for envi-
ronmentally oriented researchers.  Psychological Bulletin, 140, 434–465. 
 Hardie, J. H., & Lucas, A. (2010). Economic factors and relationship quality among young couples: 
Comparing cohabitation and marriage.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 1141–1154. 
 Harkless, L. E., & Fowers, B. J. (2005). Similarities and differences in relational boundaries among 
heterosexuals, gay men, and lesbians.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 29, 167–176. 
Harinck, F., & De Dreu, C. K. W. (2011). When does taking a break help in negotiations? The influ-
ence of breaks and social motivation on negotiation processes and outcomes. Negotiation and 
Conflict Management Research, 4, 33–46.
 Harknett, K. (2008). Mate availability and unmarried parent relationships.  Demography, 45, 555–571. 
 Harris, C. R. (2013). Shifts in masculinity preferences across the menstrual cycle: Still not there.  Sex 
Roles, 69, 507–515. 
 Harris, C. R., Chabot, A., & Mickes, L. (2013). Shifts in methodology and theory in menstrual cycle 
research on attraction.  Sex Roles, 69, 525–535. 
 Harris, C. R., & Darby, R. S. (2010). Jealousy in adulthood. In S. L. Hart & M. Legerstee (Eds.), 
 Handbook of jealousy: Theory, research, and multidisciplinary approaches (pp. 547–571). Malden, 
MA: Blackwell. 
 Harris, M. J., & Garris, C. P. (2008). You never get a second chance to make a first impression: 
Behavioral consequences of first impressions. In N. Ambady & J. Skowronski (Eds.),  First 
impressions (pp. 147–168). New York: Guilford. 
 Hartnett, J. L., & Skowronski, J. J. (2010). Affective forecasts and the Valentine’s Day shootings at 
NIU: People are resilient, but unaware of it.  Journal of Positive Psychology, 5, 275–280. 
 Harvey, J. H., & Fine, M. A. (2006). Social construction of accounts in the process of relationship 
termination. In M. A. Fine & J. H. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of divorce and relationship dissolution 
(pp. 189–199). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Haselton, M. G., & Buss, D. M. (2000). Error Management Theory: A new perspective on biases in 
cross-sex mind reading.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 81–91. 

R-36 
References
 Haselton, M. G., Buss, D. M., Oubiad, V., & Angleitner, A. (2005). Sex, lies, and strategic interfer-
ence: The psychology of deception between the sexes.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
31, 3–23. 
 Haselton, M. G., & Galperin, A. (2013). Error management in relationships. In J. A. Simpson & 
L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 234–254). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Haselton, M. G., & Gildersleeve, K. (2011). Can men detect ovulation?  Current Directions in Psycho-
logical Science, 20, 87–92. 
 Hatfield, E., & Rapson, R. L. (2008). Passionate love and sexual desire: Multidisciplinary perspec-
tives. In J. P. Forgas & J. Fitness (Eds.),  Social relationships: Cognitive, affective and motivational 
processes (pp. 21–37). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Hatfield, E., & Rapson, R. L. (2012). Equity theory in close relationships, In P. Van Lange, 
A. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.),  Handbook of theories of social psychology (Vol. 2, 
pp. 200–217). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Hatfield, E., Rapson, R. L., & Martel, L. D. (2007). Passionate love and sexual desire. In S. Kitayama &  
 D. Cohen (Eds.),  Handbook of cultural psychology (pp. 760–779). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Hatfield, E., & Sprecher, S. (1986). Measuring passionate love in intimate relationships.  Journal of 
Adolescence, 9, 383–410. 
 Hawkins, A. J. (2012). Promoting positive pathways for youth and young adults to healthy relation-
ships and marriages: A feasible public policy agenda. In P. Noller & G. C. Karantzas (Eds.),  The 
Wiley-Blackwell handbook of couple and family relationships (pp. 423–436). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Hawkley, L. C., Browne, M. W., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2005). How can I connect with thee? Let me 
count the ways.  Psychological Science, 16, 798–803. 
 Hawkley, L. C., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2013). Social connectedness and health. In C. Hazan & M. I. Campa 
(Eds.),  Human bonding: The science of affectional ties  (pp. 343–364). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Haydon, A. A., Cheng, M. M., Herring, A. H., McRee, A., & Halpern, C. T. (2014). Prevalence and 
predictors of sexual inexperience in adulthood.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 43, 221–230. 
 Haydon, K. C., & Roisman, G. I. (2013). What’s past is prologue: Social developmental antecedents 
of close relationships. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close rela-
tionships (pp. 750–770). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Hazan, C., & Shaver, P. (1987). Romantic love conceptualized as an attachment process.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 511–524. 
 Hazan, C., & Zeifman, D. (1994). Sex and the psychological tether. In K. Bartholomew & D. Perlman 
(Eds.),  Attachment processes in adulthood (pp. 151–178). London: Jessica Kingsley. 
 Heaton, T. B. (2002). Factors contributing to increasing marital stability in the U.S.  Journal of Family 
Issues, 23, 392–409. 
 Heaven, P. C. L., Smith, L., Prabhakar, S. M., Abraham, J., & Mete, M. E. (2006). Personality and con-
flict communication patterns in cohabiting couples.  Journal of Research in Personality, 40, 829–840. 
 Hebl, M. R., Foster, J. B., Mannix, L. M., & Dovidio, J. F. (2002). Formal and interpersonal discrimi-
nation: A field study of bias toward homosexual applicants.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 28, 815–825. 
 Hecht, M. L., Marston, P. J., & Larkey, L. K. (1994). Love ways and relationship quality in hetero-
sexual relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 11, 25–43. 
 Hefner, V., & Wilson, B. J. (2013). From love at first sight to soul mate: The influence of romantic 
ideals in popular films on young people’s beliefs about relationships.  Communication Mono-
graphs, 80, 150–175. 
 Hehman, E., Leitner, J. B., Deegan, M. P., & Gaertner, S. L. (2013). Facial structure is indicative of 
explicit support for prejudicial beliefs.  Psychological Science, 24, 289–296. 
 Heider, F. (1958).  The psychology of interpersonal relations. New York: Wiley. 
 Heilman, M. E., & Wallen, A. S. (2010). Wimpy and undeserving of respect: Penalties for men’s 
gender-inconsistent success.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 664–667. 
 Heiman, J. R., Long, J. S., Smith, S. N., Fisher, W. A., Sand, M. S., & Rosen, R. C. (2011). Sexual 
satisfaction and relationship happiness in midlife and older couples in five countries.  Archives 
of Sexual Behavior, 40, 741–753. 

References R-37
 Hellmuth, J. C., & McNulty, J. K. (2008). Neuroticism, marital violence, and the moderating role of 
stress and behavioral skills.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 95, 166–180. 
 Helms, H. M., Proulx, C. M., Klute, M. M., McHale, S. M., & Crouter, A. C. (2006). Spouses’ gender-
typed attributes and their links with marital quality: A pattern analytic approach.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 23, 843–864. 
 Henderson, C. E., Hayslip, B., Jr., Sanders, L. M., & Louden, L. (2009). Grandmother-grandchild 
relationship quality predicts psychological adjustment among youth from divorced families. 
 Journal of Family Issues, 30, 1245–1264. 
 Henderson, L., & Zimbardo, P. (2010). Shyness, social anxiety, and social anxiety disorder. In 
S. Hofmann & P. DiBartolo (Eds.), Social anxiety: Clinical, developmental, and social perspectives 
(pp. 65–93). New York: Academic Press. 
 Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. S. (2006). Styles of romantic love. In R. J. Sternberg & K. Weis (Eds.), 
 The new psychology of love (pp. 149–170). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Hendrick, S. S., Dicke, A., & Hendrick, C. (1998). The Relationship Assessment Scale.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 15, 137–142. 
 Hendrick, S. S., & Hendrick, C. (1993). Lovers as friends.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
10, 459–466. 
 Hendrick, S. S., Hendrick, C., & Logue, E. M. (2010). Respect and the family.  Journal of Family Theory 
& Review, 2, 126–136. 
 Henline, B. H., Lamke, L. K., & Howard, M. D. (2007). Exploring perceptions of online infidelity. 
 Personal Relationships, 14, 113–128. 
 Henrich, J., Heine, S. J., & Norenzayan, A. (2010). The weirdest people in the world?  Behavioral and 
Brain Sciences, 33, 61–135. 
 Hepper, E. G., & Carnelley, K. B. (2012). Attachment and romantic relationships: The roles of work-
ing models of self and other. In M. A. Paludi (Ed.),  The psychology of love (Vol. 1, pp. 133–154). 
Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 
 Herbenick, D., Reece, M., Schick, V., Sanders, S. A., Dodge, B., & Fortenberry, J. D. (2010a). An 
event-level analysis of the sexual characteristics and composition among adults ages 18 to 59: 
Results from a national probability sample in the United States.  Journal of Sexual Medicine, 7 
(Suppl. 5), 346–361. 
 Herbenick, D., Reece, M., Schick, V., Sanders, S. A., Dodge, B., & Fortenberry, J. D. (2010b). Sexual 
behavior in the United States: Results from a national probability sample of men and women 
ages 14–94.  Journal of Sexual Medicine, 7 (Suppl. 5), 255–265. 
 Herbst, K. C., Gaertner, L., & Insko, C. A. (2003). My head says yes but my heart says no: Cognitive 
and affective attraction as a function of similarity to the ideal self.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 84, 1206–1219. 
 Herek, G. M. (2011). Anti-equality marriage amendments and sexual stigma.  Journal of Social Issues, 
67, 413–426. 
 Herek, G. M., Norton, A. T., Allen, T. J., & Sims, C. L. (2010). Demographic, psychological, and 
social characteristics of self-identified lesbian, gay, and bisexual adults in a U.S. probability 
sample.  Sexuality Research and Social Policy, 7, 176–200. 
 Hertenstein, M. J. (2011). The communicative functions of touch in adulthood. In M. Hertenstein 
& S. Weiss (Eds.),  The handbook of touch: Neuroscience, behavioral, and health perspectives 
(pp. 299–327). New York: Springer. 
 Hertenstein, M. J., Hansel, C. A., Butts, A. M., & Hile, S. N. (2009). Smile intensity in photographs 
predicts divorce later in life.  Motivation and Emotion, 33, 99–105. 
 Herz, R. S., & Inzlicht, M. (2002). Sex differences in response to physical and social factors involved 
in human mate selection.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 23, 359–364. 
 Hess, N. H., & Hagen, E. H. (2006). Sex differences in indirect aggression: Psychological evidence 
from young adults.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 27, 231–245. 
 Hetherington, E. M. (2003). Intimate pathways: Changing patterns in close personal relationships 
across time.  Family Relations, 52, 318–331. 
 Heyman, R. E., Hunt-Martorano, A. N., Malik, J., & Smith-Slep, A. M. (2009). Desired change in cou-
ples: Gender differences and effects on communication.  Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 474–484. 

R-38 
References
 Hill, C. A., Blakemore, J. E. O., & Drumm, P. (1997). Mutual and unrequited love in adolescence and 
young adulthood.  Personal Relationships, 4, 15–23. 
 Hill, P. L., Allemand, M., & Roberts, B. W. (2013). Examining the pathways between gratitude and 
self-rated physical health across adulthood.  Personality and Individual Differences, 54, 92–96. 
 Hill, P. L., Nickel, L. B., & Roberts, B. W. (2014). Are you in a healthy relationship? Linking consci-
entiousness to health via implementing and immunizing behaviors.  Journal of Personality. doi: 
10.1111/jopy.12051  
 Hill, S. E. (2007). Overestimation bias in mate competition.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 28, 118–123. 
 Hinchliff, S., & Gott, M. (2004). Intimacy, commitment, and adaptation: Sexual relationships within 
long-term marriages.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 21, 595–609. 
 Hines, D. A. (2007). Predictors of sexual coercion against women and men: A multilevel, multina-
tional study of university students.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 403–422. 
 Hitsch, G. J., Hortaçsu, A., & Ariely, D. (2010). What makes you click? Mate preferences in online 
dating.  Quantitative Marketing and Economics, 8, 393–427. 
 Hogerbrugge, M. J. A., Komter, A. E., & Scheepers, P. (2012). Dissolving long-term romantic relation-
ships: Assessing the role of the social context.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 320–342. 
 Hohmann-Marriott, B. E. (2006). Shared beliefs and the union stability of married and cohabiting 
couples.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 68, 1015–1028. 
 Hojjat, M., & Ayotte, B. J. (2013). Forgiveness and positive psychology. In M. Hojjat & D. Cramer 
(Eds.),  Positive psychology of love (pp. 121–133). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Holland, R. W., Roeder, U. R., van Baaren, R. B., Brandt, A. C., & Hannover, B. (2004). Don’t stand 
so close to me: The effects of self-construal on interpersonal closeness.  Psychological Science, 
15, 237–242. 
 Holleran, S. E., Mehl, M. R., & Levitt, S. (2009). Eavesdropping on social life: The accuracy of 
stranger ratings of daily behavior from thin slices of natural conversations.  Journal of Research 
in Personality, 43, 660–672. 
 Holley, S. R., Haase, C. M., & Levenson, R. W. (2013). Age-related changes in demand-withdraw 
communication behaviors.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 822–836. 
 Holley, S. R., Sturm, V. E., & Levenson, R. W. (2010). Exploring the basis for gender differences in 
the demand-withdraw pattern.  Journal of Homosexuality, 57, 666–684. 
 Holloway, R. A., Waldrip, A. M., & Ickes, W. (2009). Evidence that a  simpático self-schema accounts 
for differences in the self-concepts and social behavior of Latinos versus whites (and blacks). 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 1012–1028. 
 Holman, T. B., Galbraith, R. C., Timmons, N. M., Steed, A., & Tobler, S. B. (2009). Threats to paren-
tal and romantic attachment figures’ availability and adult attachment insecurity.  Journal of 
Family Issues, 30, 413–429. 
 Holman, T. B., & Jarvis, M. O. (2003). Hostile, volatile, avoiding, and validating couple-conflict 
types: An investigation of Gottman’s couple-conflict types.  Personal Relationships, 10, 267–282. 
 Holmberg, D., Blair, K. L., & Phillips, M. (2010). Women’s sexual satisfaction as a predictor of well-
being in same-sex versus mixed-sex relationships.  Journal of Sex Research, 47, 1–11. 
 Holmes, J. G. (2004). The benefits of abstract functional analysis in theory construction: The case of 
interdependence theory.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 8, 146–155. 
 Holmes, J. G., & Levinger, G. (1994). Paradoxical effects of closeness in relationships on perceptions 
of justice: An interdependence-theory perspective. In M. J. Lerner & G. Mikula (Eds.),  Entitle-
ment and the affectional bond: Justice in close relationships (pp. 149–173). New York: Plenum. 
 Holmes, J. G., & Wood, J. V. (2009). Interpersonal situations as affordances: The example of self-
esteem.  Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 250. 
 Holtgraves, T. (2011). Text messaging, personality, and the social context.  Journal of Research in 
 Personality, 45, 92–99. 
 Holtzman, N. S., & Strube, M. J. (2013). People with dark personalities tend to create a physically 
attractive veneer.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 461–467. 
 Holtzworth-Munroe, A., & Meehan, J. C. (2005). Partner violence and men: A focus on the 
male perpetrator. In W. M. Pinsof & J. Lebow (Eds.),  Family psychology: The art of the science 
(pp. 167–190). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Honeycutt, J. M. (1996). How “helpful” are self–help relational books? Common sense or counter-
intuitive information.  Personal Relationship Issues, 3, 1–3. 

References R-39
 Hopwood, C. J., Ansell, E. B., Pincus, A. L., Wright, A. G. C., Lukowitsky, M. R., & Roche, M. J. 
(2011). The circumplex structure of interpersonal sensitivities.  Journal of Personality, 79, 707–710. 
 Horan, S. M. (2012). Affection exchange theory and perceptions of relational transgressions.  Western 
Journal of Communication, 76, 109–126. 
 Horan, S. M., & Booth-Butterfield, M. (2013). Understanding the routine expression of deceptive 
affection in romantic relationships.  Communication Quarterly, 61, 195–216. 
 Horstman, J. (2012).  The Scientific American book of love, sex, and the brain: The neuroscience of how, 
when, why, and who we love. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 Hostetler, A. J., Desrochers, S., Kopko, K., & Moen, P. (2012). Marital and family satisfaction as 
a function of work-family demands and community resources: Individual- and couple-level 
analyses.  Journal of Family Issues, 33, 316–340. 
 Hostetter, A. B. (2011). When do gestures communicate? A meta-analysis.  Psychological Bulletin, 
137, 297–315. 
 Houts, R. M., Barnett-Walker, K. C., Paley, B., & Cox, M. J. (2008). Patterns of couple interaction 
during the transition to parenthood.  Personal Relationships, 15, 103–122. 
 Howard, E. S., Gardner, W. L., & Thompson, L. (2007). The role of the self-concept and the social 
context in determining the behavior of power holders: Self-construal in intergroup versus 
dyadic dispute resolution negotiations.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 93, 614–631. 
 Howard, J. W., & Dawes, R. M. (1976). Linear prediction of marital happiness.  Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 2, 478–480. 
 Howes, C. (2011). Friendship in early childhood. In K. Rubin, W. Bukowski, & B. Laursen (Eds.), 
 Handbook of peer interactions, relationships, and groups (pp. 180–194). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Howland, M., & Simpson, J. A. (2014). Attachment orientations and reactivity to humor in a social 
support context.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 31, 114–137.  
 Hoyt, T., & Yeater, E. A. (2011). Individual and situational influences on men’s responses to dating 
and social situations.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 26, 1723–1740. 
 Hrapczynski, K. M., Epstein, N. B., Welinich, C. A., & LaTaillade, J. J. (2011). Changes in negative 
attributions during couple therapy for abusive behavior: Relations to changes in satisfaction 
and behavior.  Journal of Marital & Family Therapy, 38, 117–132. 
 Hsueh, A. C., Morrison, K. R., & Doss, B. D. (2009). Qualitative reports of problems in cohabitating 
relationships: Comparisons to married and dating relationships.  Journal of Family Psychology, 
23, 236–246. 
 Huang, P. M., Smock, P. J., Manning, W. D., & Bergstrom-Lynch, C. A. (2011). He says, she says: 
Gender and cohabitation.  Journal of Family and Economic Issues, 32, 876–905. 
 Hughes, S. M., & Gallup, G. G., Jr. (2003). Sex differences in morphological predictors of sexual 
behavior: Shoulder to hip and waist to hip ratios.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 24, 173–178. 
 Hui, C. M., Finkel, E. J., Fitzsimons, G. M., Kumashiro, M., & Hofmann, W. (2014). The Manhattan 
effect: When relationship commitment fails to promote support for partners’ interests.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 546–570. 
 Huibregtse, B. M., Bornovalova, M. A., Hicks, B. M., McGue, M., & Iacono, W. (2011). Testing 
the role of adolescent sexual initiation in later-life sexual risk behavior: A longitudinal twin 
design.  Psychological Science, 22, 924–933. 
 Human, L. J., & Biesanz, J. C. (2013). Targeting the good target: An integrative review of the char-
acteristics and consequences of being accurately perceived.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 17, 248–272. 
 Human, L. J., Sandstrom, G. M., Biesanz, J. C., & Dunn, E. W. (2013). Accurate first impressions 
leave a lasting impression: The long-term effects of distinctive self-other agreement on rela-
tionship development.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 395–402. 
 Humbad, M. N., Donnellan, M. B., Klump, K. L., & Burt, S. A. (2011). Development of the brief 
romantic relationship interaction coding scheme (BRRI Communication Studies).  Journal of 
Family Psychology, 25, 759–769. 
 Hunt, M. M. (1959).  The natural history of love. New York: Knopf. 
 Hunter, S. (2007).  Coming out and disclosures: LGBT persons across the life span. New York: Haworth 
Press. 
 Huston, T. L. (2002). Power. In H. H. Kelley, E. Berscheid, A. Christensen, et al. (Eds.),  Close relation-
ships (pp. 265–314). Clinton Corners, NY: Percheron Press. 

R-40 
References
 Huston, T. L. (2009). What’s love got to do with it? Why some marriages succeed and others fail. 
 Personal Relationships, 16, 301–327. 
 Huston, T. L., & Chorost, A. F. (1994). Behavioral buffers on the effect of negativity on marital satis-
faction: A longitudinal study.  Personal Relationships, 1, 223–239. 
 Huston, T. L., & Houts, R. M. (1998). The psychological infrastructure of courtship and marriage: 
The role of personality and compatibility in romantic relationships. In T. N. Bradbury (Ed.), 
 The developmental course of marital dysfunction (pp. 114–151). New York: Cambridge University 
Press. 
 Hyde, J. S. (2014). Gender similarities and differences.  Annual Review of Psychology, 65, 373–398. 
 Iacovelli, A. M., & Johnson, C. (2012). Disclosure through face-to-face and instant messaging 
modalities: Psychological and physiological effects.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 
31, 225–250. 
 Ickes, W. (1985). Sex-role influences on compatibility in relationships. In W. Ickes (Ed.),  Compatible 
and incompatible relationships (pp. 187–208). New York: Springer-Verlag. 
 Ickes, W. (2000). Methods of studying close relationships. In W. Ickes & S. Duck (Eds.),  The social 
psychology of personal relationships (pp. 159–180). Chichester, England: Wiley. 
 Ickes, W. (2003).  Everyday mind reading: Understanding what other people think and feel. Amherst, NY: 
Prometheus Books. 
 Ickes, W. (2009).  Strangers in a strange lab: How personality shapes our initial encounters with others. 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Ickes, W., & Barnes, R. D. (1978). Boys and girls together—and alienated: On enacting stereotyped 
sex roles in mixed-sex dyads.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 669–683. 
 Ickes, W., & Hodges, S. D. (2013). Empathic accuracy in close relationships. In J. A. Simpson & 
L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 348–373). New York: Oxford 
University Press. 
 Iemmola, F., & Ciani, A. C. (2009). New evidence of genetic factors influencing sexual orienta-
tion in men: Female fecundity increase in the maternal line.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38,
 393–399. 
 Impett, E. A., Breines, J. G., & Strachman, A. (2010). Keeping it real: Young adult women’s authen-
ticity in relationships and daily condom use.  Personal Relationships, 17, 573–584. 
 Impett, E. A., Gere, J., Kogan, A., Gordon, A. M., & Keltner, D. (2014a). How sacrifice impacts the 
giver and the recipient: Insights from approach-avoidance motivational theory.  Journal of Per-
sonality. doi: 10.1111/jopy.12070 
 Impett, E. A., Javam, L., Le, B. M., Asyabi-Eshghi, B., & Kogan, A. (2013). The joys of genuine giv-
ing: Approach and avoidance sacrifice motivation and authenticity.  Personal Relationships, 20, 
740–754.  
 Impett, E. A., Muise, A., & Peragine, D. (2014b). Sexuality in the context of relationships. In D. L. 
Tolman, L. Diamond, J. Bauermeister et al. (Eds.),  APA handbook of sexuality and psychology 
(Vol. 1, pp. 269–315). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Impett, E. A., & Peplau, L. A. (2006). “His” and “her” relationships? A review of the empirical evi-
dence. In A. L. Vangelisti & D. Perlman (Eds.),  The Cambridge handbook of personal relationships 
(pp. 273–291). New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Impett, E. A., Peplau, L. A., & Gable, S. L. (2005). Approach and avoidance sexual motives: Implica-
tions for personal and interpersonal well-being.  Personal Relationships, 12, 465–482. 
 Impett, E. A., Strachman, A., Finkel, E. J., & Gable, S. L. (2008). Maintaining sexual desire in inti-
mate relationships: The importance of approach goals.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 94, 808–823. 
 Intermarriage on the rise in the U.S. (2013, January 8). Pew Research Center. Retrieved from  http://
www.pewresearch.org/daily-number/intermarriage-on-the-rise-in-the-u-s/  
 Ireland, M. E., Slatcher, R. B., Eastwick, P. W., Scissors, L. E., Finkel, E. J., & Pennebaker, J. W. 
(2011). Language style matching predicts relationship initiation and stability.  Psychological Sci-
ence, 22, 39–44. 
 Italie, L. (2011, January 26). Pups or paramours? 14 percent prefer pets.  Houston Chronicle, p. A6. 
 Ivcevic, Z., & Ambady, N. (2013). Face to (Face)book: The two faces of social behavior?  Journal of 
Personality, 81, 290–301. 

References R-41
 Izhaki-Costi, O., & Schul, Y. (2011). I do not know you and I am keeping it that way: Attachment 
avoidance and empathic accuracy in the perception of strangers.  Personal Relationships, 18, 
321–340. 
 Jackson, T., Chen, H., Guo, C., & Gao, X. (2006). Stories we love by: Conceptions of love among 
couples from the People’s Republic of China and the United States.  Journal of Cross-Cultural 
Psychology, 37, 446–464. 
 Jacobson, N. S., Follette, W. C., & McDonald, D. W. (1982). Reactivity to positive and negative 
behavior in distressed and nondistressed married couples.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 50, 706–714. 
 Jacobson, N. S., & Margolin, G. (1979).  Marital therapy: Strategies based on social learning and behavior 
exchange principles. New York: Brunner/Mazel. 
 Jacques-Tiura, A. J., Abbey, A., Parkhill, M. R., & Zawacki, T. (2007). Why do some men misper-
ceive women’s sexual intentions more frequently than others do? An application of the Con-
fluence Model.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 1467–1480. 
 Jarnecke, A. M., & South, S. C. (2013). Attachment orientations as mediators in the intergenerational 
transmission of marital satisfaction.  Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 550–559. 
 Jasien ´ska, G., Lipson, S. F., Ellison, P. T., Thune, I., & Ziomkiewicz, A. (2006). Symmetrical women 
have higher potential fertility.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 27, 390–400. 
 Jasien ´ska, G., Ziomkiewicz, A., Ellison, P. T., Lipson, S. F., & Thune, I. (2004). Large breasts and 
narrow waists indicate high reproductive potential in women.  Proceedings of the Royal Society 
of London B, 271, 1213–1217. 
 Jemmott, J. B. (2010). Efficacy of a theory-based abstinence-only intervention over 24 months: 
A randomized controlled trial with young adolescents.  Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent 
Medicine, 164, 152–159. 
 Jensen-Campbell, L. A., & Graziano, W. G. (2001). Agreeableness as a moderator of interpersonal 
conflict.  Journal of Personality, 69, 323–362. 
 Jensen-Campbell, L. A., Graziano, W. G., & West, S. G. (1995). Dominance, prosocial orientation, 
and female preferences: Do nice guys really finish last?  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 68, 427–440. 
 Jensen-Campbell, L. A., Knack, J. M., Waldrip, A. M., & Campbell, S. D. (2007). Do Big Five per-
sonality traits associated with self-control influence the regulation of anger and aggression? 
 Journal of Research in Personality, 41, 403–424. 
 Jiang, L. C., & Hancock, J. T. (2013). Absence makes the communication grow fonder: Geographic 
separation, interpersonal media, and intimacy in dating relationships.  Journal of Communica-
tion, 63, 556–577. 
 Jöchle, W. (1973). Coitus-induced ovulation.  Contraception, 7, 523–564. 
 Johnson, K. L., Gill, S., Reichman, V., & Tassinary, L. G. (2007). Swagger, sway, and sexuality: Judg-
ing sexual orientation from body motion and morphology.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 93, 321–334. 
 Johnson, M. D. (2012). Healthy marriage initiatives: On the need for empiricism in policy imple-
mentation.  American Psychologist, 67, 296–308. 
 Johnson, M. P. (1999). Personal, moral, and structural commitment to relationships: Experiences of 
choice and constraint. In J. M. Adams & W. H. Jones (Eds.),  Handbook of interpersonal commit-
ment and relationship stability (pp. 73–87). New York: Kluwer Academic/Plenum. 
 Johnson, M. P. (2008).  A typology of domestic violence: Intimate terrorism, violent resistance, and situ-
ational couple violence. Boston: Northeastern University Press. 
 Johnson, S. M. (2004).  Creating connection: The practice of emotionally focused couple therapy (2nd ed.). 
New York: Brunner-Routledge. 
 Johnson, S. M. (2008).  Hold me tight: Seven conversations for a lifetime of love. New York: Little, 
Brown. 
 Jokela, M. (2009). Physical attractiveness and reproductive success in humans: Evidence from the 
late 20th century United States.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 30, 342–350. 
 Jonason, P. K., Li, N. P., & Buss, D. M. (2010). The costs and benefits of the Dark Triad: Implica-
tions for mate poaching and mate retention tactics.  Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 
373–378. 

R-42 
References
 Jonason, P. K., & Li, N. P. (2013). Playing hard-to-get: Manipulating one’s perceived availability as 
a mate.  European Journal of Personality, 27, 458–469. 
 Jonason, P. K., Li, N. P., & Richardson, J. (2011). Positioning the booty-call relationship on the 
spectrum of relationships: Sexual but more emotional than one-night stands.  Journal of Sex 
Research, 48, 486–495. 
 Jonason, P. K., & Marks, M. J. (2009). Common vs. uncommon sexual acts: Evidence for the sexual 
double standard.  Sex Roles, 60, 357–365. 
 Jones, B. C., DeBruine, L. M., Little, A. C., & Feinberg, D. R. (2012). Sexual conflict and the ovulatory 
cycle. In T. K. Shackelford & A. T. Goetz (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of sexual conflict in humans 
(pp. 171–183). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Jones, D. (1995). Sexual selection, physical attractiveness, and facial neotony: Cross-cultural 
evidence and implications.  Current Anthropology, 36, 723–748. 
 Jones, D. N., & Olderbak, S. G. (2013). The associations among dark personalities and sexual tactics 
across different scenarios.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 29, 1050–1070. 
 Jones, D. N., & Weiser, D. A. (2014). Differential infidelity patterns among the dark triad.  Personality 
and Individual Differences, 57, 20–24. 
 Jones, E. E., & Pittman, T. (1982). Toward a general theory of strategic self-presentation. In J. Suls 
(Ed.),  Psychological perspectives on the self (pp. 231–262). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Jones, J. M. (2008, March 25). Most Americans not willing to forgive unfaithful spouse.  Gallup 
Poll News Service. Retrieved from  http://www.gallup.com/poll/105682/Most-Americans-
Willing-Forgive-Unfaithful-Spouse.aspx 
 Jones, J. T., Pelham, B. W., Carvallo, M., & Mirenberg, M. C. (2004). How do I love thee? Let me 
count the Js: Implicit egotism and interpersonal attraction.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 87, 665–683. 
 Jones, W. H., & Burdette, M. P. (1994). Betrayal in relationships. In A. L. Weber & J. H. Harvey 
(Eds.),  Perspectives on close relationships (pp. 243–262). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
 Jones, W. H., Crouch, L. L., & Scott, S. (1997). Trust and betrayal: The psychology of trust violations. 
In R. Hogan, J. Johnson, & S. R. Briggs (Eds.),  Handbook of personality psychology (pp. 466–482). 
New York: Academic Press. 
 Jong, E. (2003, June 30). The zipless fallacy.  Newsweek, p. 48. 
 Jose, A., O’Leary, K. D., & Moyer, A. (2010). Does premarital cohabitation predict subsequent mari-
tal stability and marital quality? A meta-analysis.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 105–116. 
 Joyner, K., Manning, W., & Bogle, R. (2013).  The stability and qualities of same-sex and different-sex couples 
in young adulthood. Center for Family and Demographic Research. Retrieved from http://www.
bgsu.edu/content/dam/BGSU/college-of-arts-and-sciences/center-for-family-and-demo-
graphic-research/documents/working-papers/2013/CFDR-Working-Papers-2013-02-The-
Stability-and-Qualities-of-Same-Sex-and-Different-Sex-Couples-in-Young-Adulthood.pdf 
 Julius, H., Beetz, A., Kotrschal, K., Turner, D., & Uvnäs-Moberg, K. (2013).  Attachment to pets. 
 Cambridge, MA: Hogrefe. 
 Kachadourian, L. K., Fincham, F., & Davila, J. (2004). The tendency to forgive in dating and mar-
ried couples: The role of attachment and relationship satisfaction.  Personal Relationships, 11, 
373–393. 
 Kafetsios, K. (2004). Attachment and emotional intelligence abilities across the life course.  Personal-
ity and Individual Differences, 37, 129–145. 
 Kafetsios, K., & Nezlek, J. B. (2002). Attachment styles in everyday social interaction.  European 
Journal of Social Psychology, 32, 719–735. 
 Kaighobadi, F., Shackelford, T. K., & Buss, D. M. (2010). Spousal mate retention in the newlywed 
year and three years later.  Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 414–418. 
 Kaighobadi, F., Shackelford, T. K., Popp, D., Moyer, R. M., Bates, V. M., & Liddle, J. R. (2009). 
Perceived risk of female infidelity moderates the relationship between men’s personality and 
partner-directed violence.  Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 1033–1039. 
 Kalbfleisch, P. J., & Herold, A. L. (2006). Sex, power, and communication. In K. Dindia & 
D. J. Canary (Eds.),  Sex differences and similarities in communication (2nd ed., pp. 299–313). Mah-
wah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

References R-43
 Kammrath, L. K., Ames, D. R., & Scholer, A. A. (2007). Keeping up impressions: Inferential rules 
for impression change across the Big Five.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 43, 450–457. 
 Kammrath, L. K., & Dweck, C. (2006). Voicing conflict: Preferred conflict strategies among incre-
mental and entity theorists.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1497–1508. 
 Kammrath, L. K., & Peetz, J. (2011). The limits of love: Predicting immediate versus sustained 
caring behaviors in close relationships.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 411–417. 
Kamp Dush, C. M., & Taylor, M. G. (2012). Trajectories of marital conflict across the life course: 
Predictors and interactions with marital happiness trajectories. Journal of Family Issues, 33, 
341–368.
 Kamphuis, J. H., Emmelkamp, P. M. G., & de Vries, V. (2004). Informant personality descriptions 
of postintimate stalkers using the Five Factor Profile.  Journal of Personality Assessment, 82, 
169–178. 
 Kanazawa, S. (2010). Evolutionary psychology and intelligence research.  American Psychologist, 65, 
279–289. 
 Kandler, C. (2012). Nature and nurture in personality development: The case of neuroticism and 
extraversion.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21, 290–296. 
 Kane, H. S., Jaremka, L. M., Guichard, A. C., Ford, M. B., Collins, N. L., & Feeney, B. C. (2007). Feel-
ing supported and feeling satisfied: How one partner’s attachment style predicts the other 
partner’s relationship experiences.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 24, 535–555. 
 Kantor, L. M., Santelli, J. S., Teitler, J., & Balmer, R. (2008). Abstinence-only policies and programs: 
An overview.  Sexuality Research & Social Policy, 5, 6–17. 
 Kaplan, R. M., & Kronick, R. G. (2006). Marital status and longevity in the United States population. 
 Journal of Epidemiology & Community Health, 60, 760–765. 
 Kaplar, M. E., & Gordon, A. K. (2004). The enigma of altruistic lying: Perspective differences in 
what motivates and justifies lie telling within romantic relationships.  Personal Relationships, 
11, 489–507. 
 Karakurt, G, Christiansen, A. T., Wadsworth, S. M. M., & Weiss, H. M. (2013). Romantic relation-
ships following wartime deployment.  Journal of Family Issues, 34, 1427–1451. 
 Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (1995). The longitudinal course of marital quality and stability: 
A review of theory, methods, and research.  Psychological Bulletin, 118, 3–34. 
 Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (2000). Attributions in marriage: State or trait? A growth curve 
analysis.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 78, 295–309. 
 Karney, B. R., Davila, J., Cohan, C. L., Sullivan, K. T., Johnson, M. D., & Bradbury, T. N. (1995). An 
empirical investigation of sampling strategies in marital research.  Journal of Marriage and the 
Family, 57, 909–920. 
 Karney, B. R., & Frye, N. E. (2002). “But we’ve been getting better lately”: Comparing prospective 
and retrospective views of relationship development.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 82, 222–238. 
 Karney, B. R., McNulty, J. K., & Frye, N. E. (2001). A social-cognitive perspective on the mainte-
nance and deterioration of relationship satisfaction. In J. H. Harvey & A. E. Wenzel (Eds.), 
 Close romantic relationships: Maintenance and enhancement (p 195–214). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Karney, B. R., & Neff, L. A. (2013). Couples and stress: How demands outside a relationship affect 
intimacy within the relationship. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of 
close relationships (pp. 664–684). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Karraker, A., & DeLamater, J. (2013). Past-year sexual inactivity among older married persons and 
their partners.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 142–163. 
 Karremans, J. C., Frankenhuis, W. E., & Arons, S. (2010). Blind men prefer a low waist-to-hip ratio. 
 Evolution and Human Behavior, 31, 182–186. 
 Karremans, J. C., Regaila, C., Paleari, F. G., et al. (2011). Maintaining harmony across the globe: The 
cross-cultural association between closeness and interpersonal forgiveness.  Social Psychological 
and Personality Science, 2, 443–451. 
 Kashdan, T. B., McKnight, P. E., Fincham, F. D., & Rose, P. (2011). When curiosity breeds intimacy: 
Taking advantage of intimacy opportunities and transforming boring conversations.  Journal of 
Personality, 79, 1067–1099. 

R-44 
References
 Kashy, D. A., & DePaulo, B. M. (1996). Who lies?  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 70, 
1037–1051. 
 Katz, J., & Myhr, L. (2008). Perceived conflict patterns and relationship quality associated with 
verbal sexual coercion by male dating partners.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 23, 798–814. 
 Kavanagh, P. S., Robins, S. C., & Ellis, B. J. (2010). The mating sociometer: A regulatory mechanism 
for mating aspirations.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 120–132. 
 Kayser, K., & Rao, S. S. (2006). Process of disaffection in relationship breakdown. In M. A. Fine & 
J. H. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of divorce and relationship dissolution (pp. 201–221). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
 Kellas, J. K., Bean, D., Cunningham, C., & Cheng, K. Y. (2008). The ex-files: Trajectories, turning 
points, and adjustment in the development of post-dissolutional relationships.  Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 25, 23–50. 
 Kellas, J. K., & Manusov, V. (2003). What’s in a story? The relationship between narrative complete-
ness and adjustment to relationship dissolution.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 20, 
285–307. 
 Kellas, J. K., Willer, E. K., & Trees, A. R. (2013). Communicated perspective-taking during stories 
of marital stress: Spouses’ perceptions of one another’s perspective-taking behaviors.  Southern 
Communication Journal, 78, 326–351. 
 Kellerman, J., Lewis, J., & Laird, J. D. (1989). Looking and loving: The effects of mutual gaze on feel-
ings of love.  Journal of Research in Personality, 23, 145–161. 
 Kelley, H. H. (1979).  Personal relationships: Their structures and processes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Kelley, H. H. (2002). Love and commitment. In H. H. Kelley, E. Berscheid, A. Christensen, et al. 
(Eds.),  Close relationships (pp. 265–314). Clinton Corners, NY: Percheron Press. 
 Kelley, H. H., Berscheid, E., Christensen, A., et al. (2002).  Close relationships. Clinton Corners, NY: 
Percheron. 
 Kelley, H. H., & Thibaut, J. W. (1978).  Interpersonal relations: A theory of interdependence. New York: 
Wiley. 
 Kelly, E. L., & Conley, J. J. (1987). Personality and compatibility: A prospective analysis of marital 
stability and marital satisfaction.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 52, 27–40. 
 Kelmer, G., Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S., & Markman, H. J. (2013). Relationship quality, commitment, 
and stability in long-distance relationships.  Family Process, 52, 257–270. 
 Keltner, D., Gruenfeld, D., Galinsky, A., & Kraus, M. W. (2010). Paradoxes of power: Dynamics of 
the acquisition, experience, and social regulation of social power. In A. Guinote & T. Vescio 
(Eds.),  The social psychology of power (pp. 177–208). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Keltner, D., Oatley, K., & Jenkins, J. M. (2014).  Understanding emotions (3rd ed.). New York: Wiley. 
 Kennedy, K. A., & Pronin, E. (2008). When disagreement gets ugly: Perceptions of bias and the 
escalation of conflict.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 833–848. 
 Kenny, D. A., & Ledermann, T. (2010). Detecting, measuring, and testing dyadic patterns in the 
actor-partner interdependence model.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 359–366. 
 Kenny, D. A., West, T. V., Cillessen, A. H. N., Cole, J. D., Dodge, K. A., Hubbard, J. A., & Schwartz, 
D. (2007). Accuracy in judgments of aggressiveness.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
33, 1225–1236. 
 Kenrick, D. T., Griskevicius, V., Neuberg, S. L., & Schaller, M. (2010). Renovating the pyramid of 
needs: Contemporary extensions built upon ancient foundations.  Perspectives on Psychological 
Science, 5, 292–314. 
 Kephart, W. (1967). Some correlates of romantic love.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 29, 470–479. 
 Kern, M. L., Della Porta, S. S., & Friedman, H. S. (2014). Lifelong pathways to longevity: Personal-
ity, relationships, flourishing, and health.  Journal of Personality. doi: 10.1111/jopy.12062 
 Keysar, B., & Henly, A. S. (2002). Speakers’ overestimation of their effectiveness.  Psychological 
 Science, 13, 207–212. 
 Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., Bane, C., Glaser, R., & Malarkey, W. B. (2003). Love, marriage, and divorce: 
Newlyweds’ stress hormones foreshadow relationship changes.  Journal of Consulting and Clini-
cal Psychology, 71, 176–188. 
 Kiefer, A. K., & Sanchez, D. T. (2007). Scripting sexual passivity: A gender role perspective.  Personal 
Relationships, 14, 269–290. 

References R-45
 Kifer, Y., Heller, D., Perunovic, W. Q. E., & Galinsky, A. D. (2013). The good life of the power-
ful: The experience of power and authenticity enhances subjective well-being.  Psychological 
 Science, 24, 280–288. 
 Kille, D. R., Forest, A. L., & Wood, J. V. (2013). Tall, dark, and stable: Embodiment motivates mate 
selection preferences.  Psychological Science, 24, 112–114. 
 Kilpatrick, S. D., Bissonnette, V. L., & Rusbult, C. E. (2002). Empathic accuracy and accommodative 
behavior among newly married couples.  Personal Relationships, 9, 369–393. 
 Kim, Y. (2006). Gender, attachment, and relationship duration on cardiovascular reactivity to stress 
in a laboratory study of dating couples.  Personal Relationships, 13, 103–114. 
 Kimmel, A. J. (2004). Ethical issues in social psychology research. In C. Sansone, C. C. Morf, & 
A. T. Panter (Eds.),  The Sage handbook of methods in social psychology (pp. 45–70). Thousand 
Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 King, K. B., & Reis, H. T. (2012). Marriage and long-term survival after coronary artery bypass 
grafting.  Health Psychology, 31, 55–62. 
 Kirby, D. B. (2008). The impact of abstinence and comprehensive sex and STD/HIV education pro-
grams on adolescent sexual behavior.  Sexuality Research & Social Policy, 5, 18–27. 
 Kite, M. E., Deaux, K., & Haines, E. L. (2008). Gender stereotypes. In F. L. Denmark & M. A. Paludi 
(Eds.),  Psychology of women: A handbook of issues and theories (2nd ed., pp. 205–236). Westport, 
CT: Praeger. 
 Kleinke, C. L. (1986). Gaze and eye contact: A research review.  Psychological Bulletin, 100, 78–100. 
 Kleinke, C. L., & Dean, G. O. (1990). Evaluation of men and women receiving positive and nega-
tive responses with various acquaintance strategies.  Journal of Social Behavior and Personality, 
5, 369–377. 
 Kline, S. L., & Stafford, L. (2004). A comparison of interaction rules and interaction frequency in 
relationship to marital quality.  Communication Reports, 17, 11–26. 
 Klohnen, E. C., & Luo, S. (2003). Interpersonal attraction and personality: What is attractive—Self 
similarity, ideal similarity, complementarity, or attachment security?  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 85, 709–722. 
 Klusmann, D. (2002). Sexual motivation and the duration of partnership.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 
31, 275–287. 
 Klusmann, D. (2006). Sperm competition and female procurement of male resources.  Human 
Nature, 17, 283–300. 
 Kluwer, E. S., Tumewu, M., & van den Bos, K. (2009). Men’s and women’s reactions to fair and 
unfair treatment in relationship conflict.  Personal Relationships, 16, 455–474. 
 Knäuper, B., Kornik, R., Atkinson, K., Guberman, C., & Aydin, C. (2005). Motivation influences the 
underestimation of cumulative risk.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 31, 1511–1523. 
 Knee, C. R. (1998). Implicit theories of relationships: Assessment and prediction of romantic 
relationship initiation, coping, and longevity.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 
360–370. 
 Knee, C. R., Patrick, H., & Lonsbary, C. (2003). Implicit theories of relationships: Orientations 
toward evaluation and cultivation.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 7, 41–55. 
 Knee, C. R., & Petty, K. N. (2013). Implicit theories of relationships: Destiny and growth beliefs. In 
J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 183–198). 
New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Knobloch, L. K., & Donovan-Kicken, E. (2006). Perceived involvement of network members in 
courtships: A test of the relational turbulence model.  Personal Relationships, 13, 281–302. 
 Knobloch, L. K., Ebata, A. T., McGlaughlin, P. C., & Theiss, J. A. (2013). Generalized anxiety and 
relational uncertainty as predictors of topic avoidance during reintegration following military 
deployment.  Communication Monographs, 80, 452–477. 
 Knobloch, L. K., & Solomon, D. H. (2004). Interference and facilitation from partners in the devel-
opment of interdependence within romantic relationships.  Personal Relationships, 11, 115–130. 
 Knobloch, L. K., Solomon, D. H., & Cruz, M. G. (2001). The role of relationship development and 
attachment in the experience of romantic jealousy.  Personal Relationships, 8, 205–224. 
 Knobloch, L. K., & Theiss, J. A. (2010). An actor-partner interdependence model of relational turbu-
lence: Cognitions and emotions.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 27, 595–619. 

R-46 
References
 Knoester, C., & Booth, A. (2000). Barriers to divorce: When are they effective? When are they not? 
 Journal of Family Issues, 21, 78–99. 
 Knöfler, T., & Imhof, M. (2007). Does sexual orientation have an impact on nonverbal behavior in 
interpersonal communication?  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 31, 189–204. 
 Koch, E. J., & Shepperd, J. A. (2008). Testing competence and acceptance explanations of self-
esteem.  Self and Identity, 7, 54–74. 
 Koch, S. C., Baehne, C. G., Kruse, L., Zimmerman, F., & Zumbach, J. (2010). Visual dominance and 
visual egalitarianism: Individual and group-level influences of sex and status in group inter-
actions.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 34, 137–153. 
 Koenig, B. L., Kirkpatrick, L. A., & Ketelaar, T. (2007). Misperception of sexual and romantic inter-
ests in opposite-sex friendships: Four hypotheses.  Personal Relationships, 14, 411–429. 
 Koeppel, L. B., Montagne-Miller, Y., O’Hair, D., & Cody, M. J. (1993). Friendly? Flirting? Wrong? 
In P. J. Kalbfleisch (Ed.),  Interpersonal communication: Evolving interpersonal relationships 
(pp. 13–32). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Kogan, A., Impett, E. A., Oveis, C., Hui, B., Gordon, A. M., & Keltner, D. (2010). When giving feels 
good: The intrinsic benefits of sacrifice in romantic relationships for the communally moti-
vated.  Psychological Science,  21, 1918–1924. 
 Kohn, J. L., & Averett, S. L. (2014). Can’t we just live together? New evidence on the effect of rela-
tionship status on health.  Journal of Family and Economic Issues. doi: 10.1007/s10834-013-9371-2 
 Konrath, S. H., O’Brien, E. H., & Hsing, C. (2011). Changes in dispositional empathy in  American 
college students over time: A meta-analysis.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15, 
180–198. 
 Koppensteiner, M. (2013). Motion cues that make an impression: Predicting perceived personality 
by minimal motion information.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 1137–1143. 
Kos´cin´ski, K. (2014). Assessment of waist-to-hip ratio attractiveness in women: An anthropometric 
analysis of digital silhouettes. Archives of Sexual Behavior, 43, 989–997.
 Kosinski, M., Stillwell, D., & Graepel, T. (2013). Private traits and attributes are predictable from 
digital records of human behavior.  PNAS, 110, 5802–5805. 
 Kossinets, G., & Watts, D. J. (2006). Empirical analysis of an evolving social network.  Science, 311, 
88–90. 
 Kouzakova, M., van Baaren, R., & van Knippenberg, A. (2010). Lack of behavioral imitation in 
human interactions enhances salivary cortisol levels.  Hormones and Behavior, 57, 421–426. 
 Krahé, B., Bieneck, S., & Scheinberger-Olwig, R. (2007). The role of sexual scripts in sexual aggres-
sion and victimization.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 687–701. 
 Krasnova, H., Wenninger, H., Widjaja, T., & Buxmann, P. (2013). Envy on Facebook: A hidden 
threat to users’ life satisfaction?  Wirtschaftsinformatik Proceedings 2013.  Retrieved from   http://
aisel.aisnet.org/wi2013/92   
 Kropp, J. P., & Haynes, O. M. (1987). Abusive and nonabusive mothers’ ability to identify general 
and specific emotion signals of infants.  Child Development, 58, 187–190. 
 Kross, E., Verduyn, P., Demiralp, E., et al. (2013). Facebook use predicts declines in subjective well-
being in young adults.  PLoS ONE, 8 (8), e69841. 
 Kruger, D. J. (2008). Young adults attempt exchanges in reproductively relevant currencies.  Evolu-
tionary Psychology, 6, 204–212. 
 Kruger, D. J., Fisher, M. L., Edelstein, R. S., Chopik, W. J., Fitzgerald, C. J., & Strout, S. L. (2013). 
Was that cheating? Perceptions vary by sex, attachment anxiety, and behavior.  Evolutionary 
Psychology, 11, 159–171. 
 Kruger, D. J., & Fitzgerald, C. J. (2011). Reproductive strategies and relationship preferences associ-
ated with prestigious and dominant men.  Personality and Individual Differences, 50, 365–369. 
 Kruger, J., Epley, N., Parker, J., & Ng, Z. (2005). Egocentrism over e-mail: Can we communicate as 
well as we think?  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 89, 925–936. 
 Kruger, J., & Gilovich, T. (1999). “Naïve cynicism” in everyday theories of responsibility assess-
ment: On biased assumption of bias.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 743–753. 
 Kruger, J., & Gilovich, T. (2004). Actions, intentions, and self-assessment: The road to self-enhancement 
is paved with good intentions.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 328–339. 

References R-47
 Kubacka, K. E., Finkenaur, C., Rusbult, C. E., & Keijsers, L. (2011). Maintaining close relation-
ships: Gratitude as a motivator and a detector of maintenance behavior.  Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 37, 1362–1375. 
 Kuhle, B. X. (2011). Did you have sex with him? Do you love her? An in vivo test of sex differences 
in jealous interrogations.  Personality and Individual Differences, 51, 1044–1047. 
 Kuhle, B. X., Smedley, K. D., & Schmitt, D. P. (2009). Sex differences in the motivation and mitiga-
tion of jealousy-induced interrogations.  Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 499–502. 
 Kuijer, R. G., Buunk, B. P., Ybema, J. F., & Wobbes, T. (2002). The relation between perceived ineq-
uity, marital satisfaction and emotions among couples facing cancer.  British Journal of Social 
Psychology, 41, 39–56. 
 Kunkel, D., Eyal, K., Donnerstein, E., Farrar, K. M, Biely, E., & Rideout, V. (2007). Sexual social-
ization messages on entertainment television: Comparing content trends 1997–2002.  Media 
Psychology, 9, 595–622. 
 Kunstman, J. W., & Maner, J. K. (2011). Sexual overperception: Power, mating motives, and biases 
in social judgment.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 282–294. 
 Kurdek, L. A. (1999). The nature and predictors of the trajectory of change in marital quality 
for  husbands and wives over the first 10 years of marriage.  Developmental Psychology, 35, 
1283–1296. 
 Kurdek, L. A. (2004). Are gay and lesbian cohabiting couples  really different from heterosexual 
married couples?  Journal of Marriage and Family, 66, 880–900. 
 Kurdek, L. A. (2005). What do we know about gay and lesbian couples?  Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 14, 251–254. 
 Kurdek, L. A. (2006). Differences between partners from heterosexual, gay, and lesbian cohabiting 
couples.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 68, 509–528. 
 Kurdek, L. A. (2008). A general model of relationship commitment: Evidence from same-sex part-
ners.  Personal Relationships, 15, 391–405. 
 Kurdek, L. A. (2008a). Change in relationship quality for partners from lesbian, gay male, and het-
erosexual couples.  Journal of Family Psychology, 22, 701–711. 
 Kurdek, L. A. (2008b). Pet dogs as attachment figures.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 25, 
247–266. 
 Kurdek, L. A. (2009). Pet dogs as attachment figures for adult owners.  Journal of Family Psychology, 
23, 439–446. 
 Kurzban, R., & Weeden, J. (2005). HurryDate: Mate preferences in action.  Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 26, 227–244. 
 Kuster, F., & Orth, U. (2013). The long-term stability of self-esteem: Its time-dependent decay and 
nonzero asymptote.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 677–690. 
 Kuyper, L., Wijsen, C., & de Wit, J. (2014). Distress, need for help, and positive feelings derived 
from participation in sex research: Findings of a population study in the Netherlands.  Journal 
of Sex Research,  51, 351–358. 
 LaBrie, J. W., Hummer, J. F., Ghaidarov, T. M., Lac, A., & Kenney, S. R. (2014). Hooking up in 
the college context: The event-level effects of alcohol use and partner familiarity on hookup 
behaviors and contentment.  Journal of Sex Research, 51, 62–73. 
 Lachance-Grzela, M., & Bouchard, G. (2010). Why do women do the lion’s share of housework? A 
decade of research.  Sex Roles, 63, 767–780. 
 Lackenbauer, S. D., Campbell, L., Rubin, H., Fletcher, G. J. O., & Troister, T. (2010). The unique and 
combined benefits of accuracy and positive bias in relationships.  Personal Relationships, 17, 
475–493. 
 Lakey, B. (2013). Perceived social support and happiness: The role of personality and relational 
processes. In S. A. David, I. Boniwell, & A. C. Ayers (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of happiness 
(pp. 847–859). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Lam, A. G., Mak, A., & Lindsay, P. D. (2004). What really works? An exploratory study of condom 
negotiation strategies.  AIDS Education & Prevention, 16, 160–171. 
 Lam, C. B., McHale, S. M., & Crouter, A. C. (2012). The division of household labor: Longitudinal 
changes and within-couple variation.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 74, 944–952. 

R-48 
References
 Lambert, N. M., Fincham, F. D., DeWall, N. C., Pond, R., & Beach, S. R. (2013a). Shifting toward 
cooperative tendencies and forgiveness: How partner-focused prayer transforms motivation. 
 Personal Relationships, 20, 184–197. 
 Lambert, N. M., Fincham, F. D., & Stanley, S. (2012a). Prayer and satisfaction with sacrifice in close 
relationships . Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 29, 1058–1070. 
 Lambert, N. M., Gwinn, A. M., Baumeister, R. F., et al. (2013b). A boost of positive affect: The perks 
of sharing positive experiences.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 24–43. 
 Lambert, N. M., Negash, S., Stillman, T. F., Olmstead, S. B., & Fincham, F. D. (2012b). A love that 
doesn’t last: Pornography consumption and weakened commitment to one’s romantic part-
ner.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 31, 410–438. 
 Lammers, J., Stapel, D. A., & Galinsky, A. D. (2010). Power increases hypocrisy: Moralizing in rea-
soning, immorality in behavior.  Psychological Science, 21, 737–744. 
 Lammers, J., Stoker, J. I., Jordan, J., Pollmann, & M. Stapel, D. A. (2011). Power increases infidelity 
among men and women.  Psychological Science, 22, 1191–1197. 
 Landers, A. (1982).  Love or sex . . . and how to tell the difference. Chicago: Field Enterprises. 
 Lang, F. R., Wagner, J., Wrzus, C., & Neyer, F. J. (2013). Personal effort in social relationships across 
adulthood.  Psychology and Aging, 28, 529–539. 
 Langeslag, S. J. E., Muris, P., & Franken, I. H. A. (2013). Measuring romantic love: Psychometric 
properties of the infatuation and attachment scales.  Journal of Sex Research, 50, 739–747. 
 Langhinrichsen-Rohling, J., Misra, T. A., Selwyn, C., & Rohling, M. L. (2012). Rates of bidirectional 
versus unidirectional intimate partner violence across samples, sexual orientations, and race/
ethnicities: A comprehensive review.  Partner Abuse, 3, 199–230. 
 Långström, N., Rahman, Q., Carlström, E., & Lichtenstein, P. (2010). Genetic and environmental 
effects on same-sex sexual behavior: A population study of twins in Sweden.  Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 39, 75–80. 
 Lannin, D. G., Bittner, K. E., & Lorenz, F. O. (2013). Longitudinal effect of defensive denial on rela-
tionship instability.  Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 968–977. 
 Lansford, J. E. (2009). Parental divorce and children’s adjustment.  Perspectives on Psychological Sci-
ence, 4, 140–152. 
 Larose, S., Guay, F., & Boivin M. (2002). Attachment, social support, and loneliness in young adult-
hood: A test of two models.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 684–693. 
 Larrick, R. P., Timmerman, T. A., Carton, A. M., & Abrevaya, J. (2011). Temper, temperature, and 
temptation: Heat-related retaliation in baseball.  Psychological Science, 22, 423–428. 
 Larson, C. M., Haselton, M. G., Gildersleeve, K. A., & Pillsworth, E. G. (2013). Changes in women’s 
feelings about their romantic relationships across the ovulatory cycle.  Hormones and Behavior, 
63, 128–135. 
 Larson, R., Richards, M. H., Moneta, G., Holmbeck, G., & Duckett, E. (1996). Changes in adoles-
cents’ daily interactions with their families from ages 10 to 18: Disengagement and transfor-
mation.  Developmental Psychology, 32, 744–754. 
Larson, R. W., & Bradney, N. (1988). Precious moments with family members and friends. In 
R. M. Milardo (Ed.),  Families and social networks (pp. 107–126). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Lassek, W. D., & Gaulin, S. J. C. (2009). Costs and benefits of fat-free muscle mass in men: Rela-
tionship to mating success, dietary requirements, and native immunity.  Evolution and Human 
Behavior, 30, 322–328. 
 Lauer, J., & Lauer, R. (1985, June). Marriages made to last.  Psychology Today, pp. 22–26. 
 Lauer, R. H., Lauer, J. C., & Kerr, S. T. (1990). The long-term marriage: Perceptions of stability and 
satisfaction.  International Journal of Aging and Human Development, 31, 189–195. 
 Laumann, E. O., Gagnon, J. H., Michael, R. T., & Michaels, S. (1994).  The social organization of sexual-
ity: Sexual practices in the United States. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Laurenceau, J., Barrett, L. F., & Rovine, M. J. (2005). The interpersonal process model of intimacy 
in marriage: A daily-diary and multilevel modeling approach.  Journal of Family Psychology, 19, 
314–323. 
 Laurenceau, J., Rivera, L. M., Schaffer, A. R., & Pietromonaco, P. R. (2004). Intimacy as an interper-
sonal process: Current status and future directions. In D. J. Mashek & A. Aron (Eds.),  Hand-
book of closeness and intimacy (pp. 81–101). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

References R-49
 Laursen, B., & Collins, W. A. (1994). Interpersonal conflict during adolescence.  Psychological Bul-
letin, 115, 197–209. 
 Lavner, J. A., & Bradbury, T. N. (2012). Why do even satisfied newlyweds eventually go on to 
divorce?  Journal of Family Psychology, 26, 1–10. 
 Lavner, J. A., Bradbury, T. N., & Karney, B. R. (2012b). Incremental change or initial differences? 
Testing two models of marital deterioration.  Journal of Family Psychology, 26, 606–616. 
 Lavner, J. A., Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (2012a). Do cold feet warn of trouble ahead? Premari-
tal uncertainty and four-year marital outcomes.  Journal of Family Psychology, 26, 1012–1017. 
 Lavner, J. A., Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (2013). Newlyweds’ optimistic forecasts of their mar-
riage: For better or for worse?  Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 531–540. 
 Lawler-Row, K. A., Hyatt-Edwards, L., Wuensch, K. L., & Karremans, J. C. (2011). Forgiveness and 
health: The role of attachment.  Personal Relationships, 18, 170–183. 
 Lawrence, E., & Bradbury, T. N. (2007). Trajectories of change in physical aggression and marital 
satisfaction.  Journal of Family Psychology, 21, 236–247. 
 Lawrence, E., Orengo-Aguayo, R., Langer, A., & Brock, R. L. (2012). The impact and consequences 
of partner abuse on partners.  Partner Abuse, 3, 406–428. 
 Le, B. M., Impett, E. A., Kogan, A., Webster, G. D., & Cheng, C. (2012). The personal and 
interpersonal rewards of communal orientation.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 
694–710. 
 Le, B. M., Korn, M. S., Crockett, E. E., & Loving, T. J. (2011). Missing you maintains us: Missing a 
romantic partner, commitment, relationships maintenance, and physical infidelity.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 28, 653–667. 
 Le, B., Dove, N. L., Agnew, C. R., Korn, M. S., & Mutso, A. A. (2010). Predicting nonmarital roman-
tic relationship dissolution: A meta-analytic synthesis.  Personal Relationships, 17, 377–390. 
 Leaper, C., & Ayres, M. M. (2007). A meta-analytic review of gender variations in adults’ language 
use: Talkativeness, affiliative speech, and assertive speech.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Review, 11, 328–363. 
 Leaper, C., & Robnett, R. D. (2011). Women are more likely than men to use tentative language, 
aren’t they? A meta-analysis testing for gender differences and moderators.  Psychology of 
Women Quarterly, 35, 129–142. 
 Leary, M. R. (1986). The impact of interactional impediments on social anxiety and self- presentation. 
 Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 22, 122–135. 
 Leary, M. R. (2001). Toward a conceptualization of interpersonal rejection. In M. R. Leary (Ed.), 
 Interpersonal rejection (pp. 3–20). New York: Oxford University Press. 
Leary, M. R. (2005). Varieties of interpersonal rejection. In K. D. Williams, J. P. Forgas, & W. von 
Hippel (Eds.),  The social outcast: Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bullying (pp. 35–51). 
New York: Psychology Press. 
 Leary, M. R. (2012). Sociometer theory. In P. Van Lange, A. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.), 
 Handbook of theories of social psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 151–159). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Leary, M. R. (2012).  Introduction to behavioral research methods (6th ed.). New York: Pearson. 
 Leary, M. R., Haupt, A. L., Strausser, K. S., & Chokel, J. T. (1998). Calibrating the sociometer: The 
relationship between interpersonal appraisals and state self-esteem.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 74, 1290–1299. 
 Leary, M. R., Herbst, K. C., & McCrary, F. (2003). Finding pleasure in solitary activities: Desire for 
aloneness or disinterest in social contact?  Personality and Individual Differences, 35, 59–68. 
 Leary, M. R., & Cottrell, C. A. (2013). Evolutionary perspectives on interpersonal acceptance and 
rejection. In C. N. DeWall (Ed.),  The Oxford handbook of social exclusion  (pp. 9–19). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Leary, M. R., & Kowalski, R. M. (1995).  Social anxiety. New York: Guilford Press. 
 Leary, M. R., & Leder, S. (2009). The nature of hurt feelings: Emotional experience and cognitive 
appraisals. In A. Vangelisti (Ed.),  Feeling hurt in close relationships (pp. 15–33). New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 
 Leary, M. R., & Miller, R. S. (2000). Self-presentational perspectives on personal relationships. In 
W. Ickes & S. Duck (Eds.),  The social psychology of personal relationships (pp. 129–155).  Chichester, 
England: Wiley. 

R-50 
References
 Leary, M. R., & Miller, R. S. (2012). The pursuit of relational value as a foundation of intimate 
relationships. In M. A. Paludi (Ed.),  The psychology of love (Vol. 2, pp. 107–123). Santa Barbara, 
CA: Praeger. 
 Leary, M. R., Nezlek, J. B., Downs, D. L., Radford-Davenport, J., Martin, J., & McMullen, A. (1994). 
Self-presentation in everyday interactions.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 67, 
664–673. 
 Leary, M. R., Twenge, J. M., & Quinlivan, E. (2006). Interpersonal rejection as a determinant of 
anger and aggression.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 10, 111–132. 
 Leary, M. R., & Springer, C. A. (2001). Hurt feelings: The neglected emotion. In R. M. Kowalski 
(Ed.),  Behaving badly: Aversive behaviors in interpersonal relationships (pp. 151–175). Washington 
DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Lease, S. H., Montes, S. H., Baggett, L. R., et al. (2013). A cross-cultural exploration of masculin-
ity and relationships in men from Turkey, Norway, and the United States.  Journal of Cross-
Cultural Psychology, 44, 84–105. 
 Lebow, J. L., Chamber, A. L., Christensen, A., & Johnson, S. M. (2012). Research on the treatment of 
couple distress.  Journal of Marital & Family Therapy, 38, 145–168. 
 Lee, J. A. (1988). Love-styles. In R. J. Sternberg & M. L. Barnes (Eds.),  The psychology of love 
(pp. 38–67). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 
 Lee, K., & Ashton, M. C. (2012). Getting mad and getting even: Agreeableness and honesty- humility 
as predictors of revenge intentions.  Personality and Individual Differences, 52, 596–600. 
 Lee, L., Loewenstein, G., Ariely, D., Hong, J., & Young, J. (2008). If I’m not hot, are you hot or not? 
 Psychological Science, 19, 669–677. 
 Legate, N., Ryan, R. M., & Weinstein, N. (2012). Is coming out always a “good thing”? Exploring 
the relations of autonomy support, outness, and wellness for lesbian, gay, and bisexual indi-
viduals.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 3, 145–152. 
 Lehmiller, J. J. (2012). Perceived marginalization and its association with physical and psychologi-
cal health.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 29, 451–469. 
 Lehmiller, J. J., & Agnew, C. R. (2007). Perceived marginalization and the prediction of romantic 
relationship stability.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 69, 1036–1049. 
 Lehmiller, J. J., VanderDrift, L. E., & Kelly, J. R. (2011). Sex differences in approaching friends with 
benefits relationships.  Journal of Sex Research, 48, 275–284. 
 Lehmiller, J. J., VanderDrift, L. E., & Kelly, J. R. (2014). Sexual communication, satisfaction, and 
condom use behavior in friends with benefits and romantic partners.  Journal of Sex Research, 
51, 74–85. 
 Lehnart, J., Neyer, F. J., & Eccles, J. (2010). Long-term effects of social investment: The case of part-
nering in young adulthood.  Journal of Personality, 78, 639–670. 
 Lemay, E. P., Jr., Bechis, M. A., Martin, J., Neal, A. M., & Coyne, C. (2013). Concealing negative 
evaluations of a romantic partner’s physical attractiveness.  Personal Relationships, 20, 669–689. 
 Lemay, E. P., Jr., & Cannon, K. T. (2012). Dysphoric reassurance seeking breeds contempt: Experi-
mental evidence.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 31, 1023–1050. 
 Lemay, E. P., Jr., & Neal, A. M. (2013). The wishful memory of interpersonal responsiveness.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 653–672. 
 Lemay, E. P., Jr., & Neal, A. M. (2014). Accurate and biased perceptions of responsive support pre-
dict well-being.  Motivation and Emotion, 38, 270–286.  
 Lemay, E. P., Jr., Overall, N. C., & Clark, M. S. (2012). Experiences and interpersonal consequences 
of hurt feelings and anger.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 103, 982–1006. 
 Lennon, C. A., Stewart, A. L., & Ledermann, T. (2013). The role of power in intimate relationships. 
 Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 95–114. 
 Lenton, A. P., & Francesconi, M. (2010). How humans cognitively manage an abundance of mate 
options.  Psychological Science, 21, 528–533. 
 Lenton, A. P., & Webber, L. (2006). Cross-sex friendships: Who has more?  Sex Roles, 54, 809–820. 
 Leo, J. L., Miller, S. L., & Maner, J. K. (2012). It’s not all conflict: Relationship maintenance psychol-
ogy. In T. K. Shackleford & A. T. Goetz (Eds .), The Oxford handbook of sexual conflict in humans 
(pp. 148–168). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Leone, C., & Hawkins, L. B. (2006). Self-monitoring and close relationships.  Journal of Personality, 
74, 739–778. 

References R-51
 Lepore, S. J., & Greenberg, M. A. (2002). Mending broken hearts: Effects of expressive writing on 
mood, cognitive processing, social adjustment and health following a relationship breakup. 
 Psychology and Health, 17, 547–560. 
 Leslie, L. A., Huston, T. L., & Johnson, M. P. (1986). Parental reactions to dating relationships: Do 
they make a difference?  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 48, 57–66. 
 Letzring, T. D., & Noftle, E. E. (2010). Predicting relationship quality from self-verification of broad 
personality traits among romantic couples.  Journal of Research in Personality, 44, 353–362. 
 Letzring, T. D., Wells, S. M., & Funder, D. C. (2006). Information quantity and quality affect the real-
istic accuracy of personality judgment.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 91, 111–123. 
 Levenson, R. W., Carstensen, L. L., & Gottman, J. M. (1994). Influence of age and gender on affect, 
physiology, and their interrelations: A study of long-term marriages.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 67, 56–68. 
 Lever, J., Frederick, D. A., & Peplau, L. A. (2006). Does size matter? Men’s and women’s views on 
penis size across the lifespan.  Psychology of Men and Masculinity, 7, 129–143. 
 Levine, T. R., Serota, K. B., Shulman, H., et al. (2011). Sender demeanor: Individual differences in 
sender believability have a powerful impact on deception detection judgments.  Human Com-
munication Research, 37, 377–403. 
 Levinger, G. (1976). A social psychological perspective on marital dissolution.  Journal of Social 
Issues, 32, 21–47. 
 Levinger, G., & Levinger, A. C. (2003). Winds of time and place: How context has affected a 50-year 
marriage.  Personal Relationships, 10, 285–306. 
 Levitt, M. J., Silver, M. E., & Franco, N. (1996). Troublesome relationships: A part of human experi-
ence.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 13, 523–536. 
 Lewis, M. A., Atkins, D. C., Blayney, J. A., Dent, D. V., & Kaysen, D. L. (2013). What is hooking 
up? Examining definitions of hooking up in relation to behavior and normative perceptions. 
 Journal of Sex Research, 50, 757–766. 
 Lewis, M. A., Granato, H., Blayney, J. A., Lostutter, T. W., & Kilmer, J. R. (2012). Predictors of 
hooking up sexual behaviors and emotional reactions among U.S. college students.  Archives of 
Sexual Behavior, 41, 1219–1229. 
 Lewis, M. A., Litt, D. M., Cronce, J. M., Blayney, J. A., & Gilmore, A. K. (2014). Underestimating 
protection and overestimating risk: Examining descriptive normative perceptions and their 
association with drinking and sexual behaviors.  Journal of Sex Research, 51, 86–96. 
 Lewis, T., & Manusov, V. (2009). Listening to another’s distress in everyday relationships.  Commu-
nication Quarterly, 57, 282–301. 
 Li, H., Zeigler-Hill, V., Yang, J. J., et al. (2012). Low self-esteem and the neural basis of attentional 
bias for social rejection cues: Evidence from the N2pc ERP component.  Personality and Indi-
vidual Differences, 53, 947–951. 
 Li, N. P. (2008). Intelligent priorities: Adaptive long- and short-term mate preferences. In G. Geher 
& G. Miller (Eds.),  Mating intelligence: Sex, relationships, and the mind’s reproductive system 
(pp. 105–119). New York: Erlbaum. 
 Li, N. P., Bailey, J. M., Kenrick, D. T., & Linsenmeier, J. A. W. (2002). The necessities and luxuries of 
mate preferences: Testing the tradeoffs.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 82, 947–955. 
 Li, N. P., Sng, O., & Jonason, P. K. (2012). Sexual conflict in mating strategies. In T. K. Shackleford 
& A. T. Goetz (Eds .), The Oxford handbook of sexual conflict in humans (pp. 49–71). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Li, N. P., Valentine, K. A., & Patel, L. (2011). Mate preferences in the US and Singapore: A cross-
cultural test of the mate preference priority model.  Personality and Individual Differences, 50, 
291–294. 
 Li, N. P., Yong, J. C., Tov, W. S., et al. (2013). Mate preferences do predict attraction and choices 
in the early stages of mate selection.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 105, 757–776. 
 Liberman, V., Anderson, N. R., & Ross, L. (2010). Achieving difficult agreements: Effects of positive 
expectations on negotiation processes and outcomes.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
46, 494–504. 
 Lick, D. J., Tornello, S. L., Riskind, R. G., Schmidt, K. M., & Patterson, C. J. (2012). Social climate for 
sexual minorities predicts well-being among heterosexual offspring of lesbian and gay par-
ents.  Sexuality Research and Social Policy, 9, 99–112. 

R-52 
References
 Liebold, J. M., & McConnell, A. R. (2004). Women, sex, hostility, power, and suspicion: Sexually 
aggressive men’s cognitive associations.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 256–263. 
 Lilgendahl, J. P., & McAdams, D. P. (2011). Constructing stories of self-growth: How individual 
differences in patterns of autobiographical reasoning relate to well-being in midlife.  Journal of 
Personality, 79, 391–428. 
 Lin, A. J., & Santelli, J. S. (2008). The accuracy of condom information in three selected abstinence-
only education curricula.  Sexuality Research & Social Policy, 5, 56–70. 
 Lin, Y. W., & Rusbult, C. E. (1995). Commitment to dating relationships and cross-sex friendships 
in America and China.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 12, 7–26. 
 Lindgren, K. P., Jacques-Tiura, A. J., & Westgate, E. C. (2012). Sexual-intent perceptions: A primer 
on methods, theories, and applications. In M. A. Paludi (Ed.),  The psychology of love  (Vol. 2, 
pp. 141–155). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 
 Linville, P., Fischhoff, B., & Fischer, G. (1993). AIDS risk perceptions and decision bias. In J. B Pryor 
& G. D. Reeder (Eds.),  The social psychology of HIV infection (pp. 1–38). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Lipinski-Harten, M., & Tafarodi, R. W. (2012). A comparison of conversational quality in online and 
face-to-face first encounters.  Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 31, 331–341. 
 Lippa, R. A. (2005). Sexual orientation and personality.  Annual Review of Sex Research, 16, 119–153. 
 Lippa, R. A. (2007). The preferred traits of mates in a cross-national study of heterosexual and 
homosexual men and women: An examination of biological and cultural influences.  Archives 
of Sexual Behavior, 36, 193–208. 
 Lippa, R. A. (2009). Sex differences in sex drive, sociosexuality, and height across 53 nations: Test-
ing evolutionary and social structural theories.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 631–651. 
 Lippa, R., & Hershberger, S. (1999). Genetic and environmental influences on individual differ-
ences in masculinity, femininity, and gender diagnosticity: Analyzing data from a classic twin 
study.  Journal of Personality, 67, 127–155. 
 Lishner, D. A., Nguyen, S., Stocks, E. L., & Zillmer, E. J. (2008). Are sexual and emotional infidelity 
equally upsetting to men and women? Making sense of forced-choice responses.  Evolutionary 
Psychology, 6, 667–675. 
 Little, A. C., Burt, D. M., & Perrett, D. I. (2006). Assortative mating for perceived facial personality 
traits.  Personality and Individual Differences, 40, 973–984. 
 Little, A. C., Penton-Voak, I. S., Burt, D. M., & Perrett, D. I. (2002). Evolution and individual dif-
ferences in the perception of attractiveness: How cyclic hormonal changes and self-perceived 
attractiveness influence female preferences for male faces. In G. Rhodes & L. A. Zebrowitz 
(Eds.),  Facial attractiveness: Evolutionary, cognitive, and social perspectives (pp. 59–90). Westport, 
CT: Ablex. 
 Liu, B. S., & Rook, K. S. (2013). Emotional and social loneliness in later life: Associations with posi-
tive versus negative social exchanges.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 813–832. 
 Lloyd, S. A. (1987). Conflict in premarital relationships: Differential perceptions of males and 
females.  Family Relations, 36, 290–294. 
 Lloyd, S. A., & Emery, B. C. (2000). The context and dynamics of intimate aggression against 
women.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 17, 503–521. 
 Löckenhoff, C. E., & Carstensen, L. F. (2004). Socioemotional Selectivity Theory, aging, and health: 
The increasingly delicate balance between regulating emotions and making tough choices. 
 Journal of Personality, 72, 1395–1424. 
 Logan, J. M., & Cobb, R. J. (2013). Trajectories of relationship satisfaction: Independent contribu-
tions of capitalization and support perceptions.  Personal Relationships, 20, 277–293 
 Lohr, J. M., Olatunji, B. O., Baumeister, R. F., & Bushman, B. J. (2007). The psychology of anger vent-
ing and empirically supported alternatives that do not harm.  Scientific Review of Mental Health 
Practice, 5, 53–64. 
 Long, E. C. J., Angera, J. J., Carter, S. J., Nakamoto, M., & Kalso, M. (1999). Understanding the one 
you love: A longitudinal assessment of an empathy training program for couples in romantic 
relationships.  Family Relations, 48, 235–242. 
 Lopez, M. H. (2013, June).  Personal milestones in the coming out experience. Pew Research Center. 
Retrieved from  http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/06/13/the-coming-out-experience-
age-when-you-first-thought-knew-told/ 

References R-53
 Lorber, M. F., & O’Leary, K. D. (2004). Predictors of the persistence of male aggression in early 
marriage.  Journal of Family Violence, 19, 329–338. 
 Lorenzo, G. L., Biesanz, J. C., & Human, L. J. (2010). What is beautiful is good and more accu-
rately understood: Physical attractiveness and accuracy in first impressions of personality. 
 Psychological Science,  21, 1777–1782. 
 Loving, T. J. (2006). Predicting dating relationship fate with insiders’ and outsiders’ perspectives: 
Who and what is asked matters.  Personal Relationships, 13, 349–362. 
 Lucas, R. E. (2005). Time does not heal all wounds: A longitudinal study of reaction and adaptation 
to divorce.  Psychological Science, 16, 945–950. 
 Lucas, R. E. (2007). Adaptation and the set-point model of subjective well-being.  Current Directions 
in Psychological Science, 16, 75–79. 
 Luchies, L. B, Finkel, E. J., & Fitzsimons, G. M. (2011). The effects of self-regulatory strength, 
content, and strategies on close relationships.  Journal of Personality, 79, 1251–1279. 
 Luchies, L. B., Finkel, E. J., McNulty, J. K., & Kumashiro, M. (2010). The doormat effect: When for-
giving erodes self-respect and self-concept clarity.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
98, 734–749. 
 Luchies, L. B., Wieselquist, J., Rusbult, C. E., et al. (2013). Trust and biased memory of transgression 
in romantic relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 104, 673–694. 
 Luhmann, M., Hofmann, W., Eid, M., & Lucas, R. E. (2012). Subjective well-being and adaptation to 
life events: A meta-analysis.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 592–615. 
 Luke, M. A., Maio, G. R., & Carnelley, K. B. (2004). Attachment models of the self and others: 
Relations with self-esteem, humanity-esteem, and parental treatment.  Personal Relationships, 
11, 281–303. 
 Luo, S. (2009). Partner selection and relationship satisfaction in early dating couples: The role of 
couple similarity.  Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 133–138. 
 Luo, S., & Snider, A. G. (2009). Accuracy and biases in newlyweds’ perceptions of each other: Not 
mutually exclusive but mutually beneficial.  Psychological Science, 20, 1332–1339. 
 Luo, S., & Zhang, G. (2009). What leads to romantic attraction: Similarity, reciprocity, security, or 
beauty? Evidence from a speed-dating study.  Journal of Personality, 77, 933–964. 
 Luo, S., Zhang, G., Watson, D., & Snider, A. G. (2010). Using cross-sectional couple data to disen-
tangle the causality between positive partner perceptions and marital satisfaction.  Journal of 
Research in Personality, 44, 665–668. 
 Luo, Y., Hawkley, L. C., Waite, L. J., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2012). Loneliness, health, and mortality in 
old age: A national longitudinal study.  Social Science & Medicine, 74, 907, 914. 
 Luong, G., Charles, S. T., & Fingerman, K. L. (2011). Better with age: Social relationships across 
adulthood.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 28, 9–23. 
 Lutfey, K. E., Link, C. L., Rosen, R. C., Wiegel, M., & McKinlay, J. B. (2009). Prevalence and cor-
relates of sexual activity and function in women: Results from the Boston Area Community 
Health (BACH) survey.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 514–527. 
 Lutz-Zois, C. J., Bradley, A. C., Mihalik, J. L., & Moorman-Eavers, E. R. (2006). Perceived similarity 
and relationship success among dating couples: An idiographic approach.  Journal of Social and 
Personal Relationships, 23, 865–880. 
 Luxen, M. F., & Buunk, B. P. (2006). Human intelligence, fluctuating asymmetry and the peacock’s 
tail: General intelligence (g) as an honest signal of fitness.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
41, 897–902. 
 Lydon, J. E., Fitzsimons, G. M., & Naidoo, L. (2003). Devaluation versus enhancement of attractive 
alternatives: A critical test using the calibration paradigm.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 29, 349–359. 
 Lydon, J., Pierce, T., & O’Regan, S. (1997). Coping with moral commitment to long-distance dating 
relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 104–113. 
 Lykken, D. T. (2002). How relationships begin and end: A genetic perspective. In A. L.  Vangelisti, 
H. T. Reis, & M. A. Fitzpatrick (Eds.),  Stability and change in relationships (pp. 83–102). 
Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
 Lyndon, A., Bonds-Raacke, J., & Cratty, A. D. (2011). College students’ Facebook stalking of 
ex-partners.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14, 711–716. 

R-54 
References
 Lyngstad, T. H., & Jalovaara, M. (2010). A review of the antecedents of union dissolution.  Demo-
graphic Research, 23, 257–292. 
 Lynn, M. (2009). Determinants and consequences of female attractiveness and sexiness: Realistic 
tests with restaurant waitresses.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 38, 737–745. 
 Lyubomirsky, S., & Layous, K. (2013). How do simple positive activities increase well-being? 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22, 57–62. 
 Määttä, K., & Uusiautti, S. (2013). Silence is not golden: Review of studies of couple interaction. 
 Communication Studies, 64, 33–48. 
 MacDonald, G., & Leary, M. R. (2012). Individual differences in self-esteem. In M. R. Leary & 
J. Tangney (Eds.),  Handbook of self and identity (2nd ed., pp. 354–377). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
 MacDonald, G., Zanna, M. P., & Holmes, J. G. (2000). An experimental test of the role of alcohol in 
relationship conflict.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 36, 182–193. 
MacDonald, K., & MacDonald, T. M. (2010). The peptide that binds: A systematic review of oxyto-
cin and its prosocial effects in humans. Harvard Review of Psychiatry, 18, 1–21.
 MacDonald, T. K., MacDonald, G., Zanna, M. P., & Fong, G. (2000). Alcohol, sexual arousal, and 
intentions to use condoms in young men: Applying alcohol myopia theory to risky sexual 
behavior.  Health Psychology, 19, 290–298. 
 MacDonald, T. K., & Ross, M. (1999). Assessing the accuracy of predictions about dating relation-
ships: How and why do lovers’ predictions differ from those made by observers?  Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 25, 1417–1429. 
 Macdowall, W., Gibson, L. J., Tanton, C., et al. (2013). Lifetime prevalence, associated factors, and 
circumstances of non-volitional sex in women and men in Britain: Findings from the third 
National Survey of Sexual Attitudes and Lifestyles (Natsal-3).  Lancet, 382, 1845–1855. 
 MacNeil, S., & Byers, E. S. (2009). Role of sexual self-disclosure in the sexual satisfaction of long-
term heterosexual couples.  Journal of Sex Research, 46, 3–14. 
 Maddox, A. M., Rhoades, G. K., & Markman, H. J. (2011). Viewing sexually-explicit materials alone 
or together: Associations with relationship quality.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 441–448. 
 Madey, S. F., Simo, M., Dillworth, D., Kemper, D., Toczynski, A., & Perella, A. (1996). They do get 
more attractive at closing time, but only when you are not in a relationship.  Basic and Applied 
Social Psychology, 18, 387–393. 
 Magdol, L., & Bessel, D. R. (2003). Social capital, social currency, and portable assets: The impact of 
residential mobility on exchanges of social support.  Personal Relationships, 10, 149–169. 
 Mahoney, A. R., & Knudson-Martin, C. (2009). Gender equality in intimate relationships. In 
C. Knudson-Martin & A. Mahoney (Eds.), Couples, gender, and power: Creating change in intimate 
relationships (pp. 3–16). New York: Springer. 
 Maisel, N. C., & Gable, S. L. (2009). The paradox of received social support: The importance of 
responsiveness.  Psychological Science, 20, 928–932. 
 Maisel, N. C., Gable, S. L., & Strachman, A. (2008). Responsive behaviors in good times and in bad. 
 Personal Relationships, 15, 317–338. 
 Maisel, N. C., & Karney, B. R. (2012). Socioeconomic status moderates associations among stressful 
events, mental health, and relationship satisfaction.  Journal of Family Psychology, 26, 654–660. 
 Major, B., Carrington, P. I., & Carnevale, P. J. D. (1984). Physical attractiveness and self-esteem: 
Attributions for praise from an other-sex evaluator.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
10, 43–50. 
 Malle, B. F. (2006). The actor-observer asymmetry in attribution: A (surprising) meta-analysis. 
 Psychological Bulletin, 132, 895–919. 
 Malouff, J. M., Thorsteinsson, E. B., Schutte, N. S., Bhullar, N., & Rooke, S. E. (2010). The five-
factor model of personality and relationship satisfaction of intimate partners: A meta-analysis. 
 Journal of Research in Personality, 44, 124–127. 
 Maltby, J., Wood, A. M., Day, L., Kon, T. W. H., Colley, A., & Linley, P. A. (2008). Personality pre-
dictors of levels of forgiveness two and a half years after the transgression.  Journal of Research 
in Personality, 42, 1088–1094. 
 Mancini, A. D., Bonanno, G. A., & Clark, A. E. (2011). Stepping off the hedonic treadmill: Individual 
differences in response to major life events.  Journal of Individual Differences, 32, 144–152. 

References R-55
 Maner, J. K., DeWall, N., Baumeister, R. F., & Schaller, M. (2007). Does social exclusion motivate 
interpersonal reconnection? Resolving the “porcupine problem.”  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 92, 42–55. 
 Maner, J. K., Rouby, D. A., & Gonzaga, G. C. (2008). Automatic inattention to attractive alterna-
tives: The evolved psychology of relationship maintenance.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 29, 
343–349. 
 Maniaci, M. R., & Reis, H. T. (2013, January).  Interaction goals moderate the association between famil-
iarity and attraction.  Poster presented at the meeting of the Society for Personality and Social 
Psychology, New Orleans. 
 Mannes, A. E. (2013). Shorn scalps and perceptions of male dominance.  Social Psychological and 
Personality Science, 4, 198–205. 
 Manning, J. E. (2014, March).  Membership of the 113th Congress: A profile. Congressional Research 
Service. Retrieved from  http://www.senate.gov/CRSReports/crs-publish.cfm?pid 5 %260BL
%2BR%5CC%3F%0A   
 Manning, W. D. (2013).  Trends in cohabitation: Over twenty years of change, 1987–2010. National 
Center for Family & Marriage Research. Retrieved from  http://ncfmr.bgsu.edu/pdf/family_
profiles/file130944.pdf 
 Manning, W. D., & Cohen, J. A. (2012). Premarital cohabitation and marital dissolution: An exami-
nation of recent marriages.  Journal of Family Issues, 74, 377–387. 
 Manning, W. D., Giordano, P. C., Longmore, M. A., & Flanigan, C. M. (2012). Young adult dating 
relationships and the management of sexual risk.  Populations Research and Policy Review, 31, 
165–185. 
 March, E., Grieve, R., Marx, E., & Witteveen, K. (2013). More of a (wo)man offline? Gender roles 
measured in online and offline environments.  Personality and Individual Differences, 55, 887–891. 
 Marcus, D. K., & Miller, R. S. (2003). Sex differences in judgments of physical attractiveness: A social 
relations analysis.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 325–335. 
 Markey, P. M., Lowmaster, S., & Eichler, W. (2010). A real-time assessment of interpersonal 
complementarity.  Personal Relationships, 17, 13–25. 
 Markey, P. M., & Markey, C. N. (2007). Romantic ideals, romantic obtainment, and relationship 
experiences: The complementarity of interpersonal traits among romantic partners.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 24, 517–533. 
 Markman, H. J. (1981). Prediction of marital distress: A 5-year follow-up.  Journal of Consulting and 
Clinical Psychology, 49, 760–762. 
 Markman, H. J., Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S. M., & Peterson, K. M. (2013). A randomized clinical 
trial of the effectiveness of premarital intervention: Moderators of divorce outcomes.  Journal of 
Family Psychology, 27, 165–172. 
 Markman, H. J., Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S. M., Ragan, E. P., & Whitton, S. W. (2010). The premarital 
communication roots of marital distress and divorce: The first five years of marriage.  Journal 
of Family Psychology, 24, 289–298. 
 Markman, H., Stanley, S., & Blumberg, S. L. (1994).  Fighting for your marriage: Positive steps for pre-
venting divorce and preserving a lasting love. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 
 Marmo, J. & Canary, D. J. (2013). Connecting happiness to relational maintenance: Understand-
ing the importance of fairness. In M. Hojjat & D. Cramer (Eds.),  Positive psychology of love 
(pp. 203–217). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Marshall, A. D., & Holtzworth-Munroe, A. (2010). Recognition of wives’ emotional expressions: A 
mechanism in the relationship between psychopathology and intimate partner violence per-
petration.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 21–30. 
 Marshall, L. L., Weston, R., & Honeycutt, T. C. (2000). Does men’s positivity moderate or mediate 
the effect of their abuse on women’s relationship quality?  Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 17, 660–675. 
 Marshall, T. C. (2010). Gender, peer relations, and intimate romantic relationships. In J. Chrisler & 
D. McCreary (Eds.),  Handbook of gender research in psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 281–310). New York: 
Springer. 

R-56 
References
 Marshall, T. C. (2012). Facebook surveillance of former romantic partners: Associations with post-
breakup recovery and personal growth.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 15, 
521–526. 
 Martins, Y., Preti, G., Crabtree, C. R., Runyan, T., Vainius, A. A., & Wysocki, C. J. (2005). Preference 
for human body odors is influenced by gender and sexual orientation.  Psychological Science, 
16, 694–701. 
 Masi, C. M., Chen, H., Hawkley, L. C., & Cacioppo, J. T. (2011). A meta-analysis of interventions to 
reduce loneliness.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 15, 219–266. 
 Mason, A. E., Law, R. W., Bryan, A. E., Portley, R. M., & Sbarra, D. A. (2012). Facing a breakup: 
Electromyographic responses moderate self-concept recovery following a romantic separa-
tion.  Personal Relationships, 19, 551–568. 
 Mason, M. F., Tatkow, E. P., & Macrae, C. N. (2005). The look of love: Gaze shifts and person per-
ception.  Psychological Science, 16, 236–239. 
 Massar, K., & Buunk, A. P. (2009). Rivals in the mind’s eye: Jealous responses after subliminal expo-
sure to body shapes.  Personality and Individual Differences, 46, 129–134. 
 Master, S. L., Eisenberger, N. I., Taylor, S. E., Naliboff, B. D., Shirinyan, D., & Lieberman, M. D. 
(2009). A picture’s worth: Partner photographs reduce experimentally induced pain.  Psycho-
logical Science, 20, 1316–1318. 
 Masters, W. H., & Johnson, V. F. (1970).  Human sexual inadequacy. Boston: Little, Brown. 
 Mathes, E. W., & Kozak, G. (2008). The exchange of physical attractiveness for resource potential 
and commitment.  Journal of Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 43–56. 
 Matsumoto, D., & Hwang, H. S. (2013a). Body and gestures. In D. Matsumoto, M. Frank, & H. Hwang 
(Eds.),  Nonverbal communication: Science and applications (pp. 75–96). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Matsumoto, D., & Hwang, H. S. (2013b). Cultural influences on nonverbal behavior. In 
D.  Matsumoto, M. Frank, & H. Hwang (Eds.),  Nonverbal communication: Science and applications 
(pp. 97–120). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Matsumoto, D., & Hwang, H. S. (2013c). Cultural similarities and differences in emblematic 
gestures.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 37, 1–27. 
 Matsumoto, D., & Hwang, H. S. (2013d). Facial expressions. In D. Matsumoto, M. Frank, & H. Hwang 
(Eds.),  Nonverbal communication: Science and applications (pp. 15–52). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Mayer, J. D., Roberts, R. D., & Barsade, S. G. (2008). Human abilities: Emotional intelligence.  Annual 
Review of Psychology, 59, 507–536. 
 Mayhew, A., Mullins, T. L., Ding. L., et al. (2014). Risk perceptions and subsequent sexual behav-
iors after HPV vaccination in adolescents.  Pediatrics, 133, 404–411. 
 McAllister, S., Duncan, S. F., & Hawkins, A. J. (2012). Examining the early evidence for self-directed 
marriage and relationship education: A meta-analytic study.  Family Relations, 61, 742–755. 
 McAndrew, F. T., & de Jonge, C. R. (2011). Electronic person perception: What do we infer about 
people from the style of their e-mail messages?  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2, 
403–407. 
 McCabe, M. P., & Goldhammer, D. L. (2012). Demographic and psychological factors related to 
sexual desire among heterosexual women in a relationship.  Journal of Sex Research, 49, 78–87. 
 McClure, M. J., & Lydon, J. E. (2014). Anxiety doesn’t become you: How attachment anxiety com-
promises relational opportunities.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 89–111. 
 McClure, M. J., Xu, J. H., Craw, J. P., Lane, S. P., Bolger, N., & Shrout, P. E. (2014). Understanding 
the costs of support transactions in daily life.  Journal of Personality. doi: 10.1111/jopy.12061  
 McCornack, S. A, & Parks, M. R. (1990). What women know that men don’t: Sex differences in 
determining the truth behind deceptive messages.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
7, 107–118. 
 McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (1997). Personality trait structure as a human universal.  American 
Psychologist, 52, 509–516. 
 McCrae, R. R., & Costa, P. T., Jr. (2010). The Five-Factor Theory of personality. In O. P. John, 
R.  W.  Robins, & L. A. Pervin (Eds.),  Handbook of personality: Theory and research (3rd ed., 
pp. 159–181). New York: Guilford. 
 McCullough, M. E. (2008).  Beyond revenge: The evolution of the forgiveness instinct. New York: 
Jossey-Bass. 

References R-57
 McCullough, M. E., Bellah, C. G., Kilpatrick, S. D., & Johnson, J. L. (2001). Vengefulness: Relation-
ships with forgiveness, rumination, well-being, and the Big Five.  Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy Bulletin, 27, 601–610. 
 McCullough, M. E., Bono, G., & Root, L. M. (2007). Rumination, emotion, and forgiveness: Three 
longitudinal studies.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 490–505. 
 McCullough, M. E., Emmons, R. A., Kilpatrick, S. D., & Mooney, C. N. (2003). Narcissists as “vic-
tims”: The role of narcissism in the perception of transgressions.  Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy Bulletin, 29, 885–893. 
 McDermott, R., Fowler, J. H., & Christakis, N. A. (2013). Breaking up is hard to do, unless everyone 
else is doing it too: Social network effects on divorce in a longitudinal sample.  Social Forces, 
92, 491–519. 
 McEwan, T. E., Mullen, P. E., & MacKenzie, R. (2009). A study of the predictors of persistence in 
stalking situations.  Law and Human Behavior, 33, 149–158. 
 McGonagle, K. A., Kessler, R. C., & Schilling, E. A. (1992). The frequency and determinants of 
marital disagreements in a community sample.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 9, 
507–524. 
 McHugh, M. C., & Hambaugh, J. (2010). She said, he said: Gender, language, and power. In 
J. Chrisler & D. McCreary (Eds.),  Handbook of gender research in psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 379–410). 
New York: Springer. 
 McKibbin, W. F., Goetz, A. T., Shackelford, T. K., Schipper, L. D., Starratt, V. G., & Stewart-
Williams, S. (2007). Why do men insult their intimate partners?  Personality and Individual 
Differences, 43, 231–241. 
 McKinnish, T. G. (2007). Sexually integrated workplaces and divorce: Another form of on-the-job 
search.  Journal of Human Resources, 42, 331–352. 
 McLaren, R. M., & Steuber, K. R. (2013). Emotions, communicative responses, and relational conse-
quences of boundary turbulence.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 606–626. 
 McNulty, J. K. (2011). The dark side of forgiveness: The tendency to forgive predicts continued 
psychological and physical aggression in marriage.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
37, 770–783. 
 McNulty, J. K., & Fincham, F. D. (2012). Beyond positive psychology?  American Psychologist, 67, 
101–110. 
 McNulty, J. K., & Fisher, T. D. (2008). Gender differences in response to sexual expectancies and 
changes in sexual frequency: A short-term longitudinal study of sexual satisfaction in newly 
married couples.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 37, 229–240. 
 McNulty, J. K., & Karney, B. R. (2002). Expectancy confirmation in appraisals of marital interac-
tions.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 764–775. 
 McNulty, J. K., & Russell, V. M. (2010). When “negative” behaviors are positive: A contextual anal-
ysis of the long-term effects of problem-solving behaviors on changes in relationship satisfac-
tion.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 587–604. 
 McPherson, M., Smith-Lovin, L., & Brashears, M. E. (2006). Social isolation in America: Changes in 
core discussion networks over two decades.  American Sociological Review, 71, 353–375. 
 Mealey, L., Bridgstock, R., & Townsend, G. C. (1999). Symmetry and perceived facial attractiveness: 
A monozygotic co-twin comparison.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 76, 151–158. 
 Mehl, M. R., & Conner, T. S. (Eds.). (2012).  Handbook of research methods for studying daily life. New 
York: Guilford Press. 
 Mehl, M. R., & Robbins, M. L. (2012). Naturalistic observation sampling: The electronically acti-
vated recorder (EAR). In M. R. Mehl & T. S. Conner (Eds.),  Handbook of research methods for 
studying daily life (pp. 176–192). New York: Guilford. 
 Mehl, M. R., Vazire, S., Holleran, S. E., & Clark, C. S. (2010). Eavesdropping on happiness: Well-
being is related to having less small talk and more substantive conversations.  Psychological 
Science, 21, 539–541. 
 Mehl, M. R., Vazire, S., Ramirez-Esparza, N., Slatcher, R. B., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2007). Are women 
really more talkative than men?  Science, 317, 82. 
 Meier, A. M., Carr, D. R., & Currier, J. M. (2013). Attachment anxiety and avoidance in coping with 
bereavement: Two studies.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 32, 315–334. 

R-58 
References
 Meier, B. P., & Robinson, M. D. (2004). Does quick to blame mean quick to anger? The role of agree-
ableness in dissociating blame and anger.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 856–867. 
 Mellor, D., Stokes, M., Firth, L., Hayashi, Y., & Cummins, R. (2008). Need for belonging, relationship 
satisfaction, loneliness, and life satisfaction.  Personality and Individual Differences, 45, 213–218. 
 Meltzer, A. L., McNulty, J. K., Jackson, G. L., & Karney, B. R. (2014). Sex differences in the impli-
cations of partner physical attractiveness for the trajectory of marital satisfaction.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 418–428. 
 Meltzer, A. L., McNulty, J. K., Novak, S. A., Butler, E. A., & Karney, B. R. (2011). Marriages are more 
satisfying when wives are thinner than their husbands.  Social Psychological and Personality Sci-
ence, 2, 416–424. 
 Meltzer, A. L., Novak, S. A., McNulty, J. K., Butler, E. A., & Karney, B. R. (2013). Marital satisfaction 
predicts weight gain in early marriage.  Health Psychology, 32, 824–827. 
 Men or women: Who’s the better leader? (2008, August 25).  Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
 http://pewresearch.org/pubs/932/men-or-women-whos-the-better-leader 
Meston, C. M., & Buss, D. M. (2007). Why humans have sex.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 477–507. 
 Merali, N. (2012). Arranged and forced marriage. In M. A. Paludi (Ed.),  The psychology of love (Vol. 3, 
pp. 143–168). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 
 Mercer, C. H., Tanton, C., Prah, P., et al. (2013). Changes in sexual attitudes and lifestyles in Britain 
through the life course and over time: Findings from the National Surveys of Sexual Attitudes 
and Lifestyles (Natsal).  Lancet, 382, 1781–1794. 
 Merino, S. M. (2013). Contact with gays and lesbians and same-sex marriage support: The moderat-
ing role of social context.  Social Science Research, 42, 1156–1166. 
 Metts, S. (1994). Relational transgressions. In W. R. Cupach & B. H. Spitzberg (Eds.),  The dark side of 
interpersonal communication (pp. 217–239). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Metts, S., & Cupach, W. R. (1990). The influence of romantic beliefs and problem-solving responses 
on satisfaction in romantic relationships.  Human Communication Research, 17, 170–185. 
 Meuwly, N., Bodenmann, G., Germann, J., Bradbury, T. N., Ditzen, B., & Heinrichs, M. (2012). 
Dyadic coping, insecure attachment, and cortisol stress recovery following experimentally 
induced stress.  Journal of Family Psychology, 26, 937–947. 
 Michalski, R. L., & Shackelford, T. K. (2010). Evolutionary personality psychology: Reconciling 
human nature and individual differences.  Personality and Individual Differences, 48, 509–516. 
 Michalski, R. L., Shackelford, T. K., & Salmon, C. A. (2007). Upset in response to a sibling’s part-
ner’s infidelities.  Human Nature, 18, 74–84. 
 Mickelson, K. D., Kessler, R. C., & Shaver, P. R. (1997). Adult attachment in a nationally representa-
tive sample.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 1092–1106. 
 Mikulincer, M. (1998). Attachment working models and the sense of trust: An exploration of inter-
action goals and affect regulation.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 1209–1224. 
 Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2013). The role of attachment security in adolescent and adult close 
relationships. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships 
(pp. 66–89). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Mikulincer, M., Shaver, P. R., & Avihou-Kanza, N. (2011). Individual differences in adult attach-
ment are systematically related to dream narratives.  Attachment & Human Development, 13, 
105–123. 
 Milardo, R. M., Johnson, M. P., & Huston, T. L. (1983). Developing close relationships: Changing 
patterns of interaction between pair members and social networks.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 44, 964–976. 
 Miles, L. K. (2009). Who is approachable?  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 45, 262–266. 
 Miller, G. E., & Chen, E. (2010). Harsh family climate in early life presages the emergence of a 
proinflammatory phenotype in adolescence.  Psychological Science, 21, 848–856. 
 Miller, J. B., & Noirot, M. (1999). Attachment memories, models and information processing. 
 Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 16, 147–173. 
 Miller, L. C., Berg, J. H., & Archer, R. L. (1983). Openers: Individuals who elicit intimate self-
disclosure.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 44, 1234–1244. 
 Miller, M. A., & Rahe, R. H. (1997). Life changes scaling for the 1990s.  Journal of Psychomatic Research, 
43, 279–292. 

References R-59
 Miller, P. J. E., Caughlin, J. P., & Huston, T. L. (2003). Trait expressiveness and marital satisfaction: 
The role of idealization processes.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 65, 978–995. 
 Miller, P. J. E., Niehuis, S., & Huston, T. L. (2006). Positive illusions in marital relationships: A 
13-year longitudinal study.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 1579–1594. 
 Miller, P. J. E., & Rempel, J. K. (2004). Trust and partner-enhancing attributions in close relation-
ships.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 695–705. 
 Miller, R. S. (1996).  Embarrassment: Poise and peril in everyday life. New York: Guilford Press. 
 Miller, R. S. (1997a). Inattentive and contented: Relationship commitment and attention to alterna-
tives.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 73, 758–766. 
 Miller, R. S. (1997b). We always hurt the ones we love: Aversive interactions in close relationships. 
In R. Kowalski (Ed.),  Aversive interpersonal interactions (pp. 11–29). New York: Plenum. 
 Miller, R. S. (2001). Breaches of propriety. In R. M. Kowalski (Ed.),  Behaving badly: Aversive behaviors 
in interpersonal relationships (pp. 29–58). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Miller, R. S. (2008). Attending to temptation: The operation (and perils) of attention to alternatives 
in close relationships. In J. P. Forgas & J. Fitness (Eds.),  Social relationships: Cognitive, affective 
and motivational processes (pp. 321–337). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Miller, R. S. (2009). Social anxiousness, shyness, and embarrassability. In M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle 
(Eds.),  Handbook of individual differences in social behavior (pp. 176–191). New York: Guilford 
Press. 
 Miller, R. S., Bernhard, P., & Bowen, T. (2014, July).  Who are some of these people? An analysis of Face-
book “friends. ” Paper presented at the meeting of the International Association for Relationship 
Research, Melbourne, Australia. 
 Miller, R. S., & Schlenker, B. R. (1985). Egotism in group members: Public and private attributions 
of responsibility for group performance.  Social Psychology Quarterly, 48, 85–89. 
 Miller, S. L., & Maner, J. K. (2008). Coping with romantic betrayal: Sex differences in responses to 
partner infidelity.  Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 413–426. 
 Miller, S. L., & Maner, J. K. (2010). Scent of a woman: Men’s testosterone responses to olfactory 
ovulation cues.  Psychological Science, 21, 276–283. 
 Miller, S. L., & Maner, J. K. (2011). Ovulation as a male mating prime: Subtle signs of women’s 
 fertility influence men’s mating cognition and behavior.  Journal of Personality and Social 
 Psychology, 100, 295–308. 
 Miller, W. B., Sable, M. R., & Beckmeyer, J. J. (2009). Preconception motivation and pregnancy want-
edness: Pathways to toddler attachment security.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 71, 1174–1192. 
 Miller-Ott, A. E., Kelly, L., & Duran, R. L. (2012). The effects of cell phone usage rules on satisfaction 
in romantic relationships . Communication Quarterly, 60, 17–34. 
 Mills, J., Clark, M. S., Ford, T. E., & Johnson, M. (2004). Measurement of communal strength. 
 Personal Relationships, 11, 213–230. 
 Miner, E. J., Starratt, V. G., & Shackelford, T. K. (2009). It’s not all about her: Men’s mate value and 
mate retention.  Personality and Individual Differences, 47, 214–218. 
 Mischkowski, D., Kross, E., & Bushman, B. J. (2012). Flies on the wall are less aggressive: Self-
distancing “in the heat of the moment” reduces aggressive thoughts, angry feelings, and 
aggressive behavior.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 1187–1191. 
 Mitchell, A. E., Castellani, A. M., Herrington, R. L., Joseph, J. I., Doss, B. D., & Snyder, D. K. (2008). 
Predictors of intimacy in couples’ discussions of relationship injuries: An observational study. 
 Journal of Family Psychology, 22, 21–29. 
 Mitchell, C. (2010). Are divorce studies trustworthy? The effects of survey nonresponse and 
response errors.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 72, 893–905. 
 Mitchell, J. W. (2014). Characteristics and allowed behaviors of gay male couples’ sexual agree-
ments.  Journal of Sex Research, 51, 316–328. 
 Mitchell, K., & Sugar, M. (2007, November 8). Annie’s mailbox.  The Bryan-College Station Eagle, A6. 
 Mitchell, K., & Sugar, M. (2008, January 24). Annie’s mailbox.  The Bryan-College Station Eagle, B2. 
 Mitchell, S. A. (2002).  Can love last? The fate of romance over time. New York: Norton. 
 Mitnick, D. M., Heyman, R. E., Malik, J., & Smith-Slep, A. M. (2009). The differential association 
between change request qualities and resistance, problem resolution, and relationship satis-
faction.  Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 464–473. 

R-60 
References
 Moeller, S. K., Lee, E. A. E., & Robinson, M. D. (2011). You never think about my feelings: Interper-
sonal dominance as a predictor of emotion decoding accuracy.  Emotion, 11, 816–824. 
 Mojaverian, T., & Kim, H. S. (2013). Interpreting a helping hand: Cultural variation in the effectiveness 
of solicited and unsolicited social support.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 88–99. 
 Mongeau, P. A., Knight, K., Williams, J., Eden, J., & Shaw, C. (2013). Identifying and explicating 
variation among friends with benefits relationships.  Journal of Sex Research, 50, 37–47. 
 Montesi, J. L., Fauber, R. L., Gordon, E. A., & Heimberg, R. G. (2011). The specific importance of 
communicating about sex to couples’ sexual and overall relationship satisfaction.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 28, 591–609. 
 Montoya, R. M. (2008). I’m hot, so I’d say you’re not: The influence of objective physical attractive-
ness on mate selection.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 1315–1331. 
 Montoya, R. M., & Horton, R. S. (2004). On the importance of cognitive evaluation as a determinant 
of interpersonal attraction.  Journal of Personality & Social Psychology,  86, 696–712. 
 Montoya, R. M., & Horton, R. S. (2013). A meta-analytic investigation of the processes underlying 
the similarity-attraction effect.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 64–94. 
 Montoya, R. M., & Horton, R. S. (2014). A two-dimensional model for the study of interpersonal 
attraction.  Personality and Social Psychology Review, 18, 59–86. 
 Moore, M. M. (2010). Human nonverbal courtship behavior—A brief historical review.  Journal of 
Sex Research, 47, 171–180. 
 Moore, T. M., Stuart, G. L., McNulty, J. K., Addis, M. E., Cordova, J. V., & Temple, J. R. (2008). 
Domains of masculine gender role stress and intimate partner violence in a clinical sample of 
violent men.  Psychology of Men & Masculinity, 9, 82–89. 
 Moreland, R. L., & Beach, S. R. (1992). Exposure effects in the classroom: The development of affin-
ity among students.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 28, 255–276. 
 Moreno, J. L. (1934).  Who shall survive? A new approach to the problem of human interrelationships. 
Washington, DC: Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing. 
 Morgentaler, A. (2003).  The Viagra myth: The surprising impact on love and relationships. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 
Morin, R., & Cohn, D. (2008, September 25). Women call the shots at home; public mixed on gen-
der roles in jobs. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from http://pewresearch.org/pubs/967/
gender-power
 Morrow, G. D., Clark, E. M., & Brock, K. F. (1995). Individual and partner love styles: Implications 
for the quality of romantic involvements.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 12, 363–387. 
 Morry, M. M., Kito, M., Mann, S., & Hill, L. (2013). Relational-interdependent self-construal: 
 Perceptions of friends and friendship quality.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 
44–63.
 Morry, M. M., Kito, M., & Ortiz, L. (2011). The attraction–similarity model and dating couples: 
Projection, perceived similarity, and psychological benefits.  Personal Relationships, 18, 125–143. 
 Moss-Racusin, C. A., & Rudman, L. A. (2010). Disruptions in women’s self-promotion: The back-
lash avoidance model.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 34, 186–202. 
 Muehlenhard, C. L., & Peterson, Z. D. (2011). Distinguishing between  sex and  gender: History, 
current conceptualizations, and implications.  Sex Roles, 64, 791–803. 
 Muehlenhard, C. L., & Shippee, S. K. (2010). Men’s and women’s reports of pretending orgasm. 
 Journal of Sex Research, 47, 552–567. 
 Muise, A., Christofides, E., & Desmarais, S. (2009). More information than you ever wanted: Does 
Facebook bring out the green-eyed monster of jealousy?  Cyberpsychology & Behavior, 12, 
441–444. 
 Muise, A., Christofides, E., & Desmarais, S. (2014). “Creeping” or just information seeking? Gender 
differences in partner monitoring in response to jealousy on Facebook.  Personal Relationships, 
21, 35–50. 
 Muise, A., Impett, E. A., & Desmarais, S. (2013). Getting it on versus getting it over with: Sexual 
motivation, desire, and satisfaction in intimate bonds.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
39, 1320–1332. 
 Mundy, L. (2012).  The richer sex: How the new majority of female breadwinners is transforming sex, love, 
and family. New York: Simon & Schuster. 

References R-61
 Murray, S. L., Aloni, M., Holmes, J. G., Derrick, J. L., Stinson, D. A., & Leder, S. (2009). Fostering 
partner dependence as trust insurance: The implicit contingencies of the exchange script in 
close relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 96, 324–348. 
 Murray, S. L., Bellavia, G. M., Rose, P., & Griffin, D. W. (2003). Once hurt, twice hurtful: How per-
ceived regard regulates daily marital interactions.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 
84, 126–147. 
 Murray, S. L., Griffin, D. W., Derrick, J. L, Harris, B., Aloni, M., & Leder, S. (2011). Tempting fate 
or inviting happiness? Unrealistic idealization prevents the decline of marital satisfaction. 
 Psychological Science, 22, 619–626. 
 Murray, S. L., Griffin, D. W., Rose, P., & Bellavia, G. M. (2003). Calibrating the sociometer: The 
relational contingencies of self-esteem.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 63–84. 
 Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Derrick, J. L., Harris, B., Griffin, D. W., & Pinkus, R. T. (2013). Cautious 
to a fault: Self-protection and the trajectory of marital satisfaction.  Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 49, 522–533. 
 Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., & Griffin, D. W. (1996). The self-fulfilling nature of positive illusions in 
romantic relationships: Love is not blind, but prescient.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 71, 1155–1180. 
 Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., Griffin, D. W., Bellavia, G., & Rose, P. (2001). The mismeasure of love: 
How self-doubt contaminates relationship beliefs.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 27, 
423–436. 
 Murray, S. L., Holmes, J. G., MacDonald, G., & Ellsworth, P. C. (1998). Through the looking glass 
darkly? When self-doubts turn into relationship insecurities.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 75, 1459–1480. 
 Murray, S. L., Rose, P., Bellavia, G. M., Holmes, J. G., & Kusche, A. G. (2002). When rejection stings: 
How self-esteem constrains relationship-enhancement processes.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 83, 556–573. 
 Murstein, B. I. (1987). A clarification and extension of the SVR theory of dyadic pairing.  Journal of 
Marriage and the Family, 49, 929–933. 
 Muscanell, N. L., Guadagno, R. E., Rice, L, & Murphy, S. (2013). Don’t it make my brown eyes 
green? An analysis of Facebook use and romantic jealousy.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and 
Social Networking, 16, 237–242. 
 Musick, K., & Meier, A. (2010). Are both parents always better than one? Parental conflict and 
young adult well-being.  Social Science Research, 39, 814–830. 
 Mustonen, U., Huurre, T., Kiviruusu, O., & Haukkala, A. (2011). Long-term impact of parental 
divorce on intimate relationship quality in adulthood and the mediating role of psychosocial 
resources.  Journal of Family Psychology, 25, 615–619. 
 Myers, D. (2013). Sexual orientation, marriage, and students of faith. In D. Dunn, R. Gurung, 
K. Naufel, & J. Wilson (Eds.),  Controversy in the psychology classroom: Using hot topics to foster 
critical thinking (pp. 81–104). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Myers, D. G. (2008).  Social psychology (9th ed.). Boston: McGraw-Hill. 
 Myers, S. A., & Berscheid, E. (1997). The language of love: The difference a preposition makes. 
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 23, 347–362. 
 Neff, L. A., & Broady, E. F. (2011). Stress resilience in early marriage: Can practice make perfect? 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 1050–1067. 
 Neff, L. A., & Geers, A. L. (2013). Optimistic expectations in early marriage: A resource or vulner-
ability for adaptive relationship functioning?  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 105, 
38–60. 
 Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2002). Judgments of a relationship partner: Specific accuracy but global 
enhancement.  Journal of Personality, 70, 1079–1112. 
 Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2003). The dynamic structure of relationship perceptions: Differential 
importance as a strategy of relationship maintenance.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
29, 1433–1446. 
 Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2005). To know you is to love you: The implications of global adoration 
and specific accuracy for marital relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 88, 
480–497. 

R-62 
References
 Neff, L. A., & Karney, B. R. (2009). Compassionate love in early marriage. In B. Fehr, S. Sprecher, & 
L. Underwood (Eds.),  The science of compassionate love: Theory: research, and applications 
(pp. 201–221). Chichester, England: Wiley-Blackwell. 
 Negash, S., Cui, M., Fincham, F. D., & Pasley, K. (2014). Extradyadic involvement and relation-
ship dissolution in heterosexual women university students.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 43, 
531–539. 
 Neighbors, C., Walker, D. D., Mbilinyi, L. F., O’Rourke, A., Edleson, J. L., Zegree, J., & Roffman, 
R. A. (2010). Normative misperceptions of abuse among perpetrators of intimate partner vio-
lence.  Violence Against Women, 16, 370–386. 
 Nelson, L. D., & Morrison, E. L. (2005). The symptoms of resource scarcity: Judgments of food and 
finances influence preferences for potential partners.  Psychological Science, 16, 167–173. 
 Nelson, S. K., Kushlev, K., English, T., Dunn, E. W., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2013). In defense of parent-
hood: Children are associated with more joy than misery.  Psychological Science, 24, 3–10. 
 Nestler, S., & Back, M. D. (2013). Applications and extensions of the lens model to understand 
interpersonal judgments at zero acquaintance.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 22, 
374–379. 
 Newall, N. E., Chipperfield, J. G., Clifton, R. A., Perry, R. P., Swift, A. U., & Ruthig, J. C. (2009). 
Causal beliefs, social participation, and loneliness among older adults: A longitudinal study. 
 Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 26, 273–290. 
 Newcomb, T. M. (1961).  The acquaintance process. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
 Newman, M. L., Pennebaker, J. W., Berry, D. S., & Richards, J. M. (2003). Lying words: Predicting 
deception from linguistic styles.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 29, 665–675. 
 Newport, F. (2008, April 4). Wives still do laundry, men do yard work.  Gallup Poll News Service. Retrieved 
from  http://www.gallup.com/poll/106249/Wives-Still-Laundry-Men-Yard-Work.aspx  
 Newport, F., & Himelfarb, I. (2013, May).  In U.S., record-high say gay, lesbian relations morally OK. 
Gallup Politics. Retrieved from  http://www.gallup.com/poll/162689/record-high-say-gay-
lesbian-relations-morally.aspx 
 Nezlek, J. B., & Leary, M. R. (2002). Individual differences in self-presentational motives in daily 
social interaction.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 211–223. 
 Nezlek, J. B., Richardson, D. S., Green, L. R., & Schatten-Jones, E. C. (2002). Psychological well-
being and day-to-day social interaction among older adults.  Personal Relationships, 9, 57–71. 
 Nezlek, J. B., Schütz, A., & Sellin, I. (2007). Self-presentational success in daily interaction.  Self and 
Identity, 6, 361–379. 
 Niehuis, S., Reifman, A., & Lee, K. (2014). Disillusionment in cohabiting and married couples: 
A national study.  Journal of Family Issues. doi: 10.1177/0192513X13498594 
 Noller, P. (1980). Misunderstandings in marital communication: A study of couples’ nonverbal 
communications.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1135–1148. 
 Noller, P. (1981). Gender and marital adjustment level differences in decoding messages from 
spouses and strangers.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41, 272–278. 
 Noller, P. (2006). Nonverbal communication in close relationships. In V. Manusov & M. L.  Patterson 
(Eds.),  The Sage handbook of nonverbal communication (pp. 403–420). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Noller, P. (2012). Conflict in family relationships. In P. Noller & G. C. Karantzas (Eds.),  The Wiley-
Blackwell handbook of couple and family relationships (pp. 129–143). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Noller, P., & Venardos, C. (1986). Communication awareness in married couples.  Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 3, 31–42. 
 North, R. J., Holahan, C. J., Moos, R. H., & Cronkite, R. C. (2008). Family support, family income, 
and happiness: A 10-year perspective.  Journal of Family Psychology, 22, 475–483. 
 Norton, M. I., Frost, J. H., & Ariely, D. (2007). Less is more: The lure of ambiguity, or why familiar-
ity breeds contempt.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 97–105. 
 Norton, M. I., Frost, J. H., & Ariely, D. (2013). Less is often more, but not always: Additional evi-
dence that familiarity breeds contempt and a call for future research.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 105, 921–923. 
 Notarius, C. I., Lashley, S. L., & Sullivan, D. J. (1997). Angry at your partner? Think again. In 
R. J. Sternberg & M. Hojjat (Eds.),  Satisfaction in close relationships (pp. 219–248). New York: 
Guilford Press. 

References R-63
 Oakman, J., Gifford, S., & Chlebowsky, N. (2003). A multilevel analysis of the interpersonal behav-
ior of socially anxious people.  Journal of Personality, 71, 397–434. 
 O’Connor, J. J. M., Pisanski, K., Tigue, C. C., Fraccaro, P. J., & Feinberg, D. R. (2014). Perceptions of 
infidelity risk predict women’s preferences for low male voice pitch in short-term over long-
term relationship contexts.  Personality and Individual Differences, 56, 73–77. 
 O’Grady, M. A., Harman, J. J., Gleason, M. E. J., & Wilson, K. (2012). Managing an attractive impres-
sion by using alcohol: Evidence from two daily diary studies.  Basic and Applied Social Psychol-
ogy, 34, 76–87. 
 Ogolsky, B. G., & Bowers, J. R. (2013). A meta-analytic review of relationship maintenance and its 
correlates.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 343–367. 
 Oishi, S. (2010). The psychology of residential mobility: Implications for the self, social relation-
ships, and well-being.  Perspectives on Psychological Science, 5, 5–21. 
 Okimoto, T. G., & Brescoll, V. L. (2010). The price of power: Power seeking and backlash against 
female politicians.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 923–936. 
 Olatunji, B. O., Lohr, J. M., & Bushman, B. J. (2007). The pseudopsychology of venting in the treat-
ment of anger: Implications and alternatives for mental health practice. In T. A. Cavell & 
K. T. Malcolm (Eds.),  Anger, aggression, and interventions for interpersonal violence (pp. 119–141). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 O’Leary, K. D., Acevedo, B. P., Aron, A., Huddy, L., & Mashek, D. (2012). Is long-term love more 
than a rare phenomenon? If so, what are its correlates?  Social Psychological and Personality Sci-
ence, 3, 241–249. 
 Olivola, C. Y., & Todorov, A. (2010a). Elected in 100 milliseconds: Appearance-based trait infer-
ences and voting.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 34, 83–110. 
 Olivola, C. Y., & Todorov, A. (2010b). Fooled by first impressions? Reexamining the diagnostic 
value of appearance-based inferences.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 315–324. 
 Olmstead, S. B., Negash, S., Pasley, K., & Fincham, F. D. (2013). Emerging adults’ expectations 
for pornography use in the context of future committed romantic relationships: A qualitative 
study.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 625–635. 
 Olson, I. R., & Marshuetz, C. (2005). Facial attractiveness is appraised in a glance.  Emotion, 5, 
498–502. 
 Oncale, R. M., & King, B. M. (2001). Comparison of men’s and women’s attempts to dissuade sexual 
partners from the couple using condoms.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 30, 379–391. 
 Online dating statistics. (2014, January). Retrieved from  http://www.statisticbrain.com/online-
dating-statistics/ 
 Orbuch, T. L. (2009).  5 simple steps to take your marriage from good to great. New York: Delacorte Press. 
 Orbuch, T. L., Bauermeister, J. A., Brown, E., & McKinley, B. (2013). Early family ties and marital 
stability over 16 years: The context of race and gender.  Family Relations, 62, 255–268. 
 Oriña, M. M., Collins, W. A., Simpson, J. A., Salvatore, J. E., Haydon, K. C., & Kim, J. S. (2011). 
Developmental and dyadic perspectives on commitment in adult romantic relationships. 
 Psychological Science, 22, 908–915. 
 Oriña, M. M., Wood, W., & Simpson, J. A. (2002). Strategies of influence in close relationships. 
 Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 459–472. 
 Orth, U., Robins, R. W., & Widaman, K. F. (2012). Life-span development of self-esteem and its 
effects on important life outcomes.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 1271–1288. 
 O’Sullivan, L. F., Udell, W., Montrose, V. A., Antoniello, P., & Hoffman, S. (2010). A cognitive anal-
ysis of college students’ explanations for engaging in unprotected sexual intercourse.  Archives 
of Sexual Behavior, 39, 1121–1131. 
 Osterhout, R. E., Frame, L. E., & Johnson, M. D. (2011). Maladaptive attributions and dyadic behav-
ior are associated in engaged couples.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 30, 787–818. 
 Ostovich, J. M., & Sabini, J. (2004). How are sociosexuality, sex drive, and lifetime number of sexual 
partners related?  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 30, 1255–1266. 
 Oswald, D. L., & Clark, E. M. (2006). How do friendship maintenance behaviors and problem-
solving styles function at the individual and dyadic levels?  Personal Relationships, 13, 333–348. 
 Oswald, D. L., Clark, E. M., & Kelly, C. M. (2004). Friendship maintenance: An analysis of indi-
vidual and dyad behaviors.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 23, 413–441. 

R-64 
References
 Oswald, D. L., & Russell, B. L. (2006). Perceptions of sexual coercion in heterosexual dating rela-
tionships: The role of aggressor gender and tactics.  Journal of Sex Research, 43, 87–95. 
 Overall, N. C. (2012). The costs and benefits of trying to change intimate partners. In P. Noller & 
G. C. Karantzas (Eds.),  The Wiley-Blackwell handbook of couple and family relationships 
(pp. 234–247). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Overall, N. C., Fletcher, G. J. O., & Simpson, J. A. (2010a). Helping each other grow: Romantic 
partner support, self-improvement, and relationship quality.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 36, 1496–1513. 
 Overall, N. C., Girme, Y. U., Lemay, E. P., Jr., & Hammond, M. D. (2014). Attachment anxiety and 
reactions to relationship threat: The benefits and costs of inducing guilt in romantic partners. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 235–256. 
 Overall, N. C., & Sibley, C. G. (2008). Attachment and attraction toward romantic partners ver-
sus relevant alternatives within daily interactions.  Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 
1126–1137. 
 Overall, N. C., Sibley, C. G., & Travaglia, L. K. (2010b). Loyal but ignored: The benefits and costs of 
constructive communication behavior.  Personal Relationships, 17, 127–148. 
 Overall, N. C., & Simpson, J. A. (2013). Regulation processes in close relationships. In J. A. Simp-
son & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 427–451). New York: 
Oxford University Press. 
 Overall, N. C., Simpson, J. A., & Struthers, H. (2013). Buffering attachment-related avoidance: 
Softening emotional and behavioral defenses during conflict discussions.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 104, 854–871. 
 Owen, J., Fincham, F. D., & Manthos, M. (2013). Friendship after a friends with benefits relation-
ship: Deception, psychological functioning, and social connectedness.  Archives of Sexual Behav-
ior, 42, 1443–1449. 
 Owen, P. R., & Laurel-Seller, E. (2000). Weight and shape ideals: Thin is dangerously in.  Journal of 
 Applied Social Psychology, 30, 979–990. 
 Padgett, P. M. (2007). Personal safety and sexual safety for women using online personal ads. 
 Sexuality Research & Social Policy, 4, 27–37. 
 Paik, A. (2011). Adolescent sexuality and the risk of marital dissolution.  Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 73, 472–485. 
 Palomares, N. A. (2009). Women are sort of more tentative than men, aren’t they? How men and 
women use tentative language differently, similarly, and counterstereotypically as a function 
of gender salience.  Communication Research, 36, 538–560. 
 Papp, L. M., Cummings, E. M., & Goeke-Morey, M. C. (2009). For richer, for poorer: Money as a 
topic of marital conflict in the home.  Family Relations, 58, 91–103. 
 Pansera, C., & La Guardia, J. (2012). The role of sincere amends and perceived partner responsive-
ness in forgiveness.  Personal Relationships, 19, 696–711. 
 Papp, L. M., Danielewicz, J., & Cayemberg, C. (2012). “Are we Facebook official?” Implications of 
dating partners’ Facebook use and profiles for intimate relationship satisfaction.  Cyberpsychol-
ogy, Behavior, and Social Networking, 15, 85–90. 
 Parks-Stamm, E. J., Heilman, M. E., & Hearns, K. A. (2008). Motivated to penalize: Women’s strate-
gic rejection of successful women.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 34, 237–247. 
 Park, L. E., Streamer, L., Huang, L., & Galinsky, A. D. (2013). Stand tall, but don’t put your feet up: 
Universal and culturally-specific effects of expansive postures on power.  Journal of Experimen-
tal Social Psychology, 49, 965–971. 
 Parker, K., & Wang, W. (2013, March).  Modern parenthood. Pew Research Center. Retrieved from 
 http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2013/03/14/modern-parenthood-roles-of-moms-and-
dads-converge-as-they-balance-work-and-family/ 
 Parks-Leduc, L., Pattie, M. W., Pargas, F., & Eliason, R. G. (2014). Self-monitoring as an aggregate 
construct: Relationships with personality and values.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
58, 3–8. 
 Patterson, M. L. (2011).  More than words: The power of nonverbal communication. Barcelona, Spain: 
Aresta. 

References R-65
 Pascoal, P. M., de Santa Bárbara Narciso, I., & Pereira, N. M. (2014). What is sexual satisfaction? 
Thematic analysis of lay people’s definitions.  Journal of Sex Research, 51, 22–30. 
 Payne, J. W. (2006, January 8). Health risk indicator may be all in the belly.  Houston Chronicle, p. G7. 
 Pazda, A. D., Elliot, A. J., & Greitemeyer, T. (2012). Sexy red: Perceived sexual receptivity mediates 
the red-attraction relation in men viewing woman.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 
787–790. 
 Pearce, A. R., Chuikova, T., Ramsey, A., & Galyautdinova, S. (2010). A positive psychology per-
spective on mate preferences in the United States and Russia.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychol-
ogy, 41, 742–757. 
 Pearce, Z. J., & Halford, W. K. (2008). Do attributions mediate the association between attachment 
and negative couple communication?  Personal Relationships, 15, 155–170. 
 Peer, E., Acquisti, A., & Shalvi, S. (2014). “I cheated, but only a little”: Partial confessions to unethi-
cal behavior.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 106, 202–217. 
 Peetz, J., & Kammrath, L. (2011). Only because I love you: Why people make and why they 
break promises in romantic relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 
887–904. 
 Pedersen, W. C., Miller, L. C., Putcha-Bhagavatula, A. D., & Yang, Y. (2002). Evolved sex differ-
ences in the number of partners desired? The long and the short of it.  Psychological Science, 13, 
157–161. 
 Peipert, J. F., Madden, T., Allsworth, J. E., & Secura, G. M. (2012). Preventing unintended pregnan-
cies by providing no-cost contraception.  Obstetrics and Gynecology, 120, 1291–1297. 
 Pelham, B. W., Carvallo, M., & Jones, J. T. (2005). Implicit egotism.  Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 14, 106–110. 
 Pennebaker, J. W., Dyer, M. A., Caulkins, R. J., Litowitz, D. L., Ackerman, P. L., Anderson, D. B., & 
McGraw, K. M. (1979). Don’t the girls get prettier at closing time: A country and western 
application to psychology.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 5, 122–125. 
 Peplau, L. A. (2003). Human sexuality: How do men and women differ?  Current Directions in 
Psychological Science, 12, 37–40. 
 Peplau, L. A., & Fingerhut, A. W. (2007). The close relationships of lesbians and gay men.  Annual 
Review of Psychology, 58, 405–424. 
 Peplau, L. A., Fingerhut, A., & Beals, K. P. (2004). Sexuality in the relationships of lesbians and gay 
men. In J. H. Harvey, A. Wenzel, & S. Sprecher (Eds.),  The handbook of sexuality in close relation-
ships (pp. 349–369). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Perilloux, C., & Buss, D. M. (2008). Breaking up romantic relationships: Costs experienced and 
 coping strategies deployed.  Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 164–181. 
 Perilloux, C., Duntley, J. D., & Buss, D. M. (2012). The costs of rape.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 41, 
1099–1106. 
 Perilloux, C., Fleischman, D. S., & Buss, D. M. (2011). Meet the parents: Parent-offspring conver-
gence and divergence in mate preferences.  Personality and Individual Differences, 50, 253–258. 
 Perilloux, H. K., Webster, G. D., & Gaulin, S. J. C. (2010). Signals of genetic quality and maternal 
investment capacity: The dynamic effects of fluctuating asymmetry and waist-to-hip ratio on 
men’s ratings of women’s attractiveness.  Social Psychology and Personality Science, 1, 34–42. 
 Perlman, D. (1989, August).  You bug me: A preliminary report on hassles in relationships. Paper pre-
sented at the meeting of the American Psychological Association, New Orleans. 
 Perrett, D. (2010).  In your face: The new science of human attraction. New York: Palgrave Macmillan. 
 Perry, S. L. (2013). Racial composition of social settings, interracial friendship, and whites attitudes 
toward interracial marriage.  SSJ, 50, 13–22. 
 Peterson, D. R. (2002). Conflict. In H. H. Kelley, E. Berscheid, A. Christensen, et al. (Eds.),  Close 
relationships (pp. 265–314). Clinton Corners, NY: Percheron Press. 
 Petronio, S. (2010). Communication privacy management theory: What do we know about family 
privacy regulation?  Journal of Family Theory & Review, 2, 175–196. 
 Petronio, S., & Durham, W. T. (2008). Communication privacy management theory: Significance 
for interpersonal communication. In L. A. Baxter & D. O. Braithwaite (Eds.),  Engaging theories 
in interpersonal communication: Multiple perspectives (pp. 309–322). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

R-66 
References
 Pettijohn, T. F., II, & Jungeberg, B. J. (2004).  Playboy playmate curves: Changes in facial and body 
feature preferences across social and economic conditions.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 30, 1186–1197. 
 Pew Research Center. (2013a, May).  Breadwinner moms. Retrieved from  http://www.pewsocial-
trends.org/2013/05/29/breadwinner-moms/   
 Pew Research Center. (2013b, June).  In gay marriage debate, both supporters and opponents see legal 
recognition as “inevitable.” Retrieved from  http://www.people-press.org/2013/06/06/in-gay-
marriage-debate-both-supporters-and-opponents-see-legal-recognition-as-inevitable/  
 Pew Research. (2014a, February).  Gay marriage around the world. Retrieved from  http://www.pew-
forum.org/2013/12/19/gay-marriage-around-the-world-2013/ 
 Pew Research. (2014b, January).  There’s more to the story of the shrinking pay gap. Retrieved from 
http://www.pewsocialtrends.org/2014/01/09/theres-more-to-the-story-of-the-shrinking-
pay-gap/   
 Picardi, A., Fagnani, C., Nisticò, L., & Stazi, M. A. (2011). A twin study of attachment style in young 
adults.  Journal of Personality, 79, 965–991. 
 Pierce, L., Dahl, M. S., & Nielsen, J. (2013). In sickness and in wealth: Psychological and sexual costs 
of income comparison in marriage.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 359–374. 
 Pillsworth, E. G., & Haselton, M. G. (2006). Women’s sexual strategies: The evolution of long-term 
bonds and extrapair sex.  Annual Review of Sex Research, 17, 59–100. 
 Pines, A. M. (1998).  Romantic jealousy: Causes, symptoms, cures. New York: Routledge. 
 Pinquart, M. (2003). Loneliness in married, widowed, divorced, and never-married older adults. 
 Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 20, 31–53. 
 Pipitone, R. N., & Gallup, G. G., Jr. (2008). Women’s voice attractiveness varies across the menstrual 
cycle.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 29, 268–274. 
 Pirlott, A. G., & Schmitt, D. P. (2014). Gendered sexual cultures. In A. B. Cohen (Ed.),  Culture reex-
amined: Broadening our understanding of social and evolutionary influences (pp. 191–215). Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Pittman, F. S., & Wagers, T. P. (2005). Teaching fidelity.  Journal of Clinical Psychology, 61, 1407–1419. 
 Pitts, M. K., Smith, A. M. A., Grierson, J., O’Brien, M., & Misson, S. (2004). Who pays for sex and 
why? An analysis of social and motivational factors associated with male clients of sex work-
ers.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 33, 353–358. 
 Place, S. S., Todd, P. M., Penke, L., & Asendorpf, J. B. (2009). The ability to judge the romantic inter-
est of others.  Psychological Science, 20, 22–26. 
 Pollet, T. V., Roberts, S. G. B., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (2011). Use of social network sites and instant 
messaging does not lead to increased offline social network size, or to emotionally closer rela-
tionships with offline network members.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14, 
253–258. 
 Pollmann, M. M. H., & Finkenauer, C. (2009). Investigating the role of two types of understanding 
in relationship well-being: Understanding is more important than knowledge.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 1512–1527. 
 Poortman, A. (2005). The mediating role of financial and time pressures.  Journal of Family Issues, 26, 
168–195. 
 Poortman, A., & Liefbroer, A. C. (2010). Singles’ relational attitudes in a time of individualization. 
 Social Science Research, 39, 938–949. 
 Poortman, A., & Lyngstad, T. H. (2007). Dissolution risks in first and higher order marital and 
cohabiting unions.  Social Science Research, 36, 1431–1446. 
 Poortman, A., & Seltzer, J. A. (2007). Parents’ expectations about childrearing after divorce: Does 
anticipating difficulty deter divorce?  Journal of Marriage and Family, 69, 254–269. 
 Porter, S., & ten Brinke, L. (2010). The truth about lies: What works in detecting high-stakes decep-
tion?  Legal and Criminological Psychology, 15, 57–75. 
 Porter, S., ten Brinke, L., & Wallace, B. (2012). Secrets and lies: Involuntary leakage in deceptive 
facial expressions as a function of emotional intensity.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 36, 23–37. 
 Powers, S. I., Pietromonaco, P. R., Gunlicks, M., & Sayer, A. (2006). Dating couples’ attachment 
styles and patterns of cortisol reactivity and recovery in response to a relationship conflict. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 90, 613–628. 

References R-67
 Prager, K. J., & Roberts, L. J. (2004). Deep intimate connection: Self and intimacy in couple rela-
tionships. In D. J. Mashek & A. Aron (Eds.),  Handbook of closeness and intimacy (pp. 43–60). 
 Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Prager, K. J., Shirvani, F. K., Garcia, J. J., & Coles, M. (2013). Intimacy and positive psychology. In 
M. Hojjat & D. Cramer (Eds.),  Positive psychology of love (pp. 16–29). New York: Oxford Uni-
versity Press. 
 Pratto, F., & Walker, A. (2004). The bases of gendered power. In A. H. Eagly, A. E. Beall, & 
R. J.  Sternberg (Eds.),  The psychology of gender (2nd ed., pp. 242–268). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Pressman, S. D., Cohen, S., Miller, G. E., Barkin, A., Rabin, B. S., & Treanor, J. J. (2005). Loneliness, 
social network size, and immune response to influenza vaccination in college freshmen.  Health 
Psychology, 24, 297–306. 
 Previti, D., & Amato, P. R. (2003). Why stay married? Rewards, barriers, and marital stability.  Jour-
nal of Marriage and Family, 65, 561–573. 
 Prewitt-Freilino, J. L., Caswell, T. A., & Laakso, E. K. (2011). The gendering of language: A compari-
son of gender equality in countries with gendered, natural gender, and genderless languages. 
 Sex Roles, 66, 268–281. 
 Price, M. (2011). Alone in the crowd.  Monitor on Psychology, 26 (4), 26–28. 
 Priebe, G., & Svedin, C. G. (2013). Operationalization of three dimensions of sexual orientation in a 
national survey of late adolescents.  Journal of Sex Research, 50, 727–738. 
 Priem, J. S., Solomon, D. H., & Steuber, K. R. (2009). Accuracy and bias in perceptions of emotion-
ally supportive communication in marriage.  Personal Relationships, 16, 531–552. 
 Prokosch, M. D., Coss, R. G., Scheib, J. E., & Blozis, S. A. (2009). Intelligence and mate choice: Intel-
ligent men are always appealing.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 30, 11–20. 
 Pronin, E., Lin, D. Y., & Ross, L. (2002). The bias blind spot: Perceptions of bias in self versus others. 
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 28, 369–381. 
 Pronk, T. M., & Karremans, J. C. (2014). Does executive control relate to sacrificial behavior during 
conflicts of interests?  Personal Relationships, 21, 168–175. 
 Pronk, T. M., Karremans, J. C., Overbeek, G., Vermulst, A. A., & Wigboldus, D. H. J. (2010). What it 
takes to forgive: When and why executive functioning facilitates forgiveness.  Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 98, 119–131. 
 Pronk, T. M., Karremans, J. C., & Wigboldus, D. H. J. (2011). How can you resist? Executive control 
helps romantically involved individuals to stay faithful.  Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 100, 827–837. 
 Proost, K., Schreurs, B., de Witte, K., & Derous, E. (2010). Ingratiation and self-promotion in the 
selection interview: The effects of using single tactics or a combination of tactics on inter-
viewer judgments.  Journal of Applied Social Psychology, 40, 2155–2169. 
 Przybylski, A. K., & Weinstein, N. (2013). Can you connect with me now? How the presence of 
mobile communication technology influences face-to-face conversation quality.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 237–246. 
 Puccinelli, N. M. (2010). Nonverbal communication competence. In D. Matsumoto (Ed.),  APA hand-
book of interpersonal communication (pp. 273–288). Washington, DC: American Psychological 
Association. 
 Pulerwitz, J., Gortmaker, S. L., & DeJong, W. (2000). Measuring sexual relationship power in HIV/
STD research.  Sex Roles, 42, 637–660. 
 Purvis, J. A., Dabbs, J. M., Jr., & Hopper, C. H. (1984). The “opener”: Skilled user of facial expression 
and speech pattern.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 10, 61–66. 
 Puts, D. A, Bailey, D. H., Cárdenas, R. A., et al. (2013). Women’s attractiveness changes with estra-
diol and progesterone across the ovulatory cycle.  Hormones and Behavior, 63, 13–19. 
 Rainie, L., Smith, A., & Duggan, M. (2013).  Coming and going on Facebook. Pew Research Center. 
Retrieved from  http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Coming-and-going-on-facebook.aspx  
 Ramirez, A., Jr. (2008). An examination of the tripartite approach to commitment: An actor-partner 
interdependence model analysis of the effect of relational maintenance behavior.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 25, 943–965. 
 Ramirez, A., Jr. & Zhang, S. (2007). When online meets offline: The effect of modality switching on 
relational communication.  Communication Monographs, 74, 287–310. 

R-68 
References
 Rammstedt, B., Spinath, F. M., Richter, D., & Schupp, J. (2013). Partnership longevity and personal-
ity congruence in couples.  Personality and Individual Differences, 54, 832–835. 
 Randall, A. K., & Bodenmann, G. (2009). The role of stress on close relationships and marital satis-
faction.  Clinical Psychology Review, 29, 105–115. 
 Randolph, M. E., Pinkerton, S. D., Bogart, L. M., Cecil, H., & Abramson, P. R. (2007). Sexual plea-
sure and condom use.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 844–848. 
 Ratliff, K. A., & Oishi, S. (2013). Gender differences in implicit self-esteem following a romantic 
partner’s success or failure.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 105, 688–702. 
 Raven, B. H. (2001). Power/interaction and interpersonal influence: Experimental investigations 
and case studies. In A. Y. Lee-Chai & J. A. Bargh (Eds.),  The use and abuse of power: Multiple 
perspectives on the causes of corruption (pp. 217–240). Philadelphia: Psychology Press. 
 Regan, K. V., Bartholomew, K., Kwong, M. J., Trinke, S. J., & Henderson, A. J. Z. (2006). The relative 
severity of acts of physical violence in heterosexual relationships: An item response theory 
analysis.  Personal Relationships, 13, 37–52. 
 Regan, P. C. (2008).  The mating game: A primer on love, sex, and marriage (2nd ed.) . Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
 Regan, P. C. (2013). Sexual desire in women. In D. Castañeda (Ed.),  The essential handbook of women’s 
sexuality (Vol. 1, pp. 3–24). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 
 Reiber, C., & Garcia, J. R. (2010). Hooking up: Gender differences, evolution, and pluralistic igno-
rance.  Evolutionary Psychology, 8, 390–404. 
 Reid, P. T., Cooper, S. M., & Banks, K. H. (2008). Girls to women: Developmental theory, research, 
and issues. In F. L. Denmark & M. A. Paludi (Eds.),  Psychology of women: A handbook of issues 
and theories (2nd ed., pp. 237–270). Westport, CT: Praeger. 
 Reinhard, M., Sporer, S. L., Scharmach, M., & Marksteiner, T. (2011). Listening, not watching: Situ-
ational familiarity and the ability to detect deception.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 101, 467–484. 
 Reinhardt, J. P., Boerner, K., & Horowitz, A. (2006). Good to have but not to use: Differential impact 
of perceived and received support on well-being.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
23, 117–129. 
 Reis, H. T. (1986). Gender effects in social participation: Intimacy, loneliness, and the conduct of 
social interaction. In R. Gilmour & S. Duck (Eds.),  The emerging field of personal relationships 
(pp. 91–105). London: Academic Press. 
 Reis, H. T. (1998). Gender differences in intimacy and related behaviors: Context and process. In 
D. J. Canary & K. Dindia (Eds.),  Sex differences and similarities in communication: Critical essays 
and empirical investigations of sex and gender in interaction (pp. 203–234). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Reis, H. T. (2002). Action matters, but relationship science is basic.  Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 19, 601–611. 
 Reis, H. T. (2012). A history of relationship research in social psychology. In A. W. Kruglanski & 
W. Stroebe (Eds.),  Handbook of the history of social psychology (pp. 363–382). New York: Psychol-
ogy Press. 
 Reis, H. T. (2013). Relationship well-being: The central role of perceived partner responsiveness. In 
C. Hazan & M. I. Campa (Eds.),  Human bonding: The science of affectional ties (pp. 283–307). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
 Reis, H. T. (2014). Responsiveness: Affective interdependence in close relationships. In 
M.   Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.),  Mechanisms of social connection: From brain to group 
(pp. 255–271). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Reis, H. T., & Aron, A. (2008). Love: What is it, why does it matter, and how does it operate? 
 Perspectives on Psychological Science, 3, 80–86. 
 Reis, H. T., Aron, A., Clark, M. S., & Finkel, E. J. (2013). Ellen Berscheid, Elaine Hatfield, and the 
emergence of relationship science.  Perspectives on Psychological Science, 8, 558–572. 
 Reis, H. T., & Carothers, B. J. (2014). Black and white or shades of gray: Are gender differences cat-
egorical or dimensional?  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 23, 19–26 
 Reis, H. T., & Gable, S. L. (2003). Toward a positive psychology of relationships. In C. L. M. Keyes & 
J. Haidt (Eds.),  Flourishing: positive psychology and the life well-lived (pp. 129–159). Washington, 
DC: American Psychological Association. 

References R-69
 Reis, H. T., & Patrick, B. C. (1996). Attachment and intimacy: Component processes. In E. T.  Higgins 
& A. W. Kruglanski (Eds.),  Social psychology: Handbook of basic principles (pp. 523–563). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
 Reis, H. T., & Shaver, P. (1988). Intimacy as an interpersonal process. In S. Duck (Ed.),  Handbook 
of personal relationships: Theory, research, and interventions (pp. 367–389). Chichester, England: 
Wiley. 
 Reis, H. T., Caprariello, P. A., & Velickovic, M. (2011). The relationship superiority effect is moder-
ated by the relationship context.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 47, 481–484. 
 Reis, H. T., Lin, Y., Bennett, M. E., & Nezlek, J. B. (1993). Change and consistency in social participa-
tion during early adulthood.  Developmental Psychology, 29, 633–645. 
 Reis, H. T., Maniaci, M. R., & Rogge, R. D. (2014). The expression of compassionate love in every-
day compassionate acts.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships,31, 651–676.  
 Reis, H. T., Maniaci, M. R., Caprariello, P. A., Eastwick, P. W., & Finkel, E. J. (2011). Familiarity does 
indeed promote attraction in live interaction.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 101, 
557–570. 
 Reis, H. T., Nezlek, J., & Wheeler, L. (1980). Physical attractiveness in social interaction.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 38, 604–617. 
 Reis, H. T., Sheldon, R. M., Gable, S. L., Roscoe, J., & Ryan, R. M. (2000). Daily well-being: The role of 
autonomy, competence, and relatedness.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 26, 419–435. 
 Reis, H. T., Smith, S. M., Carmichael, C. L., Caprariello, P. A., Tsai, F., Rodrigues, A., & Maniaci, 
M. R. (2010). Are you happy for me? How sharing positive events with others provides per-
sonal and interpersonal benefits.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 99, 311–329. 
 Reis, H. T., Wheeler, L., Spiegel, N., Kernis, M. H., Nezlek, J., & Perri, M. (1982). Physical attractive-
ness in social interaction: II. Why does appearance affect social experience?  Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 43, 979–996. 
 Reissing, E. D., Andruff, H. L., & Wentland, J. J. (2012). Looking back: The experience of first sex-
ual intercourse and current sexual adjustment in young heterosexual adults.  Journal of Sex 
Research, 49, 27–35. 
 Rempel, J. K., Ross, M., & Holmes, J. G. (2001). Trust and communicated attributions in close rela-
tionships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 57–64. 
 Ren, P. (2011, November).  Lifetime mobility in the United States: 2010. U. S. Census Bureau. Retrieved 
from  http://www.census.gov/prod/2011pubs/acsbr10-07.pdf 
 Renninger, L. A., Wade, T. J., & Grammer, K. (2004). Getting that female glance: Patterns and 
consequences of male nonverbal behavior in courtship contexts.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 
25, 416–431. 
 Renshaw, K. D., Blais, R. K., & Smith, T. W. (2010). Components of negative affectivity and marital sat-
isfaction: The importance of actor and partner anger.  Journal of Research in Personality, 44, 328–334. 
 Renshaw, K. D., McKnight, P., Caska, C. M., & Blais, R. K. (2011). The utility of the relationship 
assessment scale in multiple types of relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
28, 435–447. 
 Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S. M., & Markman, H. J. (2009). The pre-engagement cohabitation effect: 
A replication and extension of previous findings.  Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 107–111. 
 Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S. M., & Markman, H. J. (2010). Should I stay or should I go? Predicting dating 
relationship stability from four aspects of commitment.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 543–550. 
 Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S. M., & Markman, H. J. (2012a). A longitudinal investigation of commit-
ment dynamics in cohabiting relationships.  Journal of Family Issues, 33, 369–390. 
 Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S. M., Markman, H. J., & Ragan, E. P. (2012b). Parents’ marital status, con-
flict, and role modeling: Links with adult romantic relationship quality.  Journal of Divorce & 
Remarriage, 53, 348–367. 
 Rhodes, G. (2006). The evolutionary psychology of facial beauty.  Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 
199–226. 
 Rhodes, G., Harwood, K., Yoshikawa, S., Nishitani, M., & MacLean, I. (2002). The attractiveness 
of average faces: Cross-cultural evidence and possible biological basis. In G. Rhodes & L. A. 
Zebrowitz (Eds.),  Facial attractiveness: Evolutionary, cognitive and social perspectives (pp. 35–58). 
Westport, CT: Ablex. 

R-70 
References
 Richman, L. S., & Leary, M. R. (2009). Reactions to discrimination, stigmatization, ostracism, and 
other forms of interpersonal rejection: A multimotive model.  Psychological Review, 116, 365–383. 
 Rick, S. I., Small, D. A., & Finkel, E. J. (2011). Fatal (fiscal) attraction: Spendthrifts and tightwads in 
marriage.  Journal of Marketing Research, 48, 228–237. 
 Ridge, R. D, & Reber, J. S. (2002). “I think she’s attracted to me”: The effect of men’s beliefs on 
women’s behavior in a job interview scenario.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 24, 1–14. 
 Riek, B. M., & Mania, E. W. (2012). The antecedents and consequences of interpersonal forgiveness: 
A meta-analytic review.  Personal Relationships, 19, 304–325. 
 Riela, S., Rodriguez, G., Aron, A., Xu, X., & Acevedo, B. P. (2010). Experiences of falling in love: 
Investigating culture, ethnicity, gender, and speed.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
27, 473–493. 
 Riggio, H. R. (2004). Parental marital conflict and divorce, parent–child relationships, social 
support, and relationship anxiety in young adulthood.  Personal Relationships, 11, 99–114. 
 Riggle, E. D. B., Rostosky, S. S., & Horne, S. G. (2010). Psychological distress, well-being, and legal 
recognition in same-sex couple relationships.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 82–86. 
 Rizkalla, L., Wertheim, E. H., & Hodgson, L. K. (2008). The roles of emotion management and per-
spective taking in individuals’ conflict management styles and disposition to forgive.  Journal 
of Research in Personality, 42, 1594–1601. 
 Roberts, S. G. B., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (2011). The costs of family and friends: An 18-month longitudi-
nal study of relationship maintenance and decay.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 32, 186–197 .
 Robillard, S. L., & Jarry, J. L. (2007, May).  Intrasexual competition for evolutionarily desirable men: The 
effect on women’s eating behavior. Poster presented at the meeting of the Association for Psycho-
logical Science, Washington, DC. 
 Robins, R. W., Mendelsohn, G. A., Connell, J. B., & Kwan, V. S. Y. (2004). Do people agree about 
the causes of behavior? A social relations analysis of behavior ratings and causal attributions. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 334–344. 
 Robinson, K. J., & Cameron, J. J. (2012). Self-esteem is a shared relationship resource: Additive 
effects of dating partners’ self-esteem levels predict relationship quality.  Journal of Research in 
Personality, 46, 227–230. 
 Robles, T. F., Slatcher, R. B., Trombello, J. M., & McGinn, M. M. (2014). Marital quality and health: 
A meta-analytic review.  Psychological Bulletin, 140, 140–187. 
 Rogers, S. J. (1999). Wives’ income and marital quality: Are there reciprocal effects?  Journal of Mar-
riage and the Family, 61, 123–132. 
 Rogge, R. D., Cobb, R. J., Lawrence, E., Johnson, M. D., & Bradbury, T. N. (2013). Is skills training 
necessary for the primary prevention of marital distress and dissolution? A 3-year experimen-
tal study of three interventions.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81, 949–961. 
 Rohner, R. P., & Khaleque, A. (2010). Testing central postulates of parental acceptance-rejection the-
ory (PARTheory): A meta-analysis of cross-cultural studies.  Journal of Family Theory & Review, 
2, 73–87. 
 Roisman, G. I., Clausell, E., Holland, A., Fortuna, K., & Elieff, C. (2008). Adult romantic relation-
ships as contexts of human development: A multimethod comparison of same-sex couples 
with opposite-sex dating, engaged, and married dyads.  Developmental Psychology, 44, 91–101. 
 Rollie, S. S., & Duck, S. (2006). Divorce and dissolution of romantic relationships: Stage models and 
their limitations. In M. Fine & J. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of divorce and relationship dissolution 
(pp. 223–240). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Romero-Canyas, R., Anderson, V. T., Reddy, K. S., & Downey, G. (2009). Rejection sensitivity. In 
M. R. Leary & R. H. Hoyle (Eds.),  Handbook of individual differences in social behavior (pp. 466–
479). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Romero-Canyas, R., Downey, G., Berenson, K., Ayduk, O., & Kang, N. J. (2010). Rejection 
sensitivity and the rejection-hostility link in romantic relationships.  Journal of Personality, 78, 
119–148. 
 Ronay, R., & von Hippel, W. (2010). The presence of an attractive woman elevates testosterone and 
physical risk taking in young men.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 1, 57–64. 
 Rosenbaum, J. E. (2009). Patient teenagers? A comparison of the sexual behavior of virginity pledg-
ers and matched nonpledgers.  Pediatrics, 123, 110–120. 

References R-71
 Rosenberg, J., & Tunney, R. J. (2008). Human vocabulary use as display.  Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 
538–549. 
 Rosenfeld, J. J., & Thomas, R. J. (2012). Searching for a mate: The rise of the internet as a social inter-
mediary.  American Sociological Review, 77, 523–547. 
 Rosenthal, N. L., & Kobak, R. (2010). Assessing adolescents’ attachment hierarchies: Differences 
across developmental periods and associations with individual adaptation.  Journal of Research 
on Adolescence, 20, 678–706. 
 Rosenthal, R. (2006). Applying psychological research on interpersonal expectations and covert 
communication in classrooms, clinics, corporations, and courtrooms. In S. I. Donaldson, 
D. E. Berger, & K. Pedzek (Eds.),  Applied psychology: New frontiers and rewarding careers 
(pp. 107–118). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Ross, M. W. (2005). Typing, doing, and being: Sexuality and the Internet.  Journal of Sex Research, 42, 
342–352. 
 Rossetto, K. R. (2013). Relational coping during deployment: Managing communication and 
connection in relationships.  Personal Relationships, 20, 568–586. 
 Rowatt, W. C., Cunningham, M. R., & Druen, P. B. (1999). Lying to get a date: The effect of facial 
physical attractiveness on the willingness to deceive prospective dating partners.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 16, 209–223. 
 Rubenstein, A. J., Langlois, J. H., & Roggman, L. A. (2002). What makes a face attractive and why: 
The role of averageness in defining facial beauty. In G. Rhodes & L. A. Zebrowitz (Eds.),  Facial 
attractiveness: Evolutionary, cognitive and social perspectives (pp. 1–33). Westport, CT: Ablex. 
 Rubin, L. B. (1986). On men and friendship.  Psychoanalytic Review, 73, 165–181. 
 Rubin, H., & Campbell, L. (2012). Day-to-day changes in intimacy predict heightened relationship 
passion, sexual occurrence, and sexual satisfaction: A dyadic diary analysis.  Social Psychologi-
cal and Personality Science, 3, 224–231. 
 Rubin, Z. (1973).  Liking and loving. New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston. 
 Rudman, L. A., Fetterolf, J. C., & Sanchez, D. T. (2013). What motivates the sexual double standard? 
More support for male versus female control theory.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
39, 250–263. 
 Rudman, L. A., & Mescher, K. (2012a). Feminism and romance. In M. A. Paludi (Ed.),  The psychology 
of love (Vol. 3, pp. 109–129). Santa Barbara, CA: Praeger. 
 Rudman, L. A., & Mescher, K. (2012b). Of animals and objects: Men’s implicit dehumanization of 
women and likelihood of sexual aggression.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 734–746. 
 Rudman, L. A., Moss-Racusin, C. A., Phelan, J. E., & Nauts, S. (2012). Status incongruity and back-
lash effects: Defending the gender hierarchy motivates prejudice against female leaders. 
 Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 48, 165–179. 
 Rudman, L. A., & Phelan, J. E. (2007). The interpersonal power of feminism: Is feminism good for 
romantic relationships?  Sex Roles, 57, 767–799. 
 Rule, N. O., Ishii, K., Ambady, N., Rosen, K. S., & Hallett, K. C. (2011a). Found in translation: Cross-
cultural consensus in the accurate categorization of male sexual orientation.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 1499–1507. 
 Rule, N. O., Rosen, K. S., Slepian, M. L., & Ambady, N. (2011b). Mating interest improves women’s 
accuracy in judging male sexual orientation.  Psychological Science, 22, 881–886. 
 Ruppel, E. K., & Curran, M. A. (2012). Relational sacrifices in romantic relationships: Satisfaction 
and the moderating role of attachment.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 29, 508–529. 
 Rusbult, C. E., Agnew, C. R., & Arriaga, X. B. (2012). The investment model of commitment pro-
cesses. In P. Van Lange, A. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.),  Handbook of theories of social 
psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 218–231). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Rusbult, C. E., Finkel, E. J., & Kumashiro, M. (2009). The Michelangelo phenomenon.  Current Direc-
tions in Psychological Science, 18, 305–309. 
 Rusbult, C. E., & Martz, J. M. (1995). Remaining in abusive relationships: An investment model 
analysis of nonvoluntary dependence.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 21, 558–571. 
 Rusbult, C. E., Van Lange, P. A. M., Wildschut, T., Yovetich, N. A., & Verette, J. (2000). Perceived 
superiority in close relationships: Why it exists and persists.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 79, 521–545. 

R-72 
References
 Rusbult, C. E., Zembrodt, I. M., & Gunn, L. K. (1982). Exit, voice, loyalty, and neglect: Responses to dis-
satisfaction in romantic involvements.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 43, 1230–1242. 
 Rusbult, C. E., Zembrodt, I. M., & Iwaniszek, J. (1986). The impact of gender and sex-role orienta-
tion on responses to dissatisfaction in close relationships.  Sex Roles, 15, 1–20. 
 Russell, D. W. (1996). The UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): Reliability, validity and factorial 
structure.  Journal of Personality Assessment, 66, 20–40. 
 Russell, V. M., Baker, L. R., & McNulty, J. K. (2013). Attachment insecurity and infidelity in mar-
riage: Do studies of dating relationships really inform us about marriage?  Journal of Family 
Psychology, 27, 242–251. 
 Rycyna, C. C., Champion, C. D., & Kelly, A. E. (2009). First impressions after various types of decep-
tion: Less favorable following expectancy violation.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 31, 40–48. 
 Rydell, R. J., McConnell, A. R., & Bringle, R. G. (2004). Jealousy and commitment: Perceived threat 
and the effect of relationship alternatives.  Personal Relationships, 11, 451–468. 
 Sabin, E. P. (1993). Social relationships and mortality among the elderly.  Journal of Applied Gerontol-
ogy, 12, 44–60. 
 Saffrey, C., & Ehrenberg, M. (2007). When thinking hurts: Attachment, rumination, and postrela-
tionship adjustment.  Personal Relationships, 14, 351–368. 
 Sagarin, B. J., Becker, D. V., Guadagno, R. E., Nicastle, L. D., & Millevoi, A. (2003). Sex differences 
(and similarities) in jealousy. The moderating influence of infidelity experience and sexual 
orientation of the infidelity.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 24, 17–23. 
Sagarin, B. J., Martin, A. L., Coutinho, S. A., et al. (2012). Sex differences in jealousy: A meta-analytic 
examination. Evolution and Human Behavior, 33, 595–614.
 Sagarin, B. J., Rhoads, K. V. L., & Cialdini, R. B. (1998). Deceiver’s distrust: Denigration as a 
consequence of undiscovered deception.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 24, 
1167–1176. 
 Sagrestano, L. M. (1992). Power strategies in interpersonal relationships: The effects of expertise 
and gender.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 16, 481–495. 
 Sagrestano, L. M., Heavey, C. L., & Christensen, A. (2006). Individual differences versus social 
structural approaches to explaining demand-withdraw and social influence behaviors. In 
K. Dindia & D. J. Canary (Eds.),  Sex differences and similarities in communication (2nd ed., 
pp. 379–395). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Sahlstein, E. M. (2006). The trouble with distance. In D. C. Kirkpatrick, S. Duck, & M. K. Foley (Eds.), 
 Relating difficulty: The processes of constructing and managing difficult interaction (pp. 119–140). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Salovey, P., & Rodin, J. (1988). Coping with envy and jealousy.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychol-
ogy, 7, 15–33. 
 Salvatore, J. E., Kuo, S. I., Steele, R. D., Simpson, J. A., & Collins, W. A. (2011). Recovering from 
conflict in romantic relationships: A developmental perspective.  Psychological Science, 22, 
376–383. 
 Sanchez, D. T., Fetterolf, J. C., & Rudman, L. A. (2012a). Eroticizing inequality in the United States: 
The consequences and determinants of traditional gender role adherence in intimate relation-
ships.  Journal of Sex Research, 49, 168–183. 
 Sanchez, D. T., Phelan, J. E., Moss-Racusin, C. A., & Good, J. J. (2012b). The gender role motiva-
tion model of women’s sexually submissive behavior and satisfaction in heterosexual couples. 
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 528–539. 
 Sandnabba, N. K., & Ahlberg, C. (1999). Parents’ attitudes and expectations about children’s cross-
gender behavior.  Sex Roles, 40, 249–263. 
 Sanford, K. (2014). A latent change score model of conflict resolution in couples: Are nega-
tive behaviors bad, benign, or beneficial?  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships. doi: 
10.1177/0265407513518156 
 Sanford, K., & Grace, A. J. (2011). Emotion and underlying concerns during couples’ conflict: An 
investigation of within-person change.  Personal Relationships, 18, 96–109. 
 Saslow, L. R., Muise, A., Impett, E. A., & Dubin. M. (2013). Can you see how happy we are? 
Facebook images and relationship satisfaction.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 4, 
411–418. 

References R-73
 Sassler, S., & Miller, A. J. (2011). Waiting to be asked: Gender, power, and relationship progression 
among cohabiting couples.  Journal of Family Issues, 32, 482–506. 
 Savin-Williams, R. C. (2005).  The new gay teenager. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 
 Savin-Williams, R. C. (2006). Who’s gay? Does it matter?  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
15, 40–44. 
 Savin-Williams, R. C., Rieger, G., & Rosenthal, A. M. (2013). Physiological evidence for a mostly 
heterosexual orientation among men.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 697–699. 
 Savitsky, K., Keysar, B., Epley, N., Carter, T., & Swanson, A. (2011). The closeness-communication 
bias: Increased egocentrism among friends versus strangers.  Journal of Experimental Social 
Psychology, 47, 269–273. 
 Saxton, T. K., Burriss, R. P., Murray, A. K., Rowland, H. M., & Roberts, S. C. (2009). Face, body and 
speech cues independently predict judgments of attractiveness.  Journal of Evolutionary Psychol-
ogy, 7, 23–35. 
 Sayer, L. C. (2006). Economic aspects of divorce and relationship dissolution. In M. A. Fine & 
J. H. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of divorce and relationship dissolution (pp. 385–406). Mahwah, NJ: 
Erlbaum. 
 Sbarra, D. A. (2006). Predicting the onset of emotional recovery following nonmarital relationship 
dissolution: Survival analyses of sadness and anger.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
32, 298–312. 
 Sbarra, D. A., & Beck, C. J. A. (2013). Divorce and close relationships: Findings, themes, and future 
directions. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of close relationships 
(pp. 795–822). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Sbarra, D. A., & Emery, R. E. (2005). The emotional sequelae of nonmarital relationship dissolution: 
Analysis of change and intraindividual variability over time.  Personal Relationships, 12, 213–232. 
 Sbarra, D. A., & Mason, A. E. (2013). The dark side of divorce. In C. N. DeWall (Ed.),  The Oxford 
handbook of social exclusion (pp. 77–90). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Sbarra, D. A., & Nietert, P. J. (2009). Divorce and death: Forty years of the Charleston Heart Study. 
 Psychological Science, 20, 107–113. 
 Schachner, D. A., & Shaver, P. R. (2002, June).  Attachment style and personality variables predict human 
mate poaching behaviors. Paper presented at the meeting of the American Psychological Society, 
New Orleans, LA. 
 Schachter, S. (1959).  The psychology of affiliation: Experimental studies of the sources of gregariousness. 
Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press. 
 Scharff, D. E., & de Varela, Y. (2005). Object relations couple therapy. In M. Harway (Ed.),  Handbook 
of couples therapy (pp. 141–156). New York: Wiley. 
 Schick, V., Calabrese, S. K., & Herbenick, D. (2014). Survey methods in sexuality research. In 
D. L. Tolman et al. (Eds.),  APA handbook of sexuality and psychology (Vol. 1, pp. 81–98). Wash-
ington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Schlenker, B. R. (2003). Self-presentation. In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.),  Handbook of self and 
identity (pp. 492–518). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Schlenker, B. R. (2012). Self-presentation. In M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.),  Handbook of self and 
identity (2nd ed., pp. 542–570). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Schmitt, D. P. (2005). Sociosexuality from Argentina to Zimbabwe: A 48-nation study of sex, 
culture, and strategies of human mating.  Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 28, 247–275. 
 Schmitt, D. P. (2008). Attachment matters: Patterns of romantic attachment across gender, geogra-
phy, and cultural forms. In J. P. Forgas & J. Fitness (Eds.),  Social relationships: Cognitive, affective 
and motivational processes (pp. 75–97). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Schmitt, D. P. (2012). When the difference is in the details: A critique of Zentner and Mitura (2012) 
 “Stepping out of the caveman’s shadow: Nations’ gender gap predicts degree of sex differentiation in 
mate preferences.”  Evolutionary Psychology, 10, 720–726. 
 Schmitt, D. P., & Buss, D. M. (2001). Human mate poaching: Tactics and temptations for infiltrating 
existing mateships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 80, 894–917. 
 Schmitt, D. P., Couden, A., & Baker, M. (2001). The effects of sex and temporal context on feelings of 
romantic desire: An experimental evaluation of sexual strategies theory.  Personality and Social 
Psychology Bulletin, 27, 833–847. 

R-74 
References
 Schmitt, D. P., Jonason, P. K., Byerley, G. J., et al. (2012). A reexamination of sex differences 
in sexuality: New studies reveal old truths.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 21, 
135–139. 
 Schmitt, D. P., & Shackelford, T. K. (2003). Nifty ways to leave your lover: The tactics people use 
to entice and disguise the process of human mate poaching.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 29, 1018–1035. 
 Schmitt, D. P., & Shackelford, T. K. (2008). Big five traits related to short-term mating: From person-
ality to promiscuity across 46 nations.  Evolutionary Psychology, 6, 246–282. 
 Schmitt, D. P., & the International Sexuality Description Project. (2003). Universal sex differences 
in the desire for sexual variety: Tests from 52 nations, 6 continents, and 13 islands.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 85–104. 
 Schmitt, D. P., & the International Sexuality Description Project. (2004). Patterns and universals of 
mate poaching across 53 nations: The effects of sex, culture, and personality on romantically 
attracting another person’s partner.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 86, 560–584. 
 Schoebi, D., Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (2012). Stability and change in the first 10 years of mar-
riage: Does commitment confer benefits beyond the effects of satisfaction?  Journal of Personal-
ity and Social Psychology, 102, 729–742. 
 Schönbrodt, F. D., & Asendorpf, J. B. (2012). Attachment dynamics in a virtual world.  Journal of 
Personality, 80, 429–463. 
 Schröder-Abé, M., & Schütz, A. (2011). Walking in each other’s shoes: Perspective taking medi-
ates effects of emotional intelligence on relationship quality.  European Journal of Personality, 
25, 155–169. 
Schütz , A. (1999). It was your fault! Self-serving biases in autobiographical accounts of conflicts in 
married couples.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 16, 193–208. 
 Schützwohl, A. (2005). Sex differences in jealousy: The processing of cues to infidelity.  Evolution and 
Human Behavior, 26, 288–299. 
 Schützwohl, A. (2006). Sex differences in jealousy: Information search and cognitive preoccupation. 
 Personality and Individual Differences, 40, 285–292. 
 Schützwohl, A. (2008a). Relief over the disconfirmation of the prospect of sexual and emotional 
infidelity.  Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 666–676. 
 Schützwohl, A. (2008b). The intentional object of romantic jealousy.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 
29, 92–99. 
 Schwartz, P., Diefendorf, S., & McGlynn-Wright, A. (2014). Sexuality in aging. In D. L. Tolman, 
L. Diamond, J. Bauermeister et al. (Eds.),  APA handbook of sexuality and psychology (Vol. 1, 
pp. 523–551). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 
 Schwarz, S., & Hassebrauck, M. (2008). Self-perceived and observed variations in women’s attrac-
tiveness throughout the menstrual cycle—A diary study.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 29, 
282–288. 
 Schweinle, W. E., Ickes, W., & Bernstein, I. H. (2002). Empathic accuracy in husband to wife aggres-
sion: The overattribution bias.  Personal Relationships, 9, 141–158. 
 Scott, S. B., Rhoades, G. K., Stanley, S. M., Allen, E. S., & Markman, H. J. (2013). Reasons for divorce 
and recollections of premarital intervention: Implications for improving relationship educa-
tion.  Couple and Family Psychology: Research and Practice, 2, 131–145. 
 Scott-Sheldon, L. A. J., & Johnson, B. T. (2006). Eroticizing creates safer sex: A research synthesis. 
 Journal of Primary Prevention, 27, 619–640. 
 Seal, D. W., Agostinelli, G., & Hannett, C. A. (1994). Extradyadic romantic involvement: Moderat-
ing effects of sociosexuality and gender.  Sex Roles, 31, 1–22. 
 Secord, P. F. (1983). Imbalanced sex ratios: The social consequences.  Personality and Social Psychology 
 Bulletin, 9, 525–543. 
 Seder, J. P., & Oishi, S. (2012). Intensity of smiling in Facebook photos predicts future life satisfac-
tion.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 3, 407–413. 
 Sedikides, C., Campbell, W. K., Reeder, G. D., & Elliot, A. J. (1998). The self-serving bias in rela-
tional context.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 74, 378–386. 

References R-75
 Sedikides, C., Oliver, M. B., & Campbell, W. K. (1994). Perceived benefits and costs of romantic 
relationships for women and men: Implications for exchange theory.  Personal Relationships, 1, 
5–21. 
 Seeman, T. E., Singer, B. H., Ryff, C. D., Love, G. D., & Levy-Storms, L. (2002). Social relationships, 
gender, and allostatic load across two age cohorts.  Psychosomatic Medicine, 64, 395–406. 
 Segal, M. W. (1974). Alphabet and attraction: An unobtrusive measure of the effect of propinquity 
in a field setting.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 30, 654–657. 
 Segal-Caspi, L., Roccas, S., & Sagiv, L. (2012). Don’t judge a book by its cover, revisited: Perceived 
and reported traits and values of attractive women.  Psychological Science, 23, 1112–1116. 
 Segrin, C., Taylor, M. E., & Altman, J. (2005). Social cognitive mediators and relational outcomes 
associated with parental divorce.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 22, 361–377. 
 Seidman, G. (2012). Positive and negative: Partner derogation and enhancement differentially 
related to relationship satisfaction.  Personal Relationships, 19, 51–71. 
 Seidman, G., & Miller, O. S. (2013). Effects of gender and physical attractiveness on visual attention 
to Facebook profiles.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 16, 20–24. 
 Seih, Y., Buhrmester, M. D., Lin, Y., Huang, C., & Swann, W. B. Jr. (2013). Do people want to be flat-
tered or understood: The cross-cultural universality of self-verification.  Journal of Experimental 
Social Psychology, 49, 169–172. 
 Selcuk, E., Günaydin, G., Sumer, N., et al. (2010). Self-reported romantic attachment style predicts 
everyday maternal caregiving behavior at home.  Journal of Research in Personality, 44, 544–549. 
 Seltzer, L. J., Prososki, A. R., Ziegler, T. E., & Pollak, S. D. (2012). Instant messages vs. 
speech: Hormones and why we still need to hear each other.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 
33, 42–45. 
 Serota, K. B., Levine, T. R., & Boster, F. J. (2010). The prevalence of lying in America: Three studies 
of self-reported lies.  Human Communication Research, 36, 2–25. 
 Shackelford, T. K., & Goetz, A. T. (2007). Adaptation to sperm competition in humans.  Current 
Directions in Psychological Science, 16, 47–50. 
 Shackelford, T. K., Goetz, A. T., Buss, D. M., Euler, H. A., & Hoier, S. (2005). When we hurt the ones 
we love: Predicting violence against women from men’s mate retention.  Personal Relationships, 
12, 447–463. 
 Shackelford, T. K., Michalski, R. L., & Schmitt, D. P. (2004). Upset in response to a child’s partner’s 
infidelities.  European Journal of Social Psychology, 34, 489–497. 
Shafer, K., & James, S. L. (2013). Gender and socioeconomic status differences in first and second 
marriage formation. Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 544–564.
 Shaffer, D. R., Pegalis, L. J., & Bazzini, D. G. (1996). When boy meets girl (revisited): Gender, 
gender-role orientation, and prospect of future interaction as determinants of self-disclosure 
among same- and opposite-sex acquaintances.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 22, 
495–506. 
 Shaffer, D. R., Ruammake, C., & Pegalis, L. J. (1990). The “opener”: Highly skilled as interviewer or 
interviewee.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 16, 511–520. 
 Shah, J. (2003). Automatic for the people: How representations of significant others implicitly affect 
goal pursuit.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 661–681. 
 Shallcross, A. J., Ford, B. Q., Floerke, V. A., & Mauss, I. B. (2013). Getting better with age: The rela-
tionship between age, acceptance, and negative affect.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 104, 734–749. 
 Shannon, J. B. (Ed.). (2009).  Domestic violence sourcebook (3rd ed.). Detroit, MI: Omnigraphics. 
 Shanteau, J., & Nagy, G. F. (1979). Probability of acceptance in dating choice.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 37, 522–533. 
 Sharp, E. A., & Ganong, L. H. (2000). Raising awareness about marital expectations: Are unrealistic 
beliefs changed by integrative teaching?  Family Relations, 49, 71–76. 
 Shaver, P., Furman, W., & Buhrmester, D. (1985). Transition to college: Network changes, social 
skills, and loneliness. In S. Duck & D. Perlman (Eds.),  Understanding personal relationships: An 
interdisciplinary approach (pp. 193–219). London: Sage. 

R-76 
References
 Shaver, P. R., & Mikulincer, M. (2013a). Attachment orientations and reactions to ostracism in 
close relationships and groups. In C. N. DeWall (Ed.),  The Oxford handbook of social exclusion 
(pp. 238–247). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Shaver, P. R., & Mikulincer, M. (2013b). Patterns of relating and of thinking about relationships: 
Conceptualizing and measuring individual differences in the adult attachment system. In 
C. Hazan & M. I. Campa (Eds.),  Human bonding: The science of affectional ties (pp. 251–280). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
 Sheets, V. L. (2014). Passion for life: Self-expansion and passionate love across the life span.  Journal 
of Social and Personal Relationships. doi: 10.1177/0265407513515618 
 Sheldon, K. M., Boehm, J., & Lyubomirsky, S. (2013). Variety is the spice of life: The hedonic adap-
tation prevention model. In S. David, I. Boniwell, & A. Ayers (Eds.),  The Oxford handbook of 
happiness (pp. 901–914). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Shettel-Neuber, J., Bryson, J. B., & Young, L. E. (1978). Physical attractiveness of the “other person” 
and jealousy.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 4, 612–615. 
 Shibazaki, K., & Brennan, K. A. (1998). When birds of different feathers flock together: A prelimi-
nary comparison of intra-ethnic and inter-ethnic dating relationships.  Journal of Social and Per-
sonal Relationships, 15, 248–256. 
 Shimizu, M., Seery, M. D., Weisbuch, M., & Lupien, S. P. (2011). Trait social anxiety and physiologi-
cal activation: Cardiovascular threat during social interaction.  Personality and Social Psychology 
Bulletin, 37, 94–106. 
 Shorey, R. C., Cornelius, T. L., & Bell, K. M. (2011). Reactions to participating in dating violence 
research: Are our questions distressing participants?  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 26, 
2890–2907. 
 Shrout, P. E., Herman, C. M., & Bolger, N. (2006). The costs and benefits of practical and emotional 
support on adjustment: A daily diary study of couples experiencing acute stress.  Personal Rela-
tionships, 13, 115–134. 
 Shu, X., Zhu, Y., & Zhang, Z. (2012). Patriarchy, resources, and specialization: Marital decision-
making power in urban china.  Journal of Family Issues, 34, 885–917. 
 Shulman, J. L., Gotta, G., & Green, R. (2012). Will marriage matter? Effects of marriage anticipated 
by same-sex couples.  Journal of Family Issues, 33, 158–181. 
 Sibley, C. G., & Overall, N. C. (2008). Modeling the hierarchical structure of attachment representa-
tions: A test of domain differentiation.  Personality and Individual Differences, 44, 238–249. 
 Sillars, A., Smith, T., & Koerner, A. (2010). Misattributions contributing to empathic (in)accuracy dur-
ing parent-adolescent conflict discussions.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 27, 727–747. 
 Simmons, C. A., & Lehmann, P. (2007). Exploring the link between pet abuse and controlling 
behaviors in violent relationships.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 22, 1211–1222. 
 Simon, R. W., & Barrett, A. E. (2010). Nonmarital romantic relationships and mental health in early 
adulthood: Does the association differ for women and men?  Journal of Health and Social Behav-
ior, 51, 168–182. 
 Simon-Thomas, E. R., Keltner, D., Sauter, D., Sinicropi-Yao, L., & Abramson, A. (2009). The voice 
conveys specific emotions: Evidence from vocal burst displays.  Emotion, 9, 838–846. 
 Simpson, J. A. (2007). Psychological foundations of trust.  Current Directions in Psychological Science, 
16, 264–268. 
 Simpson, J. A., Campbell, B., & Berscheid, E. (1986). The association between romantic love and 
marriage: Kephart (1967) twice revisited.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 12, 363–372. 
 Simpson, J. A., Collins, W. A., Salvatore, J. E., & Sung, S. (2014). The impact of early interpersonal 
experience on adult romantic relationship functioning. In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), 
 Mechanisms of social connection: From brain to group (pp. 221–234). Washington, DC: American 
Psychological Association. 
 Simpson, J. A., Collins, W. A., Tran, S., & Haydon, K. C. (2007). Attachment and the experience 
and expression of emotions in romantic relationships: A developmental perspective.  Journal of 
Personality and Social Psychology, 92, 355–367. 
 Simpson, J. A., Fillo, J., & Myers, J. (2012). Partner knowledge and relationship outcomes. In S. Vazire 
& T. W. Wilson (Eds.),  Handbook of self-knowledge  (pp. 225–241). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Simpson, J. A., & Gangestad, S. W. (1991). Individual differences in sociosexuality: Evidence for 
convergent and discriminant validity.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 60, 870–883. 

References R-77
 Simpson, J. A., Gangestad, S. W., & Lerma, M. (1990). Perception of physical attractiveness: Mecha-
nisms involved in the maintenance of romantic relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 59, 1192–1201. 
 Simpson, J. A., & Howland, M. (2012). Bringing the partner into attachment theory and research. 
 Journal of Family Theory & Review, 4, 282–289. 
 Simpson, J. A., Ickes, W., & Blackstone, T. (1995). When the head protects the heart: Empathic accu-
racy in dating relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 629–641. 
 Simpson, J. A., Ickes, W., & Grich, J. (1999). When accuracy hurts: Reactions of anxious-ambivalent 
dating partners to a relationship-threatening situation.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychol-
ogy, 76, 754–769. 
 Simpson, J. A., Kim, J. S., Fillo, J., et al. (2011). Attachment and the management of empathic 
accuracy in relationship-threatening situations.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 
242–254. 
 Simpson, J. A., Rholes, W. S., & Winterheld, H. A. (2010). Attachment working models twist memo-
ries of relationship events.  Psychological Science, 21, 252–259. 
 Simpson, J. A., Wilson, C. L., & Winterheld, H. A. (2004). Sociosexuality and romantic relationships. 
In J. H. Harvey, A. Wenzel, & S. Sprecher (Eds.),  The handbook of sexuality in close relationships 
(pp. 87–112). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Simpson, L. E., Doss, B. D., Wheeler, J., & Christensen, A. (2007). Relationship violence among 
couples seeking therapy: Common couple violence or battering?  Journal of Marital & Family 
Therapy, 33, 270–283. 
 Sinclair, H. C., & Frieze, I. H. (2005). When courtship persistence becomes intrusive pursuit: Com-
paring rejecter and pursuer perspectives of unrequited attraction.  Sex Roles, 52, 839–852. 
 Singh, D. (1993). Adaptive significance of female physical attractiveness: Role of waist-to-hip ratio. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 65, 293–307. 
 Singh, D. (1995). Female judgment of male attractiveness and desirability for relationships: Role of 
waist-to-hip ratio and financial status.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 69, 1089–1101. 
 Singh, D., Dixson, B. J., Jessop, T. S., Morgan, B., & Dixson, A. F. (2010). Cross-cultural consensus 
for waist-hip ratio and women’s attractiveness.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 31, 176–181. 
 Singh, D., & Luis, S. (1995). Ethnic and gender consensus for the effect of waist-to-hip ratio on judg-
ment of women’s attractiveness.  Human Nature, 6, 51–65. 
 Singh, D., & Singh, D. (2011). Shape and significance of feminine beauty: An evolutionary perspec-
tive.  Sex Roles, 64, 723–731. 
 Slatcher, R. B. (2010). When Harry and Sally met Dick and Jane: Creating closeness between cou-
ples.  Personal Relationships, 17, 279–297. 
 Slatcher, R. B., & Ranson, J. (2011, January).  Couples’ emotion behaviors in everyday life: Links to rela-
tionship satisfaction and stability. Poster presented at the meeting of the Society for Personality 
and Social Psychology, San Antonio, TX. 
 Slater, A., Bremner, G., Johnson, S. P., Sherwood, P., Hayes, R., & Brown, E. (2000). Newborn 
infants’ preference for attractive faces: The role of internal and external facial features.  Infancy, 
1, 265–274. 
 Slater, D. (2013).  Love in the time of algorithms: What technology does to meeting and mating. New York: 
Current. 
 Slater, P. E. (1968). Some social consequences of temporary systems. In W. G. Bennes & P. E. Slater 
(Eds.),  The temporary society (pp. 77–96). New York: Harper & Row. 
 Sloan, D. M. (2010). Self-disclosure and psychological well-being. In J. Maddux & J. P. Tangney 
(Eds.),  Social psychological foundations of clinical psychology (pp. 212–225). New York: Guilford. 
 Slotter, E. B., Duffy, C.W., & Gardner, W. L. (2014). Balancing the need to be “me” with the need to 
be “we”: Applying optimal distinctiveness theory to the understanding of multiple motives 
within romantic relationships.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 52, 71–81. 
 Slotter, E. B., Finkel, E. J., DeWall, C. N., Pond, R. S., Jr., Lambert, N. M., Bodenhausen, G. V., & 
Fincham, F. D. (2012). Putting the brakes on aggression toward a romantic partner: The inhibi-
tory influence of relationship commitment.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 102, 
291–305. 
 Smith, A., & Duggan, M. (2013, October).  Online dating and relationships. Pew Research Center. 
Retrieved from  http://pewinternet.org/Reports/2013/Online-Dating.aspx 

R-78 
References
 Smith, C. A., Ireland, T. O., Park, A., Elwyn, L., & Thornberry, T. P. (2011). Intergenerational con-
tinuities and discontinuities in intimate partner violence: A two-generational prospective 
study.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 26, 3720–3752. 
 Smith, G., Mysak, K., & Michael, S. (2008). Sexual double standards and sexually transmitted ill-
nesses: Social rejection and stigmatization of women.  Sex Roles, 58, 391–401. 
 Smith, J. L., Ickes, W., Hall, J. A., & Hodges, S. D. (Eds.). (2011).  Managing interpersonal sensitivity: 
Knowing when and when not to understand others. Hauppauge, NY: Nova Science. 
 Smith, T. W. (2006). Sexual behavior in the United States. In R. D. McAnulty & M. M. Burnette (Eds.),  Sex 
and sexuality, Vol. 1: Sexuality today: Trends and controversies (pp. 103–131). Westport, CT: Praeger. 
 Smith, T. W., Cribbet, M. R., Uchino, B. N., Williams, P. G., MacKenzie, J., Nealey-Moore, J. B., & 
Thayer, J. F. (2011). Matters of the variable heart: Respiratory sinus arrhythmia response to 
marital interaction and associations with marital quality.  Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 100, 103–119. 
 Smith, T. W., Ruiz, J. M., & Uchino, B. N. (2004). Mental activation of supportive ties, hostility, and 
cardiovascular reactivity to laboratory stress in young men and women.  Health Psychology, 23, 
476–785. 
 Snyder, D. K. (2002). Integrating insight-oriented techniques into couple therapy. In J. H. Harvey & 
A. Wenzel (Eds.),  A clinician’s guide to maintaining and enhancing close relationships (pp. 259–275). 
Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Snyder, D. K., Baucom, D. H., & Gordon, K. C. (2007).  Getting past the affair: A program to help you 
cope, heal, and move on—Together or apart. New York: Guilford Press. 
 Snyder, D. K., Castellani, A. M., & Whisman, M. A. (2006). Current status and future directions in 
couple therapy.  Annual Review of Psychology, 57, 317–344. 
 Snyder, D. K., & Schneider, W. J. (2002). Affective reconstruction: A pluralistic, developmental 
approach. In A. S. Gurman & N. S. Jacobson (Eds.),  Clinical handbook of couple therapy (3rd ed., 
pp. 151–179). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Snyder, D. K., Wills, R. M., & Grady-Fletcher, A. (1991). Long-term effectiveness of behavioral ver-
sus insight-oriented therapy: A four-year follow-up study.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 59, 138–141. 
 Snyder, M. (1981). Seek, and ye shall find: Testing hypotheses about other people. In E. T. Hig-
gins, C. P. Herman, & M. P. Zanna (Eds.),  Social cognition: The Ontario symposium (Vol. 1, 
pp. 277–303). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Snyder, M. (1987).  Public appearances, private realities: The psychology of self-monitoring. New York: 
W. H. Freeman. 
 Snyder, M., & Gangestad, S. (1986). On the nature of self-monitoring: Matters of assessment, 
matters of validity.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 51, 125–139. 
 Snyder, M., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (1978a). Behavioral confirmation in social interaction: From social 
perception to social reality.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 14, 148–163. 
 Snyder, M., & Swann, W. B., Jr. (1978b). Hypothesis-testing processes in social interaction.  Journal of 
 Personality and Social Psychology, 36, 1202–1212. 
 Snyder, M., Tanke, E. D., & Berscheid, E. (1977). Social perception and interpersonal behavior: On 
the self-fulfilling nature of social stereotypes.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 35, 
656–666. 
 Solomon, D., & Theiss, J. (2013).  Interpersonal communication: Putting theory into practice. New York: 
Routledge. 
 Solomon, D. H., Weber, K. M., & Steuber, K. R. (2010). Turbulence in relational transitions. In S. W. 
Smith & S. R. Wilson (Eds.),  New directions in interpersonal communication research (pp. 115–134). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Solomon, S. E., Rothblum, E. D., & Balsam, K. F. (2005). Money, housework, sex, and conflict: Same-
sex couples in civil unions, those not in civil unions, and heterosexual married siblings.  Sex 
Roles, 52, 561–575. 
 Sommer, K. L., & Rubin, Y. S. (2005). Role of social expectancies in cognitive and behavioral 
responses to social rejection. In K. D. Williams, J. P. Forgas, & W. von Hippel (Eds.),  The social 
outcast: Ostracism, social exclusion, rejection, and bullying (pp. 171–183). New York: Psychology 
Press. 

References R-79
 Sommer, K. L., Williams, K. D., Ciarocco, N. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (2001). When silence speaks 
louder than words: Explorations into the intrapsychic and interpersonal consequences of 
social ostracism.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 23, 225–243. 
 Soons, J. P. M., Liefbroer, A. C., & Kalmijn, M. (2009). The long-term consequences of relationship 
formation for subjective well-being.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 71, 1254–1270. 
 Soto, C. J., John, O. P., Gosling, S. D., & Potter, J. (2011). Age differences in personality traits from 
10 to 65: Big five domains and facets in a large cross-sectional sample.  Journal of Personality and 
Social Psychology, 100, 330–338. 
 South, S. J., Trent, K., & Shen, Y. (2001). Changing partners: Toward a macrostructural-opportunity 
theory of marital dissolution.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 63, 743–754. 
 Southworth, C., Finn, J., Dawson, S., Fraser, C., & Tucker, S. (2007). Intimate partner violence, tech-
nology, and stalking.  Violence Against Women, 13, 842–856. 
 Spielmann, S. S., MacDonald, G., Maxwell, J. A., et al. (2013b). Settling for less out of fear of being 
single.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 105, 1049–1073. 
 Spielmann, S. S., MacDonald, G., & Tackett, J. L. (2012). Social threat, social reward, and regulation 
of investment in romantic relationships.  Personal Relationships, 19, 601–622. 
 Spielmann, S. S., Maxwell, J. A., MacDonald, G., & Baratta, P. L. (2013). Don’t get your hopes up: 
Avoidantly attached individuals perceive lower social reward when there is potential for inti-
macy.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 219–236. 
 Spitzberg, B. H. (1999). An analysis of empirical estimates of sexual aggression, victimization, and 
perpetration.  Violence and Victims, 14, 241–260. 
 Spitzberg, B. H. (2013). Intimate partner violence. In J. G. Oetzel & A. Ting-Tomey (Eds.),  The Sage 
handbook of conflict communication (pp. 187–210). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Spitzberg, B. H., Cupach, W. R., & Ciceraro, L. D. L. (2010). Sex differences in stalking and obsessive 
relational intrusion: Two meta-analyses.  Partner Abuse, 1, 259–285. 
 Sprecher, S. (1986). The relation between inequity and emotions in close relationships.  Social Psy-
chology Quarterly, 49, 309–321. 
 Sprecher, S. (2001). A comparison of emotional consequences of and changes in equity over time 
using global and domain-specific measures of equity.  Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 18, 477–501. 
 Sprecher, S. (2002). Sexual satisfaction in premarital relationships: Associations with satisfaction, 
love, commitment, and stability.  Journal of Sex Research, 39, 190–196. 
 Sprecher, S. (2011). The influence of social networks on romantic relationships: Through the lens of 
the social network.  Personal Relationships, 18, 630–644. 
 Sprecher, S., Barbee, A., & Schwartz, P. (1995). “Was it good for you, too?” Gender differences in 
first sexual intercourse experiences.  Journal of Sex Research, 32, 3–15. 
 Sprecher, S., & Fehr, B. (2005). Compassionate love for close others and humanity.  Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 22, 629–651. 
 Sprecher, S., & Fehr, B. (2011). Dispositional attachment and relationship-specific attachment as pre-
dictors of compassionate love for a partner.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 28, 558–574 
 Sprecher, S., Fehr, B., & Zimmerman, C. (2007). Expectation for mood enhancement as a result of 
helping: The effects of gender and compassionate love.  Sex Roles, 56, 543–549. 
 Sprecher, S., & Hendrick, S. S. (2004). Self-disclosure in intimate relationships: Associations with 
individual and relationship characteristics over time.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 
23, 857–877. 
 Sprecher, S., & Metts, S. (1999). Romantic beliefs: Their influence on relationships and patterns of 
change over time.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 16, 834–851. 
 Sprecher, S., & Metts, S. (2013). Logging on, hooking up: The changing nature of romantic relation-
ship initiation and romantic relating. In C. Hazan & M. I. Campa (Eds.),  Human bonding: The 
science of affectional ties (pp. 197–225). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Sprecher, S., Orbuch, T., & Felmlee, D. (2010, January).  Equity perceptions over time in marriage: Anal-
yses of the Early Years of Marriage Project. Poster presented at the meeting of the Society for 
Personality and Social Psychology, Las Vegas, NV. 
 Sprecher, S., & Regan, P. C. (1998). Passionate and companionate love in courting and young mar-
ried couples.  Sociological Inquiry, 68, 163–185. 

R-80 
References
 Sprecher, S., Regan, P. C., & McKinney, K. (1998). Beliefs about the outcomes of extramarital sexual 
relationships as a function of the gender of the “cheating spouse.”  Sex Roles, 38, 301–311. 
 Sprecher, S., Schmeeckle, M., & Felmlee, D. (2006). Inequality in emotional involvement in romantic 
relationships.  Journal of Family Issues, 27, 1255–1280. 
 Sprecher, S., Treger, S., & Sakaluk, J. K. (2013). Premarital sexual standards and sociosexuality: 
Gender, ethnicity, and cohort differences.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 1395–1405. 
 Sprecher, S., Treger, S., & Wondra, J. D. (2013). Effects of self-disclosure role on liking, closeness, 
and other impressions in get-acquainted interactions.  Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 30, 497–514. 
 Sprecher, S., Treger, S., Wondra, J. D., Hilaire, N., & Wallpe, K. (2013). Taking turns: Reciprocal self-
disclosure promotes liking in initial interactions.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 49, 860–866. 
 Srivastava, S., McGonigal, K. M., Richards, J. M., Butler, E. A., & Gross, J. J. (2006). Optimism in 
close relationships: How seeing things in a positive light makes them so.  Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 91, 143–153. 
 Stackert, R. A., & Bursik, K. (2003). Why am I unsatisfied? Adult attachment style, gendered irra-
tional relationship beliefs, and young adult romantic relationship satisfaction.  Personality and 
Individual Differences, 34, 1419–1429. 
 Stafford, L. (2003). Maintaining romantic relationships: A summary and analysis of one research 
program. In D. J. Canary & M. Dainton (Eds.),  Maintaining relationships through communication: 
Relational, contextual, and cultural variations (pp. 51–77). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Stafford, L. (2011). Measuring relationship maintenance behaviors: Critique and development of 
the revised relationship maintenance behavior scale.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 
28, 278–303. 
 Stafford, L., & Canary, D. J. (2006). Equity and interdependence as predictors of relational mainte-
nance strategies.  Journal of Family Communication, 6, 227–254. 
 Stafford, L., & Dainton, M. (1994). The dark side of “normal” family interaction. In W. R. Cupach 
& B. H. Spitzberg (Eds.),  The dark side of interpersonal communication (pp. 259–280). Hillsdale, 
NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Stafford, L., David, P., & McPherson, S. (2014). Sanctity of marriage and marital quality.  Journal of 
Social and Personal Relationships, 31, 54–70. 
 Stafford, L., Merolla, A. J., & Castle, J. D. (2006). When long-distance dating partners become geo-
graphically close.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 23, 901–919. 
 Stake, J. E., & Eisele, H. (2010). Gender and personality. In J. Chrisler & D. McCreary (Eds.),  Hand-
book of gender research in psychology (Vol. 2, pp. 19–40). New York: Springer. 
 Stanik, C. E., & Bryant, C. M. (2012). Marital quality of newlywed African American couples: Impli-
cations of egalitarian gender role dynamics.  Sex Roles, 66, 256–267. 
 Stanik, C. E., & Ellsworth, P. C. (2010). Who cares about marrying a rich man? Intelligence and 
variation in women’s mate preferences.  Human Nature, 21, 203–217. 
 Stanik, C. E., McHale, S. M., & Crouter, A. C. (2013). Gender dynamics predict changes in marital 
love among African American couples.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 75, 795–807. 
 Stanley, S. M., Bradbury, T. N., & Markman, H. J. (2000). Structural flaws in the bridge from basic 
research on marriage to interventions.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 62, 256–264. 
 Stanley, S. M., Rhoades, G. K., Amato, P. R., Markman, H. J., & Johnson, C. A. (2010). The timing of 
cohabitation and engagement: Impact on first and second marriages.  Journal of Marriage and 
Family, 72, 906–918. 
 Starks, T. J., & Parsons, J. T. (2014). Adult Attachment among partnered gay men: Patterns and 
associations with sexual relationship quality.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 43, 107–117. 
 Stephenson, K. R., Ahrold, T. K., & Meston, C. M. (2011). The association between sexual motives 
and sexual satisfaction: Gender differences and categorical comparisons.  Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 40, 607–618 
 Steptoe, A., Shankar, A., Demakakos, P., & Wardle, J. (2013). Social isolation, loneliness, and all-
cause mortality in older men and women.  PNAS, 110, 5797–5801. 
 Sternberg, R. J. (1987).  The triangle of love: Intimacy, passion, commitment. New York: Basic Books. 
 Sternberg, R. J. (2006). A duplex theory of love. In R. J. Sternberg & K. Weis (Eds.),  The new psychol-
ogy of love (pp. 184–199). New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

References R-81
 Stewart, A. J., Copeland, A. P., Chester, N. L., Malley, J. E., & Barenbaum, N. B. (1997).  Separating 
together: How divorce transforms families. New York: Guilford Press. 
 Stickney, L. T., & Konrad, A. M. (2007). Gender-role attitudes and earnings: A multinational study 
of married women and men.  Sex Roles, 57, 801–811. 
 Stillwell, A. M., Baumeister, R. F., & Del Priore, R. E. (2008). We’re all victims here: Toward a psy-
chology of revenge.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 30, 253–263. 
 Stinson, D. A., Cameron, J. J., Wood, J. V., Gaucher, D., & Holmes, J. G. (2009). Deconstructing 
the “reign of error”: Interpersonal warmth explains the self-fulfilling prophecy of anticipated 
acceptance.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 1165–1178. 
 Stith, S. M., Smith, D. B., Penn, C. E., Ward, D. B., & Tritt, D. (2004). Intimate partner physical abuse 
perpetration and victimization risk factors: A meta-analytic review.  Aggression and Violent 
Behavior, 10, 65–98. 
 Stoeber, J. (2012). Dyadic perfectionism in romantic relationships: Predicting relationship satisfac-
tion and longterm commitment.  Personality and Individual Differences, 53, 300–305. 
 Strachman, A., & Gable, S. L. (2006). What you want (and do not want) affects what you see (and 
do not see): Avoidance social goals and social events.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
32, 1446–1458. 
 Strachman, A., & Impett, E. A. (2009). Attachment orientations and daily condom use in dating 
relationships.  Journal of Sex Research, 46, 319–329. 
 Strassberg, D. S., McKinnon, R. K., Sustaíta, M. A., & Rullo, J. (2013). Sexting by high school 
students: An exploratory and descriptive study.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 42, 15–21. 
 Straus, M. A. (2008). Dominance and symmetry in partner violence by male and female university 
students in 32 nations.  Children and Youth Services Review,  30, 252–275. 
 Straus, M. A., Hamby, S. L., Boney-McCoy, S., & Sugarman, D. B. (1996). The revised Conflict Tac-
tics Scales (CTS2): Development and preliminary psychometric data.  Journal of Family Issues, 
17, 283–316. 
 Strauss, C., Morry, M. M., & Kito, M. (2012). Attachment styles and relationship quality: Actual 
perceived, and ideal partner matching.  Personal Relationships, 19, 14–36. 
 Stroebe, M. S., Abakoumkin, G., Stroebe, W., & Schut, H. (2012). Continuing bonds in adjustment to 
bereavement: Impact of abrupt versus gradual separation.  Personal Relationships, 19, 255–266. 
 Strong, G., & Aron, A. (2006). The effect of shared participation in novel and challenging activi-
ties on experienced relationship quality: Is it mediated by high positive affect? In K. D. Vohs 
& E. J. Finkel (Eds.),  Self and relationships: Connecting intrapersonal and interpersonal processes 
(pp. 342–359). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Stroud, C. B., Durbin, C. E., Saigal, S. D., & Knobloch-Fedders, L. M. (2010). Normal and abnormal 
personality traits are associated with marital satisfaction for both men and women: An actor-
partner interdependence model analysis.  Journal of Research in Personality, 44, 466–477. 
 Stuart, G. L., Moore, T. M., Elkins, S. R., et al. (2013). The temporal association between substance 
use and intimate partner violence among women arrested for domestic violence.  Journal of 
Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 81, 681–690. 
 Stucke, T. S. (2003). Who’s to blame? Narcissism and self-serving attributions following feedback. 
 European Journal of Personality, 17, 465–478. 
 Stukas, A. A., Jr., & Snyder, M. (2002). Targets’ awareness of expectations and behavioral confirma-
tion in ongoing interactions.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 31–40. 
 Stulp, G., Buunk, A. P., & Pollet, T. V. (2013). Women want taller men more than men want shorter 
women.  Personality and Individual Differences, 54, 877–883. 
 Sullivan, K. T., Pasch, L. A., Johnson, M. D., & Bradbury, T. N. (2010). Social support, problem 
solving, and the longitudinal course of newlywed marriage.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 98, 631–644. 
 Suls, J., & Martin, R. (2005). The daily life of the garden-variety neurotic: Reactivity, stressor expo-
sure, mood spillover, and maladaptive coping.  Journal of Personality, 73, 1485–1510. 
 Summers, R. F., & Barber, J. P. (2003). Therapeutic alliance as a measurable psychotherapy skill. 
 Academic Psychiatry, 27, 160–165. 
 Sun, Y. (2001). Family environment and adolescents’ well-being before and after parents’ marital 
disruption: A longitudinal analysis.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 63, 697–713. 

R-82 
References
 Sun, Y., & Li, Y. (2002). Children’s well-being during parents’ marital disruption process: A pooled 
time-series analysis.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 64, 472–488. 
 Sunderani, S., Arnocky, S., & Vaillancourt, T. (2013). Individual differences in mate poaching: An 
examination of hormonal, dispositional, and behavioral mate-value traits.  Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 42, 533–542. 
 Sundie, J. M., Kenrick, D. T., Griskevicius, V., Tybur, J. M., Vohs, K. D., & Beal, D. J. (2011). Pea-
cocks, Porsches, and Thorstein Veblen: Conspicuous consumption as a sexual signaling 
system.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 100, 664–680. 
 Surra, C. A., & Longstreth, M. (1990). Similarity of outcomes, interdependence, and conflict in dat-
ing relationships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 501–516. 
 Swami, V., Greven, C., & Furnham, A. (2007). More than just skin deep? A pilot study integrating 
physical and non-physical factors in the perception of physical attractiveness.  Personality and 
Individual Differences, 42, 563–572. 
 Swami, V., & IBP Project Members. (2010). The attractive female body weight and female body dis-
satisfaction in 26 countries across 10 world regions: Results of the International Body Project 1. 
 Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 309–325. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr. (1996).  Self-traps: The elusive quest for higher self-esteem. New York: W. H. Freeman. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., & Bosson. J. K. (2010). Self and identity. In S. Fiske, D. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey 
(Eds.),  Handbook of social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 589–628). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., & Buhrmester, M. D. (2012). Self-verification: The search for coherence. In 
M. R. Leary & J. P. Tangney (Eds.),  Handbook of self and identity (2nd ed., pp. 405–424). New 
York: Guilford Press. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., De La Ronde, C., & Hixon, J. G. (1994). Authenticity and positivity strivings in 
marriage and courtship.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66, 857–869. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., & Gill, M. J. (1997). Confidence and accuracy in person perception: Do we know 
what we think we know about our relationship partners?  Journal of Personality and Social Psy-
chology, 73, 747–757. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., Hixon, J. G., Stein-Seroussi, A., & Gilbert, D. T. (1990). The fleeting gleam of 
praise: Cognitive processes underlying behavioral reactions to self-relevant feedback.  Journal 
of Personality and Social Psychology, 59, 17–26. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., & Pelham, B. (2002). Who wants out when the going gets good? Psychological 
investment and preference for self-verifying roommates.  Self and Identity, 1, 219–233. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., & Rentfrow, P. J. (2001). Blirtatiousness: Cognitive, behavioral, and physiological 
consequences of rapid responding.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 81, 1160–1175. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., Rentfrow, P. J., & Gosling, S. D. (2003). The precarious couple effect: Verbally 
inhibited men  1 critical, disinhibited women  5 bad chemistry.  Journal of Personality and Social 
Psychology, 85, 1095–1106. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., Sellers, J. G., & McClarty, K. L. (2006). Tempting today, troubling tomorrow: 
The roots of the precarious couple effect.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 32, 93–103. 
 Swann, W. B., Jr., Silvera, D. H., & Proske, C. U. (1995). On “knowing your partner”: Dangerous 
illusions in the age of AIDS?  Personal Relationships, 2, 173–186. 
 Tabak, B. A., McCullough, M. E., Luna, L. R., Bono, G., & Berry, J. W. (2012). Conciliatory gestures 
facilitate forgiveness and feelings of friendship by making transgressors appear more agree-
able.  Journal of Personality, 80, 503–536. 
 Tabak, J. A., & Zayas, V. (2012). The roles of featural and configural face processing in snap judg-
ments of sexual orientation.  PLoS ONE, 7, 1–7. 
 Tach, L. M., & Halpern-Meekin, S. (2012). Marital quality and divorce decisions: How do premari-
tal cohabitation and nonmarital childbearing matter?  Family Relations, 61, 571–585. 
 Tackett, S. L., Nelson, L. J., & Busby, D. M. (2013). Shyness and relationship satisfaction: Evaluating 
the associations between shyness, self-esteem, and relationship satisfaction in couples.  Ameri-
can Journal of Family Therapy, 41, 34–45. 
 Tafoya, M. A., & Spitzberg, B. H. (2007). The dark side of infidelity: Its nature, prevalence, and com-
municative functions. In B. H. Spitzberg & W. R. Cupach (Eds.),  The dark side of interpersonal 
communication (2nd ed., pp. 201–242). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

References R-83
 Takahashi, H., Matsuura, M., Yahata, N., Koeda, M., Suhara, T., & Okubo, Y. (2006). Men and 
women show distinct brain activations during imagery of sexual and emotional infidelity. 
 NeuroImage, 32, 1299–1307. 
 Tan, R., Overall, N. C., & Taylor, J. K. (2012). Let’s talk about us: Attachment, relationship-focused 
disclosure, and relationship quality.  Personal Relationships, 19, 521–534. 
 Tanha, M., Beck, C. J. A., Figueredo, A. J., & Raghavan, C. (2010). Sex differences in intimate partner 
violence and the use of coercive control as a motivational factor for intimate partner violence. 
 Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 25, 1836–1854. 
 Tausczik, Y. R., & Pennebaker, J. W. (2010). The psychological meaning of words: LIWC and com-
puterized text analysis methods.  Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 29, 24–54. 
 Tavris, C. (1989).  Anger: The misunderstood emotion. New York: Simon and Schuster. 
 Taylor, L. S., Fiore, A. T., Mendelsohn, G. A., & Cheshire, C. (2011). “Out of my league”: A real-
world test of the matching hypothesis.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 942–954. 
 Teachman, J. (2008). Complex life course patterns and the risk of divorce in second marriages. 
 Journal of Marriage and Family, 70, 294–305. 
 Tellegen, A., Lykken, D. T., Bouchard, T. J., Wilcox, K. J., Segal, N. L., & Rich, S. (1988). Personality 
similarity in twins reared apart and together.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 54, 
1031–1039. 
 Ten Brinke, L., & Porter, S. (2012). Cry me a river: Identifying the behavioral consequences of 
extremely high-stakes interpersonal deception.  Law and Human Behavior, 36, 469–477. 
 Tenney, E. R., & Spellman, B. A. (2011). Complex social consequences of self-knowledge.  Social 
Psychological and Personality Science, 2, 343–350. 
 Tenney, E. R., Turkheimer, E., & Oltmanns, T. F. (2009). Being liked is more than having a good 
personality: The role of matching.  Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 579–585. 
 Terhell, E. L., van Groenou, M. I. B., & van Tilburg, T. (2004). Network dynamics in the long-term 
period after divorce.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 21, 719–738. 
 Theiss, J. A., Estlein, R., & Weber, K. M. (2013). A longitudinal assessment of relationship charac-
teristics that predict new parents’ relationship satisfaction.  Personal Relationships, 20, 216–235. 
 Theiss, J. A., & Knobloch, L. K. (2014). Relational turbulence and the post-deployment transition: 
Self, partner, and relationship focused turbulence.  Communication Research, 41, 27–51. 
 Thibaut, J. W., & Kelley, H. H. (1959).  The social psychology of groups. New York: Wiley. 
 Thompson, S. C., & Kelley, H. H. (1981). Judgments of responsibility for activities in close relation-
ships.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41, 469–477. 
 Thornhill, R., Chapmen, J. F., & Gangestad, S. W. (2013). Women’s preferences for men’s scents 
associated with testosterone and cortisol levels: Patterns across the ovulatory cycle.  Evolution 
and Human Behavior, 34, 216–221. 
 Thornhill, R., Gangestad, S. W., Miller, R., Scheyd, G., McCollough, J. K., & Franklin, M. (2003). 
Major histocompatibility complex genes, symmetry, and body scent attractiveness in men and 
women.  Behavioral Ecology, 14, 668–678. 
 Thornton, A., Axinn, W. G., & Xie, Y. (2007).  Marriage and cohabitation. Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 
 Thornton, A., & Young-DeMarco, L. (2001). Four decades of trends in attitudes toward family issues in 
the United States: The 1960s through the 1990s.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 63, 1009–1037. 
 Tice, D. M., & Baumeister, R. F. (1993). Controlling anger: Self-induced emotion change. In D. M. 
Wegner & J. W. Pennebaker (Eds.),  Handbook of mental control (pp. 393–409). Englewood Cliffs, 
NJ: Prentice Hall. 
 Tidwell, N. D., & Eastwick, P. W. (2013). Sex differences in succumbing to sexual temptations: A 
function of impulse or control?  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 1620–1633. 
 Tidwell, N. D., Eastwick, P. W., & Finkel, E. J. (2012). Perceived, not actual, similarity predicts 
initial attraction in live romantic context: Evidence from the speed-dating paradigm.  Personal 
Relationships, 20, 199–215. 
 Tidwell, N. D., Eastwick, P. W., & Finkel, E. J. (2013). Perceived, not actual, similarity predicts ini-
tial attraction in a live romantic context: Evidence from the speed-dating paradigm.  Personal 
Relationships, 20, 199–215. 

R-84 
References
 Tokunaga, R. S. (2011). Friend me or you’ll strain us: Understanding negative events that occur 
over social networking sites.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 14, 425–432. 
 Toller, P. (2011). Bereaved parents’ experiences of supportive and unsupportive communication. 
 Southern Communication Journal, 76, 17–34. 
 Tomlinson, J. M., & Aron, A. (2012). Relationship neuroscience: Where we are and where we might 
be going. In O. Gillath, G. Adams, & A. Kunkel (Eds.),  Relationship science: Integrating evolution-
ary, neuroscience, and sociocultural approaches (pp. 13–26). Washington, DC: American Psycho-
logical Association. 
 Tomlinson, J. M., Aron, A., Carmichael, C. L., Reis, H. T., & Holmes, J. G. (2014). The costs of being put on 
a pedestal: Effects of feeling over-idealized.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 31, 384–409.  
 Tomlinson, J. M., Reis, H. T., Carmichael, C. L., & Aron, A. (2010, January).  Too much of a good thing? 
Curvilinear effects of perceived partner idealization on marital satisfaction. Poster presented at the 
meeting of the Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Las Vegas, NV. 
 Totenhagen, C. J., Butler, E. A., & Ridley, C. A. (2012a). Daily stress, closeness, and satisfaction in 
gay and lesbian couples.  Personal Relationships, 19, 219–233. 
 Totenhagen, C. J., Curran, M. A., Serido, J., & Butler, E. A. (2013). Good days, bad days: Do sacri-
fices improve relationship quality?  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 881–900. 
 Totenhagen, C. J., Serido, J., Curran, M. A., & Butler, E. A. (2012b). Daily hassles and uplifts: A 
diary study on understanding relationship quality.  Journal of Family Psychology, 26, 719–728. 
 Tracy, J. L., & Robins, R. W. (2008). The automaticity of emotion recognition.  Emotion, 8, 81–95. 
 Trail, T. E., & Karney, B. R. (2012). What’s (not) wrong with low-income marriages.  Journal of 
Marriage and Family, 74, 413–427. 
 Tran, S., Simpson, J. A., & Fletcher, G. J. O. (2008). The role of ideal standards in relationship initia-
tion processes. In S. Sprecher, A. Wenzel, & J. Harvey (Eds.),  Handbook of relationship initiation 
(pp. 487–498). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Troy, A. B., Lewis-Smith, J., & Laurenceau, J. (2006). Interracial and intraracial romantic relation-
ships: The search for differences in satisfaction, conflict, and attachment style.  Journal of Social 
and Personal Relationships, 23, 65–80. 
 Tsai, F., & Reis, H. T. (2009). Perceptions by and of lonely people in social networks.  Personal 
Relationships, 16, 221–238. 
 Tsapelas, I., Aron, A., & Orbuch, T. (2009). Marital boredom now predicts less satisfaction 9 years 
later.  Psychological Science, 20, 543–545. 
 Tsapelas, I., Fisher, H. E., & Aron, A. (2011). Infidelity: When, where, why. In W. Cupach & B. Spitz-
berg (Eds.),  The dark side of close relationships II (pp. 175–195). New York: Routledge. 
 Tskhay, K. O., & Rule, N. O. (2014). Perceptions of personality in text-based media and OSN: A 
meta-analysis.  Journal of Research in Personality, 49, 25–30. 
 Tucker, J. S., & Anders, S. L. (1998). Adult attachment style and nonverbal closeness in dating cou-
ples.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 22, 109–124. 
 Turley, R. N. L., & Desmond, M. (2011). Contributions to college costs by married, divorced, and 
remarried parents.  Journal of Family Issues, 32, 767–790. 
 Twenge, J. M. (2009). Status and gender: The paradox of progress in an age of narcissism.  Sex Roles, 
61, 338–340. 
 Twenge, J. M., Catanese, K. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2003). Social exclusion and the deconstructed 
state: Time perception, meaninglessness, lethargy, lack of emotion, and self-awareness. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 85, 409–423. 
 Twenge, J. M., & Kasser, T. (2013). Generational changes in materialism and work centrality, 
1976–2007: Associations with temporal changes in societal insecurity and materialistic role 
modeling.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 883–897. 
 Tyler, J. M., Feldman, R. S., & Reichert, A. (2006). The price of deceptive behavior: Disliking and 
lying to people who lie to us.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 42, 69–77. 
 Ueno, K., Gayman, M. D., Wright, E. R., & Quantz, S. D. (2009). Friends’ sexual orientation, rela-
tional quality, and mental health among gay, lesbian, and bisexual youth.  Personal Relation-
ships, 16, 659–670. 
 U.S. Census Bureau. (2012). Statistical abstract of the United States: 2012. Retrieved from  http://
www.census.gov/compendia/statab/cats/international_statistics.html 

References R-85
 U. S. Census Bureau. (2013).  America’s families and living arrangements: 2013.  Retrieved from   http://
www.census.gov/hhes/families/data/cps2013.html 
 Uleman, J. S., & Saribay, S. A. (2012). Initial impressions of others. In K. Deaux & M. Snyder (Eds.),  The 
Oxford handbook of personality and social psychology  (pp. 337–366). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Urquia, M. L., O’Campo, P. J., & Ray, J. G. (2013). Marital status, duration of cohabitation, and psy-
chosocial well-being among childbearing women: A Canadian nationwide survey.  American 
Journal of Public Health, 103, e8–e15. 
 Uysal, A., Lin, H. L., & Knee, C. R. (2010). The role of need satisfaction in self-concealment and 
well-being.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 187–199. 
 Uysal, A., Lin, H. L., Knee, C. R., & Bush, A. L. (2012). The association between self-concealment from 
one’s partner and relationship well-being.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 38, 39–51. 
 Vaaler, M. L., Ellison, C. G., & Powers, D. A. (2009). Religious influences on the risk of marital dis-
solution.  Journal of Marriage and Family, 71, 917–934. 
 Valentova, J., Rieger, G., Havlicek, J., Linsenmeier, J. A. W., & Bailey, J. M. (2011). Judgments of sex-
ual orientation and masculinity-femininity based on thin slices of behavior: A cross-cultural 
comparison.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 40, 1145–1152. 
 Valkenburg, P. M., & Peter, J. (2009). The effects of instant messaging on the quality of adolescents’ 
existing friendships: A longitudinal study.  Journal of Communication, 59, 79–97. 
 van den Boom, D. C. (1994). The influence of temperament and mothering on attachment and 
exploration: An experimental manipulation of sensitive responsiveness among lower-class 
mothers with irritable infants.  Child Development, 65, 1457–1477. 
 van der Linden, D., Scholte, R. H. J., Cillessen, A. H. N., te Nijenhuis, J., & Segers, E. (2010). Class-
room ratings of likeability and popularity are related to the Big Five and the general factor of 
personality.  Journal of Research in Personality, 44, 669–672. 
 Van Dongen, S., & Gangestad, S. W. (2011). Human fluctuating asymmetry in relation to health and 
quality: a meta-analysis.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 32, 380–398. 
 Van Lange, P. A. M., & Rusbult, C. E. (2012). Interdependence theory. In P. Van Lange, 
A. Kruglanski, & E. T. Higgins (Eds.),  Handbook of theories of social psychology (Vol. 2, 
pp. 251–272). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 van Steenbergen, H., Langeslag, S. J. E., Band, G. P. H., & Hommel, B. (2014). Reduced cognitive 
control in passionate lovers.  Motivation and Emotion, 38, 444–450.  
 Van Straaten, I., Engels, R. C. M. E., Finkenauer, C., & Holland, R. W. (2009). Meeting your match: 
How attractiveness similarity affects approach behavior in mixed-sex dyads.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 685–697. 
 van Straaten, I., Engels, R. C. M. E., Finkenauer, C., & Holland, R. W. (2009). Meeting your match: 
How attractiveness similarity affects approach behavior in mixed-sex dyads.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 35, 685–697. 
 Van Zalk, M. H. W., Branje, S. J. T., Denissen, J., Van Aken, M. A. G., & Meeus, W. H. J. (2011). Who 
benefits from chatting, and why? The roles of extraversion and supportiveness in online chat-
ting and emotional adjustment.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 1202–1215. 
 Vandello, J. A., & Bosson, J. K. (2013). Hard won and easily lost: A review and synthesis of theory 
and research on precarious manhood.  Psychology of Men & Masculinity, 14, 101–113. 
 VanderDrift, L. E., Agnew, C. R., Harvey, S. M., & Warren, J. T. (2013a). Whose intentions predict? 
Power over condom use within heterosexual dyads.  Health Psychology, 32, 1038–1046. 
 VanderDrift, L. E., Lehmiller, J. J., & Kelly, J. R. (2012). Commitment in friends with benefits rela-
tionships: Implications for relational and safe-sex outcomes.  Personal Relationships, 19, 1–13. 
 VanderDrift, L. E., Wilson, J. E., & Agnew, C. R. (2013b). On the benefits of valuing being friends for 
non-marital romantic partners.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 115–131. 
 Vangelisti, A. L. (Ed.). (2009).  Feeling hurt in close relationships.  New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Vangelisti, A. L., & Hampel, A. D. (2010). Hurtful communication: Current research and future 
directions. In S. Smith & S. Wilson (Eds.),  New directions in interpersonal communication research 
(pp. 221–241). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Vanhalst, J., Luyckx, K., Teppers, E., & Goossens, L. (2012). Disentangling the longitudinal relation 
between loneliness and depressive symptoms: Prospective effects and the intervening role of 
coping.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 31, 810–834. 

R-86 
References
 Vannier, S. A., & O’Sullivan, L. F. (2011). Communicating interest in sex: Verbal and nonverbal 
initiation of sexual activity in young adults’ romantic dating relationships.  Archives of Sexual 
Behavior, 40, 961–969. 
 Vasey, P. L., & VanderLaan, D. P. (2010). Avuncular tendencies and the evolution of male andro-
philia in Samoan fa’afafine.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 39, 821–830. 
 Vazire, S. (2010). Who knows what about a person? The self-other knowledge asymmetry (SOKA) 
model.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 98, 281–300. 
 Vazire, S., & Carlson, E. N. (2011). Others sometimes know us better than we know ourselves. 
 Current Directions in Psychological Science, 20, 104–108. 
 Veniegas, R. C., & Peplau, L. A. (1997). Power and the quality of same-sex friendships.  Psychology 
of  Women Quarterly, 21, 279–297. 
 Vennum, A., Lindstrom, R., Monk, J. K., & Adams, R. (2014). “It’s complicated”: The continuity 
and correlates of cycling in cohabiting and marital relationships.  Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 31, 410–430.  
Verhofstadt, L. L. L. , Buysse, A., Ickes, W., de Clercq, A., & Peene, O. J. (2005). Conflict and support 
interactions in marriage: An analysis of couples’ interactive behavior and on-line cognition. 
 Personal Relationships, 12, 23–42. 
 Verhofstadt, L. L. L., Ickes, W., & Buysse, A. (2010). “I know what you need right now”: Empathic 
accuracy and support provision in marriage. In K. Sullivan & J. Davila (Eds.),  Support processes 
in intimate relationships (pp. 71–88). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Verhofstadt, L. L. L., Lemmens, G. M. D., & Buysse, A. (2013). Support-seeking, support-provision 
and support-perception in distressed married couples: A multi-method analysis.  Journal of 
Family Therapy, 35, 320–339. 
 Vescio, T. K., Schlenker, K. A., & Lenes, J. G. (2010). Power and sexism. In A. Guinote & T. Vescio 
(Eds.),  The social psychology of power (pp. 363–380). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Vincent, J. P., Weiss, R. L., & Birchler, G. R. (1975). Dyadic problem solving behavior as a function 
of marital distress and spousal vs. stranger interactions.  Behavior Therapy, 6, 475–487. 
 Vincent, W., Peterson, J. L., & Parrott, D. J. (2009). Differences in African American and White 
women’s attitudes toward lesbians and gay men.  Sex Roles, 61, 599–606. 
 Vohs, K. D., Catanese, K. R., & Baumeister, R. F. (2004). Sex in “his” versus “her” relationships. 
In J. H. Harvey, A. Wenzel, & S. Sprecher (Eds.),  The handbook of sexuality in close relationships 
(pp. 455–474). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Vohs, K. D., Finkenauer, C., & Baumeister, R. F. (2011). The sum of friends’ and lovers’ self-control 
scores predicts relationship quality.  Social Psychological and Personality Science, 2, 138–145. 
 Volk, A. A., & Atkinson, J. A. (2013). Infant and child death in the human environment of evolu-
tionary adaptation.  Evolution and Human Behavior, 34, 182–192. 
 Voracek, M., & Fisher, M. L. (2006). Success is all in the measures: Androgenousness, curvaceous-
ness, and starring frequencies in adult media actresses.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 35, 297–304. 
 Vorauer, J. D., Cameron, J. J., Holmes, J. G., & Pearce, D. G. (2003). Invisible overtures: Fears of 
 rejection and the signal amplification bias.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 84, 
793–812. 
 Vrij, A. (2006). Nonverbal communication and deception. In V. Manusov & M. L. Patterson (Eds.), 
 The Sage handbook of nonverbal communication (pp. 341–359). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Vrij, A. (2007). Deception: A social lubricant and a selfish act. In K. Fiedler (Ed.),  Social communica-
tion (pp. 309–342). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Vrij, A., Granhag, P. A., & Porter, S. (2010). Pitfalls and opportunities in nonverbal and verbal lie 
detection.  Psychological Science in the Public Interest, 11, 89–121. 
 Vrij, A., Paterson, B., Nunkoosing, K., Soukara, S., & Oosterwegel, A. (2003). Perceived advantages 
and disadvantages of secrets disclosure.  Personality and Individual Differences, 35, 593–602. 
 Waas, G. A., & Graczyk, P. A. (1998). Group interventions for the peer-rejected child. In K. C.  Stoiber 
& T. R. Kratochwill (Eds.),  Handbook of group intervention for children and families (pp. 141–158). 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 
 Wade, J. C., & Donis, E. (2007). Masculinity ideology, male identity, and romantic relationship 
quality among heterosexual and gay men.  Sex Roles, 57, 775–786. 
 Waite, L. J., & Joyner, L. (2001). Emotional and physical satisfaction with sex in married, cohabit-
ing, and dating sexual unions: Do men and women differ? In E. O. Laumann & R. T. Michael 

References R-87
(Eds.),  Sex, love, and health in America: Private choices and public policies (pp. 239–269). Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 
 Waldron, V. R., & Kelley, D. K. (2008).  Communicating forgiveness. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
 Wallace, H. M., Exline, J. J., & Baumeister, R. F. (2008). Interpersonal consequences of forgiveness: 
Does forgiveness deter or encourage repeat offenses?  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 
44, 453–460. 
 Waller, W. (1937). The rating and dating complex.  American Sociological Review, 2, 727–734. 
 Waller, W. W., & Hill, R. (1951).  The family, a dynamic interpretation. New York: Dryden Press. 
 Walsh, J. L., Ward, L. M., Caruthers, A., & Merriwether, A. (2011). Awkward or amazing: Gender 
and age trends in first intercourse experiences.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 35, 59–71. 
 Walster, E., & Walster, G. W. (1978).  A new look at love. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley. 
 Walster, E., Walster, G. W., Piliavin, J., & Schmidt, L. (1973). “Playing hard to get”: Understanding 
an elusive phenomenon.  Journal of Personality & Social Psychology, 26, 113–121. 
 Wänke, M., Samochowiec, J., & Landwehr, J. (2012). Facial politics: Political judgment based on 
looks. In J. P. Forgas, K. Fiedler, & C. Sedikides (Eds.),  Social thinking and interpersonal behavior 
(pp. 143–160). New York: Psychology Press. 
 Watson, D., Beer, A., & McDade-Montez, E. (2014). The role of active assortment in spousal similar-
ity . Journal of Personality, 82, 116–129.  
 Watson, D., Klohnen, E. C., Casillas, A., Simms, E. N., Haig, J., & Berry, D. S. (2004). Match makers 
and deal breakers: Analyses of assortative mating in newlywed couples.  Journal of Personality, 
72, 1029–1068. 
 Weaver, S. E., & Ganong, L. H. (2004). The factor structure of the Romantic Beliefs Scale for African 
Americans and European Americans.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 21, 171–185. 
 Weber, A. L., & Harvey, J. H. (1994). Accounts in coping with relationship loss. In A. L. Weber & 
J. H. Harvey (Eds.),  Perspectives on close relationships (pp. 285–306). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 
 Weeden, J., & Sabini, J. (2007). Subjective and objective measures of attractiveness and their relation to 
sexual behavior and sexual attitudes in university students.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 36, 79–88. 
 Weege, B., Lange, B. P., & Fink, B. (2012). Women’s visual attention to variation in men’s dance 
quality.  Personality and Individual Differences, 53, 236–240. 
 Weeks, D. G., Michela, J. L., Peplau, L.A., & Bragg, M. E. (1980). The relation between loneliness and 
depression: A structural equation analysis.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 39, 1238–1244. 
 Wei, M., Russell, D. W., Mallinckrodt, B., & Vogel, D. L. (2007). The Experiences in Close Relation-
ship Scale (ECR)-Short Form: Reliability, validity, and factor structure.  Journal of Personality 
Assessment, 88, 187–204. 
 Weidman, A. C., Fernandez, K. C., Levinson, C. A., Augustine, A. A., Larsen, R. J., &  Rodebaugh, T. L. 
(2012). Compensatory internet use among individuals higher in social anxiety and its implica-
tions for well-being.  Personality and Individual Differences, 53, 191–195. 
 Weigel, D. J., & Ballard-Reisch, D. S. (2014). Constructing commitment in intimate relationships: 
Mapping interdependence in the everyday expressions of commitment.  Communication 
Research, 41, 311–332. 
 Weisbuch, M., Ambady, N., Clarke, A. L., Achor, S., & Weele, J. V. (2010). On being consistent: The role 
of verbal-nonverbal consistency in first impressions.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 32, 261–268. 
 Weiss, R. L., Birchler, G. R., & Vincent, J. P. (1974). Contractual models for negotiating training in 
marital dyads.  Journal of Marriage and the Family, 36, 321–330. 
 Weiss, R. L., Hops, H., & Patterson, G. R. (1973). A framework for conceptualizing marital conflict, 
a technology for altering it, some data for evaluating it. In L. A. Hamerlynck, L. C. Handy, & 
E. J. Mash (Eds.),  Behavior change: Methodology, concepts and practice  (pp. 309–342). Champaign, 
IL: Research Press. 
 Weiss, R. S. (1973).  Loneliness. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press. 
 Weisskirch, R. S., & Delevi, R. (2012). Its ovr b/n u n me: Technology use, attachment styles, and gen-
der roles in relationship dissolution.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 15, 486–490. 
 Wells, B. E., & Twenge, J. M. (2005). Changes in young people’s sexual behavior and attitudes, 
1943–1999: A cross-temporal meta-analysis.  Review of General Psychology, 9, 249–261. 
 Wendorf, C. A., Lucas, T., Imamo˘ glu, E. O., Weisfeld, C. C., & Weisfeld, G. E. (2011). Marital satis-
faction across three cultures: Does the number of children have an impact after accounting for 
other marital demographics?  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 42, 340–354. 

R-88 
References
 Wenzel, A., & Emerson, T. (2009). Mate selection in socially anxious and nonanxious individuals. 
 Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 28, 341–363. 
 Wesselmann, E. D., & Williams, K. D. (2013). Ostracism and stages of coping. In C. N. DeWall (Ed.), 
 The Oxford handbook of social exclusion (pp. 20–30). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Wesselmann, E. D., Wirth, J. H., Mroczek, D. K., & Williams, K. D. (2012). Dial a felling: Detecting 
moderation of affect decline during ostracism.  Personality and Individual Differences, 53, 580–586. 
 West, T. V. (2013). Repeated measures with dyads. In J. A. Simpson & L. Campbell (Eds.),  The 
Oxford handbook of close relationships (pp. 731–749). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Whalen, J. M., Pexman, P. M., & Gill, A. J. (2009). “Should be fun—not!” Incidence and marking of 
nonliteral language in e-mail.  Journal of Language and Social Psychology, 28, 263–280. 
 Wheeler, J., & Christensen, A. (2002). Creating a context for change: Integrative Couple Therapy. 
In A. L. Vangelisti, H. T. Reis, & M. A. Fitzpatrick (Eds.),  Stability and change in relationships 
(pp. 285–305). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 
 Wheeler, L., & Kim, Y. (1997). What is beautiful is culturally good: The physical attractiveness ste-
reotype has different content in collectivistic cultures.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
23, 795–800. 
 Wheeler, L., Reis, H., & Nezlek, J. (1983). Loneliness, social interaction, and sex roles.  Journal of Per-
sonality and Social Psychology, 45, 943–953. 
 Whisman, M. A. (2013). Relationship discord and the prevalence, incidence, and treatment of psy-
chopathology.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 30, 163–170. 
 Whisman, M. A., Snyder, D. K., & Beach, S. R. H. (2009). Screening for marital and relationship 
discord.  Journal of Family Psychology, 23, 247–254. 
 Whisman, M. A., Uebelacker, L. A., & Settles, T. D. (2010). Marital distress and the metabolic syn-
drome: Linking social functioning with physical health.  Journal of Family Psychology, 24, 367–370. 
 Whitaker, D. J., Le, B., & Niolon, P. H. (2010). Persistence and desistance of the perpetration of 
physical aggression across relationships: Findings from a national study of adolescents.  Jour-
nal of Interpersonal Violence, 25, 591–609. 
 White, G. L. (1980). Inducing jealousy: A power perspective.  Personality and Social Psychology 
 Bullein, 6, 222–227. 
 White, G. L. (1981). Some correlates of romantic jealousy.  Journal of Personality, 49, 129–147. 
 White, G. L., Fishbein, S., & Rutstein, J. (1981). Passionate love: The misattribution of arousal. 
 Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 41, 56–62. 
 Whitley, B. E., Jr. (1993). Reliability and aspects of the construct validity of Sternberg’s Triangular 
Love Scale.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 10, 475–480. 
 Whitton, S. W., Stanley, S. M., Markman, H. J., & Johnson, C. A. (2013). Attitudes toward divorce, 
commitment, and divorce proneness in first marriages and remarriages.  Journal of Marriage 
and Family, 75, 276–287. 
 Whitty, M. T., & Quigley, L. (2008). Emotional and sexual infidelity offline and in cyberspace. 
 Journal of Marital & Family Therapy, 34, 461–468. 
 Whyte, W. F. (1955).  Street corner society: The social structure of an Italian slum. Chicago: University 
of Chicago Press. 
 Wickrama, K. A. S., Bryant, C. M., & Wickrama, T. K. A. (2010). Perceived community disorder, 
hostile marital interactions, and self-reported health of African American couples: An interdy-
adic process.  Personal Relationships,  17, 515–531. 
 Widmer, E. D., Treas, J., & Newcomb, R. (1998). Attitudes toward nonmarital sex in 24 countries. 
 Journal of Sex Research, 35, 349–358. 
 Wiederman, M. W. (2004). Methodological issues in studying sexuality in close relationships. In 
J. H. Harvey, A. Wenzel, & S. Sprecher (Eds.),  The handbook of sexuality in close relationships 
(pp. 31–56). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Wight, R. G., LeBlanc, A. J., & Lee Badgett, M. V. (2013). Same-sex legal marriage and psychological 
well-being: Findings from the California health interview survey.  American Journal of Public 
Health, 103, 339–346. 
 Wiik, K. A., Keizer, R., & Lappegård, T. (2012). Relationship quality in marital and cohabiting 
unions across Europe.  Journal of Family Issues, 74, 389–398. 
 Wilcox, W. B., & Marquardt, E. (Eds.). (2010).  When marriage disappears: The new middle America. The 
National Marriage Project. Retrieved from   http://www.stateofourunions.org 

References R-89
 Wildsmith, E., Schelar, E., Kristen-Peterson, K., & Manlove, J. (2010, May). Sexually transmitted dis-
eases among young adults: Prevalence, perceived risk, and risk-taking behaviors.  Child Trends 
Research Brief. Retrieved from  http://www.childtrends.org/Files//Child_Trends–2010_05_01_
RB_STD.pdf  
 Wile, D. B. (1995).  After the fight: Using your disagreements to build a stronger relationship. New York: 
Guilford Press. 
 Willetts, M. C., Sprecher, S., & Beck, F. D. (2004). Overview of sexual practices and attitudes within 
relational contexts. In J. H. Harvey, A. Wenzel, & S. Sprecher (Eds.),  The handbook of sexuality in 
close relationships (pp. 57–85). Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 
 Williams, K. D. (2001).  Ostracism: The power of silence. New York: Guilford Press. 
Williams, K. D. (2007). Ostracism. Annual Review of Psychology, 58, 425–452.
 Williams, K. D., & Jarvis, B. (2006). Cyberball: A program for use in research on interpersonal ostra-
cism and acceptance.  Behavior Research Methods, 38, 174–180. 
 Williams, L. E., & Bargh, J. A. (2008). Experiencing physical warmth promotes interpersonal 
warmth.  Science, 322, 606–607. 
 Williams, M. J., & Mendelsohn, G. A. (2008). Gender clues and cues: Online interactions as win-
dows into lay theories about men and women.  Basic and Applied Social Psychology, 30, 278–294. 
 Williams, S. L., & Frieze, I. H. (2005). Courtship behaviors, relationship violence, and breakup per-
sistence in college men and women.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 29, 248–257. 
 Williamson, H. C., Karney, B. R., & Bradbury, T. N. (2013). Financial strain and stressful events 
predict newlyweds’ negative communication independent of relationship satisfaction.  Journal 
of Family Psychology, 27, 65–75. 
 Willis, J., & Todorov, A. (2006). First impressions: Making up your mind after a 100-ms exposure to 
a face.  Psychological Science, 17, 592–598. 
 Willoughby, B. J., Carroll, J. S., & Busby, D. M. (2012). The different effects of “living together”: 
Determining and comparing types of cohabiting couples.  Journal of Social and Personal Relation-
ships, 29, 397–419. 
 Willoughby, B. J., Carroll, J. S., & Busby, D. M. (2014a). Differing relationship outcomes when sex 
happens before, on, or after first dates.  Journal of Sex Research, 51, 52–61. 
 Willoughby, B. J., Farero, A M., & Busby, D. M. (2014b). Exploring the effects of sexual desire dis-
crepancy among married couples.  Archives of Sexual Behavior, 43, 551–562. 
 Wilson, B., & Lamidi, E. (2013).  Living alone in the U.S., 2011. National Center for Family and Mar-
riage Research. Retrieved from  http://ncfmr.bgsu.edu/pdf/family_profiles/file138254.pdf 
 Wimmer, A., & Lewis, K. (2010). Beyond and below racial homophily: ERG models of a friendship 
network documented on Facebook.  American Journal of Sociology, 116, 583–642. 
 Winslett, A. H., & Gross, A. M. (2008). Sexual boundaries: An examination of the importance of 
talking before touching.  Violence Against Women, 14, 542–562. 
 Winston, R. (2002).  Human instinct. London: Bantam Press. 
 Winterheld, H. A., Simpson, J. A., & Oriña, M. M. (2013). It’s in the way that you sue it: Attachment 
and the dyadic nature of humor during conflict negotiation in romantic couples.  Personality 
and Social Psychology Bulletin, 39, 496–508. 
 Wirth, J. H., Sacco, D. F., Hugenberg, K., & Williams, K. D. (2010). Eye gaze as relational evalua-
tion: Averted eye gaze leads to feelings of ostracism and relational devaluation.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 36, 869–882. 
 Witt, E. A., Donnellan, M. B., & Orlando, M. J. (2011). Timing and selection effects within a psychol-
ogy subject pool: Personality and sex matter.  Personality and Individual Differences, 50, 355–359. 
 Wolfers, J. (2006). Did unilateral divorce raise divorce rates? A reconciliation and new results. 
 American Economic Review, 96, 1802–1820. 
 Wolfinger, N. H. (2005).  Understanding the divorce cycle: The children of divorce in their own marriages. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 
 Women CEOs of the Fortune 1000. (2014, January). Retrieved from  http://www.catalyst.org/
knowledge/women-ceos-fortune-1000 
 Wong, J. S., & Schonlau, M. (2013). Does bully victimization predict future delinquency? A propen-
sity score matching approach.  Criminal Justice and Behavior, 40, 1184–1208. 
 Wood, J. T. (2004). Monsters and victims: Male felons’ accounts of intimate partner violence.  Journal 
of Social and Personal Relationships, 21, 555–576. 

R-90 
References
 Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (2007). Social structural origins of sex differences in human mating. In 
S. W. Gangestad & J. A. Simpson (Eds.),  The evolution of mind: Fundamental questions and contro-
versies (pp. 383–390). New York: Guilford Press. 
 Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (2010). Gender. In S. Fiske, D. Gilbert, & G. Lindzey (Eds.),  Handbook of 
social psychology (5th ed., Vol. 1, pp. 629–667). Hoboken, NJ: Wiley. 
 Wood, W., & Eagly, A. H. (2012). Biosocial construction of sex differences and similarities in behav-
ior.  Advances in Experimental Social Psychology, 46, 55–123. 
 Woodin, E. M. (2011). A two-dimensional approach to relationship conflict: Meta-analytic findings. 
 Journal of Family Psychology, 25, 325–335. 
 Woodin, E. M., Caldeira, V., & O’Leary, K. D. (2013). Dating aggression in emerging adulthood: 
Interactions between relationship processes and individual vulnerabilities.  Journal of Social and 
Clinical Psychology, 32, 619–650. 
 Woolf, S. E., & Maisto, S. A. (2008). Gender differences in condom use behavior? The role of power 
and partner-type.  Sex Roles, 58, 689–701. 
 World Health Organization. (2013).  Global and regional estimates of violence against women. Retrieved 
from  http://www.who.int/reproductivehealth/publications/violence/9789241564625/en/#  
 Wortman, C. B., & Boerner, K. (2007). Beyond the myths of coping with loss: Prevailing assump-
tions versus scientific evidence. In H. S. Friedman & R. C. Silver (Eds.),  Foundations of health 
psychology (pp. 285–324). New York: Oxford University Press. 
 Wright, C. N., Holloway, A., & Roloff, M. E. (2007). The dark side of self-monitoring: How high 
self-monitors view their romantic relationships.  Communication Reports, 20, 101–114. 
 Wright, P. H. (1982). Men’s friendships, women’s friendships and the alleged inferiority of the lat-
ter.  Sex Roles, 8, 1–20. 
 Wright, P. J. (2013). U.S. males and pornography, 1973–2010: Consumption, predictors, correlates. 
 Journal of Sex Research, 50, 60–71. 
 Wrzus, C., Hänel, M., Wagner, J., & Neyer, F. J. (2013). Social Network changes and life events 
across the life span: A meta-analysis.  Psychological Bulletin, 139, 53–80. 
 Xu, X., Aron, A., Brown, L., Cao, G., Feng, T., & Weng, X. (2011). Reward and motivation systems: 
A brain mapping study of early-stage intense romantic love in Chinese participants.  Human 
Brain Mapping, 32, 249–257. 
 Xue, M., & Silk, J. B. (2012). The role of tracking and tolerance in relationship among friends.  Evolu-
tion and Human Behavior, 33, 17–25. 
 Yager, J. (1997).  Friendshifts: The power of friendship and how it shapes our lives. Stamford, CT: Hann-
acroix Creek Books. 
 Yagil, D., Karnieli-Miller, O., Eisikovits, Z., & Enosh, G. (2006). Is that a “No”? The interpretation of 
responses to unwanted sexual attention.  Sex Roles, 54, 251–260. 
 Yan, W., Wu, Q., Liang, J., Chen, Y., & Fu, X. (2013). How fast are the leaked facial expressions: The 
duration of micro-expressions.  Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 37, 217–230. 
 Yarkoni, T. (2010). Personality in 100,000 words: A large-scale analysis of personality and word use 
among bloggers.  Journal of Research in Personality, 44, 363–373. 
 Yen, H. (2014, January 7). Pregnant couples moving in, not getting married.  Bryan–College Station 
Eagle,  p. A5. 
 Yoon, J. E., & Lawrence, E. (2013). Psychological victimization as a risk factor for the developmental 
course of marriage.  Journal of Family Psychology, 27, 53–64. 
 Yoshimura, S. (2007). Goals and emotional outcomes of revenge activities in interpersonal relation-
ships.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 24, 87–98. 
 Young, B. J., & Furman, W. (2013). Predicting commitment in young adults’ physically aggressive 
and sexually coercive dating relationships.  Journal of Interpersonal Violence, 28, 3245–3264. 
 Young, S. D., & Jordan, A. H. (2013). The influence of social networking photos on social norms and 
sexual health behaviors.  Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 16, 243–247. 
 Younger, J., Aron, A., Parke, S., Chatterjee, N., & Mackey, S. (2010). Viewing pictures of a romantic 
partner reduces experimental pain: Involvement of neural reward systems.  PLoS ONE, 5 (10), 
e13309. 
 Ysseldyk, R., Matheson, K., & Anisman, H. (2007). Rumination: Bridging a gap between forgiving-
ness, vengefulness, and psychological health.  Personality and Individual Differences, 42, 1573–1584. 

References R-91
 Yu, E., & Liu, J. (2007). Environmental impacts of divorce.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
ences, 104, 20629–20634. 
 Yucel, D., & Gassanov, M. A. (2010). Exploring actor and partner correlates of sexual satisfaction 
among married couples.  Social Science Research, 39, 725–738. 
 Zacchilli, T. L., Hendrick, C., & Hendrick, S. S. (2009). The Romantic Partner Conflict Scale: A new 
Scale to measure relationship conflict.  Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 26, 1073–1096. 
 Zadro, L., Arriaga, X. B., & Williams, K. D. (2008). Relational ostracism. In J. P. Forgas & J. Fitness 
(Eds.),  Social relationships: Cognitive, affective and motivational processes (pp. 305–319). New York: 
Psychology Press. 
 Zadro, L., Williams, K. D., & Richardson, R. (2004). How low can you go? Ostracism by a computer 
is sufficient to lower self-reported levels of belonging, control, self-esteem, and meaningful 
existence.  Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 40, 560–567. 
 Zajonc, R. B. (2001). Mere exposure: A gateway to the subliminal.  Current Directions in Psychological 
Science, 10, 224–228. 
 Zawacki, T. (2011). Effects of alcohol on women’s risky sexual decision making during social inter-
actions in the laboratory.  Psychology of Women Quarterly, 35, 107–118. 
 Zayas, V., & Shoda, Y. (2007). Predicting preferences for dating partners from past experiences of 
psychological abuse: Identifying the psychological ingredients of situations.  Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 33, 123–138. 
 Zayas, V., Shoda, Y., & Ayduk, O. N. (2002). Personality in context: An interpersonal systems per-
spective.  Journal of Personality, 70, 851–900. 
 Zechmeister, J. S., Garcia, S., & Vas, S. N. (2004). Don’t apologize unless you mean it: A labora-
tory investigation of forgiveness and retaliation.  Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 23, 
532–564. 
 Zeidner, M., & Kloda, I. (2013). Emotional intelligence (EI), conflict resolution patterns, and rela-
tionship satisfaction: Actor and partner effects revisited.  Personality and Individual Differences, 
54, 278–283. 
 Zengel, B., Edlund, J. E., & Sagarin, B. J. (2013). Sex differences in jealousy in response to infidel-
ity: Evaluation of demographic moderators in a national random sample.  Personality and Indi-
vidual Differences, 54, 47–51. 
 Zentner, M., & Mitura, K. (2012). Stepping out of the caveman’s shadow: Nations’ gender gap pre-
dicts degree of sex differentiation in mate preferences.  Psychological Science, 23, 1176–1185. 
 Zhang, F. (2009). The relationship between state attachment security and daily interpersonal expe-
rience.  Journal of Research in Personality, 43, 511–515. 
 Zhang, F., & Parmley, M. (2011). What your best friend sees that I don’t see: Comparing female 
close friends and casual acquaintances on the perception of emotional facial expressions of 
varying intensities.  Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 37, 28–39. 
 Zhang, S., & Kline, S. L. (2009). Can I make my own decision? A cross-cultural study of perceived 
social network influence in mate selection.  Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 40, 3–23. 
 Zhang, Y., & Epley, N. (2009). Self-centered social exchange: Differential use of costs versus benefits 
in prosocial reciprocity.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 97, 796–810. 
 Zhang, Y., & Van Hook, J. (2009). Marital dissolution among interracial couples.  Journal of Marriage 
and Family, 71, 95–107. 
 Zhong, C., & Leonardelli, G. J. (2008). Cold and lonely: Does social exclusion literally feel cold? 
 Psychological Science, 19, 838–842. 
 Zhou, W., & Chen, D. (2008). Encoding human sexual chemosensory cues in the orbitofrontal and 
fusiform cortices.  Journal of Neuroscience, 28, 14416–14421. 
 Zhou, W., & Chen, D. (2011). Entangled chemosensory emotion and identity: Familiarity enhances 
detection of chemosensorily encoded emotion.  Social Neuroscience, 6, 270–276. 
 Zilcha-Mano, S., Mikulincer, M., & Shaver, P. R. (2011). An attachment perspective on human-pet 
relationships: Conceptualization and assessment of pet attachment orientations . Journal of 
Research in Personality, 45, 345–357. 
 Zimmerman, D. H., & West, C. (1975). Sex roles, interruptions and silences in conversations. 
In B. Thorne & N. Henley (Eds.),  Language and sex: Difference and dominance (pp. 105–129). 
 Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 

R-92 
References
 Zipp, J. F., Prohaska, A., & Bemiller, M. (2004). Wives, husbands, and hidden power in marriage. 
 Journal of Family Issues, 25, 933–958. 
 Zuckerman, M., Koestner, R., & Alton, A. O. (1984). Learning to detect deception.  Journal of Person-
ality and Social Psychology, 46, 519–528. 
 Zurbriggen, E. L., & Morgan, E. M. (2006). Who wants to marry a millionaire? Reality dating televi-
sion programs, attitudes toward sex, and sexual behaviors.  Sex Roles, 54, 1–17. 
 

C-1
Credits
Photo Credits 
About the Author Photo courtesy of Rowland Miller
Chapter 1 Page 15: © 237/Tom Merton/Ocean/Corbis.
Chapter 2 Page 50: © Image Source/Digital Vision/Getty Images.
Chapter 3 Page 78 (both): Little et al., 2002; Anthony Little (www.alittlelab.com); p. 79 (top three): 
© Langlois Social Development Lab; p. 79 (bottom) © Krzysztof Kos´cin´ski; p. 93: © Asia 
Images Group/Getty Images.
Chapter 4 Page 107: © Dr. Eric Hehman; p. 109: © Paul Bradbur/age footstock. 
Chapter 5 Page 145 (all): © Paul Ekman; p. 172: © Queerstock, Inc./Alamy.
Chapter 8 Page 250: © Comstock/PunchStock.
Chapter 13 Page 422: © Image Source/PunchStock.
 Text Credits
 Page 3, Figure 1.1, The Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale 
 
Aron, A., Aron E. N., & Smollan, D. “Inclusion of Other in the Self Scale and the structure of 
interpersonal closeness.” Reprinted from Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63 (1992): 
597. Courtesy of The American Psychological Assn.
Page 6, Figure 1.2, Satisfying intimacy and life and death 
 
Coyne, James C. , Michael J. Rohrbaugh, Varda Shoham, John S. Sonnega, John M. Nicklas, & 
James A. Cranford. “Prognostic importance of marital quality for survival of congestive heart 
failure.” The American Journal of Cardiology 88:5 (2001): 526–539. Copyright © 2001 Elsevier. 
Reprinted with permission.
Page 10, Figure 1.4, The outcomes of cohabitation over time
 
From Understanding the Divorce Cycle: The Children of Divorce in Their Own Marriages, by N.H. 
Wolfinger, Copyright © 2005 Cambridge University Press. Reprinted with permission.
Page 31, Table 1.3, How My Partner Sees Me
 
Courtesy of Sandra Murray.
Page 44, Figure 2.1, Schematic diagram of William Ickes’s lab at the University of Texas at Arlington
 
Courtesy of William Ickes.
Page 56, Table 2.2, The Relationship Assessment Scale
 
Hendrick, S. S., Dicke, A., & Hendrick, C. (February 1, 1998). The Relationship Assessment 
Scale. Journal of Social and Personal Relationships, 15, 137–142. Copyright © 1998, Sage Publica-
tions. Reprinted with permission. 

C-2 
Credits
Page 70, Figure 31, A student apartment building at MIT
 
Myers, David. Reprinted from Social Psychology, 9e, by David Myers. Copyright © 1993 
McGraw-Hill. Reprinted with permission.
Page 79, Figure 3.3, Waist-to-hip ratios
 
Krzysztof Kos´cin´ski, “Assessment of Waist-to-Hip Ratio Attractiveness in Women: An Anthro-
pometric Analysis of Digital Silhouettes.” Archives of Sexual Behavior, July 2014, 43(5), 989–997. 
Page 82, Figure 3.4, Women’s probability of conception during the menstrual cycle
 
Courtesy of Jeffry Simpson.
Page 83, Figure 3.5, “What are you wearing to that party tonight?”
 
Kristina M. Durante, Norman Li, & Martie Haselton. “Changes in women’s choice of dress 
across the ovulatory cycle: Naturalistic and laboratory task-based evidence.” Personality and 
Social Psychology Bulletin, 34 (11), 1451–1460. Copyright © 2008 by the Society for Personality 
and Social Psychology, Inc. Reprinted with permission from Sage Publications, Inc.
Page 119, Table 4.1, Destiny and Growth Beliefs
 
Courtesy of C. Raymond Knee.
Page 127, Figure 4.5, The marriage shift in self-verification
 
William B. Swann, Jr., C. De La Ronde, & J. G. Hixon,. “The marriage shift in self-verification” 
from “Authenticity and positivity strivings in marriage and courtship.” Reprinted from Jour-
nal of Personality and Social Psychology, 66 (1994): 861. Courtesy of The American Psychological 
Assn.  
Page 133, Table 4.2, The Self-Monitoring Scale
 
Mark Synder and S. Gangestad, “The Self-Monitoring Scale” from “On the Nature of Self- 
Monitoring: Matters of Assessment, Matters of Validity.” Reprinted from Journal of Personality 
and Social Psychology, 51 (1986): 125–139. Courtesy of The American Psychological Assn.  
Page 147, Figure 5.2, Let’s create an avatar that moves as you do
 
Bernhard Fink, B. Weege, J. Flugge, S. Roder, N. Neave, & K, McCarty. “Men’s personality 
and women’s perceptions of their dance quality.” Personality and Individual Differences, 52, 
232–235. Copyright © 2012 Elsevier. Reprinted with permission.
Page 187, Figure 6.3, The arguments of couples at low and high risk of divorce
 
John M. Gottman & R.W. Levenson, “The arguments of couples at low and high risk of 
divorce” in “Marital processes predictive of later dissolution: Behavior, physiology, and 
health.” Reprinted from Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 63, no. 2 (1992): 221–233. 
Courtesy of The American Psychological Assn.  
Page 199, Table 6.2, A Measure of Communal Strength
 
Mills, J.S., Clark, M. S., Ford, T.E., & Johnson, M. “Measurement of communal strength.” Per-
sonal Relationships, 11: 217. Copyright © 2004, John Wiley & Sons. Reprinted with permission.
Page 206, Table 6.3, Arriaga and Agnew’s Commitment Scale
 
Ximena B. Arriaga, X.B. and C.R. Agnew. “Being committed: Affective, Cognitive and Cona-
tive Components of Relationship Commitment.” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin, 
27, no. 9: 1190–1203. Copyright © 2001, Society for Personality and Social Psychology, Inc. 
Reprinted with permission.
Page 208, Figure 6.8, The investment model of commitment
 
Caryl E. Rusbult, S.M.Drigotas, and J.Verette in “The Investment Model: An Interdependence 
Aalysis of Commitment Processes and Relationship Maintenance Phenomena.” Reprinted 
from Communication and Relational Maintenance, D.J. Canary and L. Stafford, eds. pp. 115–139, 
Copyright © 1994, with permission from Elsevier.

Credits C-3
Page 220, Table 7.1, The Perceived Responsiveness Scale
 
Harry T. Reis (2014). Responsiveness: Affective interdependence in close relationships. 
In M. Mikulincer & P. R. Shaver (Eds.), Mechanisms of social connection: From brain to group 
(pp. 255–271). Washington, DC: American Psychological Association.
Page 239, Table 7.5, The UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3)
 
Russell, D.W. “The UCLA Loneliness Scale (Version 3): Reliability, validity and factorial 
structure.” Reprinted from Journal of Personality Assessment, 66. Copyright © 1996 by Daniel 
W. Russell. Reprinted with permission of the author.
Page 259, Figure 8.1, Love is blind
 
Goodwin, S. A., Fiske, S. T., Rosen, L. D., & Rosenthal, A. M. (2002). The eye of the beholder: 
Romantic goals and impression biases. Journal of Experimental Social Psychology, 38, 232–241.
Page 256, Table 8.3, The Short form of the Passionate Love Scale
 
Hatfield, E.& R.L. Rapson. From “Passionate Love: New Directions in Research” in Advances 
in Personal Relationships, W.L. Jones and D. Perlman, eds., 1(109–139.) Copyright © 1987 
Elaine Hatfield. Reprinted with author’s permission.
Page 263, Table 8.7, A Compassionate Love Acts Diary
 
Excerpted from Table 1, p. 9 in Reis, H. T., Maniaci, M. R., & Rogge, R. D., “The expres-
sion of compassionate love in everyday compassionate acts.” Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, October 29, 2013. 
Page 270, Figure 8.2, Romantic love decreases after people marry for love
 
Myers, David. Reprinted from Social Psychology, 9e. Copyright © 1993 McGraw-Hill. Reprinted 
with permission. 
Page 278, Table 9.1 , Americans Now Approve of Marriage for Same-Sex Couples
 
Data from Washington Post-ABC News poll March 2014–Politics, Obama and 2014 midterms. 
National poll on politics, Obama, Republicans and the 2014 midterm elections.
Page 279, Figure 9.1, Tolerance of same-sex sexuality depends on one’s beliefs about its origins
 
Saad, L. (2007, May 29). Tolerance for gay rights at high-water mark. Gallup Poll News 
Service. [Online.] Available: http://www.gallup.com/poll/27694/Tolerance-Gay-Rights-
HighWater-Mark.aspx. Copyright © 2011 Gallup, Inc. All rights reserved.
Page 312, Figure 10.2, Low Rational Value in the Lab
 
Courtesy of Mark R. Leary.
Page 324, Figure 10.3, What do jealous victims of infidelity want to know?
 
Data from Kuhle, B. X. (2011). “Did you have sex with him? Do you  love her? An in vivo test of 
sex differences in jealous interrogations.” Personality and Individual Differences, 51, 1044–1047.
Page 333, Table 10.2, The Interpersonal Betrayal Scale
 
The Interpersonal Betrayal Scale from “Betrayal in Relationships,” pp. 243–262 by 
W. H. Jones and M. P. Burdette in Perspectives on Close Relationships, ed. by A.L. Weber and 
J.H. Harvey.  Copyright © 1994. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper 
Saddle River, NJ.
Page 345, Table 11.1, Issues That Produce Marital Conflict
 
Data from Papp, L. M., Cummings, E. M., & Goeke-Morey, M. C. (2009a). “For richer, for 
poorer: Money as a topic of marital conflict in the home.” Family Relations, 58, 91–103.
Page 350, Figure 11.2, The possible courses of conflict
 
Kelley, H.H.”The possible courses of conflict” in Close Relationships.© 1983 by W.H. Freeman 
and Company. Reprinted by permission of the Estate of H. Kelley.

C-4 
Credits
Page 353, Table 11.2, The Initiator Style Questionnaire
 
Denton, W. H., & Burleson, B. R. “The Initiator Style Questionnaire: A scale to assess initiator 
tendency in couples.” Personal Relationships 14, 2 (July 2007): Appendix A, p. 267. Copyright 
© 2007 by John Wiley & Sons. Reprinted with permission.
Page 355, Figure 11.3, A typology of responses to dissatisfaction in close relationships
 
Rusbult, C. E. (1987). “Responses to dissatisfaction in close relationships: The exit-voice-
loyalty-neglect model,” in D. Perlman & S. Duck (Eds.), Intimate relationships: Development, 
dynamics, and deterioration (pp. 209–237). Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications, Inc.
Page 368, Table 12.1, Resources that Grant One Power
 
Based on Raven, B. H. (2001). “Power/interaction and interpersonal influence: Experimental 
investigations and case studies.” In A. Y. Lee-Chai & J. A. Bargh (Eds.), The use and abuse of power: 
Multiple perspectives on the causes of corruption (pp. 217–240). Philadelphia: Psychology Press.
Page 373, Figure 12.1, Interruptions and Perceived Power
 
Dunbar, N. E, and J.K. Burgoon, “Interruptions and Perceived Power” in “Perceptions of 
power and interactional dominance in interpersonal relationships.” Journal of Personal and 
Social Relationships 22, no. 2 (2005):220. Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications, Inc.
Page 382, Figure 12.5, The many facets of intimate terrorism
 
Pence, E. and M. Paymar. “The many facets of intimate terrorism” from the “Power and Con-
trol Wheel” in Education Groups for men Who Batter: The Duluth Model, p. 376. Copyright © 
1993 Springer Publishing Co., LLC. Reproduced with the permission of Springer Publishing 
Co., LLC, New York, NY 10036.
Page 418, Figure 13.3, Adjusting to Breakups
 
Sbarra, D. A., & Emery, R. E. “Adjusting to Breakups” in “The emotional sequelae of nonmar-
ital relationship dissolution: Analysis of change and intraindividual variability over time.” 
Personal Relationships, 12 (June 2005): 213–232. Copyright © June 2005. Reprinted by permis-
sion of John Wiley & Sons. All rights reserved.
Page 419, Figure 13.4, Marriage, divorce, widowhood, and satisfaction with life
 
Lucas, R. E. “Marriage, divorce, widowhood, and satisfaction with life” in “Adaptation 
and the Set-Point Model of Subjective Well-Being: Does Happiness Change After Major 
Life Events?” Current Directions in Psychological Science, 16, no. 2:75–79. Copyright © 2007. 
Reprinted by permission of Sage Publications, Inc. 
Page 425, Figure 13.5, Parents’ Marital Discord and Divorce with Children’s Psychological 
Well-Being
 
Amato, Paul. “Parents’ Marital Discord and Divorce with Children’s Psychological Well-
Being” from “Reconciling Divergent Perspectives: Judith Wallerstein, Quantitative Family 
Research, and Children of Divorce” in Family Relations 52, no. 4 (Oct. 2003):332–339. Copy-
right © 2003 John Wiley & Sons. Reprinted with permission.
Page 436, Table 14.1, Canary and Stafford’s Relational Maintenance Strategies
 
Stafford, Laura. “Canary and Stafford’s Relational Maintenance Strategies” from “Maintain-
ing Romantic Relationships: A Summary and Analysis of One Research Program” in 
 Maintaining Relationships Through Communication, D.J. Canary and M. Dainton, eds. pp. 58–59. 
Reprinted by permission of Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.
Page 444, Table 14.3, Specific Steps in Emotionally Focused Therapy
 
Johnson, S. M. (2004). Creating connection: The practice of emotionally focused couple therapy 
(2nd ed.). New York: Brunner-Routledge. 

I-1
Abbey, A. 302
Abel, E. L. 145
Acevedo, B. P. 45, 251, 252, 273
Ackerman, D. 246, 247, 252
Ackerman, J. M. 217, 269
Afifi, T. D. 159, 352
Afifi, T. O. 388
Afifi, W. A. 331, 335
Agnew, C. R. 3, 112, 179, 205, 206, 
209, 217, 222, 376, 431, 439
Ahlberg, C. 27
Ahmetoglu, G. 251, 262, 272, 273
Ahrons, C. R. 422, 422
Aicken, C. R. H. 57
Ainsworth, M. D. S. 15
Aitken, S. J. 82
Aizer, A. A. 5
Albrecht, S. L. 180
Albright, L. 142
Alessi, G. 361
Algoe, S. B. 437
Allard, L. M. 267
Allen, A. B. 205
Allen, E. S. 434
Allen, J. B. 377
Allen, K. 228
Allik, J. 136
Allison, R. 277
Alterovitz, S. S. 98
Altman, I. 156, 157
Alvergne, A. 82, 83
Amato, P. R. 97, 184, 203, 204, 
226, 334, 345, 377, 378, 379
Ambadar, Z. 146
Ambady, N. 148, 241
Ames, D. R. 110
Anders, S. L. 161
Andersen, P. A. 153, 325
Andersen, S. M. 124
Anderson, J. R. 194
Anderson, K. G. 291, 319
Anderson, K. J. 204
Anderson, M. 159
Andrews, P. W. 319
Angulo, S. 166
Apostolou, M. 266
Aragón, O. R. 198, 200
Archer, J. 30, 73, 75, 89, 158, 358, 
383, 386
Argyle, M. 221, 222
Ariely, D. 296
Aron, A. 3, 45, 60, 99, 191, 251, 
252, 253, 254, 258, 259, 265, 
270, 271, 273, 274, 435
Aron, E. N. 259
Aronson, E. 91
Arriaga, X. B. 18, 19, 114, 205, 
206, 209, 381, 391
Arroyo, J. 7, 234, 237
Asch, S. E. 108
Asendorpf, J. B. 54, 85, 235
Ash, J. 33
Ashton, M. C. 334
Askari, S. F. 371
Assad, K. K. 123
Atkins, D. C. 434
Atkinson, J. A. 35
Aubé, J. 165
Aubrey, J. S. 241
Averett, S. L. 5
Averill, J. R 185
Aydin, N. 228
Ayduk, Ö. 125
Aylor, B. 325
Ayotte, B. J. 337, 435
Ayres, M. M. 164
Bach, G. R. 362, 363
Back, M. D. 69, 106, 128, 129, 163
Bacue, A. E. 329
Baddeley, J. L. 242
Bailenson, J. N. 54, 153
Bakeman, R. 160
Bale, C. 30, 89
Ballard-Reisch, D. S. 205, 447
Balsam, K. F. 29, 280, 396
Balzarini, R. 214
Bank, B. J. 231
Bar, M. 106
Barbee, A. P. 154
Barber, B. L. 297
Barber, J. P. 446
Barber, N. 397, 409, 423
Bargh, J. A. 111
Bar-Kalifa, E. 218
Barnes, R. D. 25
Barr, A. B. 62
Barrett, A. E. 415
Barriger, M. 296
Barry, R. A. 216, 343
Barthes, J. 280
Bartholomew, J. B. 78
Bartholomew, K. 16
Bartz, J. A. 207
Basow, S. A. 294
Bastian, B. 313
Battaglia, D. M. 413, 414
Baucom, B. R. 168, 352, 353
Baucom, D. H. 441, 443, 445
Baucom, T. R. 318
Baumeister, R. F. 4, 5, 172, 185, 
186, 265, 271, 294, 348
Baxter, L. A. 37, 99, 159, 308, 331, 
341, 342, 411, 412, 413
Beach, S. R. 71, 
Beach, S. R. H. 99, 189, 335, 336, 
341, 360, 432
Beall, A. T. 82, 
Beck, C. J. A. 198, 200, 207, 381, 
382, 384, 423
Beck, L. A. 343
Becker, O. A. 92, 96
Bednarczyk, R. A. 283
Bélisle, J. 129
Belkin, A. 148
Bell, K. L. 328
Bem, S. L. 24, 25, 240
Ben-Ari, A. 2
Bensman, L. 276
Benson, L. A. 446
Bente, G. 148
Berant, E. 19
Berenson, K. R. 124
Berkman, L. F. 5
Bernstein, W. M. 89
Berscheid, E. 2, 42, 184, 214, 253, 
260, 262, 263
Bessel, D. R. 398, 409
Biesanz, J. C. 135
Birditt, K. S. 45, 194, 351
Birnbaum, G. E. 303
Birnie, C. 120
Black, M. C. 380, 389
Blackhart, G. C. 434
Blanch-Hartigan, D. 156
Blascovich, J. 54
Bleakley, A. 283
Name Index

I-2 
Name Index
Blekesaune, M. 420
Bleske, A. L. 318
Bleske-Rechek, A. 231
Blickstein, I. 291
Bloch, L. 171
Blumstein, P. 29, 286, 287, 288, 
298, 396
Bobst, C. 83
Bodenmann, G. 302, 410, 440
Boerner, K. 169
Bohns, V. K. 99, 218
Bolger, N. 218
Bond, C. F., Jr. 330
Boomsma, D. I. 238
Booth, A. 402, 407, 409
Booth-Butterfield, M. 328
Boothroyd, L. G. 101, 290
Bosson. J. K. 26, 28, 91, 388
Bouchard, G. 371
Bowers, J. R. 209, 436
Bowlby, J. 14
Boyes, A. D. 113
Boynton, M. 80
Brackett, M. A 135
Bradbury, T. N. 116, 193, 194, 
195, 390, 402, 403, 405, 406, 410
Bradford, S. A. 161
Bradshaw, C. 277
Bradshaw, S. D. 235
Braithwaite, S. R. 337, 440
Brakefield, T. A. 280
Brassard, A. 303
Bratslavsky, E. 271
Braun, V. 299
Braver, S. L. 423
Brehm, J. W. 100
Brehm, S. S. ix, 100, 116
Brennan, K. A. 58, 94
Brescoll, V. L. 370
Brewer, D. D. 287
Brewer, G. 73, 75, 129, 327
Brewis, A. 83
Bridges, A. J. 292
Britt, S. L. 203, 345
Broady, E. F. 403
Brock, R. L. 218
Brody, L. R. 78, 153, 154
Brody, S. 154, 269
Broemer, P. 210
Broughton, R. 269
Brown, J. L 216
Brownridge, D. A. 387
Brumbaugh, C. C. 102
Brunell, A. B. 127, 158, 300
Brunet, P. M. 237
Bryant, C. M. 26, 377
Buck, A. A. 185, 403, 433 
Buck, D. M. 157
Buckley, K. E. 310, 311, 312
Buhrmester, D. 223
Buhrmester, M. D. 125, 126, 179
Buller, D. B. 327
Burch, R. L. 291
Burdette, M. P. 331, 332, 333
Burger, J. M. 295
Burgoon, J. K. 327, 329, 330, 373
Burleson, B. R. 166, 352, 353, 
Burleson, M. H. 149, 162, 303
Burnette, J. L. 336
Burns, G. L. 87
Burns, L. 295
Bursik, K. 120
Busby, D. M. 282, 294, 358
Buss, A. H. 233
Buss, D. M. 34, 35, 36, 69, 81, 
86, 89, 97, 98, 230, 269, 284, 
315, 316, 317, 319, 320, 321, 
322, 323, 326, 344, 346, 383, 
389, 417
Butzer, B. 303
Buunk, A. P. 248, 266, 318
Buunk, B. P. 81, 101, 115, 203, 
316, 318, 334, 431
Byers, E. S. 301
Byrne, D. 42, 43, 53, 68, 91, 93
Cacioppo, J. T. 5, 74, 75, 188, 217, 
238, 240, 242, 243
Caldeira, V. 386
Call, V. 272
Callaghan, D. E. 54
Cameron, J. J. 32, 142, 329
Campbell, A. 60, 
Campbell, J. 390
Campbell, K. 398
Campbell, L. 267, 285, 290, 303
Campbell, W. K. 127, 447
Canary, D. J. 22, 202, 268, 340, 
347, 349, 354, 361, 435, 436, 437
Canevello, A. 220
Cann, A. 318
Cannon, K. T. 242
Canterberry, M. 154
Cantú, S. M. 82
Capaldi, D. M. 386
Capezza, N. M. 381
Cardaro, D. 254
Carey, B. 60
Carli, L. L. 370
Carlsmith, K. M. 334
Carlson, E. N. 136
Carnegie, D. 221
Carnelley, K. B. 169, 268, 420
Carney, D. R. 106, 374
Carothers, B. J. 21, 22, 377
Carrère, S. 168, 204
Carroll, J. S. 282
Carstensen, L. L. 227
Carter, C. S. 260
Carver, C. S. 123
Castro, F. N. 102
Cate, R. M. 202
Catlett, J. 37
Caughlin, J. P. 159, 195, 404
Cavallo, J. V. 30, 32
Ceglian, C. P. 410
Çelik, P. 309
Chabot, A. M. 56
Chandra, A. 29, 282, 287
Chaplin, W. F. 149
Chartrand, T. L. 124, 152
Cheek, J. M. 233
Chen, D. 150
Chen, E. 423
Chen, G. M. 163
Chen, H. 92, 343
Chen, S. 124, 344, 379
Cheng, C. 24
Cherlin, A. J. 7, 8, 9, 11, 63, 184
Choi, N. 24
Chopik, W. J. 223
Chorost, A. F. 270
Christakis, N. A. 5, 217, 230
Christensen, A. 352, 439, 442
Ciani, A. C. 280
Clark, C. L. 377
Clark, E. M. 436
Clark, M. S. 131, 198, 199, 200, 
204, 207,
Clark, R. D., III 48, 49
Clarkwest, A. 410
Claxton, A. 27
Clayton, R. B. 13
Cleere, C. 306
Clement, S. 278
Cleveland, H. H. 24
Clore, G. L. 68
Coan, J. A. 4
Cobb, R. A. 120
Cobb, R. J. 19, 216
Cohen, J. A. 10
Cohen, S. 351, 419
Cohn, D. 370, 395
Cohn, E. S. 304
Collins, N. L. 120, 161, 218, 219, 
267, 313
Collins, T. J. 413
Collins, W. A. 342
Coltrane, S. 203
Confer, J. C. 33
Conley, J. J. 28
Conley, T. D. 49, 112, 277
Connelly, B. S. 134
Conner, T. S. 42
Coontz, S. 246, 247, 397
Cooper, M. 90
Cooper, M. L. 65, 188
Cope, V. 91
Cornelius, T. L. 361
Costa, P. T., Jr. 27, 28

Name Index I-3
Côté, S. 379
Cottrell, C. A. 310
Couch, L. L. 332
Coughlin, P. 11
Coulter, K. 435
Cowan, G. 388
Coyne, J. C. 6
Coyne, S. M. 386
Craighill, P. M. 278
Crane, R. D. 150
Crocker, J. 220
Crosier, B. S. 13
Cross, S. E. 232, 354
Crown, L. 305
Croy, I. 150
Cruz, J. 8, 395
Cui, M. 19, 400
Cunningham, G. B. 278
Cunningham, M. R. 76, 77, 81, 
90, 154, 195, 346
Cupach, W. R. 23, 37, 345
Cuperman, R. 93
Curran, M. A. 432
Curtis, R. C. 91, 123
Custer, L. 416
Cutrona, C. E. 243, 409
Daigen, V. 167
Dailey, R. M. 415
Dainton, M. 196, 325
Daly, J. A. 132
Daneback, K. 292
Daniels, K. 12
Darley, J. M. 108
Das, A. 293
Davies, A. P. C. 322
Davila, J. 19, 217, 267
Davis, D. 267, 303
Davis, K. C. 298
Davis, K. E. 224, 389
Davis, S. N. 184
Dean, G. O. 90
de Araújo Lopes, F. 102
De Bro, S. C. 376
Debrot, A. 149, 220
Deci, E. L. 299
Deckman, T. 312
de Graaf, H. 282
de Groot, J. H. B. 150
DeGue, S. 304, 305
de Jong, D. C. 94, 99
de Jonge, C. R. 163
de Jong Gierveld, J. 237
DeLamater, J. 285
Delaney, H. J. 100
De La Ronde, C. 127, 137
Delevi, R. 413
Della Sala, S. 117
DelPriore, D. J. 315
DeMaris, A 378, 398, 410
Denissen, J. J. A. 30
Denrell, J. 106
Denton, W. H. 352, 353
DePaulo, B. M. 9, 10, 327, 328, 
329, 330
de Ridder, D. T. D. 433
Derlega, V. J. 157
Dermer, M. 252
Desmarais, S. L. 383
Desmond, M. 423
DeSteno, D. A. 315, 317, 321
Deters, F. G. 241
de Varela, Y. 444
De Vogli, R. 351
Dew, J. 196, 437
Dewsbury, D. A. 271
Diamond, L. M. 60, 251, 285
Dickenson, J. A. 251
Dickerson, S. S. 313
Dickson, N. 280
Diehl, M. 210
Dijkstra, P. 316, 318
DiLillo, D. 304, 305
Dillow, M. R. 161
Dindia, K. 22, 157, 165, 325
Dion, K. K. 75
DiPaola, B. M. 354
Ditzen, B. 261
Dixson, B. J. 78, 80
Donaghue, N. 203
Donis, E. 26, 29
D’Onofrio, B. M. 423
Donovan-Kicken, E. 193
Dooley, T. 11
Dosmukhambetova, D. 128
Doss, B. D. 196, 442, 446
Doumas, D. M. 386
Downs, A. C. 76
Drigotas, S. M. 208
Driscoll, R. 100
Duck, S. 414
Dufner, M. 128
Duggan, M. 12, 74
Dunbar, N. E. 373
Dunbar, R. I. M. 224
Dunn, M. J. 97
Duntley, J. D. 383, 389
Durante, K. M. 13, 83
Durham, W. T. 159
Dutton, D. G. 253, 386
Dweck, C. 349
Dworkin, S. L. 300
Eagly, A. H. 23, 36, 98, 269
Eaker, E. D. 360
Eastwick, P. W. 35, 56, 69, 84, 85, 
87, 90, 94, 101, 221, 248, 293, 
318, 417
Ebbesen, E. B. 72
Ebel-Lam, A. P. 296
Eberhart, N. K. 5
Ebesu Hubbard, A. S. 336
Edlund, J. E. 89, 323
Edwards, G. L. 297
Edwards, K. M. 178, 386, 391
Ehrenberg, M. 417
Eidelson, R. J. 118, 192, 360
Eisele, H. 26
Eisenberg, A. R. 342
Eisenberger, N. I. 312
Ekman, P. 145, 254
Elaad, E. 330
Eldridge, K. A. 168, 352
Elfenbein, H. A. 145
Elizur, Y. 160
Elliot, A. J. 80, 81
Elliott, D. B. 194, 395, 420
Elliott, S. 346
Ellis, A. 178, 438
Ellis, B. J. 178
Ellsworth, P. C. 98
Ellyson, S. L. 146
Elphinston, R. A. 326
Else-Quest, N. M. 283
El-Sheikh, M. 344
Elwert, F. 5
Emerson, T. 89
Emery, R. E. 390, 417, 418, 
421, 425
Emmers-Sommer, T. M. 
22, 268
Enke, A. 90
Epley, N. 136, 188, 228
Epstein, N. 118, 360, 441
Erbert, L. A. 341, 342
Erchull, M. J. 182
Erikson, E. 224
Erol, R. Y. 32
Essayli, J. H. 335
Etcheverry, P. E. 112, 207, 217
Exline, J. J. 336
Fabricius, W. V. 423
Fagley, N. S. 437
Fagundes, C. P. 60
Falbo, T. 375, 376, 377
Fallon, B. J. 203
Faries, M. D. 78
Farina, A. 87
Farley, S. D. 151, 373
Farris, C. 154, 302
Farvid, P. 299
Fast, N. J. 371
Feeney, B. C. 120, 216, 219, 447
Feeney, J. A. 267, 303, 312, 333,
Fehr, B. 190, 214, 215, 225, 229, 
230, 252, 257, 262, 263, 266, 
267, 269, 274, 342

I-4 
Name Index
Fein, E. 438
Feingold, A. 87
Feldman, R. 260
Feldman, R. S. 329
Felmlee, D. H. 95, 102, 222
Fenigstein, A. 287, 
Fergusson, D. M. 381
Ferrara, M. H. 336
Festinger, L. 42, 69, 70
Figueredo, A. J. 96
Finch, E. 389
Fincham, F. D. 115, 189, 335, 
336, 337, 341, 347, 360, 400, 
432, 440
Fine, M. A. 416
Fingerhut, A. W. 29, 404
Fingerman, K. L. 4, 227
Fink, B. 77, 83, 147
Finkel, E. J. 43, 56, 73, 74, 124, 
318, 348, 354, 384, 385, 387, 
395, 433
Finkenauer, C. 134, 159
Firestone, R. W. 37
Fish, J. N. 303
Fisher, H. 251, 270
Fisher, M. L. 78
Fisher, T. D. 57, 287, 293, 299
Fiske, S. T. 46, 105
Fitch, C. A. 367, 398, 409
Fitzsimons, G. M. 3, 124, 431
Fleischmann, A. A. 325
Fletcher, G. J. O. 3, 101, 113
Floyd, F. J. 160
Floyd, K. 149, 162, 166, 261
Flynn, F. J. 218
Foa, U. G. 370
Ford, M. B. 313
Forest, A. L. 32, 241
Forhan, S. 282
Forrest, J. A. 329
Forsyth, D. R. 113
Foster, C. A. 447
Foster, J. D. 127, 128, 322, 333
Fournier, B. 387
Fowers, B. J. 416
Fowler, J. H. 217
Fowler, K. A. 387
Fox, A. B. 162
Fox, J. 13, 320
Fraley, R. C. 17, 18, 19, 
224, 268
Francesconi, M. 86
Franiuk, R. 119, 120
Frank, M. G. 151, 329
Frederick, D. A. 79, 101
Frei, J. R. 215
French, J. R. P., Jr. 368
Frias-Navarro, D. 281
Friesen, M. D. 336
Frieze, I. H. 57, 260, 261, 374, 
388, 389
Frost, D. M. 416
Fry, R. 395
Frye, N. E. 117
Fugère, M. A. 281
Fuglestad, P. T. 132
Fuhrman, R. W. 214, 215, 230
Funder, D. C. 134
Fung, H. H. 227
Furman, W. 223, 391
Furnham, A. 77, 78
Furr, R. M. 136
Gable, S. L. 186, 188, 189, 190, 
215, 216, 219
Gagné, F. M. 112
Gaines, S. O., Jr. 118
Galinha, I. C. 5
Galinsky, A. D. 372
Galinsky, A. M. 284
Gallrein, A. B. 136
Gallup, G. G., Jr. 33, 79, 151
Galperin, A. 269, 277, 302, 319
Galupo, M. P. 232
Gangestad, S. W. 34, 81, 83, 97, 
133, 288, 289
Ganong, L. H. 117, 121
Garcia, J. R. 277, 296
Garcia, L. T. 302
Gardner, S. 410
Gardner, W. L. 378
Garris, C. P. 106
Garver-Apgar, C. E. 291
Gassanov, M. A. 303
Gatzeva, M. 10
Gaulin, S. J. C. 79
Gaunt, R. 97
Gayle, B. M. 352
Geary, D. C. 33, 34
Gebauer, J. E. 92
Geers, A. L. 195, 196, 447
Gephart, J. M. 439
Gere, J. 190, 207
Gerressu, M. 293
Gervais, S. J. 59
Giancola, P. R. 296
Gibbs, L. 8
Gidycz, C. A. 305, 306
Gigerenzer, G. 153
Gildersleeve, K. A. 78, 82, 83, 
84, 291
Gill, M. J. 110, 134
Gillath, O. 107, 329, 413
Gilovich, T. 114
Girme, Y. U. 218, 436
Givertz, M. 238
Gladue, B. A. 100
Glass, S. P. 434
Glass, T. A. 5
Glasser, C. L. 84
Glenn, N. D. 184, 409
Godbout, N. 386
Goel, S. 94
Goetz, A. T. 291
Goldberg, A. E. 280
Golden, S. D. 386, 388
Goldhammer, D. L. 294
Goldman, R. N. 38
Gollwitzer, M. 334
Gonsalkorale, K. 314
Gonzaga, G. C. 92, 96, 
254, 258
Goodfriend, W. 179
Goodwin, R. 118
Goodwin, S. A. 258, 259
Gordon, A. K. 328
Gordon, A. M. 344
Gordon, C. L. 437
Gore, J. S. 354
Gormley, B. 386
Gorrese, A. 30
Gosling, S. D. 47
Gosnell, C. L. 188
Gott, M. 303
Gottman, J. M. 45, 141, 142, 
167, 168, 171, 172, 185, 186, 
187, 204, 351, 354, 356, 358, 
360, 406, 410, 411, 439
Gouin, J. 5, 261, 351
Gover, A. R. 387
Graber, E. C. 185
Grace, A. J. 278, 354
Graczyk, P. A. 224
Graham, A. M. 423
Graham, J. M. 261, 264
Gray, J. 20, 438
Graziano, W. G. 343
Green, B. L. 26
Green, M. C. 324
Greenberg, L. S. 38, 416
Greenfield, P. M. 11
Greenman, P. S. 443
Greenstein, T. N. 184
Greiling, H. 34, 322
Greitemeyer, T. 81, 89
Grello, C. M. 294
Grieve, R. 330
Griffitt, W. 92
Griskevicius, V. 13
Gross, A. M. 306
Gross, P. H. 108
Grote, N. K. 57, 199, 200, 204, 
260, 261
Grov, C. 292
Guastella, A. J. 261
Guéguen, N. 49, 82, 83, 98

Name Index I-5
Guerrero, L. K. 201, 315, 316, 
318, 325
Guilmoto, C. Z. 14
Guinote, A. 371
Gunnery, S. D. 146
Gupta, U. 270
Gurman, A. S. 442
Gute, G. 55, 287
Guthrie, J. 328
Guttentag, M. 14
Guttmacher Institute 282, 283, 
284, 299
Ha, T. 86
Hadden, B. W. 19, 207
Haden, S. C. 334
Haeffel, G. J. 242
Hafen, C. A. 96
Häfner, M. 209, 433
Hagen, E. H. 384
Halatsis, P. 230
Hald, G. M. 49
Halevy, R. 327
Halford, W. K. 116, 120, 360, 
422, 440
Hall, E. T. 149
Hall, J. A. 134, 135, 153, 154, 155, 
156, 214, 222, 269, 374
Hall, J. K. 72
Halpern, C. T. 277
Halpern-Meekin, S. 193, 400, 415
Hambaugh, J. 162, 164
Hamermesh, D. 76
Hamilton, B. E. 7
Hammen, C. L. 5
Hampel, A. D. 205, 331
Hampson, E. 155
Hancock, J. T. 72
Hannon, P. A. 337
Hansford, S. L. 231
Hanson, T. L. 421
Harasymchuk, C. 190, 274, 342
Harden, K. P. 282
Hardie, J. H. 62
Harkless, L. E. 416
Harknett, K. 13
Hartnett, J. L. 417
Harris, C. R. 84
Harris, M. J. 106
Harvey, J. H. 416
Harwood, J. 234, 237
Haselton, M. G. 78, 82, 83, 
101, 254, 258, 269, 290, 302, 
319, 327
Haslam, N. 313
Hassebrauck, M. 82
Hatfield, E. 42, 48, 49, 200, 202, 
246, 253, 256, 257, 266
Hawkins, A. J. 440
Hawkins, L. B. 131
Hawkley, L. C. 5, 238, 240, 242
Haydon, A. A. 268, 282
Haydon, K. C. 268, 282
Hayes, J. 330
Haynes, O. M. 155
Hazan, C. 15, 224
Heaton, T. B. 410
Heaven, P. C. L. 342
Hebl, M. R. 143
Hecht, M. L. 274
Hefner, V. 9, 119
Hehman, E. 107
Heider, F. 91
Heilman, M. E. 27
Heiman, J. R. 298, 299
Hellmuth, J. C. 386, 387
Helms, H. M. 25, 97
Henderson, C. E. 424
Henderson, L. 236
Henderson, M. 221, 222
Hendrick, C. 260, 264
Hendrick, S. S. 56, 161, 166, 215, 
260, 264
Hendrie, C. A. 129, 327
Henline, B. H. 292
Henly, A. S. 142
Henrich, J. 47
Hepper, E. G. 268
Herbenick, D. 285, 298
Herbst, K. C. 96
Herek, G. M. 29, 280, 404
Herold, A. L. 374
Hertenstein, M. J. 61, 145, 149
Herz, R. S. 80
Hess, N. H. 384
Hetherington, E. M. 420
Heyman, R. E. 188
Hill, A. 333
Hill, C. A. 265
Hill, P. L. 28, 437
Hill, R. 182, 366
Hill, S. E. 318
Himelfarb, I. 278, 434
Hinchliff, S. 303
Hines, D. A. 305
Hitsch, G. J. 80, 88, 92, 97, 129
Hodges, S. D. 44, 136
Hogerbrugge, M. J. A. 400
Høgh-Olesen, H. 49
Hohmann-Marriott, B. E. 97, 419
Hojjat, M. 334, 337, 435
Holland, R. W. 149
Holleran, S. E. 164
Holley, S. R. 344, 352
Holloway, R. A. 221
Holman, T. B. 18, 357, 358
Holmberg, D. 302
Holmes, J. G. 30, 31, 112, 167, 204
Holtgraves, T. 163
Holtzman, N. S. 128
Holtzworth-Munroe, A. 155, 387
Honeycutt, J. M. 41
Hopwood, C. J. 99
Horan, S. M. 328, 447
Horstman, J. 279
Horton, R. S. 89, 91, 96
Hostetler, A. J. 397
Hostetter, A. B. 147
Houts, R. M. 344, 361
Howard, E. S. 186, 379
Howes, C. 223
Howland, M. 36, 354
Hoyt, T. 304
Hrapczynski, K. M. 116
Hsueh, A. C. 10
Huang, P. M. 9
Hughes, S. M. 79
Hugill, N. 83
Hui, C. M. 395, 433
Huibregtse, B. M. 282
Human, L. J. 106, 135
Humbad, M. N. 59
Hunt, M. M. 247
Hunter, S. 160
Huston, S. J. 345
Huston, T. L. 270, 344, 365, 404, 
405, 406
Hwang, H. S. 144, 145, 147, 149
Hyde, J. S. 21, 22, 23, 277
Iacovelli, A. M. 164
Ickes, W. 25, 44, 65, 87, 93, 134, 
136, 234
Iemmola, F. 280
IJzerman, H. 209, 433
Imhof, M. 148
Impett, E. A. 190, 282, 283, 286, 
291, 297, 300, 303, 306, 369
Inzlicht, M. 80
Ireland, M. E. 164
Italie, L. 228
Ivcevic, Z. 241
Izhaki-Costi, O. 134 
Jackson, T. 266
Jacobson, N. S. 200, 441
Jacques-Tiura, A. J. 302
Jalovaara, M. 410
Jarnecke, A. M. 19
Jarry, J. L 128
Jarvis, B. 314
Jarvis, M. O. 357
Jasien´ska, G. 81
Jemmott, J. B. 283
Jensen-Campbell, L. A. 102, 
343, 386
Jiang, L. C. 72

I-6 
Name Index
Jöchle, W. 82
Johnson, B. T. 297 
Johnson, C. 164
Johnson, K. L. 148
Johnson, M. D. 41, 62, 409
Johnson, M. P. 208, 381, 382, 388
Johnson, S. M. 442, 443, 444
Johnson, V. F. 301
Jokela, M. 81
Jonason, P. K. 34, 230, 269, 277, 
322, 439
Jones, B. C. 83
Jones, D. 77, 81
Jones, D. N. 293, 305
Jones, E. E. 129
Jones, J. M. 434
Jones, J. T. 69, 92
Jones, W. H. 2, 331, 332, 333
Jong, E. 271
Jordan, A. H. 297
Jose, A. 10
Joyner, K. 29
Joyner, L. 298
Julius, H. 228
Jungeberg, B. J. 84
Kachadourian, L. K. 336
Kaestle, C. E. 277
Kafetsios, K. 161, 267
Kaighobadi, F. 290, 383
Kalbfleisch, P. J. 374
Kammrath, L. K. 111, 332, 
349, 437
Kamp Dush, C. M. 360
Kanazawa, S. 35
Kandler, C. 27, 28
Kane, H. S. 218
Kantor, L. M. 238
Kaplan, R. M. 9
Kaplar, M. E. 328
Karakurt, G. 72
Karney, B. R 49, 62, 112, 113, 116, 
117, 122, 125, 195, 263, 402, 
403, 405, 406, 409, 410, 426, 431
Karraker, A. 285
Karremans, J. C. 78, 336, 433, 435
Kashdan, T. B. 237
Kashy, D. A. 217, 267, 328, 329
Kasser, T. 11
Katz, J. 304
Kavanagh, P. S. 89
Kay, A. C. 3, 431
Kayser, K. 405
Kellas, J. K. 173, 415, 416
Kellerman, J. 146
Kelley, D. K. 335
Kelley, H. H. 114, 176, 179, 197, 
350, 366
Kelly, E. L. 28, 58
Kelmer, G. 72, 73
Keltner, D. 254, 371, 372
Kennedy, K. A. 347
Kenny, D. A. 64, 134
Kenrick, D. T. 6, 26, 34, 217
Kephart, W. 246
Kern, M. L. 4
Kerr, P. 113
Keysar, B. 142
Khaleque, A. 18
Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K. 352, 410
Kiefer, A. K. 300
Kifer, Y. 371
Kille, D. R. 111
Kilpatrick, S. D. 134
Kim, H. S. 219
Kim, Y. 76, 351
Kimmel, A. J. 61
King, B. M. 297
King, K. B. 6
Kirby, D. B. 283, 284
Kite, M. E. 24
Kleinke, C. L. 90, 146
Kline, S. L. 222, 266
Kloda, I. 360 360
Klohnen, E. C. 96
Klusmann, D. 272, 293, 294
Kluwer, E. S. 347
Knäuper, B. 295
Knee, C. R. 118, 119, 120
Knobloch, L. K. 159, 191, 
192, 193
Knoester, C. 402
Knöfler, T. 148
Knudson-Martin, C. 372
Kobak, R. 224
Koch, E. J. 30
Koch, S. C. 146
Koenig, B. L. 230
Koeppel, L. B. 154
Kogan, A. 199
Kohn, J. L. 5
Konrad, A. M. 26
Konrath, S. H. 11
Koppensteiner, M. 147
Kosinski, M. 130
Kossinets, G. 71
Kouzakova, M. 153
Kowalski, R. M. 234
Kozak, G. 98
Krahé, B. 304
Krasnova, H. 241, 320
Kronick, R. G. 9
Kropp, J. P. 155
Kross, E. 241
Kruger, D. J. 101, 286, 294, 
316, 366
Kruger, J. 114, 163
Kruger, M. L 145
Kubacka, K. E. 437
Kuhle, B. X. 323, 324
Kuijer, R. G. 205
Kunkel, A. 328
Kunkel, D. 299
Kunstman, J. W. 372
Kunz, P. R. 180
Kurdek, L. A. 29, 193, 194, 207, 
228, 396
Kurzban, R. 86
Kuster, F. 32
Kuyper, L. 62
LaBrie, J. W. 294, 296
Lachance-Grzela, M. 371
Lackenbauer, S. D. 125
La Guardia, J. 336
Lakey, B. 218, 219
Lakey, S. 340, 347, 349, 361
Lakin, J. L. 152
Lam, A. G. 376
Lam, C. B. 371
Lambert, N. M. 216, 292, 432
Lamidi, E. 232
Lammers, J. 372
Lamy, L. 98
Landers, A. 248
Lang, F. R. 227
Lange, B. P. 83
Langeslag, S. J. E. 262
Langhinrichsen-Rohling, J. 384
Långström, N. 280
Lannin, D. G. 168
Lansford, J. E. 423
Larose, S. 242
Larrick, R. P. 386
Larson, C. M. 291
Larson, R. W. 214, 224
Lassek, W. D. 79
Lauer, J. C. 260, 273
Lauer, R. H. 260, 273, 447
Laumann, E. O. 293
Laurel-Seller, E. 84
Laurenceau, J. 156, 159
Laursen, B. 342
Lavee, Y. 2
Lavner, J. A. 193, 195, 405, 
406, 410
Lawler-Row, K. A. 337
Lawrence, E. 218, 343, 381, 390
Layous, K. 437
Le, B. M. 72, 185, 197, 199, 
207, 208
Leaper, C. 164
Leary, M. R. 4, 5, 30, 32, 42, 131, 
132, 205, 234, 236, 237, 308, 
309, 310, 311, 312, 314, 331
Lease, S. H. 26
Lebow, J. L. 445
Leder, S. 312
Ledermann, T. 64
Lee, J. A. 263, 264

Name Index I-7
Lee, K. 334
Lee, L. 88
Legate, N. 160
Lehmann, P. 388
Lehmiller, J. J. 217, 230, 404
Lehnart, J. 28
Lemay, E. P. 75, 117, 219, 242, 
314, 328, 447
Lennon, C. A. 366, 367
Lennon, J. 213
Lenton, A. P. 86, 230 
Leo, J. L. 430
Leonardelli, G. J. 313
Leone, C. 131, 132
Lepore, S. J. 416
Leslie, L. A. 100, 411
Letzring, T. D. 128, 134
Levenson, R. W. 167, 171, 186, 
187, 268, 344, 406
Lever, J. 299
Levine, T. R. 329, 330, 336
Levinger, A. C. 407
Levinger, G. 204, 401, 407 
Levitt, M. J. 37, 308
Lewis, K. 60
Lewis, M. A. 277, 295, 296, 297
Lewis, T. 169
Li, J. 32
Li, N. P. 34, 35, 83, 85, 86, 100, 
101, 102, 269, 439
Li, Y. 423, 425
Liberman, V. 354
Lick, D. J. 404
Liebold, J. M. 388
Liefbroer, A. C. 9
Lilgendahl, J. P. 416
Lin, A. J. 283, 297
Lin, Y. W. 207
Lindgren, K. P. 302
Linville, P. 295
Lipinski-Harten, M. 164
Lippa, R. A. 24, 29, 102, 293
Lishner, D. A. 321
Little, A. C. 77, 78, 88
Liu, B. S. 238
Liu, J. 421
Lloyd, S. A. 342, 390
Lobmaier, J. S. 83
Löckenhoff, C. E. 227
Loewenstein, G. 296
Logan, J. M. 216
Lohr, J. M. 348
Lois, D. 96
Long, E. C. J. 80, 136
Longstreth, M. 344
Lopes, J. 102, 184
Lopez, F. G. 386
Lopez, M. H. 160
Lorber, M. F. 387
Lorenzo, G. L. 135
Loving, T. J. 112, 351
Lucas, A. 62
Lucas, R. E. 180, 184, 419
Luchies, L. B. 117, 337, 434
Luhmann, M. 196
Luis, S. 84
Luke, M. A. 267
Lummaa, V. 82, 83
Luo, S. 57, 86, 94, 96, 113, 
134, 431
Luo, Y. 238
Luong, G. 223
Lutfey, K. E. 298
Lutz-Zois, C. J. 96
Luxen, M. F. 81
Lydon, J. E. 85, 112, 207, 209, 432
Lykken, D. T. 410
Lyndon, A. 389
Lyngstad, T. H. 409, 410
Lynn, M. 87
Lynn, S. J. 306
Lyons, P. M. 76
Lyubomirsky, S. 437
Määttä, K. 155, 156, 374
MacDonald, G. 30, 32, 344
MacDonald, K. 60
MacDonald, T. K. 111, 296
MacDonald, T. M. 60
Macdowall, W. 305
MacNeil, S. 301
Maddox, A. M. 292
Madey, S. F. 100
Magdol, L. 398, 409
Mahoney, A. R. 372
Maisel, N. C. 219, 220, 402, 404
Maisto, S. A. 297, 376
Major, B. 87
Malle, B. F. 114
Malouff, J. M. 27, 28, 51, 435
Maltby, J. 336
Mancini, A. D. 420
Maner, J. K. 83, 259, 314, 325, 
372, 432
Mania, E. W. 336
Maniaci, M. R. 73, 263
Mannes, A. E. 80
Manning, J. E. 370
Manning, W. D. 7, 10, 295
Manstead, A. S. R. 128
Manusov, V. 169, 416
March, E. 57
Marcus, D. K. 76
Margolin, G. 441
Markey, C. N. 99, 302
Markey, P. M. 99
Markman, H. J. 141, 168, 171, 
172, 335, 361, 362, 440
Marks, M. J. 277
Marmo, J. 436
Marquardt, E. 395, 397, 407, 409
Marshall, A. D. 155
Marshall, L. L. 391
Marshall, T. C. 25, 26, 229, 
230, 418
Marshuetz, C. 75
Martin, R. 28
Martins, Y. 80
Martz, J. M. 179, 
Masi, C. M. 243
Mason, A. E. 417, 420
Mason, M. F. 146
Massar, K. 318
Mast, M. S. 134
Master, S. L. 5
Masters, W. H. 301
Mathes, E. W. 98
Matsumoto, D. 144, 145, 
147, 149
Mayer, J. D. 135
Mayhew, A. 283
McAdams, D. P. 416
McAllister, S. 439
McAndrew, F. T. 163
McCabe, M. P. 294
McClure, M. J. 85, 218
McConnell, A. R. 388
McCornack, S. A. 330
McCrae, R. R. 27, 28
McCullough, M. E. 127, 334, 
335, 336
McDermott, R. 400
McEwan, T. E. 389
McGonagle, K. A. 185, 342
McHugh, M. C. 162, 164
McKibbin, W. F. 383
McKinnish, T. G. 397, 407
McLaren, R. M. 195
McNulty, J. K. 115, 122, 299, 337, 
360, 386, 387
McPherson, M. 232
Mealey, L. 77
Meehan, J. C. 387
Mehl, M. R. 42, 45, 57, 161, 
164, 241
Meier, A. 423, 424
Meier, A. M. 420
Meier, B. P. 336
Mellor, D. 237
Melton, E. N. 278
Meltzer, A. L. 78, 86, 132
Mendelsohn, G. A. 98, 162
Merali, N. 247, 266
Mercer, C. H. 29
Merino, S. M. 232, 278
Mescher, K. 204, 305
Meston, C. M. 284
Metts, S. 23, 74, 117, 269, 331
Meuwly, N. 216
Meyer, M. 83

I-8 
Name Index
Michalski, R. L. 35, 323
Mickelson, K. D. 17
Mikulincer, M. 15, 16, 59, 120, 
161, 267, 303, 313, 343
Milardo, R. M. 226
Miles, L. K. 221
Miller, A. J. 371
Miller, G. E. 423
Miller, J. B. 120
Miller, K. 91, 123
Miller, L. C. 158, 161
Miller, M. A. 415
Miller, O. S. 86
Miller, P. J. E. 25, 215
Miller, R. S. 4, 12, 38, 46, 76, 114, 
129, 132, 179, 185, 195, 196, 
207, 233, 234, 236, 241, 308, 
310, 320, 331, 340, 431
Miller, S. L. 83, 325, 432
Miller, W. B. 18
Miller-Ott, A. E. 12
Mills, J. R. 198, 199
Mills, R. D. 388
Miner, E. J. 383
Minieri, A. 294
Mischkowski, D. 348
Misra, T. A. 333
Mitchell, A. E. 159
Mitchell, C. 57
Mitchell, J. W. 287
Mitchell, K. 197, 294
Mitchell, S. A. 271, 272
Mitnick, D. M. 354
Mitura, K. 36, 99
Moeller, S. K. 375
Mojaverian, T. 219
Mongeau, P. A. 230
Montesi, J. L. 301
Montoya, R. M. 88, 89, 91, 96
Moore, M. M. 154
Moore, T. M. 388
Moreland, R. L. 71
Moreno, J. L. 42
Morgan, E. M. 299
Morgentaler, A. 276
Morris, M. L. 232
Morrison, E. L. 84
Morrow, G. D. 265
Morry, M. M. 94, 232
Moss-Racusin, C. A. 130
Muehlenhard, C. L. 23, 129, 327
Muise, A. 286, 300, 306, 320
Mundy, L. 11, 397
Murray, S. L. 30, 31, 32, 113, 197
Murstein, B. I. 95
Muscanell, N. L. 13, 320
Musick, K. 423, 423
Mustonen, U. 400, 409
Myers, D. G. 70, 270, 280, 404
Myers, S. A. 253
Myhr, L. 304
Nagy, G. F. 88
Neal, A. M. 117, 118, 219
Neff, L. A. 112, 113, 125, 185, 
195, 196, 263, 403, 431, 
433, 447
Negash, S. 292, 434
Neighbors, C. 386
Nelson, D. 42, 53, 93
Nelson, L. D. 84
Nelson, S. K. 196
Nestler, S. 106
Newall, N. E. 243
Newcomb, T. M. 91
Newman, M. L. 320
Newport, F. 278, 371, 434
Nezlek, J. B. 5, 129, 130, 131, 267
Niehuis, S. 196, 406
Nietert, P. J. 420
Noftle, E. E. 128
Noirot, M. 120
Noller, P. 153-155, 303, 360
North, R. J. 216
Norton, M. I. 72, 73
Notarius, C. I. 349
Oakman, J. 234
O’Connor, J. J. M. 151
Ogolsky, B. G. 209, 436
O’Grady, M. A. 128
Oishi, S. 11, 145, 398
Okimoto, T. G. 370
Olatunji, B. O. 348
Olderbak, S. G. 305
O’Leary, K. D. 273
Olivola, C. Y. 76, 106
Olmstead, S. B. 292
Olson, I. R. 75
Oncale, R. M. 297
Ones, D. S. 134
Orbuch, T. L. 45, 407, 439
Oriña, M. M. 223, 371
Orth, U. 28, 32
Osterhout, R. E. 115
Ostovich, J. M. 290
O’Sullivan, L. F. 296
Oswald, D. L. 304, 436
Overall, N. C. 18, 207, 268, 343, 
351, 354, 356, 433, 434
Owen, J. 230
Owen, P. R. 84
Padgett, P. M. 295
Paik, A. 10, 282, 409
Palomares, N. A. 164
Pansera, C. 336
Papp, L. M. 320, 344, 345
Park, L. E. 72, 148
Parker, A. M. 76
Parker, K. 27, 203, 371
Parks, M. R. 330
Parks-Leduc, L. 131
Parks-Stamm, E. J. 26
Parmley, M. 156
Parsons, J. T. 303
Pascoal, P. M. 300
Patterson, M. L. 144, 153
Pauley, P. M. 162
Payne, J. W. 81
Pazda, A. D. 81
Pearce, A. R. 102
Pearce, Z. J. 116, 120
Pedersen, W. C. 322
Peer, E. 335
Peetz, J. 332, 437
Peipert, J. F. 283
Pelham, B. W. 69, 126, 230
Pennebaker, J. W. 59, 100
Peplau, L. A. 29, 287, 365, 369, 
375, 376
Perilloux, C. 266, 306, 417
Perilloux, H. K. 81
Perlman, D. ix, 185
Perrett, D. 82
Perry, S. L. 94
Peter, J. 163
Peterson, D. R. 344, 345, 346, 
359, 360
Peterson, Z. D. 23
Petronio, S. 159, 195
Pettijohn, T. F., II 84
Petty, K. N. 118, 119, 120
Pew Research Center 7, 11, 204, 
278, 279, 281, 370
Phelan, J. E. 36
Picardi, A. 18
Pierce, L. 11
Pillsworth, E. G. 290
Pines, A. M. 326
Pinquart, M. 240
Pipitone, R. N. 151
Pirlott, A. G. 36
Pittman, F. S. 434
Pittman, T. 129
Pitts, M. K. 293
Place, S. S. 135
Plant, E. A. 157
Pollet, T. V. 241
Pollmann, M. M. H. 134
Poore, J. 190
Poortman, A. 9, 402, 409, 410
Porter, S. 329
Powers, S. I. 351
Prager, K. J. 2
Pratto, F. 369

Name Index I-9
Pressman, S. D. 5
Preston, M. 287
Previti, D. 334, 402, 408, 410, 434
Prewitt-Freilino, J. L. 23
Price, M. 13
Priebe, G. 279
Priem, J. S. 219
Prokosch, M. D. 80
Pronin, E. 114, 347
Pronk, T. M. 433
Proost, K. 129, 130
Przybylski, A. K. 13, 164
Puccinelli, N. M. 142, 153
Pulerwitz, J. 297
Purvis, J. A. 158
Puts, D. A 83
Pyszczynski, T. A. 252
Quigley, L. 321
Rafaeli, E. 218
Rahe, R. H. 415
Rainie, L. 241
Ramirez, A., Jr. 72, 208, 210
Rammstedt, B. 96
Randall, A. K. 410
Randolph, M. E. 297
Ranson, J. 59
Rao, S. S. 405
Rapson, R. L. 200, 202, 246
Ratliff, K. A. 11
Raven, B. H. 368, 369
Reber, J. S. 122
Regan, K. V. 380
Regan, P. C. 253, 270, 273, 293
Reiber, C. 277
Reid, P. T. 24
Reinhard, M. 329
Reinhardt, J. P. 218
Reis, H. T. 3, 6, 21, 22, 25, 26, 42, 
43, 49, 73, 87, 88, 94, 99, 158, 
162, 165, 189, 210, 215, 216, 
219, 220, 225, 231, 242, 254, 
262, 263, 431
Reissing, E. D. 282
Rempel, J. K. 215
Ren, P. 184, 398
Renninger, L. A. 154
Renshaw, K. D. 55, 185
Rentfrow, P. J. 166
Rhoades, G. K. 10, 208, 209, 
399, 400
Rhodes, G. 77
Richman, L. S. 314
Rick, S. I. 96
Ridge, R. D. 122
Riek, B. M. 336
Riela, S. 266
Riggio, H. R. 423
Riggle, E. D. B. 280
Rill, L. 241
Risman, B. J. 277
Rizkalla, L. 354
Robbins, M. L. 45, 57
Roberts, L. J. 305
Roberts, S. G. B. 224
Robillard, S. L. 128
Robins, R. W. 114, 145
Robinson, M. D. 32, 336
Robles, T. F. 5, 64
Robnett, R. D. 164
Rodin, J. 326
Rogers, S. J. 57, 398, 399
Rogge, R. D. 263, 440
Rohner, R. P. 18
Roisman, G. I. 29, 268
Rollie, S. S. 414
Romero-Canyas, R. 38, 123
Ronay, R. 128
Rook, K. S. 238
Rosenbaum, J. E. 283,297
Rosenberg, J. 80
Rosenfeld, J. J. 74, 163
Rosenthal, N. L. 224
Rosenthal, R. 121, 122
Ross, M. 111
Ross, M. W. 292
Rossetto, K. R. 72
Rowatt, W. C. 87
Roy, R. R. N. 203
Rubenstein, A. J. 77, 79
Rubin, H. 285
Rubin, L. B. 229, 231
Rubin, Y. S. 315
Rubin, Z. 257, 269
Rudman, L. A. 130, 204, 277, 
300, 305, 306, 370
Ruggieri, R. 30
Ruggles, S. 367, 398, 409
Rule, N. O. 82, 130, 148
Ruppel, E. K. 432
Rusbult, C. E. 114, 137, 176, 
179, 206, 208, 209, 355, 356, 
431, 433
Russell, B. L. 304
Russell, D. W. 239
Russell, V. M. 293
Ryan, R. M. 299
Rycyna, C. C. 335
Rydell, R. J. 317
Sabin, E. P. 227
Sabini, J. 87, 290, 324
Saffrey, C. 417
Sagarin, B. J. 89, 321, 323, 
324, 328
Sagrestano, L. M. 377
Sahlstein, E. M. 72, 73
Salovey, P. 315, 321, 326
Salvatore, J. E. 351
Sanchez, D. T. 300
Sandnabba, N. K. 26
Sanford, K. 354, 358
Santelli, J. S. 283, 297
Saribay, S. A. 106
Saslow, L. R. 130
Sassler, S. 371
Savin-Williams, R. C. 160, 279
Savitsky, K. 142
Saxton, T. K. 151
Sayer, L. C. 421
Sbarra, D. A. 417, 418, 420, 423
Schachner, D. A. 322
Schachter, S. 1, 4, 42, 69
Scharff, D. E. 444
Scheier, M. F. 123
Schick, V. 57, 28
Schlenker, B. R. 113, 114, 
128, 129
Schmidt, L. A. 237
Schmitt, D. P. 17, 34, 36, 48, 86, 
98, 268, 269, 288, 293, 322
Schneider, S. 438
Schneider, W. J. 445
Schoebi, D. 205
Schönbrodt, F. D. 54
Schonlau, M. 223
Schröder-Abé, M. 135
Schul, Y. 134
Schütz, A. 115, 135
Schützwohl, A. 34, 315, 323
Schwartz, P. 29, 286, 287, 288, 
298, 396
Schwarz, S. 82
Schweinle, W. E. 135
Scott-Sheldon, L. A. J. 297
Scott, S. B. 408
Seal, D. W. 290
Secord, P. F. 13, 14
Seder, J. P. 145
Sedikides, C. 115, 177
Seeley, E. A. 378
Seeman, T. E. 216
Segal, M. W. 71
Segal-Caspi, L. 75
Segrin, C. 410
Seidman, G. 86, 186
Seih, Y. 125
Selcuk, E. 18
Seltzer, J. A. 402
Seltzer, L. J. 164
Serota, K. B. 327
Shackelford, T. K. 35, 89, 291, 
293, 318, 322, 323, 383
Shaffer, D. R. 158, 165
Shah, J. 124
Shallcross, A. J. 268

I-10 
Name Index
Shannon, J. B. 389
Shanteau, J. 88
Sharp, E. A. 121
Shaver, P. R. 15, 16, 59, 120, 158, 
161, 215, 224, 267, 303, 313, 
322, 343
Sheets, V. L. 191
Sheldon, K. M. 183, 191, 342, 435
Sheldon, M. S. 65
Shepperd, J. A. 30
Shettel-Neuber, J. 325
Shibazaki, K. 94
Shih, K. Y. 203
Shimizu, M. 237
Shippee, S. K. 129, 327
Shoda, Y. 391
Shorey, R. C. 62
Shrout, P. E. 218
Shu, X. 370
Shulman, J. L. 404
Sibley, C. G. 268
Silk, J. B. 199
Sillars, A. 116
Simmons, C. A. 388
Simmons, T. 194, 395, 402
Simon, R. W. 415
Simons, R. L. 62
Simon-Thomas, E. R. 151
Simpson, J. A. 2, 18, 19, 34, 36, 
37, 117, 136, 137, 215, 246, 288, 
289, 354, 432, 434
Simpson, L. E. 386
Sinclair, H. C. 389
Singh, D. 78, 79, 81, 84
Singh, P. 270
Skowronski, J. J. 417
Slatcher, R. B. 59, 156, 161
Slater, A. 76, 81 
Slater, D. 74, 184
Slater, P. E. 397
Sloan, D. M. 161
Slotter, E. B. 341, 387
Smith, A. 12, 74,
Smith, C. A. 388
Smith, G. 277, 297
Smith, J. L. 134
Smith, J. Z. 280
Smith, T. W. 216, 285, 351
Snider, A. G. 134
Snyder, D. K. 434, 445, 446, 447
Snyder, M. 109, 110, 122, 132, 133
Solano, A. C. 266
Solomon, D. H. 156, 191, 192
Solomon, S. E. 346
Sommer, K. L. 313, 315
Sonenstein, F. L. 284
Soons, J. P. M. 184
Soto, C. J. 27
South, S. C. 19
South, S. J. 11
Southworth, C. 389
Spellman, B. A. 129
Spielmann, S. S. 4, 9, 187, 418
Spitzberg, B. H. 37, 286, 305, 319, 
380, 389
Sprecher, S. 74, 117, 157, 161, 
166, 182, 202, 205, 217, 256, 
257, 262, 263, 267, 269, 270, 
273, 277, 293, 321
Springer, C. A. 331
Srivastava, S 123
Stackert, R. A. 120
Staeheli, J. C. 434
Stafford, L. 72, 196, 202, 208, 
222, 435, 436
Stake, J. E. 26
Stanik, C. E. 26, 98, 204, 378
Stanley, S. M. 10, 173, 432
Starks, T. J. 303
Stephenson, K. R. 300
Steptoe, A. 238
Sternberg, R. J. 248, 249, 250, 
251, 269
Steuber, K. R. 195
Stewart, A. J. 413, 421
Stickney, L. T. 26
Stillwell, A. M. 333, 334
Stinson, D. A. 123, 128
Stith, S. M. 385
Stoeber, J. 196
Strachman, A. 190, 303
Strassberg, D. S. 12
Straus, M. A. 380, 384
Strauss, C. 96
Stroebe, M. S. 420
Strong, G. 191, 271, 274, 435
Stroud, C. B. 403
Strube, M. J. 128
Stuart, G. L. 387
Stucke, T. S. 127
Stukas, A. A., Jr. 122
Stulp, G. 80
Sugar, M. 197, 294
Sullivan, K. T. 216
Suls, J. 28
Summers, R. F. 446
Sun, Y. 423, 425
Sunderani, S. 322
Sundie, J. M. 98, 128
Surra, C. A. 344
Svedin, C. G. 279
Swami, V. 78, 84
Swann, W. B. 28, 110, 122, 125, 
126, 127, 134, 137, 166, 179
Sweeper, S. 422
Tabak, B. A. 336
Tabak, J. A. 148
Tach, L. M. 193, 400
Tackett, S. L. 234, 235
Tafarodi, R. W. 164
Tafoya, M. A. 286, 319
Takahashi, H. 323
Tan, R. 161
Tanha, M. 383, 391
Tausczik, Y. R. 59
Tavris, C. 172, 348
Taylor, D. A. 157
Taylor, L. S. 88
Taylor, M. G. 360
Taylor, S. E. 105
Teachman, J. 410
Tellegen, A. 33
Ten Brinke, L. 329
Tenney, E. R. 93, 129
Terhell, E. L. 421
Theiss, J. A. 156, 192
Thibaut, J. W. 176, 366
Thomas, R. J. 74, 151, 163, 402
Thompson, S. C. 114
Thornhill, R. 80, 82
Thornton, A. 10, 365
Tice, D. M. 172, 348
Tidwell, N. D. 43, 51, 84, 94, 293
Timmerman, L. 325
Todorov, A. 68, 76, 85, 106
Tokunaga, R. S. 320
Toller, P. 169
Tomlinson, J. M. 60, 113
Totenhagen, C. J. 37, 209, 402, 432
Tracy, J. L. 80, 82, 145
Trail, T. E. 62, 409
Tran, S. 23, 101, 112
Troy, A. B. 94
Tsai, F. 242
Tsapelas, I. 34, 190, 274, 291
Tskhay, K. O. 130
Tucker, J. S. 161, 270
Tunney, R. J. 80
Turley, R. N. L. 423
Twenge, J. M. 11, 27, 127, 128, 
277, 282, 313, 377, 398
Tyler, J. M. 328
Ueno, K. 232
Uleman, J. S. 106
Umberson, D. 346
Urquia, M. L. 10
U. S. Census Bureau 7, 11, 395
Uusiautti, S. 155, 156, 374
Uysal, A. 159
Vaaler, M. L. 409
Valentova, J. 148
Valkenburg, P. M. 163
Vandello, J. A. 26, 328

Name Index I-11
van den Boom, D. C. 18
VanderDrift, L. E. 222, 230, 376
VanderLaan, D. P. 280
van der Linden, D. 28
Van Dongen, S. 81, 97
Vangelisti, A. L. 159, 205, 308, 331
Vanhalst, J. 242
Van Hook, J. 94
Van Lange, P. A. M. 176
Vannier, S. A. 301
van Steenbergen, H. 258
van Straaten, I. 88
VanYperen, N. W. 203
Van Zalk, M. H. W. 163
Vasey, P. L. 280
Vazire, S. 135, 136
Veitch, R. 92
Vélez-Blasini, C. J. 296
Veniegas, R. C. 365
Vennum, A. 415
Verhofstadt, L. L. L. 173, 216, 218
Venardos, C. 155
Vescio, T. K. 380
Vincent, J. P. 185
Vincent, W. 281
Vohs, K. D. 29, 293, 294, 433
Volk, A. A. 35
von Hippel, W. 128
Voracek, M. 78
Vorauer, J. D. 142, 143
Vrij, A. 151, 161, 327, 329, 330
Waas, G. A. 224
Wade, J. C. 11, 26, 29
Wagers, T. P. 434
Waite, L. J. 298
Waldron, V. R. 335
Walker, A. 369
Wallace, H. M. 337
Wallen, A. S. 27
Waller, N. G. 17
Waller, W. W. 42, 182, 366
Walsh, J. L. 282
Walster, E. 91, 253, 271, 273, 439
Walster, G. W. 271, 273
Wang, W. 27, 203, 371
Wänke, M. 107
Warber, K. M. 13, 320
Watson, D. 91, 92
Watts, D. J. 71
Weaver, S. E. 117
Webber, L. 230
Weber, A. L. 416
Webster, G. D. 300
Weeden, J. 86, 87
Weege, B. 147, 148
Weeks, D. G. 242, 243
Wei, M. 58, 59
Weidman, A. C. 237
Weigel, D. J. 205, 447
Weinstein, N. 13, 164
Weisbuch, M. 151
Weiser, D. A. 293
Weiss, P. 78
Weiss, R. L. 441
Weiss, R. S. 238
Weisskirch, R. S. 413
Wells, B. E. 277
Wendorf, C. A. 196, 345
Wenzel, A. 89
Wesselmann, E. D. 313
West, C. 373
West, L. 99
West, T. V. 63
Westbay, L. 251
Westen, D. 387
Whalen, J. M. 163
Wheeler, J. 442
Wheeler, L. 76, 165, 240
Whisman, M. A. 5, 38
Whitaker, D. J. 387
Whitchurch, E. 136
White, G. L. 255, 317, 325
Whitley, B. E., Jr. 252, 274
Whitton, S. W. 360, 399
Whitty, M. T. 321
Whyte, W. F. 42
Wickrama, K. A. S. 407
Widmer, E. D. 281, 286
Wiederman, M. W. 49, 56
Wight, R. G. 5
Wiik, K. A. 10
Wilcox, W. B. 196, 395, 397, 407, 
409, 437
Wildsmith, E. 296
Wile, D. B. 171
Willetts, M. C. 285
Williams, K. D. 168, 313, 314,
Williams, L. E. 111
Williams, M. J. 162
Williams, S. L. 388
Williamson, H. C. 402, 407, 408
Willis, J. 68, 85, 106
Willoughby, B. J. 11, 282, 294, 
399, 410
Wilmot, W. W 159
Wilson, B. 9, 119, 222, 232
Wimmer, A. 60
Winslett, A. H. 306
Winston, R. 36
Winterheld, H. A. 354
Wirth, J. H. 146
Witt, E. A. 49
Wolfers, J. 399, 409
Wolfinger, N. H. 10
Wong, J. S. 223
Wood, D. 102
Wood, J. T. 388, 389
Wood, J. V. 30, 31, 32, 241
Wood, W. 23, 36, 98, 269
Woodin, E. M. 358, 386
Woolf, S. E. 297, 376
World Health Organization 
381, 383
Wortman, C. B. 169
Wotman, S. R. 265
Wright, C. N. 132
Wright, P. H. 229
Wright, P. J. 292
Wrzus, C. 226, 227
Wyden, P. 362, 363
Xu, X. 251, 254, 266
Xue, M. 199
Yager, J. 225
Yagil, D. 302
Yan, W. 146
Yarkoni, T. 164
Ybema, J. F. 431
Yeater, E. A. 304
Yee, N. 153
Yoon, J. E. 381
Yoshimura, S. 335
Young, B. J. 391
Young, S. D. 297
Young-DeMarco, L. 365
Younger, J. 252
Ysseldyk, R. 336
Yu, E. 421
Yucel, D. 303
Zacchilli, T. L. 349, 359
Zadro, L. 313, 314
Zajonc, R. B. 71
Zawacki, T. 296
Zayas, V. 37, 148, 391
Zechmeister, J. S. 336
Zeidner, M. 360
Zeifman, D. 224
Zengel, B. 323
Zentner, M. 36, 99
Zhang, F. 19, 156 
Zhang, G. 57, 86, 
Zhang, S. 72, 266
Zhang, Y. 94, 188
Zhong, C. 313
Zhou, W. 150
Zilcha-Mano, S. 228
Zimbardo, P. 236
Zimmerman, D. H. 373
Zipp, J. F. 378
Zoccola, P. M. 313
Zuckerman, M. 330
Zurbriggen, E. L. 299

I-12
Abstinence-only sex 
education, 283–284, 297, 307
Acceptance
degrees of, in relationships, 
18, 309–310
emotional support 
and, 216
expectations of, 88–90
relational value, 308–310
self-esteem and, 30, 32, 
126–128
Accommodation, 208, 209, 
356, 364, 372, 433, 448
Acetaminophen, 312
Active listening, 170–171
Actor/observer effects, 114, 
122, 139, 347, 364
Adolescence 
conflict in, 342
divorce and, 422
first sexual experience 
during, 282
friendship during, 
223–224, 244
parenting of, and 
attachment style, 19
Romeo and Juliet effect 
in, 100
Advice support, 216
Affection
as component of 
intimacy, 2
communication and, 153, 
162, 175, 229, 328, 441
conflict and, 245, 350, 354, 
357, 358, 363
emotional isolation and, 
238, 242
emotional support and, 216
fMRI and, 60, 251
in friendship, 214, 244
love and, 251, 256, 260, 261, 
269, 270, 430
mate choice and, 23, 25, 35
need to belong and, 4–5, 38
nonverbal behavior and, 
146, 149
permissiveness-with-
affection standard, 277
relationship success and, 
185, 186, 203, 205, 270, 
406, 437, 447
rewarding nature of, 
186, 188
sociosexual orientation and, 
288, 289
Affective reconstruction, 444
African Americans
divorce and, 407, 409
Early Years of Marriage 
Project and, 45, 407
Facebook and, 130
interaction with, 221
marriage enrichment 
program for, 62
physical attractiveness and, 
76, 84
sexual attitudes in, 281
Agape, 264
Age. See also Adolescence; 
Elderly
attraction and, 93–95 
conflict and, 343–344
first sexual experience, 
409
love affected by, 265–266
at marriage, divorce and, 
78, 408, 409
sexual frequency and, 272, 
285, 298, 303
Agreeableness
conflict and, 351
controlling mate and, 391
dancing and, 148
divorce and, 408, 410
Facebook and, 130
forgiveness and, 336
grief and, 420
hurt feelings and, 312
infidelity and, 293, 322
interactive effects of, 39, 
99, 164
intimate partner violence, 
jealousy and, 318
loneliness and, 238
mates, preferences for, 102, 
104
nature of, 27–28
pets and, 228
relationship functioning 
and, 92
stalking and, 389
stereotypes, good looks 
and, 75
vengefulness and, 334
AIDS/HIV, 6, 35, 227, 295,
Alcohol myopia, 296
Alcohol 
as predictor of divorce, 410
condom use and, 296
conflict and, 344, 364
sexual coercion, 304, 306
Ambivalence, 309
American Psychological 
Association, 280
American Sociological 
Association, 280
Androgyny 
communication and, 165 
in relationships, 26, 39, 231
instrumental and expressive 
traits in, 23–24 
interaction and, 25, 166
loneliness and, 240
nature of, 24, 39
self-disclosure and, 165
Anger 
attributions and, 347
breakups, reacting to, 
417–418
communication and, 144, 
145, 149, 171–172
conflict and, 347, 356, 361
controlling, 348–349, 361
forgiveness and, 336
Subject Index

Subject Index I-13
Autonomy and connection 
tension, 341
Avoidance motivation, 
188–191, 211, 300, 406
Avoidance of conflict, 349–350
Avoidance of intimacy
assessment of, 58–59
breakups and, 413
caregiving and, 267
communication and, 
161, 267
conflict and, 351
divorce and, 410
forgiveness and, 336
hurt feelings and, 362
interdependency and, 207
judgments of, 134
loneliness and, 238
love and, 267–268
mismatched partners, 
343, 386
nature of, 16–17, 39
pets and, 228
sex and, 303
Avoidant style of attachment, 
14, 348
Avoiders, 357, 358, 364
Bachelor, The (TV show), 
63, 299
Bachelorette, The (TV show), 
63, 299
Bad stronger than good, 
185–186, 428
Balance theory, 91, 103
Barrier model of breakups, 
401–402
Beauty. See Physical 
attractiveness
Behavioral approaches to 
marital therapy, 441–443
Behavioral couple therapy 
441–442, 443, 449
Behavioral relationship 
maintenance mechanisms, 
432–435
Behavior control, 367
Behavior description, 170
Beliefs about relationships, 
117–121, 139
destiny and growth, 
119–120 
difficulties in relationships 
and, 118–119
hurt feelings and, 312
interdependency and, 207
jealousy and, 318, 325, 
338, 339
learning and unlearning, 
18–19
loneliness and, 238, 245
love and, 267–268
lying and, 329
mismatched, 19, 343–346, 
385, 386
social support, judgments 
of, 219
social support, provision 
of, 217–218
perception of partners 
and, 120
sexuality and, 303
sexual orientation and, 29
similarities in, 92–93
speed-dates and, 88
Attitudes
about casual sex, 
276–279, 306
about same-sex sexuality, 
278–281, 307
cultural differences in, 
281, 307
similarities in, 42–43, 53, 
92–93
Attention to alternative 
partners, 179, 258–259, 
431, 448
Attraction
arousal and, 253–257 
physical appearance and, 
73, 75–91
proximity and, 69–73, 102
qualities desired in mates, 
101–102
reciprocity and, 88–91
rewards and, 68–69
sex differences, 101–102
similarity and, 91–100
to those we can’t have, 100
in Triangular Theory 
of Love, 252
Attributional conflict, 347
Attributional processes 
conflict and, 347–348 
defined, 113 
made by happy and 
unhappy couples, 116
patterns, 114–116
intimate partner violence 
and, 386, 391
jealousy and, 31, 338
low self-esteem and, 32
neuroticism and, 27, 28
Annie Hall (film), 294
Annoyances, cumulative, 346
Anxiety about abandon-
ment, 16
assessment of, 58–59
communication and, 161
conflict and, 351
forgiveness and, 336
grief and, 420
hurt feelings and, 312
infidelity and, 293
judgments of, 85
loneliness and, 238
love and, 267, 268
nature of, 17–18, 39
pets and, 228
possessive men and, 391
relationship satisfaction 
and, 207
sex and, 303
shoes and, 107
Anxious-ambivalent 
attachment, 14–15
Approach motivation, 188–190
Archives, 61
Arousal, 60, 190, 228, 236, 
249, 253–257, 259, 266, 267, 
268, 271, 272–273, 296, 300, 
321, 351
Attachment
friendship and, 224
four components of, 224
love and, 252, 261
Attachment styles, 14–19 
See also Anxiety about 
abandonment, Avoidance of 
intimacy, Insecure style of 
attachment, Secure style of 
attachment
accuracy of judging 
partners and, 137 
assessment of, 58
attributions and, 116 
breakups and, 413, 417–418
coming out and, 160
communication and, 161 
conflict and, 343, 351
divorce and, 410 
forgiveness and, 336

I-14 
Subject Index
divorce and, 397
definition of, 205–206, 212
Commitment Scale, 205–206
Communal relationships, 
198–200, 211, 378
vs. exchange 
relationships,198
Communal Strength scale, 199
Communication, 141–174. 
See also Dysfunctional 
communication, Nonverbal 
communication, Verbal 
communication
about sex, 301–302, 307
active listening in, 170–171
attachment styles and, 161
computer-mediated, 
163–164
behavior descriptions in, 170 
dysfunctional, 166–169
error and misunderstanding 
in, 141–142
gender differences in 
verbal, 162–166
I-statements in, 170
miscommunication in, 
166–168
model of, 142
politeness and, 171 
respect and validation in, 
173, 175
saying what we mean in, 
169–170
secrets, 159
self-disclosure in, 156–162
sympathy and concern, 169
taboo topics, 159–161
talk table, 141
verbal, 156–166
Communion, in friendship, 
214, 244
Companionate love, 250, 251, 
252, 260–262, 273–274, 275
Companionship, 214
Comparison level (CL), 
177–178, 180–184, 195, 211
Comparison level for 
alternatives (CLalt), 
178–184, 211, 367, 391, 411
Compassionate love, 
262–263, 275
Compassionate Love Acts 
Diary, 263
Compassionate Love 
Scale, 262
Cheating. See Infidelity
Chemosignals, 150
Children
care of, 203–204
friendship among, 
223–224, 244
having without marriage, 7
in single-parent homes, 
8, 395
mother’s influence on 
attachment styles of, 
18–19
of divorce, 400, 422–425, 427
predictor of divorce, 410
Churning, 415, 427
Civil unions, 281, 396
Cleo (magazine), 299
Closedness and openness 
tension, 341
“Closing time effect,” 100
Coding procedures (scientific 
observations), 59
Coercion, sexual, 302, 
304–306, 307
Coercive power, 368, 371
Cognitive-behavioral couple 
therapy (CBCT), 441–442, 
443, 449
Cognitive interdependence, 
431, 448
Cognitive relationship 
maintenance mechanisms, 
431–432, 440
Cohabitation, 396
changes in, 7
divorce and, 9–11, 39, 
399–400, 407, 409
Columbia Pacific 
University, 438
Coming out, 160
Commitment, 204–210
attachment style and, 267
between best friends, 225
cognitive relationship 
maintenance mechanisms 
for, 431–432, 440
as component of love, 
249–251, 252, 260, 261, 
264, 267, 273, 274–275
consequences of, 209–210 
as part of intimacy, 2, 3
investment model of, 
206–208
sex and, 281–282
three types of, 208–209
Beliefs about relationships—
Cont.
dysfunctional, 117–119
romanticism, 117
Belligerence, 168
Belong, need to, 4–6, 
32–33, 236
Best friends, 225
Betrayal, 308, 331–335, 
339
defined, 331
getting away with, 335
individual differences in, 
332, 339
two sides to every, 332–334
Bias
for beauty, 75–76
confirmation, 109
self-serving, 57–58, 
114–115, 343
social desirability, 57, 287
truth, 330
volunteer, 49
Big Five personality traits, 
27–28. See also 
Agreeableness, 
Conscientiousness, 
Extraversion, Neuroticism, 
Openness to experience.
Bilateral style of power, 375
Births out of wedlock, 7
Blirtatiousness, 166, 175
Body, attractiveness in, 77–79
Body movement, 146–148, 174
Booty calls, 230, 415
Boredom, 189–190, 274
Breakups
adjustment to, 417–422
trajectories of, 411–413, 414
Capitalization, in friendships, 
215–216, 244
Caring
as part of intimacy, 2
attachment style and, 267
compassionate love and, 
262–263
in friendship, 213,
on the Love Scale, 257
Casual sex, attitudes about, 
48–49, 274–275
Census Bureau, U.S., 7, 11
Centers for Disease Control 
and Prevention, 380, 381
Cheaters (TV show), 323

Subject Index I-15
Direct rewards, 68
Direct strategies of breaking 
up, 411–413
Direct style of power, 375
Direct tactics in conflict, 349, 
351, 354, 364
Disillusionment model of 
breakups, 405–406
Dismissing style of 
attachment, 16–17, 137, 187, 
268, 318
Display rules, 145–146
Dissolution of relationships. 
See also Divorce
adjustments after, 417–418 
aftermath of, 415–422
barrier model of, 
401–402, 421
narratives of, 416
postdissolution 
relationships, 415–416, 
421–422
process of breaking up, 
411–413
relationship rules and, 412
types of relationship and, 
394–395
typical script for, 414
Vulnerability-Stress-
Adaptation Model of, 
402–404, 426
Distress-maintaining 
attributions, 115–116
Distressed relationships, 189
Divorce
adjustment following, 
414–417
children of, 400, 422–425
cohabitation and, 9–11, 39, 
399–400
comparison level for 
alternatives and, 180, 184
cultural changes in, 8, 
395–401, 426
economic resources and, 
397–398, 421
effects on social 
network, 421
environmental impact 
of, 421
Early Years of Marriage 
Project on, 407, 426
high-risk vs. low-risk 
couples for, 185, 186
PAIR Project on, 404, 426
cohabitation and, 7, 9–11
comparison levels and, 184
divorce and, 395–401
gestures and, 147
importance of, 9
individualism, 11
love and, 265–267, 275
physical attractiveness and, 
76, 81, 84
sex ratio, 13–14
sexual attitudes and, 281
socioeconomic development 
and, 11–13
sources of change in, 
11–14, 39
 technology and, 11–13
Cumulative annoyances, 
conflict and, 346, 364
Cyberball, 314
Cybersex, 292
“Dark side” of relationships, 38
Data, research 
analysis of, 63–64
archival materials, 61
observational, 57, 59–61
paired, interdependent, 
63–64
physiological, 60
self-report, 55–57
Dating, online, 72, 74
Deceiver’s distrust, 328
Deception
deceiver’s distrust and, 
328, 339
defined, 327, 39
detecting a partner’s, 
330–331
getting away with, 335, 339
impression management 
and, 129
in close vs. casual 
relationships, 327–329
Defensiveness, 168
Demand/withdrawal pattern 
of conflict, 352–353, 364
Derogation of tempting 
alternatives, 432, 448
Designs, research
correlational, 49–50, 52
experimental, 52–53, 66
Destiny beliefs, 119, 139
Devaluation, relational, 311, 
312, 331, 338, 362
Dialectics, 341–342, 364
Competence, 299
Complementarity, 99
Compromise, 350, 359
Computer-mediated 
communication, 163–164
Concern, communicating, 169
Condoms, 283, 295–298, 299, 
307, 376
Confirmation bias, 109–110, 138
Conflict. See Interpersonal 
conflict
Conflict Tactics Scale, 380
Connection with others, 3, 4, 
5, 32, 38, 163–164, 165, 225, 
238, 252, 299, 341–342
Conscientiousness, 27, 28, 39, 
49, 75, 92, 106, 130, 136, 148, 
238, 293, 322, 385, 386
Constraint commitment, 
208–209
Consummate love, 250–251
Contempt, 168
Contrition, forgiveness and, 
336
Convenience, proximity and, 
73, 103
Convenience samples, 47–49
Conversation, 162, 164–166
dysfunctional, 167–168
styles of, 164
topics of, 162
Coolidge effect, 271
Correlational designs, 50–53
Correlations, 50–52, 66
Cosmetic surgery, 86
Cosmopolitan (magazine), 299
Costs
as time goes by, 191–197
avoidance motivation and, 
188–191
in interdependency theory, 
177, 210
relationship satisfaction 
and, 184–197 
to rewards ratio, 186
unanticipated, 195–197
Counterpower, 367–368
Courtly love, 247
Criticism
in communication, 167–168
conflict and, 345, 364
Cross-complaining, 
167–168, 173
Cultural influences, 6–14, 39
changes in, 6–14, 39

I-16 
Subject Index
disagreement regarding, 36, 
84, 98, 269
explaining patterns in 
relationships, 32–36, 40
on attraction, 97–99, 103
on conflict, 346
on cultural change, 35–36
on infidelity, 290–291
on jealousy, 318–324
on mate-guarding, 383
on need to belong, 6, 32–33
on parental investment, 
33–34
on physical attractiveness, 
78, 81–84
on same-sex sexuality, 280
on sexual selection, 33–35
sex differences in love and, 
269
Excessive reassurance 
seeking, 242
Exchange relationships, 
198–200, 211
vs. communal relationships, 
198
Exclusion, degrees of, 308, 
310–312
Exit as response to conflict, 
and 355–356
Expectations
interaction, and 121–124, 
139
of marriage, 195, 396, 447
of rewards in relationships, 
177–178, 195–196
Experimental research 
designs, 52–53, 66
Expert power, 368, 369, 370
Expressive traits, 24–27
Expressivity, 165, 166, 231
after breakups, 417–418, 427
age and, 268
communication and, 
165–166
loneliness and, 240
men’s vs. women’s, 298–269
Extradyadic sex
attitudes toward, 285–286
cohabitation before 
marriage and, 8–11
divorce and, 410
emotional infidelity vs., 
319–321, 323–324
evolutionary perspective 
on, 290–291
Elderly, the
frequency of sex in, 272, 285
friendships of, 227
loneliness in, 238
love in, 268
Electronically activated 
recorders (EARs), 45, 59
Emotional constraint, 231
Emergent distress model of 
breakups, 405
Emotional infidelity, 319–321, 
323–324
Emotional intelligence, 135
Emotional isolation, 238, 245
Emotionally focused therapy 
(EFCT), 442–444, 449
Emotional sharing, 229, 244
Emotional support, 216, 218
Emotions
facial expressions revealing, 
144–146
feigned expressions 
of, 146
nature of, 254
romantic love as an, 254
Empathic joining, 442
Empathy, 336, 371–372
Empty love, 249, 251
Encoding, 142, 153–154
Enduring dynamics model of 
breakups, 405–406
Envy, jealousy vs., 315
Equality, in close 
relationships, 365, 369–371, 
377–378, 399
Equitable relationships, 
200–205
Equity
and relationship 
satisfaction, 202–205, 440
as norm, 369, 412
defined, 200, 211
violations of, 201–202
ways to restore, 202
Eros, 264
Escalation, of conflict, 349, 
350, 364
Ethical issues in research, 
61–63, 284
Ethnicity
divorce and, 407, 409
interethnic relationships, 94
judgments of attractiveness 
and, 76, 84
Evolutionary perspectives
Divorce—Cont.
perceived cause of, 407–408, 
426
predictors of, 395–408
rates of, 8, 11, 394–395
reasons for increase in, 
395–401
relationship with ex-spouses 
following, 421–422
same-sex couples and, 397
sex ratios, 413–415, 427
social networks and, 400, 412
specific predictors of, 61, 
145, 216, 273, 282, 
409–410, 426
steps to, 413–415, 427
Vulnerability-Stress-
Adaptation Model of, 
402–404, 426
Domestic violence. See 
Violence in relationships
Domination in conflict, 
350, 359
Dopamine, 252, 261, 272, 273
Double standard, sexual, 277, 
299, 306
Dyadic phase of dissolution of 
relationships, 414
Dyadic withdrawal, 
225–226, 244
Dysfunctional beliefs, 
117–118, 446
Dysfunctional
communication, 166–173
active listening and, 170–171
miscommunication, 166–168
polite interaction and, 
171–173
respect and validation, 173
saying what we mean and, 
169–170
Early Years of Marriage 
(EYM) Project, 45, 190, 
407, 426
Economic hardship model of 
children of divorce, 423
Economics
and relationships, 11 
of relationships, 176, 
184–197
Effort
in impression 
management, 132
to please partner, 195–197

Subject Index I-17
“Friends with benefits,” 
230–231
Functional magnetic 
resonance imaging (fMRI), 
45, 60, 251, 265–266
Gay and lesbian relationships. 
See also Civil Unions
attitudes about same-sex 
sexuality, 278–281
causes of conflict, 346
disapproval of, 404
disclosing, 160
dissolution of 
relationships, 397
equity in household tasks 
and, 203
extradyadic sex in, 
286–288
household tasks in, 203
jealousy and, 324
online origins, 74
possible evolutionary 
origins of, 280
postdissolution, 416
power styles of, 376
sexual communication 
in, 301
sexual frequency and, 
285, 286
violence and, 386, 388
with heterosexuals, 232
Gay men. See also Gay and 
lesbian relationships
coming out, 160
expressivity in, 29
extradyadic sex by, 
286–288
mate preferences, 86, 102
smell and, 80
styles of power, 376
“Gaydar,” 148
Gazing, 146
Gender differences
conflict and, 352–353
expressive vs. instrumental 
traits, 23–25
in casual sex, 48–49
in control of power 
resources, 369–371
in desired rewards, 188
in friendships, 227–231, 244
in intimate violence, 
382–384
in loneliness, 240
in love, 268–269, 275
accuracy of perceptions 
and, 110–112
confirmation bias in, 
109–110, 138
influencing use of 
subsequent information, 
109–110
overconfidence in, 
110–112, 138
physical attractiveness and, 
75–76
primacy effect, 107–109, 138
rapidity of, 106
stereotypes in, 106
Flirting, 154
Florida State University, 48
“Flourishing” relationships, 
189
Forgiveness, 335–337, 339, 
390, 430, 433, 435, 448
Framingham Heart Study, 400
Friendship-Based Love Scale, 
260, 261
Friendships, 213–232
after marriage, 225–226
attributes of, 214–221
best, 225
between men and women, 
230–231
compared to love, 214–215
defined, 214
difficulties in, 232–243
during adolescence, 224
during childhood, 223–224, 
244
during midlife, 225–226, 244 
during old age, 227, 244
enjoyment of. 214
Facebook friends, 12, 227
frequency of, 232–233
gender differences in same-
sex, 231, 244
importance of, 217
in love, 260
in young adulthood, 224–225
individual differences in, 
231–232
intimacy in, 213
networks of, and marital 
adjustment, 226
proximity and, 69–73
rules of, 221–222
self-monitoring and, 
131–133
sex in, 230–231
gender and sexual 
orientation differences in, 
286–288
jealousy and, 318–321, 
323–324
sociosexual orientation and, 
288–290
Extraversion, 27, 28, 39, 49, 75, 
106, 130, 135, 140, 148, 149, 
163, 164, 238, 322
Eye-tracking methodology, 59
Facebook, 6, 12–13, 32, 60, 
74, 86, 144, 163, 227, 233, 
237, 241, 297, 389, 411, 413, 
418, 434
impression management 
and, 129, 130
Facebook friends, 2, 241
jealousy and, 320
“Face-to-face” friendships, 
229
Facial expressions, 144–174
display rules regarding, 
145–146
microexpressions, 146
smiles, 144–145
universality of, 144
Facial features, attractive, 
76–77
Facial symmetry, 77, 81
Familiarity, attraction and, 
70–71, 73, 103
Fantasy, 271, 275
Fatal attraction, 95–96, 128, 
195–196
Fate control, 367
Fatuous love, 250, 251
Fearful style of attachment,
16–17, 187
Femininity, 24–27
Feminism, 204
Fertility, 77, 78, 81, 82, 83, 84, 
97, 280, 291, 432
Fight Effect Profile, 362–363
Fighting, 360–363
benefits of, 360
Fight Effects Profile, 
362–363
list of “don’ts” for, 361
speaker-listener technique, 
358, 359
Financial status, attraction 
and, 79, 98–99
First impressions, 106–112

I-18 
Subject Index
Income
divorce and, 396, 407, 408, 
409, 421 
height and, 80
Indirect power, 375
Indirect rewards, 68, 69
Indirect strategies of breaking 
up, 411–413
Indirect style of power, 375
Indirect tactics in conflict, 349, 
351, 354, 364
Individual differences, 19–32. 
See also Attachment styles, 
Personality
approach and avoidance 
motivations, 190
betrayal, 332
communal strength, 199
divorce and, 408
emotional intelligence, 135
friendships, 231–232
gender differences, 22–27
jealousy, susceptibility to, 
317–318
loneliness and, 238–240, 242
love, 265, 267–269
narcissism, 127
optimism, 123 
personality, 27–28
rejection sensitivity, 123
self-esteem, 28, 30–32
self-monitoring, 131–133
self-serving biases in, 115
sex differences, 19–22
sexual orientation, 29, 
231–232, 288–290
Individualism, 11, 398
Inequity, 201–202
Infatuation, 249, 251
Infidelity. See also 
Extradyadic sex
avoiding, 412, 434,
sexual vs. emotional, 
319–321, 323–324
Informational power, 368, 369, 
376, 392
Ingratiation, 129–130, 139
Inhibiting influences, 
384–385, 386
Initiator Style Questionnaire, 
352, 353
Insecure styles of attachment, 
15, 17, 18–19, 60, 316, 
386, 404
breakups and, 417–418
Height, attractiveness and, 80
High self-monitors, 131–132
HIV/AIDS, 35, 227, 275
Homosexual relationships. 
See Gay and lesbian 
relationships
Hookups, 277, 294–295, 296, 
297, 307
Hostile conflict style, 
357–358, 364
Household tasks, 96–97, 203, 
371, 378, 398, 399, 436–437
How to Win Friends and 
Influence People (book), 221
Human nature 
in intimate relationships, 
32–36 
need to belong, 4–6
Humor, 90, 101,102, 168, 186, 
194, 349, 354, 407, 447 
HurryDate, 85
Hurt feelings, 310–313, 315, 
320, 331, 338, 363
I-cubed (I3) model, 384
Inclusion, degrees of, 309, 
310–311
Ideal selves, and attraction, 96
Idealizing, of partners, 
112–113, 139, 258–259, 
271, 360
Illegitimate demands, 
345–346, 364
Illusion of unique 
invulnerability, 295–296
Illusions regarding partners, 
112–113, 139
Immersive virtual 
environments (IVEs), 54, 
152–153
Impelling influences, 384–385
Impression management, 
129–133, 139
deception in, 129
effort in, 132, 428
individual differences in, 
131–133
on Facebook, 130
strategies of, 129–131
Impressions of others. See 
First impressions
Inadequacy as partner, 317
Inattention to alternatives, 430
Inclusion of Other in the Self 
Scale, 3
Gender differences—Cont.
in nonverbal 
communication, 153–156
in number of sexual 
partners, 287
in pressures to adhering to 
“proper” gender roles, 
26–27
in same-sex friendships, 
227–229, 231
in targets of betrayal, 332
in use of power, 373–377
in verbal 
communication,162, 
164–166
interest in physical 
attractiveness, 86
nature of, 23, 39
post-divorce finances 
and, 418
responses to jealousy, 325
sex differences vs., 22–24
Gender roles
divorce and, 24, 398
pressure on adhering to 
“proper,” 26–27
Genetics
loneliness and, 238
as predictor of divorce, 410
same-sex sexual orientation 
and, 278–281
German Socio-Economic 
Panel Study, 419–420
Gestures, 146–147, 148, 174
Glee (TV show), 278
Good faith contracts, 441
Good genes hypothesis, 
290–291, 307
Gratitude, 437
Growth beliefs, 119–120, 139
Hair length, attractiveness 
and, 80
Half-truths, 327
Handshaking, 148–149
Hard-to-get, playing, 90–91
Health
conflict and, 351
connections with others 
and, 4–6, 227
emotional support 
and, 216
loneliness and, 238
pets and, 228
Healthy Marriage Initiative, 62

Subject Index I-19
types of couples in, 356–358
Interpersonal distance, 
149–150, 174
Interpersonal gap, 142, 163, 428
Interpersonal process model 
of intimacy, 158–159, 171
Interrupting, 167, 373
Intimacy
attachment styles and, 267
in childhood friendships, 
223
as component of love, 
248–251, 252, 260, 264, 
273, 274–275
costs of, 195–196
on the Love Scale, 257
nature and importance of, 
2–6, 38, 227
Intimacy vs. isolation, 224
Intimate-mutual sharing, 223
Intimate partner violence 
(IPV), 380–391
chronic nature of, 387
gender differences in, 
382–384, 393
impelling influences on, 
385–386
inhibiting influences on, 
386–387
instigating triggers of, 384, 
385, 387
intergenerational 
transmission of, 388
rationales for, 388–390
types of, 381–382, 393
Intimate terrorism (IT), 
381–382, 384, 387
leaving a relationship with, 
390–391
many facets of, 382
rationales for, 388–390
Intimate zone, 149, 150
Intimidation, 130–131, 139
Intoxication, safe sex 
and, 296
Investment model of 
commitment, 207–209, 
212, 426
Investments, in relationships, 
179, 206–208, 
Invisible support, 218
Isolation, 170, 238, 245
I-statements, 171, 361, 362
IVEs (immersive virtual 
environments), 54, 152–153
in equitable relationships, 
200–203
in exchange relationships, 
197–198
nature of, 197, 211
power and, 181, 366–367
relational turbulence model, 
191–193
rewards and costs, 
203–204, 428
social exchange, 176–197
Interdependent self-construal, 
232, 245, 379
Interethnic relationships, 94
International Association for 
Relationship Research, 46
Internet 
cybersex, 292
dating, 74–75, 163, 295
impression management 
on, 72
lying, 327
ostracism on, 314
research involving, 47, 60, 
102, 299
Interpersonal Betrayal Scale, 
332, 333
Interpersonal conflict
anger and, 347, 348–349,
attributions and, 346, 
347–348
defined, 340
demand/withdraw pattern 
in, 352–353
dialectics causing, 341–342
ending, 359, 364
engagement and escalation 
of, 349–353
events instigating, 
344–346, 364
evolutionary 
perspective, 346
fighting in, 360–363
four different responses to, 
355–356
frequency of, 342–344, 364
inevitability of, 340, 
341–342, 360
issues producing, 344–345
negotiation and 
accommodation, 
353–356 
possible courses of, 350
tactics of, 349, 351, 354, 
361–362, 364
coming out, 160
conflict and, 343, 351
distress-maintaining 
attributions and, 116
loneliness and, 238, 245
love and, 267, 368
parenting and, 18–19
perceptions of partners 
and, 120
perceptions of social 
support, 219
social support provision 
and, 217–218
Insight-oriented couple 
therapy (IOCT), 444–445, 449
Instigating triggers, 384, 
385, 387
Instrumental traits, 24–27, 
165–166, 231, 377
Integration vs. separation 
tension, 312
Integrative agreements, 
350, 359
Integrative behavioral couple 
therapy (IBCT), 442, 443, 449
Intelligence, attractiveness 
and, 80
Interaction, influence of, 36–37
Intercourse, for the first time, 
282–283, 307, 409
Interdependence theory, 176
businesslike emphasis 
of, 185
comparison level, 177–178, 
180–184 
comparison level for 
alternatives, 178–184
four types of relationships, 
180–183, 211 
outcomes, 177
power, 182, 366–367
principle of lesser interest, 
183, 394, 366–367, 392
rewards and costs in, 177, 
186, 191–197
Interdependency
approach and avoidance 
motivations, 188–192
attachment and, 207
commitment and, 205–210
in communal relationships, 
198–199
as part of intimacy, 2
costs of intimacy and, 
183–185

I-20 
Subject Index
sex differences and, 
268–269, 275
styles of loving, 263–265, 
275 
thought and, 257–259
through the passage of 
time, 269–294, 275
Triangular Theory, 248–251, 
252
types of 249–263
United States and China 
compared, 265–267
unrequited, 265
“Love is blind,” 258–299
Love Scale, 266–268, 257–258, 
269, 270
Low self-esteem, 26, 30–32, 40, 
89, 127, 234, 240, 241, 313, 
315, 317, 388, 428
Low self-monitors, 131–132
Loyalty, as response to 
conflict, 355–356
Ludus, 264
Lust, 60, 251–252
Lying, 326–331, 339
in close vs. casual 
relationships, 308, 327
detecting, 330–331 
getting away with, 335
liar characteristics and, 329
Machismo, 24, 165
loneliness in men and, 240
Maintaining relationships. See 
Relationship maintenance 
mechanisms
Male attractiveness, 77–80
Male dominance in power, 
369–371
Mania, 264
Marital Instability Over the 
Life Course project, 407–408
Marital satisfaction
aggression and, 381
average trajectory of, 
193–194, 196, 211, 405, 406
divorce and, 408
dysfunctional 
communication and, 
167–168
forgiveness and, 337
health and, 6
household tasks and, 399
money and, 345, 397
neuroticism and, 28, 51
gender differences in, 165, 
239–240 
genetics and, 238
health and, 238
interactive effects of, 242, 
245
overcoming, 242–243
personality and, 238
self-esteem and, 238, 240 
shyness vs., 242
social isolation, 238, 245
UCLA Loneliness Scale, 
238, 239
with vs. without a romantic 
partner, 240
Long-distance relationships, 
72
Long-term mating strategies, 
34, 101
Love. See also Companionate 
love, Compassionate love, 
Romantic love
age and, 268, 295
arousal in, 253–257, 
271–273
attachment style and, 
267–268
commitment and, 249–251
companionate, 250, 251 
258–260
compared to friendship, 
214–215
compassionate, 260–261
consummate, 250, 251
courtly, 247
cultural influences on, 365, 
267, 275
empty, 249, 251
fatuous, 250, 251
fMRI and, 60
friendship in, 260
history of, 247–249
idealization of partners and, 
258–259, 271
in choice of a spouse, 
246–248
individual differences in, 
267–269
intimacy and, 248–251
changing nature of, 269–273
lust and, 60, 251–252
novelty and, 271–272
passion and, 249–251 
romantic, passionate, 
251–258
Jealousy
coping constructively with, 
326, 339
defining feelings, 315, 338
envy vs., 315
evolutionary perspective 
on, 318, 321, 323–324
for sexual vs. emotional 
infidelity, 319–321, 323–
324, 338
methods of studying, 321, 
323
people prone to, 316–318
reactive, 316, 338
responses to, 325–326
rivals and, 318
sex differences in, 321, 
323–326
suspicious, 316, 338 
therapy for, 326
types of, 316
Journal of Marriage and the 
Family, 46
Journal of Social and Personal 
Relationships, 46
Kansas State University, 92
Kitchen-sinking, 167
Knowledge
as part of intimacy, 2
between best friends, 225
in friendship, 213
Legitimate power, 368, 369
Lesbians. See also Gay and 
lesbian relationships
coming out, 160
heterosexual women vs., 29
mate preferences, 102
styles of power, 376
extradyadic sex by, 286–288
Liars, 329
Lies, types of, 327–329
Liking, 247, 249
loving vs., 214–215
romantic love vs., 249, 251
Liking Scale, 257–258
Listening, active, 170–171
Loneliness
attributions and, 243, 245
defined, 237, 245
depression and, 242
emotional isolation, 238, 245 
expressivity and, 240
Facebook and, 241

Subject Index I-21
Midlife, friendship during, 
225–226
Mimicry, 151–153, 174
Mindreading, 167
Miscommunication, 
141–142, 153–156, 163, 
169. See also Dysfunctional 
communication
Misperceptions of sexual 
interest, 302
Moral commitment, 208–209
Mothers
influence on attachment 
styles of children, 18–19
working, 8
Mutuality
dissolution of relationships 
and, 417
as part of intimacy, 2–3
Narcissism, 127–128, 322, 
387, 429
National Center for Health 
Statistics, U.S., 7, 287
Natural selection, 33
Nature of commitment, 
204–209
Nature of interdependency, 
196–197
Need to belong, 4–6, 38, 308
human nature and, 32–33
loneliness and, 238
Negative affect, 167–168
Negative affect reciprocity, 
171–172, 175, 351, 364
Negative self-concept, 
126–128
Neglect, as response to 
conflict and, 355
Negotiation, 349, 350, 353–354
Neuroticism, 27, 28, 39, 51, 
135, 164, 194, 238, 318, 334, 
336, 342, 364, 385, 386, 410, 
423, 429
No-fault divorce laws, 398, 
399, 409, 426
Nonconscious social 
cognition, 124
Nonlove, 249
Nonverbal communication, 
143–156
body movement, 146–148, 
174 
combining components of, 
151–153, 174
Matching, 88, 103, 317
as broad process, 97–99
Mating
long-term vs. short-term, 
34, 101
preferences for, 100–102, 
104
Mate-guarding, 383
Mate poaching, 322
Material support, 216, 218
Mate value, 89, 97, 151, 372
Maximal exclusion, 309
Maximal inclusion, 309
Memories, 116–117
Men. See also Gender 
differences; Sex differences
extradyadic sex by, 286
interest in physical 
attractiveness, 85–86
jealousy in, 319–321, 
323–324
language used by, 373
love in, 268–269, 275
marital therapy and, 446
misperceptions of sexual 
interest by, 302
motives for sex, 284–285
number of sex partners, 287
opening lines used by, 90
rationale for violence, 
388–390, 393
sex drive in, 293–294, 307
sexual double standard 
and, 277
sexual satisfaction in, 298, 
300
verbal communication 
styles, 164
violence committed by, 
382–384, 386, 388–390
Men Are From Mars, Women 
Are From Venus (book), 
20, 438
Menstrual cycle
preferences during, 77, 
81–82
behavior during, 82–83
men’s reaction to, 83
voice and, 151
Mere exposure effect, 71, 103
Meta-analyses, 64, 291, 330
Michelangelo phenomenon, 
433, 448
Microexpressions, 146
nonverbal sensitivity and, 
153–156
parenthood and, 196
power and, 379, 398
reasons for waning, 192–194
self-disclosure and, 159
sex and, 303
stress and, 403
traditional gender roles 
and, 25
women working and, 398
Marital therapy, 440–447
behavioral approaches, 
441–442
common features of, 
445–446
core features of, 443
effectiveness of, 445–447
emotionally focused, 
442–444, 449 
insight-oriented, 444–445, 
449
Marriage. See also Divorce
African Americans and, 62
age at first, 7–8
attitudes, as predictor of 
divorce, 410
balance of power in, 
369–371, 372, 
377–378, 379
boredom in, 190
changes in, 7–8
cohabitation before, 7, 9–11
doubts about, 193
friendships and, 226
high expectations of, 195, 
396, 447
history of romance and 
passion in, 247–248
household tasks and, 96–97, 
203, 371, 378, 396, 398, 
399, 436–437
life satisfaction and, 419
parents’ preferences, 266
prior, as predictor of 
divorce, 409
rates of, 7
romantic love decreasing 
after, 271–273
satisfaction in, 193–196, 235
Marriage shift, 126–127
Masculinity, 24–27
Massachusetts Institute of 
Technology, 69–70
Masturbation, 21, 290

I-22 
Subject Index
Permissiveness-with-affection 
standard, 277
Persevering indirectness, 
413, 427
Personal commitment, 
208, 209
Personality, 27–28, 39. 
See also Agreeableness, 
Conscientiousness, 
Extraversion, Individual 
differences, Neuroticism
as predictor of divorce, 410
conflict and, 342–343 
jealousy and, 318
loneliness and, 238
similarities in, 92–93
Personal phrase of dissolution 
of relationships, 414
Personal Relationships, 46
Pets, as friends, 228 
“Phantom stranger” 
technique, 43
Physical attractiveness, 73, 
75–91, 428 
averageness and, 77
bias for beauty, 75–76, 103
consensus regarding, 76–77
culture and, 84
desire for, 86–87
evolutionary perspective 
on, 81–84, 97–99
height and, 80
impact on interactions with 
others, 85–88, 103
in men, 77
in women, 77
judgments of others with, 
75–76
matching in, 88, 97–99
of bodies, 77–79 
smell and, 80
speed-dating and, 85–86
symmetry and, 77
weight and, 78
Physical comfort, 216
Physical proximity, 69–73
Physiological measures, 45, 
60, 251–252, 313
Platonic love, 247
Play, relationship maintenance 
through, 434–435, 440, 448
Playboy Playmates, 84
Playing “hard to get,” 
90–91, 439
Pluralistic ignorance, 296–297
PAIR Project, 404–406
Pairfam, 45
Paralanguage, 151, 174
Paraphrasing, 170–171, 175
Parental conflict model of 
divorce, 423–425
Parental investment, 34, 35, 98
Parental loss model of 
divorce, 423
Parental stress model of 
children of divorce, 423–425
Parenthood
attachment and, 18–19
childcare, 203–204
reactions to “coming out,” 
160
relationship satisfaction 
and, 196
single-parent homes, 8
with or without marriage, 7
working mothers and, 8
Participants in research, 47–49
Particularistic resources of 
power, 370
Passion
fantasy and, 270
men and, 269
over time, 271–272, 285
attachment style and, 267
as component of love, 
249–251, 252, 253, 260, 
261, 264, 267, 269, 274–275
in marriage, history of, 
247–248
romantic passionate love, 
252–260
Passionate Love Scale, 256, 
269
Passive exclusion, 309
Paternity uncertainty, 34, 319
Penis size, 299
Perceived partner 
responsiveness, 159, 
220, 244
Perceived relational value, 
308–310, 320, 331, 338
Perceived Responsiveness 
Scale, 220
Perceived similarity, 
93–94, 104
Perceived superiority, 
209–210, 431, 448
Perceiver ability, 135–136
Perceiver influence, 137
Perception checking, 171, 175
Nonverbal communication—
Cont.
components of, 144–153
facial expressions, 144–146, 
174 
flirting and, 154
functions of, 143–144, 174 
gazing, 146, 176
gender differences in, 
153–156, 174, 428
gestures, 147
interpersonal distance, 
150, 174 
lying and, 329 
mimicry, 151–153, 174
misunderstanding in, 
153–156
paralanguage, 151, 174
power expressed through, 
374
touch, 148–149
Nonverbal sensitivity, 153–156
Normal curves, 20–22
Northwestern University, 43, 
342
Novelty, 295, 271–272, 273, 
274, 295
Observational studies, 57–61
Off-beam conversations, 167
Old age, friendship during, 227
Online dating, 72, 74–75
Opener Scale, 158, 165
Openness and closedness 
tension, 341, 412
Openness to experience, 27, 28
Optimism
beneficial, 27, 117, 120, 123, 
139, 196, 243, 357, 354, 
361, 446
unhelpful, 31, 111, 265
Opening lines, 90
Orgasm, 56, 129, 276, 282, 283, 
300, 303
Ostracism, 313–315, 338
Other-oriented strategies of 
breaking up, 411–413
Others’ judgments
of oneself, 125–127, 136
of one’s relationship, 111–112
Outcomes, 177–184, 210
“Overbenefited”, 201–205, 212
Overconfidence, 110–112, 138
Ovulatory shift, 77, 81–84
Oxytocin, 60, 252, 260–261

Subject Index I-23
actions in, 435–437, 448
behavioral, 432–435, 448
cognitive, 431–432, 448
expressing gratitude for 
partner, 432
preventive, 439–440, 449
Relationships
approach and avoidance 
processes in, 188–191
continuing after breakups, 
415–416
ending (see Dissolution of 
relationships)
equality elements in, 372
exchange and communal 
differences, 198–199
forecasts regarding, 112
gay and lesbian (see Gay 
and lesbian relationships)
illusions in, 112–113
importance of, 2–6
pornography and, 292
repairing, 438–447
rewards-costs and, 
180–197
romantic (see Romantic 
relationships)
rules for, 221–222, 244, 412
Relationship satisfaction
attributions and, 115–116
compassionate acts and, 
262–263 
equity and, 202–205
in interdependence theory, 
177–178, 180–182
nonverbal communication 
and, 153–156
over time, 182–184, 193–196
perceived support and, 
218–219
relational turbulence model 
on, 192
self-disclosure and, 
161–162 
sexual satisfaction and, 
302–304, 307
shared friendships and, 226
shyness and, 235
Relationship science. See 
Research, relationship
Reliability of data, 55
Religion,
divorce and, 409
importance of, 96
Remarriage, 409, 420
Processes of Adaptation in 
Intimate Relationships 
(PAIR Project), 404–406
Proper Care and Feeding of 
Marriage, The (book), 438
Proximity, attraction and, 
69–73, 102, 428
convenience and, 73
familiarity and, 70–71
power of, 73
Proximity seeking, 224
Public zone, 149, 150
Quid pro quid contract, 441
Race, divorce and, 409
Rape, 305
Ratings (scientific 
observations), 59
Reactance, 100, 104
Reactive jealousy, 316
Reactivity, 60, 61, 66
Rebuffs, conflict and, 346, 364
Reciprocity
in self-disclosure, 157
liking and, 88–91
of benefits, 197, 200
Reconstructive memory, 117, 
139
Red color, attractiveness and, 
80–81
Referent power, 368, 369
Regulating interaction, 
nonverbal communication 
and, 143, 144
Rejection
degrees of, 309
hurt feelings, 311–313 
ostracism, 313–315 
relational value, 310
Rejection sensitivity, 123
Relatedness, 299
Relational devaluation, 311, 
312, 331, 338, 362
Relational turbulence model, 
191–193, 211
Relational value, 308–310, 320, 
324, 338, 363
Relationship Assessment 
Scale, 56
Relationship beliefs. See 
Beliefs about relationships
Relationship maintenance
mechanisms, 209–210, 
430–437, 448
Politeness, in communication, 
171–173
Pornography, 292, 293
Positive illusions, 112–113, 
139, 427, 431, 439
Positive self-concept, 
127–128
Post-dissolution relationships, 
415–416, 421–422
Posture, body, 148, 374
Power, 365–380, 392–393
and (in)dependence, 183, 
366–367
behavior control, 367, 392
defined, 365
fate control, 367, 392
gender differences in 
control of resources, 
369–371, 392
in conversation, 373
indirect, 375
interdependence theory 
and, 366–368, 392
nonverbal behavior and, 
374
outcome of, 378
resources underlying, 
368–369, 392
sex differences in use of, 
373–377
sexual behavior and, 397
styles of, 375–377
two faces of, 378–380 
Pragma, 264
“Precarious” relationships, 
189–190
Prejudice against singles, 9
Premarital sex, attitudes 
toward, 276–277
Preoccupied style of 
attachment, 16, 17, 137
jealousy and, 318
Prevention and Relationship 
Enhancement Program 
(PREP), 440, 449
Preventive relationship 
maintenance, 439
Primacy effect, 108, 138
Princeton University, 108
Principle of lesser interest, 
183, 214, 363, 366–367, 392
Prior marriage, as predictor of 
divorce, 409
Privacy, in relationships, 
159, 341

I-24 
Subject Index
Scales
Commitment, 206
Compassionate Love, 262
Conflict Tactics, 380
Friendship-Based Love, 258
Initiator Style, 352, 353
Interpersonal Betrayal, 330
Loneliness, 238, 239
Love and Liking, 257
Measuring Communal 
Strength, 199
Opener, 158, 165
Passionate Love, 256
Perceived Responsiveness, 
220
Relationship Assessment, 56
Self-Monitoring, 133
Shyness, 233
Sociosexual Orientation 
Inventory, 289
Scenarios, 54
Secrets, 158–161, 175, 195
Secure base, 224
Secure style of attachment, 
14–19, 37, 39, 58, 60, 207, 
88, 325
communication and, 160, 161
conflict and, 343, 351
forgiveness, and, 336
jealousy and, 316, 325
love and, 265, 267–268
lying and, 329
perception of partners, 120
relationship-enhancing 
attributions and, 116
sex and, 303
social support and, 217–218
Self-bolstering, jealousy and, 
326
Self-concepts, 125–128, 259, 
414
Self-control, 336, 357, 361, 384, 
386, 387, 433–434, 437, 448
Self-Determination Theory, 
297–300
Self-disclosure, 156–161, 412
coming out, 160
defined, 156, 174
gender differences in, 
165, 229 
high openers, 158
in cybersex, 292
reciprocity in, 157
relationship satisfaction, 
161–162
relationship satisfaction, 
180–197
Role-playing, as method 
of research, 54, 66
Romance
enhanced by fantasy, 271
feminism’s compatibility 
with, 204
in marriage, history of, 
247–248
Romanticism, 117, 269
Romantic love
arousal in, 253–257
as an emotion, 254
as reason for marriage, 
247–248
companionate love, vs., 
261–262
decreasing after marriage, 
270–274, 429
friendship vs., 213–214, 256
in Triangular Theory of 
Love, 250, 251 
infatuation, vs. 248
involving passion, 250–257 
nature of, 252, 275
role of thoughts in, 257–259
through the passage of 
time, 269–274
unrequited, 265
Romeo and Juliet effect, 
100, 104
Rules: Time-Tested Secrets for 
Capturing the Heart of Mr. 
Right, The (book), 438–439
Rules of relationships, 
221–222, 244, 412
Sacrifice, willingness to, 209, 
432, 448
Safe haven, 224
Safe sex, 294–298, 299
Sam Houston State 
University, 12
Same-sex friendships, 231–232
Same-sex relationships. 
See Gay and lesbian 
relationships
Same-sex sexuality
attitudes about, 278–281
perceived origins, 278–280
Sarcasm, 151
Satisfaction, see Relationship 
satisfaction, Sexual 
satisfaction
Repairing relationships, 
438–447, 448–449
advice from the media, 
438–439
marital therapy, 
440–447, 449 
preventive maintenance, 
439–440, 449
Representative samples, 
47–50, 66
Research, relationship, 41–67
archival materials for, 61
beginnings of, 42–43
correlational designs, 50–52
current nature of, 43 
ethical issues in, 61–63 
examples of, 42–45
experimental designs, 52–53 
goals of, 46
history of, 42–46
imposters and, 41
interpreting and integrating 
results of, 63–64
need for understanding, 
41–42
observations of behavior, 
57, 59–61
participants for, 47–49
physiological measures
 in, 60
question development, 
46–47
selecting a setting for, 
53–54
self-report data in, 55–57
Respect
in communication, 173
in friendships, 215, 244
Responsiveness, 354
as part of intimacy, 2–3 
in communication, 158–159, 
171, 173, 174
in friendship, 213, 
219–221, 244
perceived partner, 220
Resurrection phase of 
dissolution of 
relationships, 414
Revenge, 384–335
Reward power, 368, 370
Rewards
in attraction 68–69 
in interdependence theory, 
177, 204, 210, 211
over time, 191–197

Subject Index I-25
sex ratio and, 13–15
sexual coercion, 
304–306, 307
without love or 
commitment, 288–290
Sexual satisfaction, 
298–304
attachment styles 
and, 303
divorce and, 410
in gays and lesbians, 301
in men, 298, 300
in women, 298, 300
motives for sex and, 300
needs and, 299–300
number of partners and, 
298, 302
relationship satisfaction 
and, 302–304, 307
sexual communication and, 
301–302, 307
unwanted sexual behavior 
and, 304–306
Sexually transmitted 
infections (STIs), 282, 
295–296
Sexual orientation, 29, 80 
beliefs regarding, 279
disclosure of, 160
evolution and, 280
extradyadic sex and, 
286–288
frequency of sex, 285–286
friendships and, 231–232
genetic basis, 279
history of love and, 247
nonverbal behavior 
and, 148
Sexual selection, 32, 33, 69
Shared activities, 229, 244
Short-term mating strategies, 
34, 101
Shyness, 232–237, 245
alleviating, 236–237
characteristics of, 234
definition of, 223
doing better with excuse for 
failure, 236–237
interpersonal effects of, 
234–235
vs. loneliness, 242
Shyness Scale, 233
“Side-by-side” friendships, 
229
Silent treatment, 313–315
jealousy, 312, 316, 323–324
love and, 268–269 
mate preferences, 101–102
nature of, 19–22
nonverbal sensitivity, 
153–156, 428
number of sex partners, 287
parental investment, 34
paternity uncertainty 
and, 34
relative resources, 370
reproductive potential, 33
sex drives, 293–294, 307
sexual attitudes, 277
stereotypes about, 20–23
Sex drives, see Sexual desire
Sex education, 283–284, 297
Sex ratio, 13–14, 39, 396
Sexting, 12
Sexual behavior, unwanted, 
302, 304–306, 409
Sexual coercion, 304–306, 307
Sexual desire, 293–294, 
307, 412
Sexual double standard, 277, 
299, 306
Sexuality, 276–306
adolescent friendships 
and, 223
age of first experience, 282
attachment and, 303 
attitudes about, 276–281 
causes of conflict and, 
294, 346 
in committed relationships, 
284–287
first experiences, 242, 284 
frequency of sexual activity, 
272, 285, 294
in homosexual vs. 
heterosexual 
relationships, 29
in the media, 299
numbers of sexual partners 
and, 287
online sex, 292
in other-sex friendships, 230
paternity uncertainty 
and, 34
power and, 366–367
problems with self-report 
research on, 57
responses to offers for, 
48–49
safe sex, 294–298
small talk, vs. 156, 161
social penetration theory, 
156–157
taboo topics, 159–160
Self-enhancement, 125–128
Self-esteem, 28, 39–40, 125, 
178, 259
based on rejection and 
acceptance, 311
effects on relationships, 
30–32, 40, 194
hurt feelings and, 309–310
loneliness and, 238, 240 
ostracism and, 311
Self-expansion model, 191, 
259, 417
Self-fulfilling prophecies, 
121–123, 139
Self-monitoring, 131–133, 228
Self-Monitoring Scale, 133
Self-oriented strategies of 
breaking up, 411–413
Self-perceptions, 125–128, 139
Self-promotion, 124–130, 139
Self-reliance, jealousy and, 326
Self-reports, 55–57, 66
nature of 55, 66
potential problems with, 
55–57, 66
Self-serving bias, 114–115, 136, 
139, 347
Self-verification, 125–128, 139
Sensitivity, nonverbal, 155–156
Separation from conflict, 
358, 359
Separation protest, 224
Separation versus integration 
tension, 342
Sex
attachment styles and, 303
coercive, 304–306
frequency of, 272, 285, 294
initiation of, 282–283, 
307, 409
motives for, 284–285, 300
number of partners, 287
online, 292
Sex differences
betrayal, 332
demand/withdraw 
pattern, 352
extradyadic sex, 286–287
gender differences vs., 
22–23
housework, 371

I-26 
Subject Index
Stonewalling, 168
Stony Brook University, 45
Storge, 264
Street Corner Society (book), 42
Stresses and strains in 
relationships, 37–38, 
308–337
divorce and, 402–404, 
410, 415
pets and, 228
violence and, 386
Vulnerability-Stress-
Adaptation Model, 
402–404
Stress hormones, as predictor 
of divorce, 410
Stress spillover, 403
Structural improvement, 
350, 359
Styles of loving, 263–265, 275
Supplication, 131, 139
Survivor (TV show), 309
Suspicious jealousy, 316, 320
Symmetry, facial, 77, 81
Sympathy, communicating, 
169
Taboo topics, 161, 175
Talk table, 141
Technology. See also Internet
influences on relationships, 
11–13
dating online and, 74–75
for observational studies, 
59, 60
Teen sex, as predictor of 
divorce, 409
Texting, 163–164
Therapy. See also Marital 
therapy
coping with jealousy 
through, 326
Thought, romantic love and, 
257–259
Threatening perceptions, 
136–137
Time, passage of, 
cohabitation outcomes, 10
love and, 269–274, 275
marital satisfaction, 194
passion, 285
sexual interaction and, 
272–285
Tolerance building, 438, 442
Touch, 148–149, 174 
Social phase of dissolution 
of relationships, 414
Social responsibility 
norm, 369
Social skills, 234, 236
Social support, 216–219, 
244, 412
Facebook and, 241
perceptions of, 218–219
physical effects, 216
types of, 216, 218
Social zone, 150
Sociocultural model, 269
Socioeconomic 
development, cultural 
changes and, 11–12
Socioeconomic status, 
divorce and, 407, 409
Socioemotional selectivity 
theory, 227, 244
Sociometer model of 
self-esteem, 30, 39–40, 238
Sociosexual Orientation 
Inventory, 289
Sociosexual orientation, 
288–290, 307, 321
Solitary confinement, 1
Speaker-listener technique, 
361–362, 364, 440
Speed-dating, 43, 50, 
85–86, 88, 90
Sperm competition, 
291, 307
Stability and change 
tension, 342
Stage of life, conflict 
and, 343
Stalking, 389
Star Wars (movie), 294
Statistical significance, 21, 
63–64
Stepchildren, as predictor 
of divorce, 410
Stereotypes
about communication, 
164, 166
about sex differences in 
intimate relationships, 
20–23
dangers of, 23
first impressions and, 106
physical attractiveness, 
75–76
power and gender, 370
Stimulus-value-role theory, 95
Similarity, 91–100, 103–104, 
412, 447
attitudes, 42–43, 53, 92–93
complementarity and, 99
conflict and, 344
divorce and, 410
examples of, 91–92 
opposites and attraction, 
93–100
over time, 94–96
perceived vs. real, 51, 93–94
personalities, 92–93
types of, 96–97
Simulations, 54
Single, staying, 7, 9
Single-parent homes, 8, 395
Singlism, 9
Situational couple violence 
(SCV), 381, 384–387
Sleep, 344, 364
Small talk, 156, 161
Smell, 150, 174
attractiveness and, 80
Smiling, 144–145
Social allergies, 346
Social cognition, 105–128, 
133–137 
accuracy of perceptions, 
133–138, 139
attributions in, 113–116
definition of, 105
expectations, 121–124
first impressions in, 106–112
ignorance of origins, 111
illusions in, 112–113
impression management, 
128–133
memories and, 116–117
nonconscious, 124
relationship beliefs, 117–121 
self-perception and, 125–128
Social desirability bias, 57
Social exchange, 176–197 
comparison level and, 
177–178, 180–184
comparison level for 
alternatives, 178–184 
defined, 176
outcome, 177
rewards and costs, 177
Social isolation, 238, 245
Social mobility, as predictor of 
divorce, 409
Social penetration theory, 
156–157

Subject Index I-27
Washington Post (newspaper), 
278, 281
Weight, attractiveness and, 78
“Weird” research participants, 47
Widowhood, 103, 419–420
Wild and Crazy Guy, A 
(recording), 255
Will and Grace 
(TV show), 278
Willingness to sacrifice, 209, 
432, 448
Women. See also Gender 
differences; Sex differences
interest in physical 
attractiveness, 86 
language style of, 373
love in, 268–269, 275
motives for sex, 284–285
number of sex partners, 287
sex drives in, 293–294, 307
sexual satisfaction 
in, 398, 300
violence committed 
by, 382–384
violent relationships, 
leaving, 390–391
opening lines used by, 90
response to emotional 
infidelity, 319–321, 
323–324
sexual double standard 
and, 277
verbal communication 
styles, 164
Women’s intuition, 153
Work, effects of, 396, 398, 
400, 409
Working mothers, 8, 
397–398, 309
World Health Organization, 381
XYZ statements, 170, 175
Yes-butting, 167
Young adulthood, 
friendship in, 224–225
Verbal communication, 156–166
affection in, 161–162
attachment styles, 161 
gender differences in, 162, 
164–166, 175 
interpersonal model of 
intimacy, 158–159 
secrets, 159
self-disclosure, 156–161, 165 
styles of, 164
taboo topics, 159–161
Viagra, 276
Violence in relationships, 
380–391, 393
Conflict Tactics Scale, 380
correlates of, 384–388, 393 
escaping from, 390–391, 393
gender differences in, 
382–384, 393
impelling influences, 385–386
inhibiting influences, 
386–387
instigating triggers, 385
mate-guarding and, 383
prevalence of, 380–381 
rationales of, 388–390, 393
situational couple violence, 
384–387
stalking, 389
types of, 381–382, 393
Violent resistance, 381–382
Visual Dominance Ratio 
(VDR), 146
Voice
as response to conflict, 
355–356
nonverbal communication 
through, 151
Volatile couples, 356–358, 364
Volunteer bias, 49
Vulnerability-Stress-
Adaptation Model of 
marital instability, 402–404
Waist-to-hip ratios (WHR), 
77–79, 84, 103
Traditional behavioral couple 
therapy, 441, 443, 445, 449
Triangular Theory of Love, 
248–251, 252, 274
Trust
as a fluid process, 39
as component of intimacy, 2
between best friends, 225
in friendships, 213, 215, 244
Truth bias, 330, 339
UCLA, 300
UCLA Loneliness Scale, 
238, 239
 “Underbenefitted,” 
201–205, 212
Unified detachment, 442
Unilateral style of power, 
375–376
Universalistic resources of 
power, 370
University of Arizona, 45
University of Denver, 224
University of Kansas, 107
University of Michigan, 91, 344
University of Minnesota, 122
University of Texas at 
Arlington, 44
University of Texas at Austin, 
91, 110, 284
University of Virginia, 417
University of Washington, 167
Unmarried birthrate, 7
Unrequited love, 265
Unwanted sexual behavior, 
304–306
Validation, in communication, 
173, 175, 354
Validator conflict style, 
355–356, 364
Validity of data, 55
Value, relational, 308–313
Values, similarities in, 92, 95
Vengefulness, 284, 332, 33, 33, 
339, 363






