
Engineering
McGraw−Hill Primis
ISBN: 0−390−86122−7
Text: 
 
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Çengel
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
2nd Edition
Çengel
McGraw-Hill


Engineering
http://www.primisonline.com
Copyright ©2008 by The McGraw−Hill Companies, Inc. All rights 
reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Except as 
permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part 
of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form 
or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, 
without prior written permission of the publisher. 
 
This McGraw−Hill Primis text may include materials submitted to 
McGraw−Hill for publication by the instructor of this course. The 
instructor is solely responsible for the editorial content of such 
materials.
111
ENGNGEN
ISBN: 0−390−86122−7
This book was printed on recycled paper.

Engineering
Contents
Çengel  •  Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer, Second Edition  
Front Matter 
1
Preface 
1
1. Introduction and Overview 
8
I. Thermodynamics 
26
Introduction 
26
2. Introduction and Basic Concepts 
27
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, and General Energy Analysis 
62
4. Properties of Pure Substances 
114
5. Energy Analysis of Closed Systems 
162
6. Mass and Energy Analysis of Control Volumes 
204
7. The Second Law of Thermodynamics 
256
8. Entropy 
300
II. Heat Transfer 
375
Introduction 
375
9. Mechanisms of Heat Transfer 
376
10. Steady Heat Conduction 
404
11. Transient Heat Conduction 
474
12. External Forced Convection 
528
13. Internal Forced Convection 
574
14. Natural Convection 
614
15. Radiation Heat Transfer 
656
16. Heat Exchangers 
716
Back Matter 
767
Appendix 1: Property Tables and Charts (SI Units) 
767
Appendix 2: Property Tables and Charts (English Units) 
811
Index 
849
iii

This page intentionally left blank 

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
Preface
1
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
P  R  E  F  A  C  E  
BACKGROUND
T
his text is an abbreviated version of standard thermodynamics and heat
transfer texts, covering topics that the engineering students are most
likely to need in their professional lives. The thermodynamics portion of
this text is based on the text Thermodynamics: An Engineering Approach by
Y. A. Çengel and M. A. Boles, and the heat transfer portion is based on Heat
and Mass Transfer: A Practical Approach by Y. A. Çengel, both published by 
McGraw-Hill. Most chapters are practically independent of each other and
can be covered in any order. The text is well-suited for curricula that have a
common introductory course on thermodynamics and heat transfer. Instructors
who desire to incorporate some coverage of fluid mechanics  in their courses
may wish to use the textbook Fundamentals of Thermal-Fluid Sciences in-
stead, as it offers coverage of the essentials of fluid mechanics in addition to
the thermodynamics and the heat transfer coverage in this book.
It is recognized that all topics of thermodynamics, and heat transfer cannot
be covered adequately in a typical three-semester-hour course, and, therefore,
sacrifices must be made from the depth if not from the breadth. Selecting the
right topics and finding the proper level of depth and breadth are no small
challenge for the instructors, and this text is intended to serve as the ground
for such selection. Students in a combined thermal sciences course can gain a
basic understanding of energy and energy interactions, as well as various
mechanisms of heat transfer. Such a course can also instill in students the con-
fidence and the background to do further reading of their own and to be able
to communicate effectively with specialists in thermal sciences.
OBJECTIVES
This book is intended for use as a textbook in a first course in thermal sciences
for undergraduate engineering students in their junior or senior year, and as a
reference book for practicing engineers. Students are assumed to have an ad-
equate background in calculus, physics, and engineering mechanics. The ob-
jectives of this text are
• To cover the basic principles of thermodynamics and heat transfer.
• To present numerous and diverse real-world engineering examples to
give students a feel for how thermal sciences are applied in engineering
practice.
• To develop an intuitive understanding of thermal sciences by emphasiz-
ing the physics and physical arguments.
The text contains sufficient material to give instructors flexibility and to 
accommodate their preferences on the right blend of thermodynamics and
heat transfer for their students. By careful selection of topics, an instructor can
spend one-third, one-half, or two-thirds of the course on thermodynamics and
the rest on selected topics of heat transfer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
Preface
2
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
PHILOSOPHY AND GOAL
The philosophy that contributed to the warm reception of the first edition of
this book has remained unchanged. Namely, our goal is to offer an engineer-
ing textbook that
• Communicates directly to the minds of tomorrow’s engineers in a sim-
ple yet precise manner.
• Leads students towards a clear understanding and firm grasp of the 
basic principles of thermodynamics and heat transfer.
• Encourages creative thinking and development of a deeper understand-
ing and intuitive feel for thermodynamics and heat transfer.
• Is read by students with interest and enthusiasm rather than being used
as an aid to solve problems.
Special effort has been made to appeal to readers’natural curiosity and to help
students explore the various facets of the exciting subject area of thermal sci-
ences. The enthusiastic response we received from the users of the previous
edition—from small colleges to large universities all over the world—
indicates that our objectives have largely been achieved. It is our philosophy
that the best way to learn is by practice. Therefore, special effort is made
throughout the book to reinforce material that was presented earlier.
Yesterday’s engineers spent a major portion of their time substituting values
into the formulas and obtaining numerical results. However, now formula
manipulations and number crunching are being left to computers. Tomorrow’s
engineer will need to have a clear understanding and a firm grasp of the basic
principles so that he or she can understand even the most complex problems,
formulate them, and interpret the results. A conscious effort is made to 
emphasize these basic principles while also providing students with a look at
how modern tools are used in engineering practice.
NEW IN THIS EDITION
All the popular features of the previous edition is retained while new ones are
added. The main body of the text remains largely unchanged except that two
new chapters are added, and two chapters are removed. The most significant
changes in this edition are highlighted below.
EARLY INTRODUCTION OF THE FIRST LAW 
OF THERMODYNAMICS
The first law of thermodynamics is now introduced early Chapter 3, “Energy,
Energy Transfer, and General Energy Analysis.” This introductory chapter sets
the framework of establishing a general understanding of various forms of en-
ergy, mechanisms of energy transfer, the concept of energy balance, thermo-
economics, energy conversion, and conversion efficiency using familiar
settings that involve mostly electrical and mechanical forms of energy. It also
exposes students to some exciting real-world applications of thermodynamics
early in the course, and helps them establish a sense of the monetary value of
energy.
xvi
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
Preface
3
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
COMPREHENSIVE PROBLEMS WITH EXTENSIVE PARAMETRIC
STUDIES
A distinctive feature of this edition is the incorporation of numerous compre-
hensive problems that require conducting extensive parametric studies, using
the enclosed EES (or other suitable) software. Students are asked to study the
effects of certain variables in the problems on some quantities of interest, to
plot the results, and to draw conclusions from the results obtained. These
problems are designated by a square computer-EES icon for easy recognition,
and can be ignored if desired. Solutions of these problems are given in the
Instructor’s Manual.
EXPANDED COVERAGE OF CONVECTION
Forced convection is now covered in two chapters instead of one. Chapter 12
deals with the practical analysis of external convection while Chapter 13 deals
with the practical aspects of internal convection.
UPDATED STEAM AND REFRIGERANT-134A TABLES
The steam and refrigerant-134a tables are updated using the most current
property data from EES. Tables A-4 through A-8, and A-11 through A-13, as
well as their counterparts in English units have all been revised. All the exam-
ples and homework problems in the text that involve steam or refrigerant-134a
are also revised to reflect the small changes in steam and refrigerant proper-
ties. An added advantage of this update is that students will get the same result
when solving problems whether they use steam or refrigerant properties from
EES or property tables in the Appendices.
LEARNING OBJECTIVES
Each chapter now begins with an overview of the material to be covered and
chapter-specific learning objectives to introduce the material and to set goals.
CONTENT CHANGES AND REORGANIZATION
The noteworthy changes in various chapters are summarized below for those
who are familiar with the previous edition.
• The text now starts with a new introductory chapter Introduction and
Overview where thermodynamics and heat transfer are introduced, di-
mensions and units are discussed, and a systematic problem solving ap-
proach is described.
• The new Chapter 3 mainly consists of the sections Forms of Energy, En-
ergy and the Environment, Energy Transfer by Heat, Energy Transfer by
Work, Mechanical Forms of Energy, The First Law of Thermodynamics,
and Energy Conversion Efficiencies.
• Chapters 3 and 4 (now Chapters 5 and 6) on the first law of thermody-
namics for closed systems and control volumes remain largely un-
changed, but a new intutive “energy balance” approach is used in
problem solving.  Also, coverage is extended to include unsteady flow
systems.
• Chapter 6 (now Chapter 8) Entropy is revised considerably, and the sec-
tion on Entropy Balance is moved to the end of the chapter.
Preface
|
xvii

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
Preface
4
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
• Chapter 7 Power and Refrigeration Cycles is deleted, but is available for
downloading from the web site as a PDF file if needed.
• Chapter 8, Steady Heat Conduction, is now replaced by two chapters:
Chapter 9 Mechanisms of Heat Transfer, where the three basic heat
transfer mechanisms are introduced; and Chapter 10 Steady Heat Con-
duction, where steady conduction problems in various geometries are
solved.
• Chapter 9 (now Chapter 11), Transient Heat Conduction, is greatly ex-
panded to include the derivation of one-term solutions and additional
cases of heat transfer in semi-infinite bodies.
• Chapter 10, Forced Convection, is now replaced by two chapters: Chap-
ter 12 External Forced Convection, where the basic concepts of convec-
tion are introduced and drag and heat transfer for flow over surfaces,
including flow over tube banks, are discussed; and Chapter 13 Internal
Forced Convection, where pressure drop and heat transfer for flow in
tubes are presented.
• Chapter 11 (now Chapter 14) Natural Convection is completely rewritten.
The Grashof number is derived from a momentum balance on a differen-
tial volume element, some Nusselt number relations (especially those for
rectangular enclosures) are updated, and the section Natural Convection
from Finned Surfaces is expanded to include heat transfer from PCBs.
• In Chapter 12 (now Chapter 15) Radiation Heat Transfer, the sections
on Atmospheric and Solar Radiation and Radiation Shields are deleted.
• In Appendices 1 and 2, the steam and refrigerant-134a tables (Tables 4
through 8 and 11 through 13) are entirely revised, but the table numbers
are kept the same. Appendix 3 Introduction to EES is in the Student Re-
sources DVD that comes packaged free with the text.
• The conversion factors on the inner cover pages and the physical con-
stants are updated, and some nomenclature symbols are revised.
LEARNING TOOLS
EMPHASIS ON PHYSICS
A distinctive feature of this book is its emphasis on the physical aspects of
subject matter in addition to mathematical representations and manipulations.
The authors believe that the emphasis in undergraduate education should 
remain on developing a sense of underlying physical mechanisms and a mas-
tery of solving practical problems that an engineer is likely to face in the real
world. Developing an intuitive understanding should also make the course a
more motivating and worthwhile experience for the students.
EFFECTIVE USE OF ASSOCIATION
An observant mind should have no difficulty understanding engineering
sciences. After all, the principles of engineering sciences are based on our
everyday experiences and experimental observations. A more physical, intu-
itive approach is used throughout this text. Frequently, parallels are drawn be-
tween the subject matter and students’ everyday experiences so that they can
relate the subject matter to what they already know.
xviii
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
Preface
5
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
SELF-INSTRUCTING
The material in the text is introduced at a level that an average student can fol-
low comfortably. It speaks to students, not over students. In fact, it is self-
instructive. Noting that the principles of science are based on experimental 
observations, most of the derivations in this text are largely based on physical
arguments, and thus they are easy to follow and understand.
EXTENSIVE USE OF ARTWORK
Figures are important learning tools that help the students “get the picture.”
The text makes effective use of graphics, and it contains a great number of fig-
ures and illustrations. Figures attract attention and stimulate curiosity and in-
terest. Some of the figures in this text are intended to serve as a means of
emphasizing some key concepts that would otherwise go unnoticed; some
serve as page summaries.
CHAPTER OPENERS AND SUMMARIES
Each chapter begins with an overview of the material to be covered and chap-
ter objectives. A summary is included at the end of each chapter for a quick re-
view of basic concepts and important relations.
NUMEROUS WORKED-OUT EXAMPLES
Each chapter contains several worked-out examples that clarify the material
and illustrate the use of the basic principles. An intuitive and systematic ap-
proach is used in the solution of the example problems, with particular atten-
tion to the proper use of units.
A WEALTH OF REAL-WORLD END-OF-CHAPTER PROBLEMS
The end-of-chapter problems are grouped under specific topics in the order
they are covered to make problem selection easier for both instructors and stu-
dents. Within each group of problems are Concept Questions, indicated by “C”
to check the students’ level of understanding of basic concepts. The problems
under Review Problems are more comprehensive in nature and are not directly
tied to any specific section of a chapter—in some cases they require review of
material learned in previous chapters. The problems under the Design and
Essay Problems title are intended to encourage students to make engineering
judgments, to conduct independent exploration of topics of interest, and to
communicate their findings in a professional manner. Several economics- and
safety-related problems are incorporated throughout to enhance cost and
safety awareness among engineering students. Answers to selected problems
are listed immediately following the problem for convenience to students.
A SYSTEMATIC SOLUTION PROCEDURE
A well-structured approach is used in problem solving while maintaining an
informal conversational style. The problem is first stated and the objectives are
identified, and the assumptions made are stated together with their justifi-
cations. The properties needed to solve the problem are listed separately.
Numerical values are used together with their units to emphasize that numbers
without units are meaningless, and unit manipulations are as important as
manipulating the numerical values with a calculator. The significance of the
findings is discussed following the solutions. This approach is also used con-
sistently in the solutions presented in the Instructor’s Solutions Manual.
Preface
|
xix

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
Preface
6
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
RELAXED SIGN CONVENTION
The use of a formal sign convention for heat and work is abandoned as it often
becomes counterproductive. A physically meaningful and engaging approach
is adopted for interactions instead of a mechanical approach. Subscripts “in”
and “out,” rather than the plus and minus signs, are used to indicate the direc-
tions of interactions.
A CHOICE OF SI ALONE OR SI / ENGLISH UNITS
In recognition of the fact that English units are still widely used in some in-
dustries, both SI and English units are used in this text, with an emphasis on
SI. The material in this text can be covered using combined SI/English units
or SI units alone, depending on the preference of the instructor. The property
tables and charts in the appendices are presented in both units, except the ones
that involve dimensionless quantities. Problems, tables, and charts in English
units are designated by “E” after the number for easy recognition, and they
can be ignored easily by the SI users.
CONVERSION FACTORS
Frequently used conversion factors and physical constants are listed on the 
inner cover pages of the text for easy reference.
SUPPLEMENTS
The following supplements are available to the adopters of the book.
ENGINEERING EQUATION SOLVER (EES) DVD
(Limited Academic Version packaged free with every new copy of the text)
Developed by Sanford Klein and William Beckman from the University of
Wisconsin–Madison, this software combines equation-solving capability and
engineering property data. EES can do optimization, parametric analysis, and
linear and nonlinear regression, and provides publication-quality plotting ca-
pabilities. Thermodynamic and transport properties for air, water, and many
other fluids are built in, and EES allows the user to enter property data or
functional relationships. Some problems are solved using EES, and complete
solutions together with parametric studies are included on the enclosed 
DVD. To obtain the full version of EES, contact your McGraw-Hill represen-
tative or visit www.mhhe.com/ees.
TEXTBOOK WEBSITE (www.mhhe.com/cengel)
Visit the text website for general text information, errata, and author informa-
tion. The site also includes resources for students including a list of helpful
web links. The instructor side of the site includes the solutions manual, the
text’s images in PowerPoint form, and more!
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge with appreciation the numerous and valuable
comments, suggestions, criticisms, and praise of these academic evaluators:
Heather L. Cooper, Purdue University and Charles W. Knisely, Bucknell 
University.
xx
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
Preface
7
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Preface
|
xxi
Their suggestions have greatly helped to improve the quality of this text. Spe-
cial thanks are due to Mehmet Kanoglu of the University of Gaziantep, Turkey,
for his valuable contributions and his critical review of the manuscript and for
his special attention to accuracy and detail. I also would like to thank our stu-
dents who provided plenty of feedback from their perspectives. Finally, I would
like to express my appreciation to my wife and children for their continued pa-
tience, understanding, and support throughout the preparation of this text.
Yunus A. Çengel

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
8
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 1
INTRODUCTION AND OVERVIEW
|
1
M
any engineering systems involve the transfer
and conversion of energy, and the sciences that
deal with these subjects are broadly referred to
as thermal sciences. Thermal sciences are usually stud-
ied under the subcategories of thermodynamics and heat
transfer. We start this chapter with an overview of these
sciences, and give some historical background. Then we
review the unit systems that will be used, and discuss
dimensional homogeneity. We then present an intuitive
systematic problem solving technique that can be used
as a model in solving engineering problems, followed
by a discussion of the proper place of software pack-
ages in engineering. Finally, we discuss accuracy and
significant digits in engineering measurements and cal-
culations.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Be acquainted with the engineering sciences
thermodynamics and heat transfer, and understand the
basic concepts of thermal sciences,
• Be comfortable with the metric SI and English units
commonly used in engineering,
• Develop an intuitive systematic problem-solving technique,
• Learn the proper use of software packages in engineering,
and
• Develop an understanding of accuracy and significant digits
in calculations.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
9
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
2
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1–1
■INTRODUCTION TO THERMAL SCIENCES
The word thermal stems from the Greek word therme, which means heat.
Therefore, thermal sciences can loosely be defined as the sciences that deal
with heat. The recognition of different forms of energy and its transforma-
tions has forced this definition to be broadened. Today, the physical sciences
that deal with energy and the transfer, transport, and conversion of energy
are usually referred to as thermal sciences. Traditionally, the thermal sci-
ences are studied under the subcategories of thermodynamics and heat
transfer. In this book we present the basic principles of these sciences, and
apply them to situations that engineers are likely to encounter in their
practice.
The design and analysis of most thermal systems such as power plants,
automotive engines, and refrigerators involve all categories of thermal sci-
ences as well as other sciences (Fig. 1–1). For example, designing the radia-
tor of a car involves the determination of the amount of energy transfer from
a knowledge of the properties of the coolant using thermodynamics and the
determination of the size and shape of the inner tubes and the outer fins using
heat transfer. Of course, the determination of the size and type of the water
pump requires using fluid mechanics. Also, the determination of the materi-
als and the thickness of the tubes requires the use of material science as well
as strength of materials. The reason for studying different sciences separately
is simply to facilitate learning without being overwhelmed. Once the basic
principles are mastered, they can then be synthesized by solving comprehen-
sive real-world practical problems. But first we will present an overview of
thermal sciences.
Application Areas of Thermal Sciences
All activities in nature involve some interaction between energy and matter;
thus it is hard to imagine an area that does not relate to thermal sciences in
some manner. Therefore, developing a good understanding of basic princi-
ples of thermal sciences has long been an essential part of engineering edu-
cation.
Thermal sciences are commonly encountered in many engineering systems
and other aspects of life, and one does not need to go very far to see some
application areas of them. In fact, one does not need to go anywhere. The
heart is constantly pumping blood to all parts of the human body, various
energy conversions occur in trillions of body cells, and the body heat gener-
ated is constantly rejected to the environment. The human comfort is closely
tied to the rate of this metabolic heat rejection. We try to control this
heat transfer rate by adjusting our clothing to the environmental conditions.
Also, any defect in the heart and the circulatory system is a major cause for
alarm.
Other applications of thermal sciences are right where one lives. An
ordinary house is, in some respects, an exhibition hall filled with wonders
of thermal sciences. Many ordinary household utensils and appliances
are designed, in whole or in part, by using the principles of thermal sci-
ences. Some examples include the electric or gas range, the heating and
air-conditioning systems, the refrigerator, the humidifier, the pressure cooker,
the water heater, the shower, the iron, the plumbing and sprinkling systems,
Solar
collectors
Hot
water
Heat
exchanger
Pump
Shower
Cold
water
Hot water tank
FIGURE 1–1
The design of many engineering
systems, such as this solar hot water
system, involves thermal sciences.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
10
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
and even the computer, the TV, and the DVD player. On a larger scale,
thermal sciences play a major part in the design and analysis of automotive
engines, rockets, jet engines, and conventional or nuclear power plants, solar
collectors, the transportation of water, crude oil, and natural gas, the water
distribution systems in cities, and the design of vehicles from ordinary cars to
airplanes (Fig. 1–2). The energy-efficient home that you may be living in, for
example, is designed on the basis of minimizing heat loss in winter and heat
gain in summer. The size, location, and the power input of the fan of your
computer is also selected after a thermodynamic, heat transfer, and fluid flow
analysis of the computer.
1–2
■THERMODYNAMICS
Thermodynamics can be defined as the science of energy. Although every-
body has a feeling of what energy is, it is difficult to give a precise defini-
tion for it. Energy can be viewed as the ability to cause changes.
The name thermodynamics stems from the Greek words therme (heat) and
dynamis (power), which is most descriptive of the early efforts to convert
heat into power. Today the same name is broadly interpreted to include all
Introduction and Overview
|
3
FIGURE 1–2
Some application areas of thermal sciences.
A/C unit, fridge, radiator: © The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Jill Braaten, photographer; Plane: © Vol. 14/PhotoDisc; Humans: © Vol.
121/PhotoDisc; Power plant: © Corbis Royalty Free
The human body
Air conditioning systems
Airplanes
Automobile radiators
Power plants
Refrigeration systems

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
11
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
aspects of energy and energy transformations, including power generation,
refrigeration, and relationships among the properties of matter.
One of the most fundamental laws of nature is the conservation of
energy principle. It simply states that during an interaction, energy can
change from one form to another but the total amount of energy remains
constant. That is, energy cannot be created or destroyed. A rock falling off a
cliff, for example, picks up speed as a result of its potential energy being
converted to kinetic energy (Fig. 1–3). The conservation of energy principle
also forms the backbone of the diet industry: A person who has a greater
energy input (food) than energy output (exercise) will gain weight (store
energy in the form of fat), and a person who has a smaller energy input
than output will lose weight (Fig. 1–4). The change in the energy content 
of a body or any other system is equal to the difference between the 
energy input and the energy output, and the energy balance is expressed as
Ein  Eout  E.
The first law of thermodynamics is simply an expression of the conser-
vation of energy principle, and it asserts that energy is a thermodynamic
property. The second law of thermodynamics asserts that energy has qual-
ity as well as quantity, and actual processes occur in the direction of
decreasing quality of energy. For example, a cup of hot coffee left on a table
eventually cools, but a cup of cool coffee in the same room never gets hot
by itself (Fig. 1–5). The high-temperature energy of the coffee is degraded
(transformed into a less useful form at a lower temperature) once it is trans-
ferred to the surrounding air.
Although the principles of thermodynamics have been in existence since
the creation of the universe, thermodynamics did not emerge as a science
until the construction of the first successful atmospheric steam engines in
England by Thomas Savery in 1697 and Thomas Newcomen in 1712. These
engines were very slow and inefficient, but they opened the way for the
development of a new science.
The first and second laws of thermodynamics emerged simultaneously in
the 1850s, primarily out of the works of William Rankine, Rudolph Clau-
sius, and Lord Kelvin (formerly William Thomson). The term thermody-
namics was first used in a publication by Lord Kelvin in 1849. The first
thermodynamic textbook was written in 1859 by William Rankine, a profes-
sor at the University of Glasgow.
It is well-known that a substance consists of a large number of particles
called molecules. The properties of the substance naturally depend on the
behavior of these particles. For example, the pressure of a gas in a container
is the result of momentum transfer between the molecules and the walls of
the container. However, one does not need to know the behavior of the gas
particles to determine the pressure in the container. It would be sufficient to
attach a pressure gage to the container. This macroscopic approach to the
study of thermodynamics that does not require a knowledge of the behavior
of individual particles is called classical thermodynamics. It provides a
direct and easy way to the solution of engineering problems. A more elabo-
rate approach, based on the average behavior of large groups of individual
particles, is called statistical thermodynamics. This microscopic approach
is rather involved and is used in this text only in the supporting role.
4
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Potential
energy
Kinetic
energy
PE = 10 units
KE = 0
PE = 7 units
KE = 3 units
FIGURE 1–3
Energy cannot be created or
destroyed; it can only change forms
(the first law).
Energy out
(4 units)
Energy in
(5 units)
Energy storage
(1 unit)
FIGURE 1–4
Conservation of energy principle for
the human body.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
12
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
1–3
■HEAT TRANSFER
We all know from experience that a cold canned drink left in a room warms
up and a warm canned drink put in a refrigerator cools down. This is accom-
plished by the transfer of energy from the warm medium to the cold one. The
energy transfer is always from the higher temperature medium to the lower
temperature one, and the energy transfer stops when the two mediums reach
the same temperature.
Energy exists in various forms. In heat transfer, we are primarily interested
in heat, which is the form of energy that can be transferred from one system
to another as a result of temperature difference. The science that deals with
the determination of the rates of such energy transfers is heat transfer.
You may be wondering why we need the science of heat transfer. After
all, we can determine the amount of heat transfer for any system undergoing
any process using a thermodynamic analysis alone. The reason is that ther-
modynamics is concerned with the amount of heat transfer as a system
undergoes a process from one equilibrium state to another, and it gives no
indication about how long the process will take. But in engineering, we are
often interested in the rate of heat transfer, which is the topic of the science
of heat transfer. A thermodynamic analysis simply tells us how much heat
must be transferred to realize a specified change of state to satisfy the con-
servation of energy principle.
In practice we are more concerned about the rate of heat transfer (heat
transfer per unit time) than we are with the amount of it. For example, we can
determine the amount of heat transferred from a thermos bottle as the hot cof-
fee inside cools from 90C to 80C by a thermodynamic analysis alone. But a
typical user or designer of a thermos is primarily interested in how long it
will be before the hot coffee inside cools to 80C, and a thermodynamic
analysis cannot answer this question. Determining the rates of heat transfer to
or from a system and thus the times of cooling or heating, as well as the vari-
ation of the temperature, is the subject of heat transfer (Fig. 1–6).
Thermodynamics deals with equilibrium states and changes from one
equilibrium state to another. Heat transfer, on the other hand, deals with
systems that lack thermal equilibrium, and thus it is a nonequilibrium phe-
nomenon. Therefore, the study of heat transfer cannot be based on the prin-
ciples of thermodynamics alone. However, the laws of thermodynamics 
lay the framework for the science of heat transfer. The first law requires
that the rate of energy transfer into a system be equal to the rate of increase
of the energy of that system. The second law requires that heat be trans-
ferred in the direction of decreasing temperature. This is analogous to a car
parked on an inclined road; it must go downhill in the direction of decreas-
ing elevation when its brakes are released. It is also analogous to the elec-
tric current flowing in the direction of decreasing voltage or the fluid
flowing in the direction of decreasing pressure.
The basic requirement for heat transfer is the presence of a temperature
difference. There can be no net heat transfer between two mediums that are
at the same temperature. The temperature difference is the driving force for
heat transfer; just as the voltage difference is the driving force for electric
current, and pressure difference is the driving force for fluid flow. The rate
Introduction and Overview
|
5
Heat
Cool
environment
20°C
Hot
coffee
70°C
FIGURE 1–5
Heat flows in the direction of
decreasing temperature.
Hot
coffee
Thermos
bottle
Insulation
FIGURE 1–6
We are normally interested in
how long it takes for the hot coffee
in a thermos to cool to a certain
temperature, which cannot be
determined from a thermodynamic
analysis alone.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
13
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
of heat transfer in a certain direction depends on the magnitude of the tem-
perature gradient (the temperature difference per unit length or the rate of
change of temperature) in that direction. The larger the temperature gradi-
ent, the higher the rate of heat transfer.
1–4
■IMPORTANCE OF DIMENSIONS AND UNITS
Any physical quantity can be characterized by dimensions. The magnitudes
assigned to the dimensions are called units. Some basic dimensions such as
mass m, length L, time t, and temperature T are selected as primary, basic,
or fundamental dimensions, while others such as velocity V, energy E, and
volume V are expressed in terms of the primary dimensions and are called
secondary dimensions, or derived dimensions.
A number of unit systems have been developed over the years. Despite
strong efforts in the scientific and engineering community to unify the
world with a single unit system, two sets of units are still in common use
today: the English system, which is also known as the United States Cus-
tomary System (USCS), and the metric SI (from Le Système International
d’ Unités), which is also known as the International System. The SI is a sim-
ple and logical system based on a decimal relationship between the various
units, and it is being used for scientific and engineering work in most of the
industrialized nations, including England. The English system, however, has
no systematic numerical base, and various units in this system are related to
each other rather arbitrarily (12 in  1 ft, 1 mile  5280 ft, 4 qt  1 gal,
etc.), which makes it confusing and difficult to learn. The United States is
the only industrialized country that has not yet fully converted to the metric
system.
The systematic efforts to develop a universally acceptable system of units
dates back to 1790 when the French National Assembly charged the French
Academy of Sciences to come up with such a unit system. An early version of
the metric system was soon developed in France, but it did not find universal
acceptance until 1875 when The Metric Convention Treaty was prepared and
signed by 17 nations, including the United States. In this international treaty,
meter and gram were established as the metric units for length and mass,
respectively, and a General Conference of Weights and Measures (CGPM)
was established that was to meet every six years. In 1960, the CGPM pro-
duced the SI, which was based on six fundamental quantities, and their units
were adopted in 1954 at the Tenth General Conference of Weights and Mea-
sures: meter (m) for length, kilogram (kg) for mass, second (s) for time,
ampere (A) for electric current, degree Kelvin (°K) for temperature, and
candela (cd) for luminous intensity (amount of light). In 1971, the CGPM
added a seventh fundamental quantity and unit: mole (mol) for the amount of
matter.
Based on the notational scheme introduced in 1967, the degree symbol
was officially dropped from the absolute temperature unit, and all unit
names were to be written without capitalization even if they were derived
from proper names (Table 1–1). However, the abbreviation of a unit was to
be capitalized if the unit was derived from a proper name. For example, the
SI unit of force, which is named after Sir Isaac Newton (1647–1723), is
newton (not Newton), and it is abbreviated as N. Also, the full name of a
6
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 1–1
The seven fundamental (or primary)
dimensions and their units in SI
Dimension
Unit
Length
meter (m)
Mass
kilogram (kg)
Time
second (s)
Temperature
kelvin (K)
Electric current
ampere (A)
Amount of light
candela (cd)
Amount of matter
mole (mol)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
14
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
unit may be pluralized, but its abbreviation cannot. For example, the length
of an object can be 5 m or 5 meters, not 5 ms or 5 meter. Finally, no period
is to be used in unit abbreviations unless they appear at the end of a sen-
tence. For example, the proper abbreviation of meter is m (not m.).
The recent move toward the metric system in the United States seems to
have started in 1968 when Congress, in response to what was happening in
the rest of the world, passed a Metric Study Act. Congress continued to pro-
mote a voluntary switch to the metric system by passing the Metric Conver-
sion Act in 1975. A trade bill passed by Congress in 1988 set a September
1992 deadline for all federal agencies to convert to the metric system. How-
ever, the deadlines were relaxed later with no clear plans for the future.
The industries that are heavily involved in international trade (such as the
automotive, soft drink, and liquor industries) have been quick in converting to
the metric system for economic reasons (having a single worldwide design,
fewer sizes, smaller inventories, etc.). Today, nearly all the cars manufactured
in the United States are metric. Most car owners probably do not realize this
until they try an English socket wrench on a metric bolt. Most industries,
however, resisted the change, thus slowing down the conversion process.
Presently the United States is a dual-system society, and it will stay that
way until the transition to the metric system is completed. This puts an extra
burden on today’s engineering students, since they are expected to retain their
understanding of the English system while learning, thinking, and working in
terms of the SI. Given the position of the engineers in the transition period,
both unit systems are used in this text, with particular emphasis on SI units.
As pointed out, the SI is based on a decimal relationship between units.
The prefixes used to express the multiples of the various units are listed in
Table 1–2. They are standard for all units, and the student is encouraged to
memorize them because of their widespread use (Fig. 1–7).
Some SI and English Units
In SI, the units of mass, length, and time are the kilogram (kg), meter (m),
and second (s), respectively. The respective units in the English system are
the pound-mass (lbm), foot (ft), and second (s). The pound symbol lb is
actually the abbreviation of libra, which was the ancient Roman unit of
weight. The English retained this symbol even after the end of the Roman
occupation of Britain in 410. The mass and length units in the two systems
are related to each other by
1 ft  0.3048 m
1 lbm  0.45359 kg
Introduction and Overview
|
7
200 mL
(0.2 L)
1 kg
(103 g)
1 M
(106 )
FIGURE 1–7
The SI unit prefixes are used in all branches of engineering.
TABLE 1–2
Standard prefixes in SI units
Multiple
Prefix
1012
tera, T
109
giga, G
106
mega, M
103
kilo, k
102
hecto, h
101
deka, da
101
deci, d
102
centi, c
103
milli, m
106
micro, m
109
nano, n
1012
pico, p

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
15
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
In the English system, force is usually considered to be one of the primary
dimensions and is assigned a nonderived unit. This is a source of confusion
and error that necessitates the use of a dimensional constant (gc) in many for-
mulas. To avoid this nuisance, we consider force to be a secondary dimension
whose unit is derived from an equation based on Newton’s second law, i.e.,
Force  (Mass) (Acceleration)
or
F  ma
(1–1)
In SI, the force unit is the newton (N), and it is defined as the force required
to accelerate a mass of 1 kg at a rate of 1 m/s2. In the English system, the
force unit is the pound-force (lbf) and is defined as the force required to
accelerate a mass of 32.174 lbm (1 slug) at a rate of 1 ft/s2 (Fig. 1–8). That is,
A force of 1 N is roughly equivalent to the weight of a small apple (m 
102 g), whereas a force of 1 lbf is roughly equivalent to the weight of four
apples (mtotal  454 g), as shown in Fig. 1–9. Another force unit in common
use in Europe is the kilogram-force (kgf), which is the weight of 1 kg mass at
sea level (1 kgf  9.807 N).
The term weight is often incorrectly used to express mass, particularly by
the “weight watchers.” Unlike mass, weight W is a force. It is the gravita-
tional force applied to a body, and its magnitude is determined from an
equation based on Newton’s second law,
(1–2)
where m is the mass of the body, and g is the local gravitational acceleration
(g is 9.807 m/s2 or 32.174 ft/s2 at sea level and 45° latitude). An ordinary
bathroom scale measures the gravitational force acting on a body. The
weight per unit volume of a substance is called the specific weight g and is
determined from g  rg, where r is density.
The mass of a body remains the same regardless of its location in the uni-
verse. Its weight, however, changes with a change in gravitational accelera-
tion. A body weighs less on top of a mountain since g decreases (by a small
amount) with altitude. On the surface of the moon, an astronaut weighs
about one-sixth of what she or he normally weighs on earth (Fig. 1–10).
At sea level a mass of 1 kg weighs 9.807 N, as illustrated in Fig. 1–11. A
mass of 1 lbm, however, weighs 1 lbf, which misleads people to believe that
pound-mass and pound-force can be used interchangeably as pound (lb),
which is a major source of error in the English system.
It should be noted that the gravity force acting on a mass is due to the
attraction between the masses, and thus it is proportional to the magnitudes
of the masses and inversely proportional to the square of the distance between
them. Therefore, the gravitational acceleration g at a location depends on the
local density of the earth’s crust, the distance to the center of the earth, and to
a lesser extent, the positions of the moon and the sun. The value of g varies
with location from 9.8295 m/s2 at 4500 m below sea level to 7.3218 m/s2 at
100,000 m above sea level. However, at altitudes up to 30,000 m, the varia-
tion of g from the sea-level value of 9.807 m/s2 is less than 1 percent. There-
fore, for most practical purposes, the gravitational acceleration can be
W  mg  (N)
1 lbf  32.174 lbm  ft/s2
 1 N  1kg  m/s2
8
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
m = 1 kg
m = 32.174 lbm
a = 1 m/s 2
a = 1 ft/s 2
F = 1 lbf
F = 1 N
FIGURE 1–8
The definition of the force units.
1 kgf
10 apples
m ≈ 1 kg
4 apples
m ≈ 1 lbm
1 lbf
1 apple
m ≈ 102 g
1 N
FIGURE 1–9
The relative magnitudes of the force
units newton (N), kilogram-force
(kgf), and pound-force (lbf).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
16
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
approximated to be constant at 9.81 m/s2. It is interesting to note that at loca-
tions below sea level, the value of g increases with distance below the sea
level, reaches a maximum at about 4500 m, and then starts decreasing. (What
do you think the value of g is at the center of the earth?)
The primary cause of confusion between mass and weight is that mass is
usually measured indirectly by measuring the gravity force it exerts. This
approach also assumes that the forces exerted by other effects such as air
buoyancy and fluid motion are negligible. This is like measuring the dis-
tance to a star by measuring its red shift, or measuring the altitude of an air-
plane by measuring barometric pressure. Both of these are also indirect
measurements. The correct direct way of measuring mass is to compare it to
a known mass. This is cumbersome, however, and it is mostly used for cali-
bration and measuring precious metals.
Work, which is a form of energy, can simply be defined as force times dis-
tance; therefore, it has the unit “newton-meter (N . m),” which is called a
joule (J). That is,
(1–3)
A more common unit for energy in SI is the kilojoule (1 kJ  103 J). In the
English system, the energy unit is the Btu (British thermal unit), which is
defined as the energy required to raise the temperature of 1 lbm of water at
68°F by 1°F. The magnitudes of the kilojoule and Btu are very nearly the
same (1 Btu  1.0551 kJ). In the metric system, the amount of energy
needed to raise the temperature of 1 g of water at 14.5°C by 1°C is defined
as 1 calorie (cal), and 1 cal  4.1868 J. Don’t confuse this calorie unit with
the Calories that you eat (1 Calorie  1000 calories).
Dimensional Homogeneity
We all know from grade school that apples and oranges do not add. But we
somehow manage to do it (by mistake, of course). In engineering, all equa-
tions must be dimensionally homogeneous. That is, every term in an equa-
tion must have the same dimensions (Fig. 1–12). If, at some stage of an
analysis, we find ourselves in a position to add two quantities that have dif-
ferent dimensions (or units), it is a clear indication that we have made an
error at an earlier stage. So checking dimensions (or units) can serve as a
valuable tool to spot errors.
1 J  1 N  m
Introduction and Overview
|
9
FIGURE 1–10
A body weighing 150 lbf on earth
would weigh only 25 lbf on the moon.
g = 9.807 m/s2
W = 9.807 kg · m/s2
 = 9.807 N
 = 1 kgf
W = 32.174 lbm · ft/s2
 = 1 lbf
g = 32.174 ft/s2
kg
lbm
FIGURE 1–11
The weight of a unit mass at sea level.
EXAMPLE 1–1
Spotting Errors from Unit Inconsistencies
While solving a problem, a person ended up with the following equation at
some stage:
where E is the total energy and has the unit of kilojoules. Determine how to
correct the error.
Solution
During an analysis, a relation with inconsistent units is obtained.
A correction is to be found, and the probable cause of the error is to be
determined.
E  25 kJ  7 kJ/kg

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
17
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
We all know from experience that units can give terrible headaches if they
are not used carefully in solving a problem. However, with some attention
and skill, units can be used to our advantage. They can be used to check for-
mulas; sometimes they can even be used to derive formulas, as illustrated in
the following example.
10
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 1–2
Obtaining Formulas from Unit Considerations
A tank is filled with oil whose density is r  850 kg/m3. If the volume of the
tank is V  2 m3, determine the amount of mass m in the tank.
Solution
The volume of an oil tank is given. The mass of oil is to be deter-
mined.
Assumptions
Oil is a nearly incompressible substance and thus its density
is constant.
Analysis
A sketch of the system just described is given in Fig. 1–14. Sup-
pose we forgot the formula that relates mass to density and volume. However,
we know that mass has the unit of kilograms. That is, whatever calculations
we do, we should end up with the unit of kilograms. Putting the given infor-
mation into perspective, we have
It is obvious that we can eliminate m3 and end up with kg by multiplying
these two quantities. Therefore, the formula we are looking for should be
Thus,
Discussion
Note that this approach may not work for more complicated
formulas. Nondimensional constants may also be present in the formulas,
and these cannot be derived from unit considerations alone.
m  (850 kg/m3)(2 m3)  1700 kg
m  rV
r  850 kg/m3  and  V  2 m3
CAUTION!
 
EVERY  TERM  IN  AN
EQUATION  MUST  HAVE
THE  SAME  UNITS
FIGURE 1–13
Always check the units in your
calculations.
You should keep in mind that a formula that is not dimensionally homo-
geneous is definitely wrong, but a dimensionally homogeneous formula is
not necessarily right.
Unity Conversion Ratios
Just as all nonprimary dimensions can be formed by suitable combinations
of primary dimensions, all nonprimary units (secondary units) can be
formed by combinations of primary units. Force units, for example, can be
expressed as
FIGURE 1–12
To be dimensionally homogeneous, all
the terms in an equation must have the
same dimensions.
© Reprinted with special permission of King
Features Syndicate.
Analysis
The two terms on the right-hand side do not have the same units,
and therefore they cannot be added to obtain the total energy (Fig. 1–13).
Multiplying the last term by mass will eliminate the kilograms in the denom-
inator, and the whole equation will become dimensionally homogeneous; that
is, every term in the equation will have the same dimensions and units.
Discussion
This error was most likely caused by forgetting to multiply the
last term by mass at an earlier stage.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
18
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
They can also be expressed more conveniently as unity conversion ratios as
Unity conversion ratios are identically equal to 1 and are unitless, and thus
such ratios (or their inverses) can be inserted conveniently into any calcula-
tion to properly convert units (Fig. 1–15). You are encouraged to always use
unity conversion ratios such as those given here when converting units. 
Some textbooks insert the archaic gravitational constant gc defined as gc 
32.174 lbm · ft/lbf · s2  kg · m/N · s2  1 into equations in order to force
units to match. This practice leads to unnecessary confusion and is strongly
discouraged by the present authors. We recommend that you instead use
unity conversion ratios.
N
kg  m/s2  1  and  
lbf
32.174 lbm  ft/s2  1
N  kg m
s2  and  lbf  32.174 lbm ft
s2
Introduction and Overview
|
11
V = 2 m3
ρ   = 850 kg/m3
m = ?
OIL
FIGURE 1–14
Schematic for Example 1–2.
32.174 lbmft/s2
1 lbf
1 kgm/s2
1 N
1 kPa
1000 N/m2
1 kJ
1000 Nm
1 W
1 J/s
FIGURE 1–15
Every unity conversion ratio (as well
as its inverse) is exactly equal to one.
Shown here are a few commonly used
unity conversion ratios.
EXAMPLE 1–3
The Weight of One Pound-Mass
Using unity conversion ratios, show that 1.00 lbm weighs 1.00 lbf on earth
(Fig. 1–16).
Solution
A mass of 1.00 lbm is subjected to standard earth gravity. Its
weight in lbf is to be determined.
Assumptions
Standard sea-level conditions are assumed.
Properties
The gravitational constant is g  32.174 ft/s2.
Analysis
We apply Newton’s second law to calculate the weight (force) that
corresponds to the known mass and acceleration. The weight of any object is
equal to its mass times the local value of gravitational acceleration. Thus,
Discussion
The quantity in large parentheses in the above equation is a unity
conversion ratio. Mass is the same regardless of its location. However, on
some other planet with a different value of gravitational acceleration, the
weight of 1 lbm would differ from that calculated here.
W  mg  (1.00 lbm)(32.174 ft/s2)a
1 lbf
32.174 lbm  ft/s2b  1.00 lbf
When you buy a box of breakfast cereal, the printing may say “Net
weight: One pound (454 grams).” (See Fig. 1–17.) Technically, this means
that the cereal inside the box weighs 1.00 lbf on earth and has a mass of
453.6 g (0.4536 kg). Using Newton’s second law, the actual weight of the
cereal on earth is
1–5
■PROBLEM-SOLVING TECHNIQUE
The first step in learning any science is to grasp the fundamentals and to gain
a sound knowledge of it. The next step is to master the fundamentals by test-
ing this knowledge. This is done by solving significant real-world problems.
W  mg  (453.6 g)(9.81 m/s2)a
1 N
1 kg  m/s2b a 1 kg
1000 gb  4.49 N
lbm
FIGURE 1–16
A mass of 1 lbm weighs 1 lbf on earth.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
19
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Solving such problems, especially complicated ones, requires a systematic
approach. By using a step-by-step approach, an engineer can reduce the solu-
tion of a complicated problem into the solution of a series of simple problems
(Fig. 1–18). When you are solving a problem, we recommend that you use
the following steps zealously as applicable. This will help you avoid some of
the common pitfalls associated with problem solving.
Step 1: Problem Statement
In your own words, briefly state the problem, the key information given,
and the quantities to be found. This is to make sure that you understand the
problem and the objectives before you attempt to solve the problem.
Step 2: Schematic
Draw a realistic sketch of the physical system involved, and list the relevant
information on the figure. The sketch does not have to be something elabo-
rate, but it should resemble the actual system and show the key features. Indi-
cate any energy and mass interactions with the surroundings. Listing the
given information on the sketch helps one to see the entire problem at once.
Also, check for properties that remain constant during a process (such as tem-
perature during an isothermal process), and indicate them on the sketch.
Step 3: Assumptions and Approximations
State any appropriate assumptions and approximations made to simplify the
problem to make it possible to obtain a solution. Justify the questionable
assumptions. Assume reasonable values for missing quantities that are nec-
essary. For example, in the absence of specific data for atmospheric pres-
sure, it can be taken to be 1 atm. However, it should be noted in the analysis
that the atmospheric pressure decreases with increasing elevation. For exam-
ple, it drops to 0.83 atm in Denver (elevation 1610 m) (Fig. 1–19).
Step 4: Physical Laws
Apply all the relevant basic physical laws and principles (such as the con-
servation of mass), and reduce them to their simplest form by utilizing the
assumptions made. However, the region to which a physical law is applied
must be clearly identified first. For example, the increase in speed of water
flowing through a nozzle is analyzed by applying conservation of mass
between the inlet and outlet of the nozzle.
Step 5: Properties
Determine the unknown properties at known states necessary to solve the
problem from property relations or tables. List the properties separately, and
indicate their source, if applicable.
Step 6: Calculations
Substitute the known quantities into the simplified relations and perform the
calculations to determine the unknowns. Pay particular attention to the units
and unit cancellations, and remember that a dimensional quantity without a
12
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Net weight:
One pound 
(454 grams)
FIGURE 1–17
A quirk in the metric system of units.
SOLUTION
PROBLEM
HARD WAY
EASY WAY
FIGURE 1–18
A step-by-step approach can greatly
simplify problem solving.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
20
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
unit is meaningless. Also, don’t give a false implication of high precision by
copying all the digits from the screen of the calculator—round the results to
an appropriate number of significant digits (see p. 15).
Step 7: Reasoning, Verification, and Discussion
Check to make sure that the results obtained are reasonable and intuitive,
and verify the validity of the questionable assumptions. Re-do the calcula-
tions that resulted in unreasonable values. For example, insulating a water
heater that uses $80 worth of natural gas a year cannot result in savings of
$200 a year (Fig. 1–20).
Also, point out the significance of the results, and discuss their implica-
tions. State the conclusions that can be drawn from the results, and any rec-
ommendations that can be made from them. Emphasize the limitations under
which the results are applicable, and caution against any possible misunder-
standings and using the results in situations where the underlying assump-
tions do not apply. For example, if you determined that wrapping a water
heater with a $20 insulation jacket will reduce the energy cost by $30 a year,
indicate that the insulation will pay for itself from the energy it saves in less
than a year. However, also indicate that the analysis does not consider labor
costs, and that this will be the case if you install the insulation yourself.
Keep in mind that the solutions you present to your instructors, and any
engineering analysis presented to others, is a form of communication.There-
fore neatness, organization, completeness, and visual appearance are of
utmost importance for maximum effectiveness. Besides, neatness also
serves as a great checking tool since it is very easy to spot errors and incon-
sistencies in neat work. Carelessness and skipping steps to save time often
end up costing more time and unnecessary anxiety.
The approach described here is used in the solved example problems with-
out explicitly stating each step, as well as in the Solutions Manual of this text.
For some problems, some of the steps may not be applicable or necessary.
For example, often it is not practical to list the properties separately. How-
ever, we cannot overemphasize the importance of a logical and orderly ap-
proach to problem solving. Most difficulties encountered while solving a
problem are not due to a lack of knowledge; rather, they are due to a lack of
organization. You are strongly encouraged to follow these steps in problem
solving until you develop your own approach that works best for you.
Engineering Software Packages
You may be wondering why we are about to undertake an in-depth study of
the fundamentals of another engineering science. After all, almost all such
problems we are likely to encounter in practice can be solved using one of
several sophisticated software packages readily available in the market
today. These software packages not only give the desired numerical results,
but also supply the outputs in colorful graphical form for impressive presen-
tations. It is unthinkable to practice engineering today without using some
of these packages. This tremendous computing power available to us at the
touch of a button is both a blessing and a curse. It certainly enables engi-
neers to solve problems easily and quickly, but it also opens the door for
abuses and misinformation. In the hands of poorly educated people, these
Introduction and Overview
|
13
Given: Air temperature in Denver
To be found: Density of air
Missing information: Atmospheric
pressure
Assumption #1: Take P = 1 atm
(Inappropriate. Ignores effect of 
altitude. Will cause more than 
15% error.)
Assumption #2: Take P = 0.83 atm
(Appropriate. Ignores only minor 
effects such as weather.)
FIGURE 1–19
The assumptions made while solving
an engineering problem must be
reasonable and justifiable.
Energy use:
Energy use:
Energy saved
Energy saved
by insulation:
by insulation:
IMPOSSIBLE!
$80/yr
$200/yr
FIGURE 1–20
The results obtained from an
engineering analysis must be checked
for reasonableness.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
21
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
software packages are as dangerous as sophisticated powerful weapons in
the hands of poorly trained soldiers.
Thinking that a person who can use the engineering software packages
without proper training on fundamentals can practice engineering is like
thinking that a person who can use a wrench can work as a car mechanic. If it
were true that the engineering students do not need all these fundamental
courses they are taking because practically everything can be done by com-
puters quickly and easily, then it would also be true that the employers would
no longer need high-salaried engineers since any person who knows how to
use a word-processing program can also learn how to use those software
packages. However, the statistics show that the need for engineers is on the
rise, not on the decline, despite the availability of these powerful packages.
We should always remember that all the computing power and the engi-
neering software packages available today are just tools, and tools have
meaning only in the hands of masters. Having the best word-processing pro-
gram does not make a person a good writer, but it certainly makes the job of a
good writer much easier and makes the writer more productive (Fig. 1–21).
Hand calculators did not eliminate the need to teach our children how to add
or subtract, and sophisticated medical software packages did not take the
place of medical school training. Neither will engineering software packages
replace the traditional engineering education. They will simply cause a shift
in emphasis in the courses from mathematics to physics. That is, more time
will be spent in the classroom discussing the physical aspects of the problems
in greater detail, and less time on the mechanics of solution procedures.
All these marvelous and powerful tools available today put an extra bur-
den on today’s engineers. They must still have a thorough understanding of
the fundamentals, develop a “feel” of the physical phenomena, be able to
put the data into proper perspective, and make sound engineering judg-
ments, just like their predecessors. However, they must do it much better,
and much faster, using more realistic models because of the powerful tools
available today. The engineers in the past had to rely on hand calculations,
slide rules, and later hand calculators and computers. Today they rely on
software packages. The easy access to such power and the possibility of a
simple misunderstanding or misinterpretation causing great damage make it
more important today than ever to have solid training in the fundamentals of
engineering. In this text we make an extra effort to put the emphasis on
developing an intuitive and physical understanding of natural phenomena
instead of on the mathematical details of solution procedures.
Engineering Equation Solver (EES)
EES is a program that solves systems of linear or nonlinear algebraic or dif-
ferential equations numerically. It has a large library of built-in thermody-
namic property functions as well as mathematical functions, and allows the
user to supply additional property data. Unlike some software packages,
EES does not solve engineering problems; it only solves the equations sup-
plied by the user. Therefore, the user must understand the problem and for-
mulate it by applying any relevant physical laws and relations. EES saves
the user considerable time and effort by simply solving the resulting mathe-
matical equations. This makes it possible to attempt significant engineering
problems not suitable for hand calculations, and to conduct parametric stud-
14
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 1–21
An excellent word-processing
program does not make a person a
good writer; it simply makes a good
writer a more efficient writer.
© Vol. 80/PhotoDisc

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
22
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
ies quickly and conveniently. EES is a very powerful yet intuitive program
that is very easy to use, as shown in Example 1–4. The use and capabilities
of EES are explained in Appendix 3 on the enclosed DVD.
Introduction and Overview
|
15
EXAMPLE 1–4
Solving a System of Equations with EES
The difference of two numbers is 4, and the sum of the squares of these two
numbers is equal to the sum of the numbers plus 20. Determine these two
numbers.
Solution
Relations are given for the difference and the sum of the squares
of two numbers. They are to be determined.
Analysis
We start the EES program by double-clicking on its icon, open a
new file, and type the following on the blank screen that appears:
which is an exact mathematical expression of the problem statement with x
and y denoting the unknown numbers. The solution to this system of two
nonlinear equations with two unknowns is obtained by a single click on the
“calculator” icon on the taskbar. It gives
Discussion
Note that all we did is formulate the problem as we would on
paper; EES took care of all the mathematical details of the solution. Also
note that equations can be linear or nonlinear, and they can be entered in
any order with unknowns on either side. Friendly equation solvers such as
EES allow the user to concentrate on the physics of the problem without
worrying about the mathematical complexities associated with the solution of
the resulting system of equations.
x5 and y1
x^2y^2  xy20
xy  4
A Remark on Significant Digits
In engineering calculations, the information given is not known to more
than a certain number of significant digits, usually three digits. Conse-
quently, the results obtained cannot possibly be accurate to more significant
digits. Reporting results in more significant digits implies greater accuracy
than exists, and it should be avoided.
For example, consider a 3.75-L container filled with gasoline whose den-
sity is 0.845 kg/L, and determine its mass. Probably the first thought that
comes to your mind is to multiply the volume and density to obtain 3.16875
kg for the mass, which falsely implies that the mass determined is accurate to
six significant digits. In reality, however, the mass cannot be more accurate
than three significant digits since both the volume and the density are accu-
rate to three significant digits only. Therefore, the result should be rounded to
three significant digits, and the mass should be reported to be 3.17 kg instead
of what appears in the screen of the calculator. The result 3.16875 kg would
be correct only if the volume and density were given to be 3.75000 L and
0.845000 kg/L, respectively. The value 3.75 L implies that we are fairly

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
23
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
confident that the volume is accurate within 	0.01 L, and it cannot be 3.74 or
3.76 L. However, the volume can be 3.746, 3.750, 3.753, etc., since they all
round to 3.75 L (Fig. 1–22). It is more appropriate to retain all the digits dur-
ing intermediate calculations, and to do the rounding in the final step. This is
also what a computer will normally do.
When solving problems, we typically assume the given information to be
accurate to at least three significant digits. Therefore, if the length of a pipe
is given to be 40 m, we will assume it to be 40.0 m in order to justify using
three significant digits in the final results. You should also keep in mind that
all experimentally determined values are subject to measurement errors, and
such errors will reflect in the results obtained. For example, if the density of
a substance has an uncertainty of 2 percent, then the mass determined using
this density value will also have an uncertainty of 2 percent.
You should also be aware that we sometimes knowingly introduce small
errors in order to avoid the trouble of searching for more accurate data. For
example, when dealing with liquid water, we just use the value of 1000 kg/m3
for density, which is the density value of pure water at 0°C. Using this value
at 75°C will result in an error of 2.5 percent since the density at this tempera-
ture is 975 kg/m3. The minerals and impurities in the water will introduce
additional error. This being the case, you should have no reservation in
rounding the final results to a reasonable number of significant digits.
Besides, having a few percent uncertainty in the results of engineering analy-
sis is usually the norm, not the exception.
16
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Given:
Also,
3.75 
 0.845 = 3.16875
0.845 = 3.16875
Volume:
Density:
Find:
Mass: m = 
= rV = 3.16875 kg
= 3.16875 kg
Rounding to 3 significant digits:
Rounding to 3 significant digits:
m = 3.17 kg
= 3.17 kg
(3 significant digits)
(3 significant digits)
V = 3.75 L
= 3.75 L
r = 0.845 kg
= 0.845 kg/L
FIGURE 1–22
A result with more significant digits
than that of given data falsely implies
more accuracy.
In this chapter, some basic concepts of thermal sciences are
introduced and discussed. The physical sciences that deal
with energy and the transfer and conversion of energy are
referred to as thermal sciences, and they are studied under
the subcategories of thermodynamics and heat transfer.
Thermodynamics is the science that primarily deals with
energy. The first law of thermodynamics is simply an expres-
sion of the conservation of energy principle, and it asserts that
energy is a thermodynamic property. The second law of ther-
modynamics asserts that energy has quality as well as quantity,
and actual processes occur in the direction of decreasing qual-
ity of energy. Determining the rates of heat transfer to or from
a system and thus the times of cooling or heating, as well as
the variation of the temperature, is the subject of heat transfer.
The basic requirement for heat transfer is the presence of a
temperature difference.
In engineering calculations, it is important to pay particular
attention to the units of the quantities to avoid errors caused
by inconsistent units, and to follow a systematic approach. It
is also important to recognize that the information given is
not known to more than a certain number of significant dig-
its, and the results obtained cannot possibly be accurate to
more significant digits.
When solving a problem, it is recommended that a step-
by-step approach be used. Such an approach involves stating
the problem, drawing a schematic, making appropriate
assumptions, applying the physical laws, listing the relevant
properties, making the necessary calculations, and making
sure that the results are reasonable.
SUMMARY
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
1. American Society for Testing and Materials. Stan-
dards for Metric Practice. ASTM E 380-79, January
1980.
2. Y. A. Çengel. Heat and Mass Transfer: A Practical
Approach. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.
3. Y. A. Çengel and M. A. Boles. Thermodynamics: An Engi-
neering Approach. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2008.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
24
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 1
|
17
PROBLEMS*
Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer Fluid Mechanics
1–1C
What is the difference between the classical and the
statistical approaches to thermodynamics?
1–2C
Why does a bicyclist pick up speed on a downhill
road even when he is not pedaling? Does this violate the con-
servation of energy principle?
1–3C
An office worker claims that a cup of cold coffee on
his table warmed up to 80C by picking up energy from the
surrounding air, which is at 25C. Is there any truth to his
claim? Does this process violate any thermodynamic laws?
1–4C
One of the most amusing things a person can experi-
ence is that in certain parts of the world a still car on neutral
going uphill when its brakes are released. Such occurrences
are even broadcast on TV. Can this really happen or is it a
bad eyesight? How can you verify if a road is really uphill or
downhill?
1–5C
How does the science of heat transfer differ from the
science of thermodynamics?
1–6C
What is the driving force for (a) heat transfer, (b)
electric current, and (c) fluid flow?
1–7C
Why is heat transfer a nonequilibrium phenomenon?
1–8C
Can there be any heat transfer between two bodies
that are at the same temperature but at different pressures?
1–9C
Consider a 1000-kg car moving horizontally at a con-
stant speed of 10 km/h on a straight path. What is the absolute
minimum energy needed to move this car horizontally 500 m?
Assume the final speed of the car is still 10 km/h.
Mass, Force, and Units
1–10C
What is the difference between pound-mass and
pound-force?
1–11C
Explain why the light-year has the dimension of
length.
1–12C
What is the net force acting on a car cruising at a
constant velocity of 70 km/h (a) on a level road and (b) on an
uphill road?
1–13E
A man weighs 180 lbf at a location where g 
32.10 ft/s2. Determine his weight on the moon, where g 
5.47 ft/s2. Answer: 30.7 lbf
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and
students are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated
by an “E” are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them.
Problems with an icon 
are solved using EES, and complete
solutions together with parametric studies are included on the
enclosed DVD. Problems with the icon 
are comprehensive in
nature, and are intended to be solved with a computer, preferably
using the EES software that accompanies this text.
1–14
Determine the mass and the weight of the air con-
tained in a room whose dimensions are 6 m 
 6 m 
 8 m.
Assume the density of the air is 1.16 kg/m3.
Answers: 334.1
kg, 3277 N
1–15
At 45 latitude, the gravitational acceleration as a func-
tion of elevation z above sea level is given by g  a  bz,
where a  9.807 m/s2 and b  3.32 
 106 s2. Determine
the height above sea level where the weight of an object will
decrease by 1 percent.
Answer: 29,539 m
1–16E
If the mass of an object is 10 lbm, what is its
weight, in lbf, at a location where g  32.0 ft/s2?
1–17
The acceleration of high-speed aircraft is sometimes
expressed in g’s (in multiples of the standard acceleration
of gravity). Determine the net upward force, in N, that a
90-kg
man
would
experience
in
an
aircraft
whose
acceleration is 6 g’s.
1–18
A 5-kg rock is thrown upward with a force
of 150 N at a location where the local gravita-
tional acceleration is 9.79 m/s2. Determine the acceleration of
the rock, in m/s2.
1–19
Solve Prob. 1–18 using EES (or other) software.
Print out the entire solution, including the
numerical results with proper units.
1–20
The value of the gravitational acceleration g decreases
with elevation from 9.807 m/s2 at sea level to 9.767 m/s2
at an altitude of 13,000 m, where large passenger planes
cruise. Determine the percent reduction in the weight of an
airplane cruising at 13,000 m relative to its weight at
sea level.
Modeling and Solving Engineering Problems
1–21C
How do rating problems in heat transfer differ from
the sizing problems?
1–22C
What is the difference between the analytical and
experimental approach to engineering problems? Discuss the
advantages and disadvantages of each approach?
1–23C
What is the importance of modeling in engineering?
How are the mathematical models for engineering processes
prepared?
1–24C
When modeling an engineering process, how is the
right choice made between a simple but crude and a complex
but accurate model? Is the complex model necessarily a bet-
ter choice since it is more accurate?
Solving Engineering Problems and EES
1–25C
What is the value of the engineering software 
packages in (a) engineering education and (b) engineering
practice?

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Front Matter
1. Introduction and 
Overview
25
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
18
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1–26
Determine a positive real root of this equation
using EES:
1–27
Solve this system of two equations with two
unknowns using EES:
1–28
Solve this system of three equations with three
unknowns using EES:
1–29
Solve this system of three equations with three
unknowns using EES:
1–30E
Specific heat is defined as the amount of
energy needed to increase the temperature of a
unit mass of a substance by one degree. The specific heat of
water at room temperature is 4.18 kJ/kg  °C in SI unit
system. Using the unit conversion function capability of
x  y  z  2
x  3y0.5  xz  2
x2y  z  1
xy  2z  8
 3x2  2y  z  2
 2x  y  z  5
 3xy  y  3.5
x3  y2  7.75
 2x3  10x0.5  3x  3
EES, express the specific heat of water in (a) kJ/kg  K,
(b) Btu/lbm  °F, (c) Btu/lbm  R, and (d) kcal/kg  °C units.
Answers: (a) 4.18, (b) (c) (d) 0.9984
Review Problems
1–31
A lunar exploration module weighs 4000 N at a loca-
tion where g  9.8 m/s2. Determine the weight of this mod-
ule in newtons when it is on the moon where g  1.64 m/s2.
1–32
The weight of bodies may change somewhat from one
location to another as a result of the variation of the gravita-
tional acceleration g with elevation. Accounting for this vari-
ation using the relation in Prob. 1–15, determine the weight of
an 80-kg person at sea level (z  0), in Denver (z  1610 m),
and on the top of Mount Everest (z  8848 m).
1–33E
A man goes to a traditional market to buy a steak
for dinner. He finds a 12-oz steak (1 lbm  16 oz) for $3.15.
He then goes to the adjacent international market and finds a
320-g steak of identical quality for $2.80. Which steak is the
better buy?
1–34E
The reactive force developed by a jet engine to push
an airplane forward is called thrust, and the thrust developed
by the engine of a Boeing 777 is about 85,000 lbf. Express
this thrust in N and kgf.
Design and Essay Problems
1–35
Write an essay on the various mass- and volume-mea-
surement devices used throughout history. Also, explain the
development of the modern units for mass and volume.SUM-
MAR

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
Introduction
26
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
1
THERMODYNAMICS
PART
19

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
27
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 2
INTRODUCTION AND BASIC CONCEPTS
|
21
E
very science has a unique vocabulary associated with
it, and thermodynamics is no exception. Precise defini-
tion of basic concepts forms a sound foundation for
the development of a science and prevents possible misun-
derstandings. We start this chapter with a discussion of some
basic concepts such as system, state, state postulate, equilib-
rium, and process. We also discuss temperature and temper-
ature scales with particular emphasis on the International
Temperature Scale of 1990. We then present pressure, which
is the normal force exerted by a fluid per unit area and dis-
cuss absolute and gage pressures, the variation of pressure
with depth, and pressure measurement devices, such as
manometers and barometers. Careful study of these concepts
is essential for a good understanding of the topics in the fol-
lowing chapters.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Identify the unique vocabulary associated with
thermodynamics through the precise definition of basic
concepts to form a sound foundation for the development
of the principles of thermodynamics.
• Explain the basic concepts of thermodynamics such 
as system, state, state postulate, equilibrium, process, 
and cycle.
• Review concepts of temperature, temperature scales,
pressure, and absolute and gage pressure.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
28
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
2–1
■SYSTEMS AND CONTROL VOLUMES
A system is defined as a quantity of matter or a region in space chosen for
study. The mass or region outside the system is called the surroundings.
The real or imaginary surface that separates the system from its surround-
ings is called the boundary. These terms are illustrated in Fig. 2–1. The
boundary of a system can be fixed or movable. Note that the boundary is the
contact surface shared by both the system and the surroundings. Mathemati-
cally speaking, the boundary has zero thickness, and thus it can neither con-
tain any mass nor occupy any volume in space.
Systems may be considered to be closed or open, depending on whether a
fixed mass or a fixed volume in space is chosen for study. A closed system
(also known as a control mass) consists of a fixed amount of mass, and no
mass can cross its boundary. That is, no mass can enter or leave a closed
system, as shown in Fig. 2–2. But energy, in the form of heat or work, can
cross the boundary; and the volume of a closed system does not have to be
fixed. If, as a special case, even energy is not allowed to cross the boundary,
that system is called an isolated system.
Consider the piston-cylinder device shown in Fig. 2–3. Let us say that we
would like to find out what happens to the enclosed gas when it is heated.
Since we are focusing our attention on the gas, it is our system. The inner
surfaces of the piston and the cylinder form the boundary, and since no
mass is crossing this boundary, it is a closed system. Notice that energy may
cross the boundary, and part of the boundary (the inner surface of the pis-
ton, in this case) may move. Everything outside the gas, including the piston
and the cylinder, is the surroundings.
An open system, or a control volume, as it is often called, is a properly
selected region in space. It usually encloses a device that involves mass flow
such as a compressor, turbine, or nozzle. Flow through these devices is best
studied by selecting the region within the device as the control volume.
Both mass and energy can cross the boundary of a control volume.
A large number of engineering problems involve mass flow in and out of
a system and, therefore, are modeled as control volumes. A water heater, a
car radiator, a turbine, and a compressor all involve mass flow and should
be analyzed as control volumes (open systems) instead of as control masses
(closed systems). In general, any arbitrary region in space can be selected
as a control volume. There are no concrete rules for the selection of control
volumes, but the proper choice certainly makes the analysis much easier. If
we were to analyze the flow of air through a nozzle, for example, a good
choice for the control volume would be the region within the nozzle.
The boundaries of a control volume are called a control surface, and they
can be real or imaginary. In the case of a nozzle, the inner surface of the
nozzle forms the real part of the boundary, and the entrance and exit areas
form the imaginary part, since there are no physical surfaces there 
(Fig. 2–4a).
A control volume can be fixed in size and shape, as in the case of a noz-
zle, or it may involve a moving boundary, as shown in Fig. 2–4b. Most con-
trol volumes, however, have fixed boundaries and thus do not involve any
moving boundaries. A control volume can also involve heat and work inter-
actions just as a closed system, in addition to mass interaction.
22
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
GAS
2 kg
3 m3
GAS
2 kg
1 m3
Moving
boundary
Fixed
boundary
FIGURE 2–3
A closed system with a moving
boundary.
SURROUNDINGS
BOUNDARY
SYSTEM
FIGURE 2–1
System, surroundings, and boundary.
CLOSED
SYSTEM
YES
m = constant
Energy
NO
Mass
FIGURE 2–2
Mass cannot cross the boundaries of a
closed system, but energy can.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
29
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
As an example of an open system, consider the water heater shown in Fig.
2–5. Let us say that we would like to determine how much heat we must
transfer to the water in the tank in order to supply a steady stream of hot
water. Since hot water will leave the tank and be replaced by cold water, it
is not convenient to choose a fixed mass as our system for the analysis.
Instead, we can concentrate our attention on the volume formed by the inte-
rior surfaces of the tank and consider the hot and cold water streams as
mass leaving and entering the control volume. The interior surfaces of the
tank form the control surface for this case, and mass is crossing the control
surface at two locations.
In an engineering analysis, the system under study must be defined care-
fully. In most cases, the system investigated is quite simple and obvious,
and defining the system may seem like a tedious and unnecessary task. In
other cases, however, the system under study may be rather involved, and a
proper choice of the system may greatly simplify the analysis.
2–2
■PROPERTIES OF A SYSTEM
Any characteristic of a system is called a property. Some familiar proper-
ties are pressure P, temperature T, volume V, and mass m. The list can be
extended to include less familiar ones such as viscosity, thermal conductiv-
ity, modulus of elasticity, thermal expansion coefficient, electric resistivity,
and even velocity and elevation.
Properties are considered to be either intensive or extensive. Intensive
properties are those that are independent of the mass of the system, such as
temperature, pressure, and density. Extensive properties are those whose
values depend on the size—or extent—of the system. Total mass, total vol-
ume V, and total momentum are some examples of extensive properties. An
easy way to determine whether a property is intensive or extensive is to
divide the system into two equal parts with an imaginary partition, as shown
in Fig. 2–6. Each part will have the same value of intensive properties as the
original system, but half the value of the extensive properties.
Chapter 2
|
23
CV
Moving
boundary
Fixed
boundary
CV
(a nozzle)
Real boundary
(b) A control volume with fixed and
      moving boundaries
(a) A control volume with real and
      imaginary boundaries
Imaginary
boundary
FIGURE 2–4
A control volume can involve fixed, moving, real, and imaginary boundaries.
Control
surface
WATER
HEATER
(control
volume)
Cold
water
in
Hot
water
out
FIGURE 2–5
An open system (a control volume)
with one inlet and one exit.
ρ
m
V
T
P
ρ
m
V
T
P
1
2–
1
2–
ρ
m
V
T
P
1
2–
1
2–
Extensive
Extensive
properties
properties
Intensive
Intensive
properties
properties
FIGURE 2–6
Criteria to differentiate intensive and
extensive properties.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
30
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Generally, uppercase letters are used to denote extensive properties (with
mass m being a major exception), and lowercase letters are used for intensive
properties (with pressure P and temperature T being the obvious exceptions).
Extensive properties per unit mass are called specific properties. Some
examples of specific properties are specific volume (v  V/m) and specific
total energy (e  E/m).
Continuum
Matter is made up of atoms that are widely spaced in the gas phase. Yet it is
very convenient to disregard the atomic nature of a substance and view it as
continuous, homogeneous matter with no holes, that is, a continuum. The
continuum idealization allows us to treat properties as point functions and to
assume that the properties vary continually in space with no jump disconti-
nuities. This idealization is valid as long as the size of the system we deal
with is large relative to the space between the molecules (Fig. 2–7). This is
the case in practically all problems, except some specialized ones. The con-
tinuum idealization is implicit in many statements we make, such as “the
density of water in a glass is the same at any point.”
To have a sense of the distances involved at the molecular level, consider a
container filled with oxygen at atmospheric conditions. The diameter of the
oxygen molecule is about 3 
 1010 m and its mass is 5.3 
 1026 kg. Also,
the mean free path of oxygen at 1 atm pressure and 20°C is 6.3 
 108 m.
That is, an oxygen molecule travels, on average, a distance of 6.3 
 108 m
(about 200 times its diameter) before it collides with another molecule.
Also, there are about 2.5 
 1016 molecules of oxygen in the tiny volume
of 1 mm3 at 1 atm pressure and 20°C (Fig. 2–8). The continuum model is
applicable as long as the characteristic length of the system (such as its dia-
meter) is much larger than the mean free path of the molecules. At very high
vacuums or very high elevations, the mean free path may become large (for
example, it is about 0.1 m for atmospheric air at an elevation of 100 km).
For such cases the rarefied gas flow theory should be used, and the impact
of individual molecules should be considered. In this text we limit our con-
sideration to substances that can be modeled as a continuum.
2–3
■DENSITY AND SPECIFIC GRAVITY
Density is defined as mass per unit volume (Fig. 2–9). That is,
Density:
(2–1)
The reciprocal of density is the specific volume v, which is defined as vol-
ume per unit mass. That is,
(2–2)
For a differential volume element of mass dm and volume dV, density can
be expressed as r  dm/dV.
The density of a substance, in general, depends on temperature and pres-
sure. The density of most gases is proportional to pressure and inversely
proportional to temperature. Liquids and solids, on the other hand, are
v  V
m  1
r
r  m
V  (kg/m3)
24
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 2–7
The length scale associated with most
ﬂows, such as seagulls in ﬂight, is
orders of magnitude larger than the
mean free path of the air molecules.
Therefore, here, and for all ﬂuid ﬂows
considered in this book, the continuum
idealization is appropriate.
© Vol. 6/PhotoDisc/Getty Images.
VOID
1 atm, 20°C
O2
2.5 × 1016 molecules/mm3
FIGURE 2–8
Despite the large gaps between
molecules, a substance can be treated
as a continuum because of the very
large number of molecules even in an
extremely small volume.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
31
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
essentially incompressible substances, and the variation of their density with
pressure is usually negligible. At 20°C, for example, the density of water
changes from 998 kg/m3 at 1 atm to 1003 kg/m3 at 100 atm, a change of
just 0.5 percent. The density of liquids and solids depends more strongly on
temperature than it does on pressure. At 1 atm, for example, the density of
water changes from 998 kg/m3 at 20°C to 975 kg/m3 at 75°C, a change of
2.3 percent, which can still be neglected in many engineering analyses.
Sometimes the density of a substance is given relative to the density of a
well-known substance. Then it is called specific gravity, or relative den-
sity, and is defined as the ratio of the density of a substance to the density
of some standard substance at a specified temperature (usually water at
4°C, for which rH2O  1000 kg/m3). That is,
Specific gravity:
(2–3)
Note that the specific gravity of a substance is a dimensionless quantity.
However, in SI units, the numerical value of the specific gravity of a sub-
stance is exactly equal to its density in g/cm3 or kg/L (or 0.001 times the
density in kg/m3) since the density of water at 4°C is 1 g/cm3  1 kg/L 
1000 kg/m3. The specific gravity of mercury at 20°C, for example, is 13.6.
Therefore, its density at 20°C is 13.6 g/cm3  13.6 kg/L  13,600 kg/m3.
The specific gravities of some substances at 20°C are given in Table 2–1.
Note that substances with specific gravities less than 1 are lighter than
water, and thus they would float on water (if immiscible).
The weight of a unit volume of a substance is called specific weight, or
weight density, and is expressed as
Specific weight:
(2–4)
where g is the gravitational acceleration.
The densities of liquids are essentially constant, and thus liquids can often
be approximated as being incompressible substances during most processes
without sacrificing much in accuracy.
2–4
■STATE AND EQUILIBRIUM
Consider a system not undergoing any change. At this point, all the proper-
ties can be measured or calculated throughout the entire system, which
gives us a set of properties that completely describes the condition, or the
state, of the system. At a given state, all the properties of a system have
fixed values. If the value of even one property changes, the state will change
to a different one. In Fig. 2–10 a system is shown at two different states.
Thermodynamics deals with equilibrium states. The word equilibrium
implies a state of balance. In an equilibrium state there are no unbalanced
potentials (or driving forces) within the system. A system in equilibrium
experiences no changes when it is isolated from its surroundings.
There are many types of equilibrium, and a system is not in thermody-
namic equilibrium unless the conditions of all the relevant types of equilib-
rium are satisfied. For example, a system is in thermal equilibrium if the
temperature is the same throughout the entire system, as shown in Fig. 2–11.
That is, the system involves no temperature differential, which is the driving
gs  rg  (N/m3)
SG 
r
rH2O
Chapter 2
|
25
V = 12 m
= 12 m3
ρ = 0.25 kg/m
= 0.25 kg/m3
m = 3 kg
= 3 kg
v =
= 4 m
= 4 m3/kg
/kg
1–ρ
FIGURE 2–9
Density is mass per unit volume;
specific volume is volume per 
unit mass.
TABLE 2–1
The specific gravity of some
substances at 20°C and 1 atm
unless stated otherwise
Substance
SG
Water
1.0
Blood (at 37°C)
1.06
Seawater
1.025
Gasoline
0.68
Ethyl alcohol
0.790
Mercury
13.6
Balsa wood
0.17
Dense oak wood
0.93
Gold
19.3
Bones
1.7–2.0
Ice (at 0° C)
0.916
Air
0.001204
m = 2 kg
T2 = 20°C
V2 = 2.5 m3
(a) State 1
m = 2 kg
T1 = 20°C
V1 = 1.5 m3
(b) State 2
FIGURE 2–10
A system at two different states.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
32
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
force for heat flow. Mechanical equilibrium is related to pressure, and a
system is in mechanical equilibrium if there is no change in pressure at any
point of the system with time. However, the pressure may vary within the
system with elevation as a result of gravitational effects. For example, the
higher pressure at a bottom layer is balanced by the extra weight it must
carry, and, therefore, there is no imbalance of forces. The variation of pres-
sure as a result of gravity in most thermodynamic systems is relatively small
and usually disregarded. If a system involves two phases, it is in phase
equilibrium when the mass of each phase reaches an equilibrium level and
stays there. Finally, a system is in chemical equilibrium if its chemical
composition does not change with time, that is, no chemical reactions occur.
A system is not in equilibrium unless all the relevant equilibrium criteria are
satisfied.
The State Postulate
As noted earlier, the state of a system is described by its properties. But we
know from experience that we do not need to specify all the properties in
order to fix a state. Once a sufficient number of properties are specified, the
rest of the properties assume certain values automatically. That is, specifying
a certain number of properties is sufficient to fix a state. The number of prop-
erties required to fix the state of a system is given by the state postulate:
The state of a simple compressible system is completely specified by two
independent, intensive properties.
A system is called a simple compressible system in the absence of elec-
trical, magnetic, gravitational, motion, and surface tension effects. These
effects are due to external force fields and are negligible for most engineer-
ing problems. Otherwise, an additional property needs to be specified for
each effect that is significant. If the gravitational effects are to be consid-
ered, for example, the elevation z needs to be specified in addition to the
two properties necessary to fix the state.
The state postulate requires that the two properties specified be indepen-
dent to fix the state. Two properties are independent if one property can be
varied while the other one is held constant. Temperature and specific volume,
for example, are always independent properties, and together they can fix the
state of a simple compressible system (Fig. 2–12). Temperature and pressure,
however, are independent properties for single-phase systems, but are depen-
dent properties for multiphase systems. At sea level (P  1 atm), water boils
at 100°C, but on a mountaintop where the pressure is lower, water boils at a
lower temperature. That is, T  f(P) during a phase-change process; thus,
temperature and pressure are not sufficient to fix the state of a two-phase sys-
tem. Phase-change processes are discussed in detail in Chap. 4.
2–5
■PROCESSES AND CYCLES
Any change that a system undergoes from one equilibrium state to another
is called a process, and the series of states through which a system passes
during a process is called the path of the process (Fig. 2–13). To describe a
26
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
20°C
(a) Before
(b) After
23°C
35°C
40°C
30°C
42°C
32°C
32°C
32°C
32°C
32°C
32°C
FIGURE 2–11
A closed system reaching thermal
equilibrium.
Nitrogen
T = 25°C
 = 0.9 m3/kg
v
FIGURE 2–12
The state of nitrogen is fixed by two
independent, intensive properties.
State 1
State 2
Process path
Property B
Property A
FIGURE 2–13
A process between states 1 and 2 and
the process path.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
33
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
process completely, one should specify the initial and final states of the
process, as well as the path it follows, and the interactions with the 
surroundings.
When a process proceeds in such a manner that the system remains infin-
itesimally close to an equilibrium state at all times, it is called a quasi-
static, or quasi-equilibrium, process. A quasi-equilibrium process can be
viewed as a sufficiently slow process that allows the system to adjust itself
internally so that properties in one part of the system do not change any
faster than those at other parts.
This is illustrated in Fig. 2–14. When a gas in a piston-cylinder device is
compressed suddenly, the molecules near the face of the piston do not have
enough time to escape and they will have to pile up in a small region in
front of the piston, thus creating a high-pressure region there. Because of
this pressure difference, the system can no longer be said to be in equilib-
rium, and this makes the entire process nonquasi-equilibrium. However, if
the piston is moved slowly, the molecules have sufficient time to redistribute
and there will not be a molecule pileup in front of the piston. As a result,
the pressure inside the cylinder will always be nearly uniform and will rise
at the same rate at all locations. Since equilibrium is maintained at all times,
this is a quasi-equilibrium process.
It should be pointed out that a quasi-equilibrium process is an idealized
process and is not a true representation of an actual process. But many
actual processes closely approximate it, and they can be modeled as quasi-
equilibrium with negligible error. Engineers are interested in quasiequilib-
rium processes for two reasons. First, they are easy to analyze; second,
work-producing devices deliver the most work when they operate on quasi-
equilibrium processes. Therefore, quasi-equilibrium processes serve as stan-
dards to which actual processes can be compared.
Process diagrams plotted by employing thermodynamic properties as
coordinates are very useful in visualizing the processes. Some common
properties that are used as coordinates are temperature T, pressure P, and
volume V (or specific volume v). Figure 2–15 shows the P-V diagram of a
compression process of a gas.
Note that the process path indicates a series of equilibrium states through
which the system passes during a process and has significance for quasi-
equilibrium processes only. For nonquasi-equilibrium processes, we are not
able to characterize the entire system by a single state, and thus we cannot
speak of a process path for a system as a whole. A nonquasi-equilibrium
process is denoted by a dashed line between the initial and final states
instead of a solid line.
The prefix iso- is often used to designate a process for which a particular
property remains constant. An isothermal process, for example, is a process
during which the temperature T remains constant; an isobaric process is a
process during which the pressure P remains constant; and an isochoric (or
isometric) process is a process during which the specific volume v remains
constant.
A system is said to have undergone a cycle if it returns to its initial state
at the end of the process. That is, for a cycle the initial and final states are
identical.
Chapter 2
|
27
(a) Slow compression
      (quasi-equilibrium)
(b) Very fast compression
      (nonquasi-equilibrium)
FIGURE 2–14
Quasi-equilibrium and nonquasi-
equilibrium compression processes.
Initial
state
Final state
Process path
2
1
P
V2
V1
V
(2)
System
(1)
FIGURE 2–15
The P-V diagram of a compression
process.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
34
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The Steady-Flow Process
The terms steady and uniform are used frequently in engineering, and thus it
is important to have a clear understanding of their meanings. The term
steady implies no change with time. The opposite of steady is unsteady, or
transient. The term uniform, however, implies no change with location over
a specified region. These meanings are consistent with their everyday use
(steady girlfriend, uniform properties, etc.).
A large number of engineering devices operate for long periods of time
under the same conditions, and they are classified as steady-flow devices.
Processes involving such devices can be represented reasonably well by a
somewhat idealized process, called the steady-flow process, which is de-
fined as a process during which a fluid flows through a control volume
steadily (Fig. 2–16). That is, the fluid properties can change from point to
point within the control volume, but at any fixed point they remain the same
during the entire process. Therefore, the volume V, the mass m, and the total
energy content E of the control volume remain constant during a steady-
flow process (Fig. 2–17).
Steady-flow conditions can be closely approximated by devices that are
intended for continuous operation such as turbines, pumps, boilers, con-
densers, and heat exchangers or power plants or refrigeration systems. Some
cyclic devices, such as reciprocating engines or compressors, do not satisfy
any of the conditions stated above since the flow at the inlets and the exits are
pulsating and not steady. However, the fluid properties vary with time in a
periodic manner, and the flow through these devices can still be analyzed as a
steady-flow process by using time-averaged values for the properties.
2–6
■TEMPERATURE AND THE ZEROTH 
LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
Although we are familiar with temperature as a measure of “hotness” or
“coldness,” it is not easy to give an exact definition for it. Based on our
physiological sensations, we express the level of temperature qualitatively
with words like freezing cold, cold, warm, hot, and red-hot. However, we
cannot assign numerical values to temperatures based on our sensations
alone. Furthermore, our senses may be misleading. A metal chair, for exam-
ple, feels much colder than a wooden one even when both are at the same
temperature.
Fortunately, several properties of materials change with temperature in a
repeatable and predictable way, and this forms the basis for accurate tem-
perature measurement. The commonly used mercury-in-glass thermometer,
for example, is based on the expansion of mercury with temperature. Tem-
perature is also measured by using several other temperature-dependent
properties.
It is a common experience that a cup of hot coffee left on the table even-
tually cools off and a cold drink eventually warms up. That is, when a body
is brought into contact with another body that is at a different temperature,
heat is transferred from the body at higher temperature to the one at lower
temperature until both bodies attain the same temperature (Fig. 2–18). At
that point, the heat transfer stops, and the two bodies are said to have
28
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Control volume
300°C
250°C
200°C
150°C
225°C
Mass
Time: 1 PM
in
Mass
out
Control volume
300°C
250°C
200°C
150°C
225°C
Mass
Time: 3 PM
in
Mass
out
FIGURE 2–16
During a steady-flow process, fluid
properties within the control volume
may change with position but not with
time.
Control
volume
Mass
in
Mass
out
mCV = const.
ECV = const.
FIGURE 2–17
Under steady-flow conditions, the
mass and energy contents of a control
volume remain constant.
150°C
IRON
20°C
COPPER
60°C
IRON
60°C
COPPER
FIGURE 2–18
Two bodies reaching thermal
equilibrium after being brought into
contact in an isolated enclosure.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
35
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
reached thermal equilibrium. The equality of temperature is the only
requirement for thermal equilibrium.
The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that if two bodies are in ther-
mal equilibrium with a third body, they are also in thermal equilibrium with
each other. It may seem silly that such an obvious fact is called one of the
basic laws of thermodynamics. However, it cannot be concluded from the
other laws of thermodynamics, and it serves as a basis for the validity of
temperature measurement. By replacing the third body with a thermometer,
the zeroth law can be restated as two bodies are in thermal equilibrium if
both have the same temperature reading even if they are not in contact.
The zeroth law was first formulated and labeled by R. H. Fowler in 1931.
As the name suggests, its value as a fundamental physical principle was rec-
ognized more than half a century after the formulation of the first and the
second laws of thermodynamics. It was named the zeroth law since it
should have preceded the first and the second laws of thermodynamics.
Temperature Scales
Temperature scales enable us to use a common basis for temperature mea-
surements, and several have been introduced throughout history. All temper-
ature scales are based on some easily reproducible states such as the
freezing and boiling points of water, which are also called the ice point and
the steam point, respectively. A mixture of ice and water that is in equilib-
rium with air saturated with vapor at 1 atm pressure is said to be at the ice
point, and a mixture of liquid water and water vapor (with no air) in equilib-
rium at 1 atm pressure is said to be at the steam point.
The temperature scales used in the SI and in the English system today are
the Celsius scale (formerly called the centigrade scale; in 1948 it was
renamed after the Swedish astronomer A. Celsius, 1702–1744, who devised
it) and the Fahrenheit scale (named after the German instrument maker G.
Fahrenheit, 1686–1736), respectively. On the Celsius scale, the ice and
steam points were originally assigned the values of 0 and 100°C, respec-
tively. The corresponding values on the Fahrenheit scale are 32 and 212°F.
These are often referred to as two-point scales since temperature values are
assigned at two different points.
In thermodynamics, it is very desirable to have a temperature scale that is
independent of the properties of any substance or substances. Such a tem-
perature scale is called a thermodynamic temperature scale, which is
developed later in conjunction with the second law of thermodynamics. The
thermodynamic temperature scale in the SI is the Kelvin scale, named after
Lord Kelvin (1824–1907). The temperature unit on this scale is the kelvin,
which is designated by K (not °K; the degree symbol was officially dropped
from kelvin in 1967). The lowest temperature on the Kelvin scale is
absolute zero, or 0 K. Then it follows that only one nonzero reference point
needs to be assigned to establish the slope of this linear scale. Using non-
conventional refrigeration techniques, scientists have approached absolute
zero kelvin (they achieved 0.000000002 K in 1989).
The thermodynamic temperature scale in the English system is the Ran-
kine scale, named after William Rankine (1820–1872). The temperature
unit on this scale is the rankine, which is designated by R.
Chapter 2
|
29

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
36
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
A temperature scale that turns out to be nearly identical to the Kelvin
scale is the ideal-gas temperature scale. The temperatures on this scale are
measured using a constant-volume gas thermometer, which is basically a
rigid vessel filled with a gas, usually hydrogen or helium, at low pressure.
This thermometer is based on the principle that at low pressures, the tem-
perature of a gas is proportional to its pressure at constant volume. That is,
the temperature of a gas of fixed volume varies linearly with pressure at
sufficiently low pressures. Then the relationship between the temperature
and the pressure of the gas in the vessel can be expressed as
(2–5)
where the values of the constants a and b for a gas thermometer are deter-
mined experimentally. Once a and b are known, the temperature of a
medium can be calculated from this relation by immersing the rigid vessel
of the gas thermometer into the medium and measuring the gas pressure
when thermal equilibrium is established between the medium and the gas in
the vessel whose volume is held constant.
An ideal-gas temperature scale can be developed by measuring the pres-
sures of the gas in the vessel at two reproducible points (such as the ice and
the steam points) and assigning suitable values to temperatures at those two
points. Considering that only one straight line passes through two fixed
points on a plane, these two measurements are sufficient to determine the
constants a and b in Eq. 2–5. Then the unknown temperature T of a medium
corresponding to a pressure reading P can be determined from that equation
by a simple calculation. The values of the constants will be different for
each thermometer, depending on the type and the amount of the gas in the
vessel, and the temperature values assigned at the two reference points. If
the ice and steam points are assigned the values 0°C and 100°C, respec-
tively, then the gas temperature scale will be identical to the Celsius scale.
In this case the value of the constant a (which corresponds to an absolute
pressure of zero) is determined to be 273.15°C regardless of the type and
the amount of the gas in the vessel of the gas thermometer. That is, on a P-T
diagram, all the straight lines passing through the data points in this case
will intersect the temperature axis at 273.15°C when extrapolated, as
shown in Fig. 2–19. This is the lowest temperature that can be obtained by a
gas thermometer, and thus we can obtain an absolute gas temperature scale
by assigning a value of zero to the constant a in Eq. 2–5. In that case Eq.
2–5 reduces to T  bP, and thus we need to specify the temperature at only
one point to define an absolute gas temperature scale.
It should be noted that the absolute gas temperature scale is not a thermo-
dynamic temperature scale, since it cannot be used at very low temperatures
(due to condensation) and at very high temperatures (due to dissociation and
ionization). However, absolute gas temperature is identical to the thermody-
namic temperature in the temperature range in which the gas thermometer
can be used, and thus we can view the thermodynamic temperature scale at
this point as an absolute gas temperature scale that utilizes an “ideal” or
“imaginary” gas that always acts as a low-pressure gas regardless of the
temperature. If such a gas thermometer existed, it would read zero kelvin at
absolute zero pressure, which corresponds to 273.15°C on the Celsius
scale (Fig. 2–20).
T  a  bP
30
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Measured
data points
P
Gas A 
Gas B
Gas C
Gas D
0
–273.15
Extrapolation
T(°C)
FIGURE 2–19
P versus T plots of the experimental
data obtained from a constant-volume
gas thermometer using four different
gases at different (but low) pressures.
Absolute
vacuum
V = constant
T (°C)
T (K)
0
0
–273.15
P (kPa)
275
250
225
200
0
25
50
75
0
40
80
120
FIGURE 2–20
A constant-volume gas thermometer
would read 273.15°C at absolute
zero pressure.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
37
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The Kelvin scale is related to the Celsius scale by
(2–6)
The Rankine scale is related to the Fahrenheit scale by
(2–7)
It is common practice to round the constant in Eq. 2–6 to 273 and that in
Eq. 2–7 to 460.
The temperature scales in the two unit systems are related by
(2–8)
(2–9)
A comparison of various temperature scales is given in Fig. 2–21.
The reference temperature chosen in the original Kelvin scale was 273.15
K (or 0°C), which is the temperature at which water freezes (or ice melts)
and water exists as a solid–liquid mixture in equilibrium under standard
atmospheric pressure (the ice point). At the Tenth General Conference on
Weights and Measures in 1954, the reference point was changed to a much
more precisely reproducible point, the triple point of water (the state at
which all three phases of water coexist in equilibrium), which is assigned
the value 273.16 K. The Celsius scale was also redefined at this conference
in terms of the ideal-gas temperature scale and a single fixed point, which is
again the triple point of water with an assigned value of 0.01°C. The boiling
temperature of water (the steam point) was experimentally determined to be
again 100.00°C, and thus the new and old Celsius scales were in good
agreement.
The International Temperature 
Scale of 1990 (ITS-90)
The International Temperature Scale of 1990, which supersedes the Interna-
tional Practical Temperature Scale of 1968 (IPTS-68), 1948 (ITPS-48), and
1927 (ITS-27), was adopted by the International Committee of Weights and
Measures at its meeting in 1989 at the request of the Eighteenth General
Conference on Weights and Measures. The ITS-90 is similar to its predeces-
sors except that it is more refined with updated values of fixed temperatures,
has an extended range, and conforms more closely to the thermodynamic
temperature scale. On this scale, the unit of thermodynamic temperature T is
again the kelvin (K), defined as the fraction 1273.16 of the thermodynamic
temperature of the triple point of water, which is the sole defining fixed
point of both the ITS-90 and the Kelvin scale and is the most important
thermometric fixed point used in the calibration of thermometers to ITS-90.
The unit of Celsius temperature is the degree Celsius (°C), which is by
definition equal in magnitude to the kelvin (K). A temperature difference
may be expressed in kelvins or degrees Celsius. The ice point remains the
same at 0°C (273.15°C) in both ITS-90 and ITPS-68, but the steam point is
99.975°C in ITS-90 (with an uncertainly of 	0.005°C) whereas it was
100.000°C in IPTS-68. The change is due to precise measurements made by
gas thermometry by paying particular attention to the effect of sorption (the
impurities in a gas absorbed by the walls of the bulb at the reference 
T 1°F2  1.8T 1°C2  32
T 1R2  1.8T 1K2
T 1R2  T 1°F2  459.67
T 1K2  T 1°C2  273.15
Chapter 2
|
31
–273.15
°C
0
273.16
0.01
K
–459.67
°F
0
491.69
32.02
R
Triple
point
of water
Absolute
zero
FIGURE 2–21
Comparison of temperature scales.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
38
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
temperature being desorbed at higher temperatures, causing the measured
gas pressure to increase).
The ITS-90 extends upward from 0.65 K to the highest temperature prac-
tically measurable in terms of the Planck radiation law using monochro-
matic radiation. It is based on specifying definite temperature values on a
number of fixed and easily reproducible points to serve as benchmarks and
expressing the variation of temperature in a number of ranges and subranges
in functional form.
In ITS-90, the temperature scale is considered in four ranges. In the 
range of 0.65 to 5 K, the temperature scale is defined in terms of the vapor
pressure—temperature relations for 3He and 4He. Between 3 and 24.5561 K
(the triple point of neon), it is defined by means of a properly calibrated
helium gas thermometer. From 13.8033 K (the triple point of hydrogen) to
1234.93 K (the freezing point of silver), it is defined by means of platinum
resistance thermometers calibrated at specified sets of defining fixed points.
Above 1234.93 K, it is defined in terms of the Planck radiation law and a
suitable defining fixed point such as the freezing point of gold (1337.33 K).
We emphasize that the magnitudes of each division of 1 K and 1°C are
identical (Fig. 2–22). Therefore, when we are dealing with temperature dif-
ferences T, the temperature interval on both scales is the same. Raising the
temperature of a substance by 10°C is the same as raising it by 10 K. That is,
(2–10)
(2–11)
Some thermodynamic relations involve the temperature T and often the
question arises of whether it is in K or °C. If the relation involves tempera-
ture differences (such as a  bT), it makes no difference and either can be
used. However, if the relation involves temperatures only instead of temper-
ature differences (such as a  bT) then K must be used. When in doubt, it is
always safe to use K because there are virtually no situations in which the
use of K is incorrect, but there are many thermodynamic relations that will
yield an erroneous result if °C is used.
¢T1R2  ¢T1°F2
¢T1K2  ¢T1°C2
32
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1°C
1 K
1.8°F
1.8 R
FIGURE 2–22
Comparison of magnitudes of various
temperature units.
Example 2–1
Expressing Temperature Rise in Different Units
During a heating process, the temperature of a system rises by 10°C. Express
this rise in temperature in K, °F, and R.
Solution
The temperature rise of a system is to be expressed in different
units.
Analysis
This problem deals with temperature changes, which are identical
in Kelvin and Celsius scales. Then,
The temperature changes in Fahrenheit and Rankine scales are also identical
and are related to the changes in Celsius and Kelvin scales through Eqs. 2–8
and 2–11:
¢T1R2  1.8 ¢T1K2  11.82 1102  18 R
¢T1K2  ¢T1°C2  10 K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
39
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 2
|
33
2–7
■PRESSURE
Pressure is defined as a normal force exerted by a fluid per unit area. We
speak of pressure only when we deal with a gas or a liquid. The counterpart
of pressure in solids is normal stress. Since pressure is defined as force per
unit area, it has the unit of newtons per square meter (N/m2), which is called
a pascal (Pa). That is,
The pressure unit pascal is too small for pressures encountered in prac-
tice. Therefore, its multiples kilopascal (1 kPa  103 Pa) and megapascal
(1 MPa  106 Pa) are commonly used. Three other pressure units com-
monly used in practice, especially in Europe, are bar, standard atmosphere,
and kilogram-force per square centimeter:
Note the pressure units bar, atm, and kgf/cm2 are almost equivalent to each
other. In the English system, the pressure unit is pound-force per square
inch (lbfin2, or psi), and 1 atm  14.696 psi. The pressure units kgf/cm2
and lbfin2 are also denoted by kg/cm2 and lb/in2, respectively, and they are
commonly used in tire gages. It can be shown that 1 kgf/cm2  14.223 psi.
When used for solids, pressure is synonymous to normal stress, which is
force acting perpendicular to the surface per unit area. For example, a 150-
pound person with a total foot imprint area of 50 in2 exerts a pressure of
150 lbf50 in2  3.0 psi on the floor (Fig. 2–23). If the person stands on
one foot, the pressure doubles. If the person gains excessive weight, he or
she is likely to encounter foot discomfort because of the increased pressure
on the foot (the size of the foot does not change with weight gain). This also
explains how a person can walk on fresh snow without sinking by wearing
large snowshoes, and how a person cuts with little effort when using a sharp
knife.
The actual pressure at a given position is called the absolute pressure,
and it is measured relative to absolute vacuum (i.e., absolute zero pressure).
Most pressure-measuring devices, however, are calibrated to read zero in the
atmosphere (Fig. 2–24), and so they indicate the difference between the
absolute pressure and the local atmospheric pressure. This difference is
called the gage pressure. Pgage can be positive or negative, but pressures
 0.9679 atm 
 0.9807 bar 
 1 kgfcm2  9.807 Ncm2  9.807 
 104 Nm2  9.807 
 104 Pa 
 1 atm  101,325 Pa  101.325 kPa  1.01325 bars 
 1 bar  105 Pa  0.1 MPa  100 kPa 
1 Pa  1 Nm2
and
Discussion
Note that the units °C and K are interchangeable when dealing
with temperature differences.
¢T 1°F2  ¢T 1R2  18°F
150 pounds
Afeet = 50 in2
P = 3 psi
P = 6 psi
300 pounds
W
––––
Afeet
150 lbf
––––––
50 in2
P =   n =
= 3 psi
=
s
FIGURE 2–23
The normal stress (or “pressure”) 
on the feet of a chubby person is 
much greater than on the feet of 
a slim person.
FIGURE 2–24
Some basic pressure gages.
Ashcroft, Inc. Used by permission.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
40
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
below atmospheric pressure are sometimes called vacuum pressures and
are measured by vacuum gages that indicate the difference between the at-
mospheric pressure and the absolute pressure. Absolute, gage, and vacuum
pressures are related to each other by
(2–12)
(2–13)
This is illustrated in Fig. 2–25.
Like other pressure gages, the gage used to measure the air pressure in an
automobile tire reads the gage pressure. Therefore, the common reading of
32 psi (2.25 kgf/cm2) indicates a pressure of 32 psi above the atmospheric
pressure. At a location where the atmospheric pressure is 14.3 psi, for exam-
ple, the absolute pressure in the tire is 32  14.3  46.3 psi.
In thermodynamic relations and tables, absolute pressure is almost always
used. Throughout this text, the pressure P will denote absolute pressure
unless specified otherwise. Often the letters “a” (for absolute pressure) and
“g” (for gage pressure) are added to pressure units (such as psia and psig) to
clarify what is meant.
Pvac  Patm  Pabs
Pgage  Pabs  Patm
34
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 2–2
Absolute Pressure of a Vacuum Chamber
A vacuum gage connected to a chamber reads 5.8 psi at a location where
the atmospheric pressure is 14.5 psi. Determine the absolute pressure in the
chamber.
Solution
The gage pressure of a vacuum chamber is given. The absolute
pressure in the chamber is to be determined.
Analysis
The absolute pressure is easily determined from Eq. 2–13 to be
Discussion
Note that the local value of the atmospheric pressure is used
when determining the absolute pressure.
Pabs  Patm  Pvac  14.5  5.8  8.7 psi
Absolute
vacuum
Absolute
vacuum
Pabs
Pvac
Patm
Patm
Patm
Pgage
Pabs
Pabs = 0
FIGURE 2–25
Absolute, gage, and vacuum pressures.
P
P
P
P
P
FIGURE 2–26
Pressure is a scalar quantity, not a
vector; the pressure at a point in a ﬂuid
is the same in all directions.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
41
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Pressure at a Point
Pressure is the compressive force per unit area, and it gives the impression
of being a vector. However, pressure at any point in a fluid is the same in all
directions (Fig. 2–26). That is, it has magnitude but not a specific direction,
and thus it is a scalar quantity. In other words, the pressure at a point in a
fluid has the same magnitude in all directions. It can be shown in the ab-
sence of shear forces that this result is applicable to fluids in motion as well
as fluids at rest.
Variation of Pressure with Depth
It will come as no surprise to you that pressure in a fluid at rest does not
change in the horizontal direction. This can be shown easily by considering
a thin horizontal layer of fluid and doing a force balance in any horizontal
direction. However, this is not the case in the vertical direction in a gravity
field. Pressure in a fluid increases with depth because more fluid rests on
deeper layers, and the effect of this “extra weight” on a deeper layer is bal-
anced by an increase in pressure (Fig. 2–27).
To obtain a relation for the variation of pressure with depth, consider a rec-
tangular fluid element of height z, length x, and unit depth (y  1 unit
into the page) in equilibrium, as shown in Fig. 2–28. Assuming the density
of the fluid r to be constant, a force balance in the vertical z-direction gives
(2–14)
where W  mg  rg x z y is the weight of the fluid element. Dividing
by x y and rearranging gives
(2–15)
where gs  rg is the specific weight of the fluid. Thus, we conclude that the
pressure difference between two points in a constant density fluid is propor-
tional to the vertical distance z between the points and the density r of the
fluid. In other words, pressure in a static fluid increases linearly with depth.
This is what a diver experiences when diving deeper in a lake. For a given
fluid, the vertical distance z is sometimes used as a measure of pressure,
and it is called the pressure head.
We also conclude from Eq. 2–15 that for small to moderate distances, the
variation of pressure with height is negligible for gases because of their low
density. The pressure in a tank containing a gas, for example, can be consid-
ered to be uniform since the weight of the gas is too small to make a signif-
icant difference. Also, the pressure in a room filled with air can be assumed
to be constant (Fig. 2–29).
If we take point 1 to be at the free surface of a liquid open to the atmo-
sphere (Fig. 2–30), where the pressure is the atmospheric pressure Patm, then
the pressure at a depth h from the free surface becomes
(2–16)
Liquids are essentially incompressible substances, and thus the variation
of density with depth is negligible. This is also the case for gases when the
elevation change is not very large. The variation of density of liquids or
P  Patm  rgh    or    Pgage  rgh
P  P2  P1  rg z  gs z
a Fz  maz  0:    P2 xy  P1 xy  rg x zy  0
Chapter 2
|
35
Pgage
FIGURE 2–27
The pressure of a fluid at rest
increases with depth (as a result 
of added weight).
P2
W
P1
x
0
z
z
x


g
FIGURE 2–28
Free-body diagram of a rectangular
fluid element in equilibrium.
Ptop = 1 atm
AIR
(A 5-m-high room)
Pbottom  = 1.006 atm
FIGURE 2–29
In a room filled with a gas, the
variation of pressure with height 
is negligible.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
42
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
gases with temperature can be significant, however, and may need to be
considered when high accuracy is desired. Also, at great depths such as
those encountered in oceans, the change in the density of a liquid can be
significant because of the compression by the tremendous amount of liquid
weight above.
The gravitational acceleration g varies from 9.807 m/s2 at sea level to
9.764 m/s2 at an elevation of 14,000 m where large passenger planes cruise.
This is a change of just 0.4 percent in this extreme case. Therefore, g can be
assumed to be constant with negligible error.
For fluids whose density changes significantly with elevation, a relation
for the variation of pressure with elevation can be obtained by dividing 
Eq. 2–14 by x y z, and taking the limit as z →0. It gives
(2–17)
The negative sign is due to our taking the positive z direction to be upward
so that dP is negative when dz is positive since pressure decreases in an
upward direction. When the variation of density with elevation is known,
the pressure difference between points 1 and 2 can be determined by inte-
gration to be
(2–18)
For constant density and constant gravitational acceleration, this relation
reduces to Eq. 2–15, as expected.
Pressure in a fluid at rest is independent of the shape or cross section of
the container. It changes with the vertical distance, but remains constant in
other directions. Therefore, the pressure is the same at all points on a hori-
zontal plane in a given fluid. The Dutch mathematician Simon Stevin
(1548–1620) published in 1586 the principle illustrated in Fig. 2–31. Note
P  P2  P1  
2
1
rg dz
dP
dz  rg
36
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
P1 = Patm
P2 = Patm + rgh
h
1
2
FIGURE 2–30
Pressure in a liquid at rest increases
linearly with distance from the free
surface.
h
A
B
C
D
E
Water
Mercury
F
G
I
H
Patm
PA = PB = PC = PD = PE = PF = PG = Patm + rgh
PH ≠PI
FIGURE 2–31
The pressure is the same at all points on a horizontal plane in a given fluid at rest regardless of geometry, provided 
that the points are interconnected by the same fluid.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
43
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
that the pressures at points A, B, C, D, E, F, and G are the same since they
are at the same depth, and they are interconnected by the same static fluid.
However, the pressures at points H and I are not the same since these two
points cannot be interconnected by the same fluid (i.e., we cannot draw a
curve from point I to point H while remaining in the same fluid at all
times), although they are at the same depth. (Can you tell at which point the
pressure is higher?) Also, the pressure force exerted by the fluid is always
normal to the surface at the specified points.
A consequence of the pressure in a fluid remaining constant in the hori-
zontal direction is that the pressure applied to a confined fluid increases the
pressure throughout by the same amount. This is called Pascal’s law, after
Blaise Pascal (1623–1662). Pascal also knew that the force applied by a
fluid is proportional to the surface area. He realized that two hydraulic
cylinders of different areas could be connected, and the larger could be used
to exert a proportionally greater force than that applied to the smaller. “Pas-
cal’s machine” has been the source of many inventions that are a part of our
daily lives such as hydraulic brakes and lifts. This is what enables us to lift
a car easily by one arm, as shown in Fig. 2–32. Noting that P1  P2 since
both pistons are at the same level (the effect of small height differences is
negligible, especially at high pressures), the ratio of output force to input
force is determined to be
(2–19)
The area ratio A2/A1 is called the ideal mechanical advantage of the hydraulic
lift. Using a hydraulic car jack with a piston area ratio of A2/A1  100, for
example, a person can lift a 1000-kg car by applying a force of just 10 kgf (
90.8 N).
2–8
■PRESSURE MEASUREMENT DEVICES
The Barometer
Atmospheric pressure is measured by a device called a barometer; thus, the
atmospheric pressure is often referred to as the barometric pressure.
The Italian Evangelista Torricelli (1608–1647) was the first to conclu-
sively prove that the atmospheric pressure can be measured by inverting a
mercury-filled tube into a mercury container that is open to the atmosphere,
as shown in Fig. 2–33. The pressure at point B is equal to the atmospheric
pressure, and the pressure at C can be taken to be zero since there is only
mercury vapor above point C and the pressure is very low relative to Patm
and can be neglected to an excellent approximation. Writing a force balance
in the vertical direction gives
(2–20)
where r is the density of mercury, g is the local gravitational acceleration,
and h is the height of the mercury column above the free surface. Note that
the length and the cross-sectional area of the tube (unless it is so small that
surface tension effects are signiﬁcant) have no effect on the height of the
fluid column of a barometer (Fig. 2–34).
A frequently used pressure unit is the standard atmosphere, which is
defined as the pressure produced by a column of mercury 760 mm in height
at 0°C (rHg  13,595 kg/m3) under standard gravitational acceleration 
Patm  rgh
P1  P2  
→  F1
A1
 F2
A2  
→  F2
F1
 A2
A1
Chapter 2
|
37
F1 = P1A1
1
2
A1
P1
F2 = P2 A2
A2
P2
FIGURE 2–32
Lifting of a large weight by 
a small force by the application 
of Pascal’s law.
h
W
rghA
=
A
h
B
Mercury
C
Patm
FIGURE 2–33
The basic barometer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
44
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
(g  9.807 m/s2). If water instead of mercury were used to measure the
standard atmospheric pressure, a water column of about 10.3 m would be
needed. Pressure is sometimes expressed (especially by weather forecasters)
in terms of the height of the mercury column. The standard atmospheric
pressure, for example, is 760 mmHg (29.92 inHg) at 0°C. The unit mmHg
is also called the torr in honor of Torricelli. Therefore, 1 atm  760 torr
and 1 torr  133.3 Pa.
The atmospheric pressure Patm changes from 101.325 kPa at sea level to
89.88, 79.50, 54.05, 26.5, and 5.53 kPa at altitudes of 1000, 2000, 5000,
10,000, and 20,000 meters, respectively. The typical atmospheric pressure in
Denver (elevation  1610 m), for example, is 83.4 kPa. Remember that the
atmospheric pressure at a location is simply the weight of the air above that
location per unit surface area. Therefore, it changes not only with elevation
but also with weather conditions.
The decline of atmospheric pressure with elevation has far-reaching rami-
fications in daily life. For example, cooking takes longer at high altitudes
since water boils at a lower temperature at lower atmospheric pressures.
Nose bleeding is a common experience at high altitudes since the difference
between the blood pressure and the atmospheric pressure is larger in this
case, and the delicate walls of veins in the nose are often unable to with-
stand this extra stress.
For a given temperature, the density of air is lower at high altitudes, and
thus a given volume contains less air and less oxygen. So it is no surprise
that we tire more easily and experience breathing problems at high altitudes.
To compensate for this effect, people living at higher altitudes develop more
efficient lungs. Similarly, a 2.0-L car engine will act like a 1.7-L car engine
at 1500 m altitude (unless it is turbocharged) because of the 15 percent drop
in pressure and thus 15 percent drop in the density of air (Fig. 2–35). A fan
or compressor will displace 15 percent less air at that altitude for the same
volume displacement rate. Therefore, larger cooling fans may need to be
selected for operation at high altitudes to ensure the specified mass flow
rate. The lower pressure and thus lower density also affects lift and drag:
airplanes need a longer runway at high altitudes to develop the required lift,
and they climb to very high altitudes for cruising for reduced drag and thus
better fuel efficiency.
38
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 2–3
Measuring Atmospheric Pressure 
with a Barometer
Determine the atmospheric pressure at a location where the barometric read-
ing is 740 mm Hg and the gravitational acceleration is g  9.81 m/s2.
Assume the temperature of mercury to be 10°C, at which its density is
13,570 kg/m3.
Solution
The barometric reading at a location in height of mercury column
is given. The atmospheric pressure is to be determined.
Assumptions
The temperature of mercury is assumed to be 10°C.
Properties
The density of mercury is given to be 13,570 kg/m3.
A2
A1
A3
FIGURE 2–34
The length or the cross-sectional area
of the tube has no effect on the height
of the fluid column of a barometer,
provided that the tube diameter is
large enough to avoid surface tension
(capillary) effects.
Engine
Lungs
FIGURE 2–35
At high altitudes, a car engine
generates less power and a person 
gets less oxygen because of the 
lower density of air.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
45
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The Manometer
We notice from Eq. 2–15 that an elevation change of z in a fluid at rest 
corresponds to P/rg, which suggests that a fluid column can be used to
measure pressure differences. A device based on this principle is called a
manometer, and it is commonly used to measure small and moderate pres-
sure differences. A manometer consists of a glass or plastic U-tube contain-
ing one or more fluids such as mercury, water, alcohol, or oil. To keep the
size of the manometer to a manageable level, heavy fluids such as mercury
are used if large pressure differences are anticipated.
Consider the manometer shown in Fig. 2–36 that is used to measure the
pressure in the tank. Since the gravitational effects of gases are negligible,
the pressure anywhere in the tank and at position 1 has nearly the same
value. Furthermore, since pressure in a fluid does not vary in the horizontal
direction within a fluid, the pressure at point 2 is the same as the pressure at
point 1, P2  P1.
The differential fluid column of height h is in static equilibrium, and it is
open to the atmosphere. Then the pressure at point 2 is determined directly
from Eq. 2–16 to be
(2–21)
where r is the density of the fluid in the tube. Note that the cross-sectional
area of the tube has no effect on the differential height h, and thus the pres-
sure exerted by the fluid. However, the diameter of the tube should be large
enough (more than a few millimeters) to ensure that the surface tension
effect and thus the capillary rise is negligible.
P2  Patm  rgh
Chapter 2
|
39
Analysis
From Eq. 2–20, the atmospheric pressure is determined to be
Discussion
Note that density changes with temperature, and thus this effect
should be considered in calculations.
 98.5 kPa
 (13,570 kgm3)(9.81 ms2)(0.74 m)a
1 N
1 kg  ms2b a
1 kPa
1000 Nm2b
Patm  rgh
Gas
h
1
2
FIGURE 2–36
The basic manometer.
P
SG
 = ?
h = 55 cm
= 0.85
Patm = 96 kPa
FIGURE 2–37
Schematic for Example 2–4.
EXAMPLE 2–4
Measuring Pressure with a Manometer
A manometer is used to measure the pressure in a tank. The fluid used has
a specific gravity of 0.85, and the manometer column height is 55 cm, as
shown in Fig. 2–37. If the local atmospheric pressure is 96 kPa, determine
the absolute pressure within the tank.
Solution
The reading of a manometer attached to a tank and the 
atmospheric pressure are given. The absolute pressure in the tank is to be
determined.
Assumptions
The fluid in the tank is a gas whose density is much lower
than the density of manometer fluid.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
46
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
40
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Properties
The specific gravity of the manometer fluid is given to be 0.85.
We take the standard density of water.
Analysis
The density of the fluid is obtained by multiplying its specific
gravity by the density of water.
Then from Eq. 2–21,
Discussion
Note that the gage pressure in the tank is 4.6 kPa.
 100.6 kPa
 96 kPa  (850 kgm3)(9.81 ms2)(0.55 m)a
1 N
1 kg  ms2b a
1 kPa
1000 Nm2b
P  Patm  rgh
r  SG (rH2O)  (0.85)(1000 kgm3)  850 kgm3
EXAMPLE 2–5
Measuring Pressure with a Multifluid Manometer
The water in a tank is pressurized by air, and the pressure is measured by a
multifluid manometer as shown in Fig. 2–38. The tank is located on a moun-
tain at an altitude of 1400 m where the atmospheric pressure is 85.6 kPa.
Determine the air pressure in the tank if h1  0.1 m, h2  0.2 m, and h3 
0.35 m. Take the densities of water, oil, and mercury to be 1000 kg/m3, 850
kg/m3, and 13,600 kg/m3, respectively.
Solution
The pressure in a pressurized water tank is measured by a multi-
fluid manometer. The air pressure in the tank is to be determined.
Assumption
The air pressure in the tank is uniform (i.e., its variation with
elevation is negligible due to its low density), and thus we can determine the
pressure at the air–water interface.
Properties
The densities of water, oil, and mercury are given to be
1000 kg/m3, 850 kg/m3, and 13,600 kg/m3, respectively.
Analysis
Starting with the pressure at point 1 at the air–water interface,
moving along the tube by adding or subtracting the rgh terms until we reach
point 2, and setting the result equal to Patm since the tube is open to the
atmosphere gives
Solving for P1 and substituting,
Discussion
Note that jumping horizontally from one tube to the next and
realizing that pressure remains the same in the same fluid simplifies the
analysis considerably. Also note that mercury is a toxic fluid, and mercury
manometers and thermometers are being replaced by ones with safer fluids
because of the risk of exposure to mercury vapor during an accident.
 130 kPa
  (850 kgm3)(0.2 m)]a
1 N
1 kg   ms2b a
1 kPa
1000 Nm2b
 85.6 kPa  (9.81 ms2)[(13,600 kgm3)(0.35 m)  (1000 kgm3)(0.1 m)
 Patm  g(rmercuryh3  rwaterh1  roilh2)
P1  Patm  rwatergh1  roilgh2  rmercurygh3
P1  rwatergh1  roilgh2  rmercurygh3  P2  Patm
h1
h2
h3
Oil
Mercury
WATER
AIR
1
2
FIGURE 2–38
Schematic for Example 2–5; drawing
not to scale.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
47
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Some manometers use a slanted or inclined tube in order to increase the
resolution (precision) when reading the ﬂuid height. Such devices are called
inclined manometers.
Many engineering problems and some manometers involve multiple immis-
cible fluids of different densities stacked on top of each other. Such systems
can be analyzed easily by remembering that (1) the pressure change across a
fluid column of height h is P  rgh, (2) pressure increases downward in a
given fluid and decreases upward (i.e., Pbottom  Ptop), and (3) two points at
the same elevation in a continuous fluid at rest are at the same pressure.
The last principle, which is a result of Pascal’s law, allows us to “jump”
from one fluid column to the next in manometers without worrying about
pressure change as long as we stay in the same continuous ﬂuid and the
fluid is at rest. Then the pressure at any point can be determined by starting
with a point of known pressure and adding or subtracting rgh terms as we
advance toward the point of interest. For example, the pressure at the bot-
tom of the tank in Fig. 2–39 can be determined by starting at the free sur-
face where the pressure is Patm, moving downward until we reach point 1 at
the bottom, and setting the result equal to P1. It gives
In the special case of all fluids having the same density, this relation reduces
to Eq. 2–21, as expected.
Manometers are particularly well-suited to measure pressure drops across
a horizontal flow section between two specified points due to the presence
of a device such as a valve or heat exchanger or any resistance to flow. This
is done by connecting the two legs of the manometer to these two points, as
shown in Fig. 2–40. The working fluid can be either a gas or a liquid whose
density is r1. The density of the manometer fluid is r2, and the differential
fluid height is h. The two ﬂuids must be immiscible, and r2 must be greater
than r1.
A relation for the pressure difference P1  P2 can be obtained by starting
at point 1 with P1, moving along the tube by adding or subtracting the rgh
terms until we reach point 2, and setting the result equal to P2:
(2–22)
Note that we jumped from point A horizontally to point B and ignored the
part underneath since the pressure at both points is the same. Simplifying,
(2–23)
Note that the distance a has been included in the analysis even though it has
no effect on the result. Also, when the fluid flowing in the pipe is a gas,
then r1  r2 and the relation in Eq. 2–23 simplifies to P1  P2  r2gh.
Other Pressure Measurement Devices
Another type of commonly used mechanical pressure measurement device
is the Bourdon tube, named after the French engineer and inventor Eugene
Bourdon (1808–1884), which consists of a bent, coiled, or twisted hollow
metal tube whose end is closed and connected to a dial indicator needle
(Fig. 2–41). When the tube is open to the atmosphere, the tube is unde-
flected, and the needle on the dial at this state is calibrated to read zero
P1  P2  (r2  r1)gh
P1  r1g(a  h)  r2gh  r1ga  P2
Patm  r1gh1  r2gh2  r3gh3  P1
Chapter 2
|
41
Patm
1
h3
h2
h1
Fluid 2
Fluid 1
Fluid 3
FIGURE 2–39
In stacked-up fluid layers, the pressure
change across a fluid layer of density
r and height h is rgh.
a
h
r1
A
B
Fluid
A flow section
or flow device
1
2
r2
FIGURE 2–40
Measuring the pressure drop across a
flow section or a flow device by a
differential manometer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
48
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
42
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 2–6
Analyzing a Multifluid Manometer with EES
Reconsider the multifluid manometer discussed in Example 2–5. Determine
the air pressure in the tank using EES. Also determine what the differential
fluid height h3 would be for the same air pressure if the mercury in the last
column were replaced by seawater with a density of 1030 kg/m3.
Solution
The pressure in a water tank is measured by a multifluid
manometer. The air pressure in the tank and the differential fluid height h3
if mercury is replaced by seawater are to be determined using EES.
Analysis
We start the EES program by double-clicking on its icon, open a
new file, and type the following on the blank screen that appears (we express
the atmospheric pressure in Pa for unit consistency):
g=9.81
Patm=85600
h1=0.1;
h2=0.2;
h3=0.35
rw=1000;
roil=850;
rm=13600
P1+rw*g*h1+roil*g*h2-rm*g*h3=Patm
Here P1 is the only unknown, and it is determined by EES to be
which is identical to the result obtained before. The height of the fluid col-
umn h3 when mercury is replaced by seawater is determined easily by
replacing “h30.35” by “P1129647” and “rm13600” by “r m1030,”
and clicking on the calculator symbol. It gives
Discussion
Note that we used the screen like a paper pad and wrote down
the relevant information together with the applicable relations in an orga-
nized manner. EES did the rest. Equations can be written on separate lines
or on the same line by separating them by semicolons, and blank or com-
ment lines can be inserted for readability. EES makes it very easy to ask
“what if” questions, and to perform parametric studies, as explained in
Appendix 3 on the DVD.
EES also has the capability to check the equations for unit consistency if
units are supplied together with numerical values. Units can be specified 
within brackets [ ] after the specified value. When this feature is utilized,
the previous equations would take the following form:
g=9.81 [m/s^2]
Patm=85600 [Pa]
h1=0.1 [m];
h2=0.2 [m];
h3=0.35 [m]
rw=1000 [kg/m^3];
roil=850 [kg/m^3];
rm=13600 [kg/m^3]
P1+rw*g*h1+roil*g*h2-rm*g*h3=Patm
h3  4.62 m
P1  129647 Pa  130 kPa
(gage pressure). When the fluid inside the tube is pressurized, the tube
stretches and moves the needle in proportion to the pressure applied.
Electronics have made their way into every aspect of life, including pres-
sure measurement devices. Modern pressure sensors, called pressure trans-
ducers, use various techniques to convert the pressure effect to an electrical
effect such as a change in voltage, resistance, or capacitance. Pressure trans-
ducers are smaller and faster, and they can be more sensitive, reliable, and
C-type
Spiral
Twisted tube
Tube cross section
Helical
FIGURE 2–41
Various types of Bourdon tubes used
to measure pressure.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
49
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
precise than their mechanical counterparts. They can measure pressures
from less than a millionth of 1 atm to several thousands of atm.
A wide variety of pressure transducers is available to measure gage,
absolute, and differential pressures in a wide range of applications. Gage
pressure transducers use the atmospheric pressure as a reference by venting
the back side of the pressure-sensing diaphragm to the atmosphere, and they
give a zero signal output at atmospheric pressure regardless of altitude. Ab-
solute pressure transducers are calibrated to have a zero signal output at full
vacuum. Differential pressure transducers measure the pressure difference
between two locations directly instead of using two pressure transducers
and taking their difference.
Strain-gage pressure transducers work by having a diaphragm deflect
between two chambers open to the pressure inputs. As the diaphragm
stretches in response to a change in pressure difference across it, the strain
gage stretches and a Wheatstone bridge circuit amplifies the output. A
capacitance transducer works similarly, but capacitance change is measured
instead of resistance change as the diaphragm stretches.
Piezoelectric transducers, also called solid-state pressure transducers,
work on the principle that an electric potential is generated in a crystalline
substance when it is subjected to mechanical pressure. This phenomenon,
first discovered by brothers Pierre and Jacques Curie in 1880, is called the
piezoelectric (or press-electric) effect. Piezoelectric pressure transducers
have a much faster frequency response compared to diaphragm units and are
very suitable for high-pressure applications, but they are generally not as
sensitive as are diaphragm-type transducers, especially at low pressures.
Chapter 2
|
43
EXAMPLE 2–7
Effect of Piston Weight on Pressure in a Cylinder
The piston of a vertical piston–cylinder device containing a gas has a mass
of 60 kg and a cross-sectional area of 0.04 m2, as shown in Fig. 2–42. The
local atmospheric pressure is 0.97 bar, and the gravitational acceleration is
9.81 m/s2. (a) Determine the pressure inside the cylinder. (b) If some heat is
transferred to the gas and its volume is doubled, do you expect the pressure
inside the cylinder to change?
Solution
A gas is contained in a vertical cylinder with a heavy piston. The
pressure inside the cylinder and the effect of volume change on pressure are
to be determined.
Assumptions
Friction between the piston and the cylinder is negligible.
Analysis
(a) The gas pressure in the piston–cylinder device depends on the
atmospheric pressure and the weight of the piston. Drawing the free-body
diagram of the piston as shown in Fig. 2–42 and balancing the vertical
forces yield
Solving for P and substituting,
 1.12 bars
 0.97 bar  (60 kg)(9.81 ms2)
0.04 m2
a
1 N
1 kg  ms2b a
1 bar
105 Nm2b
P  Patm  mg
A
PA  Patm A  W
A = 0.04 m2
P = ?
Patm = 0.97 bar
m = 60 kg
Patm
W = mg
P
FIGURE 2–42
Schematic for Example 2–7, and the
free-body diagram of the piston.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
50
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
44
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(b) The volume change will have no effect on the free-body diagram drawn in
part (a), and therefore the pressure inside the cylinder will remain the same.
Discussion
If the gas behaves as an ideal gas, the absolute temperature
doubles when the volume is doubled at constant pressure.
EXAMPLE 2–8
Hydrostatic Pressure in a Solar Pond 
with Variable Density
Solar ponds are small artificial lakes of a few meters deep that are used to
store solar energy. The rise of heated (and thus less dense) water to the sur-
face is prevented by adding salt at the pond bottom. In a typical salt gradi-
ent solar pond, the density of water increases in the gradient zone, as shown
in Fig. 2–43, and the density can be expressed as
where r0 is the density on the water surface, z is the vertical distance mea-
sured downward from the top of the gradient zone, and H is the thickness of
the gradient zone. For H  4 m, r0  1040 kg/m3, and a thickness of 0.8
m for the surface zone, calculate the gage pressure at the bottom of the gra-
dient zone.
Solution
The variation of density of saline water in the gradient zone of a
solar pond with depth is given. The gage pressure at the bottom of the gradi-
ent zone is to be determined.
Assumptions
The density in the surface zone of the pond is constant.
Properties
The density of brine on the surface is given to be 1040 kg/m3.
Analysis
We label the top and the bottom of the gradient zone as 1 and 2,
respectively. Noting that the density of the surface zone is constant, the gage
pressure at the bottom of the surface zone (which is the top of the gradient
zone) is
P1  rgh1  11040 kg>m32 19.81 m>s22 10.8 m2 a
1 kN
1000 kg # m>s2 b  8.16 kPa
r  r0B1  tan2a p
4
z
H b
1
2
Increasing salinity
and density
Surface zone
Sun
r0 = 1040 kg/m3
H = 4 m
z
Gradient zone
Storage zone
FIGURE 2–43
Schematic for Example 2–8.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
51
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 2
|
45
In this chapter, the basic concepts of thermodynamics are
introduced and discussed. A system of fixed mass is called a
closed system, or control mass, and a system that involves
mass transfer across its boundaries is called an open system,
or control volume. The mass-dependent properties of a sys-
tem are called extensive properties and the others intensive
properties. Density is mass per unit volume, and specific vol-
ume is volume per unit mass.
A system is said to be in thermodynamic equilibrium if it
maintains thermal, mechanical, phase, and chemical equilib-
rium. Any change from one state to another is called a
process. A process with identical end states is called a cycle.
During a quasi-static or quasi-equilibrium process, the sys-
tem remains practically in equilibrium at all times. The state
of a simple, compressible system is completely specified by
two independent, intensive properties.
The zeroth law of thermodynamics states that two bodies
are in thermal equilibrium if both have the same temperature
reading even if they are not in contact.
The temperature scales used in the SI and the English sys-
tem today are the Celsius scale and the Fahrenheit scale,
respectively. They are related to absolute temperature scales by
The magnitudes of each division of 1 K and 1°C are identi-
cal, and so are the magnitudes of each division of 1 R and
1°F. Therefore,
The normal force exerted by a fluid per unit area is called
pressure, and its unit is the pascal, 1 Pa  1 N/m2. The pres-
sure relative to absolute vacuum is called the absolute pres-
sure, and the difference between the absolute pressure and
the local atmospheric pressure is called the gage pressure.
Pressures below atmospheric pressure are called vacuum
¢T1K2  ¢T1°C2
and ¢T1R2  ¢T1°F2
T1R2  T1°F2  459.67
T1K2  T1°C2  273.15
since 1 kN/m2  1 kPa. The differential change in hydrostatic pressure
across a vertical distance of dz is given by
Integrating from the top of the gradient zone (point 1 where z  0) to any
location z in the gradient zone (no subscript) gives
Performing the integration gives the variation of gage pressure in the gradi-
ent zone to be
Then the pressure at the bottom of the gradient zone (z  H  4 m)
becomes
Discussion
The variation of gage pressure in the gradient zone with depth is
plotted in Fig. 2–44. The dashed line indicates the hydrostatic pressure for
the case of constant density at 1040 kg/m3 and is given for reference. Note
that the variation of pressure with depth is not linear when density varies
with depth.
 54.0 kPa 1gage2

 sinh1a tan p
4
4
4 b a
1 kN
1000 kg # m>s2 b
P2  8.16 kPa  11040 kg>m32 19.81 m>s22
414 m2
p
P  P1  r0g 4H
p  sinh1a tan p
4
z
H b
P  P1  
z
0
rg dz  
S
P  P1  
z
0
r0B1  tan2a p
4
z
H b g dz
dP  rg dz
4
3
2
3.5
2.5
1.5
1
0.5
0
0
10
20
30
P, kPa
z, m
40
50
60
FIGURE 2–44
The variation of gage pressure with
depth in the gradient zone of the solar
pond.
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
52
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Systems, Properties, State, and Processes
2–1C
You have been asked to do a metabolism (energy)
analysis of a person. How would you define the system for
this purpose? What type of system is this?
2–2C
You are trying to understand how a reciprocating air
compressor (a piston-cylinder device) works. What system
would you use? What type of system is this?
2–3C
How would you define a system to determine the rate
at which an automobile adds carbon dioxide to the atmosphere?
46
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
2–4C
How would you define a system to determine the
temperature rise created in a lake when a portion of its water
is used to cool a nearby electrical power plant?
2–5C
What is the difference between intensive and exten-
sive properties?
2–6C
The specific weight of a system is defined as the
weight per unit volume (note that this definition violates the
normal specific property-naming convention). Is the specific
weight an extensive or intensive property?
2–7C
Is the number of moles of a substance contained in a
system an extensive or intensive property?
2–8C
For a system to be in thermodynamic equilibrium,
do the temperature and the pressure have to be the same
everywhere?
2–9C
What is a quasi-equilibrium process? What is its
importance in engineering?
2–10C
Define the isothermal,
isobaric,
and isochoric
processes.
1. A. Bejan. Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics. 3rd
ed. New York: Wiley, 2006.
2. J. A. Schooley. Thermometry. Boca Raton, FL: CRC
Press, 1986.
pressures. The absolute, gage, and vacuum pressures are
related by
The pressure at a point in a fluid has the same magnitude in
all directions. The variation of pressure with elevation is
given by
where the positive z direction is taken to be upward. When
the density of the fluid is constant, the pressure difference
across a fluid layer of thickness z is
¢P  P2  P1  rg ¢z
dP
dz  rg
Pvac  Patm  Pabs  
1for pressures below Patm2
Pgage  Pabs  Patm  
1for pressures above or below Patm2
The absolute and gage pressures in a liquid open to the atmo-
sphere at a depth h from the free surface are
Small to moderate pressure differences are measured by a
manometer. The pressure in a stationary fluid remains con-
stant in the horizontal direction. Pascal’s principle states that
the pressure applied to a confined fluid increases the pressure
throughout by the same amount. The atmospheric pressure is
measured by a barometer and is given by
where h is the height of the liquid column.
Patm  rgh
P  Patm  rgh or Pgage  rgh
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
PROBLEMS*
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and
students are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated
by an “E” are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them.
Problems with the
icon are solved using EES, and complete
solutions together with parametric studies are included on the
enclosed DVD. Problems with the
icon are comprehensive in
nature and are intended to be solved with a computer, preferably
using the EES software that accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
53
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 2
|
47
2–11C
What is the state postulate?
2–12C
How would you describe the state of the air in the
atmosphere? What kind of process does this air undergo from
a cool morning to a warm afternoon?
2–13C
What is a steady-flow process?
2–14
The density of atmospheric air varies with eleva-
tion, decreasing with increasing altitude. (a)
Using the data given in the table, obtain a relation for the
variation of density with elevation, and calculate the density
at an elevation of 7000 m. (b) Calculate the mass of the
atmosphere using the correlation you obtained. Assume the
earth to be a perfect sphere with a radius of 6377 km, and
take the thickness of the atmosphere to be 25 km.
z, km
r, kg/m3
6377
1.225
6378
1.112
6379
1.007
6380
0.9093
6381
0.8194
6382
0.7364
6383
0.6601
6385
0.5258
6387
0.4135
6392
0.1948
6397
0.08891
6402
0.04008
Temperature
2–15C
What is the zeroth law of thermodynamics?
2–16C
What are the ordinary and absolute temperature
scales in the SI and the English system?
2–17C
Consider an alcohol and a mercury thermometer
that read exactly 0°C at the ice point and 100°C at the steam
point. The distance between the two points is divided into
100 equal parts in both thermometers. Do you think these
thermometers will give exactly the same reading at a temper-
ature of, say, 60°C? Explain.
2–18
The deep body temperature of a healthy person is
37°C. What is it in kelvins?
2–19E
Consider a system whose temperature is 18°C.
Express this temperature in R, K, and °F.
2–20
The temperature of a system rises by 15°C during a
heating process. Express this rise in temperature in kelvins.
2–21E
Steam enters a heat exchanger at 300 K. What is the
temperature of this steam in °F?
2–22E
The temperature of the lubricating oil in an automo-
bile engine is measured as 150°F. What is the temperature of
this oil in °C? 
2–23E
Heated air is at 150°C. What is the temperature of
this air in °F?
2–24E
Humans are most comfortable when the temperature
is between 65°F and 75°F. Express these temperature limits
in °C. Convert the size of this temperature range (10°F) to K,
°C, and R. Is there any difference in the size of this range as
measured in relative or absolute units?
Pressure, Manometer, and Barometer
2–25C
What is the difference between gage pressure and
absolute pressure?
2–26C
A health magazine reported that physicians measured
100 adults’ blood pressure using two different arm positions:
parallel to the body (along the side) and perpendicular to the
body (straight out). Readings in the parallel position were up
to 10 percent higher than those in the perpendicular position,
regardless of whether the patient was standing, sitting, or ly-
ing down. Explain the possible cause for the difference. 
2–27C
Someone claims that the absolute pressure in a liq-
uid of constant density doubles when the depth is doubled.
Do you agree? Explain.
2–28C
A tiny steel cube is suspended in water by a string.
If the lengths of the sides of the cube are very small, how
would you compare the magnitudes of the pressures on the
top, bottom, and side surfaces of the cube?
2–29C
Express Pascal’s law, and give a real-world example
of it.
2–30E
The maximum safe air pressure of a tire is typically
written on the tire itself. The label on a tire indicates that the
maximum pressure is 35 psi (gage). Express this maximum
pressure in kPa.
FIGURE P2–30E
2–31
The pressure in a compressed air storage tank is 1500
kPa. What is the tank’s pressure in (a) kN and m units; (b) kg,
m, and s units; and (c) kg, km, and s units?

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
54
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
2–32E
The absolute pressure in a compressed air tank is
200 kPa. What is this pressure in psia?
2–33E
A manometer measures a pressure difference as 40
inches of water. What is this pressure difference in pounds-
force per square inch, psi?
Answer: 1.44 psi
2–34
The pressure of the helium inside a toy balloon is
1000 mm Hg. What is this pressure in kPa?
2–35
The water in a tank is pressurized by air, and the pres-
sure is measured by a multifluid manometer as shown in Fig.
P2–35. Determine the gage pressure of air in the tank if h1 
0.2 m, h2  0.3 m, and h3  0.46 m. Take the densities of
water, oil, and mercury to be 1000 kg/m3, 850 kg/m3, and
13,600 kg/m3, respectively.
FIGURE P2–35
2–36
Determine the atmospheric pressure at a location
where the barometric reading is 750 mm Hg. Take the density
of mercury to be 13,600 kg/m3.
2–37
The gage pressure in a liquid at a depth of 3 m is read
to be 28 kPa. Determine the gage pressure in the same liquid
at a depth of 9 m.
2–38
The absolute pressure in water at a depth of 5 m is
read to be 145 kPa. Determine (a) the local atmospheric pres-
sure, and (b) the absolute pressure at a depth of 5 m in a liq-
uid whose specific gravity is 0.85 at the same location.
2–39E
Show that 1 kgf/cm2  14.223 psi.
2–40E
The diameters of the pistons shown in Fig. P2–40E
are D1  3 in and D2  2 in. Determine the pressure in cham-
ber 3, in psia, when the other pressures are P1  150 psia
and P2  200 psia.
h1
h2
h3
Oil
Mercury
WATER
AIR
1
2
48
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P2–40E
2–41
In Fig. P2–40E, the piston diameters are D1  10 cm
and D2  4 cm. If P1  1000 kPa and P3 500 kPa, what is
the pressure in chamber 2, in kPa? 
2–42
The piston diameters in Fig. P2–40E are D1  10 cm
and D2  4 cm. When the pressure in chamber 2 is 2000 kPa
and the pressure in chamber 3 is 700 kPa, what is the pres-
sure in chamber 1, in kPa?
Answer: 908 kPa
2–43
Consider a 70-kg woman who has a total foot imprint
area of 400 cm2. She wishes to walk on the snow, but the
snow cannot withstand pressures greater than 0.5 kPa. Deter-
mine the minimum size of the snowshoes needed (imprint
area per shoe) to enable her to walk on the snow without
sinking.
2–44
A vacuum gage connected to a tank reads 15 kPa at a
location where the barometric reading is 750 mm Hg. Deter-
mine the absolute pressure in the tank. Take rHg  13,590
kg/m3.
Answer: 85.0 kPa
2–45E
A pressure gage connected to a tank reads 50 psi at
a location where the barometric reading is 29.1 in Hg. Deter-
mine the absolute pressure in the tank. Take rHg  848.4
lbm/ft3.
Answer: 64.3 psia
2–46
A pressure gage connected to a tank reads 500 kPa at
a location where the atmospheric pressure is 94 kPa. Deter-
mine the absolute pressure in the tank.
2–47
The barometer of a mountain hiker reads 930 mbars
at the beginning of a hiking trip and 780 mbars at the 
end. Neglecting the effect of altitude on local gravitational
P1
P2
P3
D1
D2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
55
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 2
|
49
acceleration, determine the vertical distance climbed. Assume
an average air density of 1.20 kg/m3.
Answer: 1274 m
2–48
The basic barometer can be used to measure the
height of a building. If the barometric readings at the top and
at the bottom of a building are 730 and 755 mm Hg, respec-
tively, determine the height of the building. Take the densities
of air and mercury to be 1.18 kg/m3 and 13,600 kg/m3,
respectively.
FIGURE P2–48
© Vol. 74/Corbis
2–49
Solve Prob. 2–48 using EES (or other) software.
Print out the entire solution, including the
numerical results with proper units.
2–50
Determine the pressure exerted on a diver at 30 m
below the free surface of the sea. Assume a barometric pres-
sure of 101 kPa and a specific gravity of 1.03 for seawater.
Answer: 404.0 kPa
2–51
A gas is contained in a vertical,
frictionless
piston–cylinder device. The piston has a mass of 4 kg and a
cross-sectional area of 35 cm2. A compressed spring above
the piston exerts a force of 60 N on the piston. If the atmo-
spheric pressure is 95 kPa, determine the pressure inside the
cylinder.
Answer: 123.4 kPa
FIGURE P2–51
2–52
Reconsider Prob. 2–51. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the spring
force in the range of 0 to 500 N on the pressure inside the
cylinder. Plot the pressure against the spring force, and dis-
cuss the results.
2–53
Both a gage and a manometer are attached to a
gas tank to measure its pressure. If the reading on
the pressure gage is 80 kPa, determine the distance between
the two fluid levels of the manometer if the fluid is (a) mer-
cury (r  13,600 kg/m3) or (b) water (r  1000 kg/m3).
FIGURE P2–53
2–54
Reconsider Prob. 2–53. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the manometer
fluid density in the range of 800 to 13,000 kg/m3 on the dif-
ferential fluid height of the manometer. Plot the differential
fluid height against the density, and discuss the results.
2–55
A manometer containing oil (r  850 kg/m3) is
attached to a tank filled with air. If the oil-level difference
between the two columns is 60 cm and the atmospheric pres-
sure is 98 kPa, determine the absolute pressure of the air in
the tank.
Answer: 103 kPa
2–56
A mercury manometer (r  13,600 kg/m3) is con-
nected to an air duct to measure the pressure inside. The differ-
ence in the manometer levels is 15 mm, and the atmospheric
Gas
h = ?
Pg = 80 kPa
A = 35 cm2
Patm = 95 kPa
mP = 4 kg
60 N

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
56
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
pressure is 100 kPa. (a) Judging from Fig. P2–56, determine if
the pressure in the duct is above or below the atmospheric
pressure. (b) Determine the absolute pressure in the duct.
FIGURE P2–56
2–57
Repeat Prob. 2–56 for a differential mercury height of
45 mm.
2–58E
Blood pressure is usually measured by wrapping a
closed air-filled jacket equipped with a pressure gage around
the upper arm of a person at the level of the heart. Using a
mercury manometer and a stethoscope, the systolic pressure
(the maximum pressure when the heart is pumping) and the
diastolic pressure (the minimum pressure when the heart is
resting) are measured in mm Hg. The systolic and diastolic
pressures of a healthy person are about 120 mm Hg and 80
mm Hg, respectively, and are indicated as 120/80. Express
both of these gage pressures in kPa, psi, and meter water 
column.
2–59
The maximum blood pressure in the upper arm of a
healthy person is about 120 mm Hg. If a vertical tube open to
the atmosphere is connected to the vein in the arm of the per-
son, determine how high the blood will rise in the tube. Take
the density of the blood to be 1050 kg/m3.
FIGURE P2–59
h
h = 15 mm
P = ?
AIR
50
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
2–60
Consider a 1.8-m-tall man standing vertically in water
and completely submerged in a pool. Determine the differ-
ence between the pressures acting at the head and at the toes
of this man, in kPa.
2–61
Consider a U-tube whose arms are open to the atmo-
sphere. Now water is poured into the U-tube from one arm,
and light oil (r  790 kg/m3) from the other. One arm con-
tains 70-cm-high water, while the other arm contains both
fluids with an oil-to-water height ratio of 4. Determine the
height of each fluid in that arm.
FIGURE P2–61
2–62
Freshwater and seawater flowing in parallel horizontal
pipelines are connected to each other by a double U-tube
manometer, as shown in Fig. P2–62. Determine the pressure
difference between the two pipelines. Take the density of sea-
water at that location to be r  1035 kg/m3. Can the air col-
umn be ignored in the analysis?
FIGURE P2–62
2–63
Repeat Prob. 2–62 by replacing the air with oil whose
specific gravity is 0.72.
2–64
Calculate the absolute pressure, P1, of the manometer
shown in Fig. P2–64 in kPa. The local atmospheric pressure
is 758 mm Hg.
Mercury
Air
Sea
water
Fresh
water
60 cm
10 cm
70 cm
40 cm
70 cm
Water
Oil

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
57
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 2
|
51
FIGURE P2–64
2–65
Consider the manometer in Fig. P2–64. If the specific
weight of fluid A is 100 kN/m3, what is the absolute pressure,
in kPa, indicated by the manometer when the local atmos-
pheric pressure is 90 kPa?
2–66
Consider the manometer in Fig. P2–64. If the specific
weight of fluid B is 20 kN/m3, what is the absolute pressure,
in kPa, indicated by the manometer when the local atmos-
pheric pressure is 745 mm Hg?
2–67
The gage pressure of the air in the tank shown in 
Fig. P2–67 is measured to be 80 kPa. Determine the differen-
tial height h of the mercury column.
FIGURE P2–67
2–68
Repeat Prob. 2–67 for a gage pressure of 40 kPa.
2–69
The top part of a water tank is divided into two com-
partments, as shown in Fig. P2–69. Now a fluid with an
unknown density is poured into one side, and the water level
rises a certain amount on the other side to compensate for
this effect. Based on the final fluid heights shown on the 
Air
30 cm
75 cm
h
Mercury
SG = 13.6
Water
Oil
SG = 0.72
80 kPa
P1
12 cm
5 cm
30 cm
15 cm
ATMOSPHERIC
PRESSURE
Fluid B
8 kN/m3
Fluid A
10 kN/m3
figure, determine the density of the fluid added. Assume the
liquid does not mix with water.
FIGURE P2–69
2–70
Consider the system shown in Fig. P2–70. If a change
of 0.7 kPa in the pressure of air causes the brine–mercury
interface in the right column to drop by 5 mm in the brine
level in the right column while the pressure in the brine pipe
remains constant, determine the ratio of A2/A1.
FIGURE P2–70
2–71
A multifluid container is connected to a U-tube, as
shown in Fig. P2–71. For the given specific gravities and
fluid column heights, determine the gage pressure at A. Also
determine the height of a mercury column that would create
the same pressure at A.
Answers: 0.471 kPa, 0.353 cm
50 cm
95 cm
80 cm
Unknown
liquid
WATER
Mercury
SG = 13.56
Water
Air
Area, A1
Area, A2
Brine
pipe
SG = 1.1

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
58
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
52
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P2–71
Review Problems
2–72
The force generated by a spring is given by F  kx,
where k is the spring constant and x is the deflection of the
spring. The spring of Fig. P2–72 has a spring constant of 8 kN/
cm. The pressures are P1  5000 kPa, P2  10,000 kPa, and
P3  1000 kPa. If the piston diameters are D1  8 cm and D2 
3 cm, how far will the spring be deflected?
Answer: 1.72 cm
FIGURE P2–72
2–73
In Fig. P2–72, the spring has a spring constant of 
12 kN/cm and has been extended 5 cm. The piston diameters
are D1  7 cm and D2  3 cm. Determine P1 when P2  8
MPa and P3  0.3 MPa.
P1
P2
P3
D1
D2
Spring
70 cm
Oil
SG = 0.90
Water
Glycerin
SG = 1.26
30 cm
20 cm
15 cm
90 cm
A
2–74E
In Fig. P2–72, the spring has a spring constant of
200 lbf/in and has been compressed 2 inches. The piston di-
ameters are D1  5 in and D2  2 in. What is P2 when P1 
100 psia and P3  20 psia?
2–75
The pilot of an airplane reads the altitude 3000 m and
the absolute pressure 58 kPa when flying over a city. Calcu-
late the local atmospheric pressure in that city in kPa and in
mm Hg. Take the densities of air and mercury to be 1.15
kg/m3 and 13,600 kg/m3, respectively.
FIGURE P2–75
2–76E
The efficiency of a refrigerator increases by 3 per-
cent for each °C rise in the minimum temperature in the
device. What is the increase in the efficiency for each (a) K,
(b) °F, and (c) R rise in temperature?
2–77E
The boiling temperature of water decreases by about
3°C for each 1000-m rise in altitude. What is the decrease in
the boiling temperature in (a) K, (b) °F, and (c) R for each
1000-m rise in altitude?
2–78E
Hyperthermia of 5°C (i.e., 5°C rise above the nor-
mal body temperature) is considered fatal. Express this fatal
level of hyperthermia in (a) K, (b) °F, and (c) R.
2–79E
A house is losing heat at a rate of 4500 kJ/h per °C
temperature difference between the indoor and the outdoor
temperatures. Express the rate of heat loss from this house
per (a) K, (b) °F, and (c) R difference between the indoor and
the outdoor temperature.
2–80
The average temperature of the atmosphere in the
world is approximated as a function of altitude by the relation
where Tatm is the temperature of the atmosphere in K and z is
the altitude in km with z  0 at sea level. Determine the
average temperature of the atmosphere outside an airplane
that is cruising at an altitude of 12,000 m.
2–81
Joe Smith, an old-fashioned engineering student,
believes that the boiling point of water is best suited for use
as the reference point on temperature scales. Unhappy that
the boiling point corresponds to some odd number in the cur-
rent absolute temperature scales, he has proposed a new
absolute temperature scale that he calls the Smith scale. The
temperature unit on this scale is smith, denoted by S, and the
boiling point of water on this scale is assigned to be 1000 S.
From a thermodynamic point of view, discuss if it is an
Tatm  288.15  6.5z
Altitude: 3 km
P = 58 kPa

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
59
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 2
|
53
acceptable temperature scale. Also, determine the ice point of
water on the Smith scale and obtain a relation between the
Smith and Celsius scales.
2–82E
It is well-known that cold air feels much colder in
windy weather than what the thermometer reading indicates
because of the “chilling effect” of the wind. This effect is due
to the increase in the convection heat transfer coefficient with
increasing air velocities. The equivalent wind chill tempera-
ture in °F is given by [ASHRAE, Handbook of Fundamentals
(Atlanta, GA, 1993), p. 8.15]
where V is the wind velocity in mi/h and Tambient is the ambi-
ent air temperature in °F in calm air, which is taken to be 
air with light winds at speeds up to 4 mi/h. The constant
91.4°F in the given equation is the mean skin temperature of
a resting person in a comfortable environment. Windy air at
temperature Tambient and velocity V will feel as cold as the
calm air at temperature Tequiv. Using proper conversion fac-
tors, obtain an equivalent relation in SI units where V is the
wind velocity in km/h and Tambient is the ambient air tempera-
ture in °C.
Answer:
Tequiv 33.0(33.0Tambient)

(0.475  0.0126V  0.240V–)
2–83E
Reconsider Prob. 2–82E. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the equivalent wind chill tem-
peratures in °F as a function of wind velocity in the range of
4 to 100 mph for the ambient temperatures of 20, 40, and
60°F. Discuss the results.
2–84
An air-conditioning system requires a 20-m-long sec-
tion of 15-cm diameter duct work to be laid underwater.
Determine the upward force the water will exert on the duct.
Take the densities of air and water to be 1.3 kg/m3 and 1000
kg/m3, respectively.
2–85
Balloons are often filled with helium gas because it
weighs only about one-seventh of what air weighs under
identical conditions. The buoyancy force, which can be
expressed as Fb  rairgVballoon, will push the balloon upward.
If the balloon has a diameter of 10 m and carries two people,
70 kg each, determine the acceleration of the balloon when it
is first released. Assume the density of air is r  1.16 kg/m3,
and neglect the weight of the ropes and the cage.
Answer:
16.5 m/s2
 

 10.475  0.0203V  0.3042V2
Tequiv  91.4  191.4  Tambient2
FIGURE P2–85
2–86
Reconsider Prob. 2–85. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the number of
people carried in the balloon on acceleration. Plot the accel-
eration against the number of people, and discuss the results.
2–87
Determine the maximum amount of load, in kg,
the balloon described in Prob. 2–85 can carry.
Answer:
520.5 kg
2–88E
The pressure in a steam boiler is given to be
92 kgf/cm2. Express this pressure in psi, kPa, atm, and bars.
2–89
The lower half of a 10-m-high cylindrical container is
filled with water (r  1000 kg/m3) and the upper half with
oil that has a specific gravity of 0.85. Determine the pressure
difference between the top and bottom of the cylinder.
Answer: 90.7 kPa
FIGURE P2–89
2–90
A vertical, frictionless piston–cylinder device contains
a gas at 250 kPa absolute pressure. The atmospheric pressure
outside is 100 kPa, and the piston area is 30 cm2. Determine
the mass of the piston.
2–91
A pressure cooker cooks a lot faster than an ordinary
pan by maintaining a higher pressure and temperature inside.
OIL
WATER
SG = 0.85
r = 1000 kg/m3
h = 10 m
HELIUM
D = 10 m
rHe = rair
1
7
m = 140 kg

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
60
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
54
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
The lid of a pressure cooker is well sealed, and steam can
escape only through an opening in the middle of the lid. A
separate metal piece, the petcock, sits on top of this opening
and prevents steam from escaping until the pressure force
overcomes the weight of the petcock. The periodic escape of
the steam in this manner prevents any potentially dangerous
pressure buildup and keeps the pressure inside at a constant
value. Determine the mass of the petcock of a pressure
cooker whose operation pressure is 100 kPa gage and has an
opening cross-sectional area of 4 mm2. Assume an atmo-
spheric pressure of 101 kPa, and draw the free-body diagram
of the petcock.
Answer: 40.8 g
FIGURE P2–91
2–92
A glass tube is attached to a water pipe, as shown in
Fig. P2–92. If the water pressure at the bottom of the tube is
115 kPa and the local atmospheric pressure is 92 kPa, deter-
mine how high the water will rise in the tube, in m. Take the
density of water to be 1000 kg/m3.
FIGURE P2–92
2–93
The average atmospheric pressure on earth is approxi-
mated as a function of altitude by the relation Patm  101.325
Patm = 92 kPa
h = ?
Water
Patm = 101 kPa
Petcock
PRESSURE
COOKER
A = 4 mm2
(1  0.02256z)5.256, where Patm is the atmospheric pressure in
kPa and z is the altitude in km with z  0 at sea level. Deter-
mine the approximate atmospheric pressures at Atlanta (z 
306 m), Denver (z  1610 m), Mexico City (z  2309 m),
and the top of Mount Everest (z  8848 m).
2–94
When measuring small pressure differences with a
manometer, often one arm of the manometer is inclined to
improve the accuracy of reading. (The pressure difference is
still proportional to the vertical distance and not the actual
length of the fluid along the tube.) The air pressure in a cir-
cular duct is to be measured using a manometer whose open
arm is inclined 35° from the horizontal, as shown in Fig.
P2–94. The density of the liquid in the manometer is 0.81
kg/L, and the vertical distance between the fluid levels in the
two arms of the manometer is 8 cm. Determine the gage
pressure of air in the duct and the length of the fluid column
in the inclined arm above the fluid level in the vertical arm.
FIGURE P2–94
2–95E
Consider a U-tube whose arms are open to the
atmosphere. Now equal volumes of water and light oil (r 
49.3 lbm/ft3) are poured from different arms. A person blows
from the oil side of the U-tube until the contact surface of the
two fluids moves to the bottom of the U-tube, and thus the
liquid levels in the two arms are the same. If the fluid height
in each arm is 30 in, determine the gage pressure the person
exerts on the oil by blowing.
FIGURE P2–95E
2–96
Intravenous infusions are usually driven by gravity by
hanging the fluid bottle at sufficient height to counteract the
blood pressure in the vein and to force the fluid into the
body. The higher the bottle is raised, the higher the flow rate
of the fluid will be. (a) If it is observed that the fluid and the
Air
Water
30 in
Oil
Duct
35°
8 cm
L
Air

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
2. Introduction and Basic 
Concepts
61
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 2
|
55
blood pressures balance each other when the bottle is 1.2 m
above the arm level, determine the gage pressure of the
blood. (b) If the gage pressure of the fluid at the arm level
needs to be 20 kPa for sufficient flow rate, determine how
high the bottle must be placed. Take the density of the fluid
to be 1020 kg/m3.
FIGURE P2–96
2–97E
A water pipe is connected to a double-U manometer
as shown in Fig. P2–97E at a location where the local atmos-
pheric pressure is 14.2 psia. Determine the absolute pressure
at the center of the pipe.
FIGURE P2–97E
2–98
It is well-known that the temperature of the atmo-
sphere varies with altitude. In the troposphere, which extends
to an altitude of 11 km, for example, the variation of temper-
ature can be approximated by T  T0  bz, where T0 is the
temperature at sea level, which can be taken to be 288.15 K,
and b  0.0065 K/m. The gravitational acceleration also
changes with altitude as g(z)  g0/(1  z/6,370,320)2 where
g0  9.807 m/s2 and z is the elevation from sea level in m.
Obtain a relation for the variation of pressure in the tropo-
sphere (a) by ignoring and (b) by considering the variation of
g with altitude.
2–99
The variation of pressure with density in a thick gas
layer is given by P  Crn, where C and n are constants. 
Noting that the pressure change across a differential fluid
layer of thickness dz in the vertical z-direction is given as 
dP   rg dz, obtain a relation for pressure as a function of
Mercury
SG = 13.6
Oil SG = 0.80
Oil SG = 0.80
Water
pipe
15 in
40 in
60 in
35 in
1.2 m
Patm
IV bottle
elevation z. Take the pressure and density at z  0 to be P0
and r0, respectively.
2–100
Pressure transducers are commonly used to measure
pressure by generating analog signals usually in the range of
4 mA to 20 mA or 0 V-dc to 10 V-dc in response to applied
pressure. The system whose schematic is shown in Fig.
P2–100 can be used to calibrate pressure transducers. A rigid
container is filled with pressurized air, and pressure is mea-
sured by the manometer attached. A valve is used to regulate
the pressure in the container. Both the pressure and the elec-
tric signal are measured simultaneously for various settings,
and the results are tabulated. For the given set of measure-
ments, obtain the calibration curve in the form of P  aI  b,
where a and b are constants, and calculate the pressure that
corresponds to a signal of 10 mA.
h, mm
28.0
181.5
297.8
413.1
765.9
I, mA
4.21
5.78
6.97
8.15
11.76
h, mm
1027
1149
1362
1458
1536
I, mA
14.43
15.68
17.86
18.84
19.64
FIGURE P2–100
Design and Essay Problems
2–101
Write an essay on different temperature measure-
ment devices. Explain the operational principle of each
device, its advantages and disadvantages, its cost, and its
range of applicability. Which device would you recommend
for use in the following cases: taking the temperatures of
patients in a doctor’s office, monitoring the variations of tem-
perature of a car engine block at several locations, and moni-
toring the temperatures in the furnace of a power plant?
Pressure
transducer
Valve
Pressurized
air, P
Multimeter
Rigid container
Manometer
Mercury
SG = 13.56
Δh

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
62
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
ENERGY, ENERGY TRANSFER, AND 
GENERAL ENERGY ANALYSIS
|
57
W
hether we realize it or not, energy is an important
part of most aspects of daily life. The quality of life,
and even its sustenance, depends on the availabil-
ity of energy. Therefore, it is important to have a good under-
standing of the sources of energy, the conversion of energy
from one form to another, and the ramifications of these con-
versions.
Energy exists in numerous forms such as thermal,
mechanical, electric, chemical, and nuclear. Even mass can
be considered a form of energy. Energy can be transferred to
or from a closed system (a fixed mass) in two distinct forms:
heat and work. For control volumes, energy can also be
transferred by mass flow. An energy transfer to or from a
closed system is heat if it is caused by a temperature differ-
ence. Otherwise it is work, and it is caused by a force acting
through a distance.
We start this chapter with a discussion of various forms of
energy and energy transfer by heat. We then introduce vari-
ous forms of work and discuss energy transfer by work. We
continue with developing a general intuitive expression for the
first law of thermodynamics, also known as the conservation
of energy principle, which is one of the most fundamental
principles in nature, and we then demonstrate its use. Finally,
we discuss the efficiencies of some familiar energy conver-
sion processes, and examine the impact on energy conver-
sion on the environment. Detailed treatments of the first law
of thermodynamics for closed systems and control volumes
are given in Chaps. 5 and 6, respectively.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Introduce the concept of energy and define its various
forms.
• Discuss the nature of internal energy.
• Define the concept of heat and the terminology associated
with energy transfer by heat.
• Define the concept of work, including electrical work and
several forms of mechanical work.
• Introduce the first law of thermodynamics, energy balances,
and mechanisms of energy transfer to or from a system.
• Determine that a fluid flowing across a control surface of a
control volume carries energy across the control surface in
addition to any energy transfer across the control surface
that may be in the form of heat and/or work.
• Define energy conversion efficiencies.
• Discuss the implications of energy conversion on the
environment.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
63
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
3–1
■INTRODUCTION
Since our high school years, we have been familiar with the conservation of
energy principle, which is an expression of the first law of thermodynamics.
We are told repeatedly that energy cannot be created or destroyed during a
process; it can only change from one form to another. This seems simple
enough, but let’s test ourselves to see how well we understand and truly
believe in this principle.
Consider a room whose door and windows are tightly closed, and whose
walls are well-insulated so that heat loss or gain through the walls is negli-
gible. Now let’s place a refrigerator in the middle of the room with its door
open, and plug it into a wall outlet (Fig. 3–1). You may even use a small fan
to circulate the air in order to maintain temperature uniformity in the room.
Now, what do you think will happen to the average temperature of air in the
room? Will it be increasing or decreasing? Or will it remain constant?
Probably the first thought that comes to mind is that the average air tem-
perature in the room will decrease as the warmer room air mixes with the
air cooled by the refrigerator. Some may draw our attention to the heat gen-
erated by the motor of the refrigerator, and may argue that the average air
temperature may rise if this heating effect is greater than the cooling effect.
But they will get confused if it is stated that the motor is made of supercon-
ducting materials, and thus there is hardly any heat generation in the motor.
Heated discussion may continue with no end in sight until we remember
the conservation of energy principle that we take for granted: If we take the
entire room—including the air and the refrigerator—as the system, which is
an adiabatic closed system since the room is well-sealed and well-insulated,
the only energy interaction involved is the electrical energy crossing the sys-
tem boundary and entering the room. The conservation of energy requires
the energy content of the room to increase by an amount equal to the
amount of the electrical energy drawn by the refrigerator, which can be
measured by an ordinary electric meter. The refrigerator or its motor does
not store this energy. Therefore, this energy must now be in the room air,
and it will manifest itself as a rise in the air temperature. The temperature
rise of air can be calculated on the basis of the conservation of energy
principle using the properties of air and the amount of electrical energy con-
sumed. What do you think would happen if we had a window air condition-
ing unit instead of a refrigerator placed in the middle of this room? What if
we operated a fan in this room instead (Fig. 3–2)?
Note that energy is conserved during the process of operating the refrigera-
tor placed in a room—the electrical energy is converted into an equivalent
amount of thermal energy stored in the room air. If energy is already con-
served, then what are all those speeches on energy conservation and the mea-
sures taken to conserve energy? Actually, by “energy conservation” what is
meant is the conservation of the quality of energy, not the quantity. Electric-
ity, which is of the highest quality of energy, for example, can always be
converted to an equal amount of thermal energy (also called heat). But only
a small fraction of thermal energy, which is the lowest quality of energy, can
be converted back to electricity, as we discuss in Chap. 7. Think about the
things that you can do with the electrical energy that the refrigerator has con-
sumed, and the air in the room that is now at a higher temperature.
58
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Room
FIGURE 3–1
A refrigerator operating with its 
door open in a well-sealed and 
well-insulated room.
Fan
Well-sealed and 
well-insulated
room
FIGURE 3–2
A fan running in a well-sealed and
well-insulated room will raise the
temperature of air in the room.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
64
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Now if asked to name the energy transformations associated with the
operation of a refrigerator, we may still have a hard time answering because
all we see is electrical energy entering the refrigerator and heat dissipated
from the refrigerator to the room air. Obviously there is need to study the
various forms of energy first, and this is exactly what we do next, followed
by a study of the mechanisms of energy transfer.
3–2
■FORMS OF ENERGY
Energy can exist in numerous forms such as thermal, mechanical, kinetic,
potential, electric, magnetic, chemical, and nuclear, and their sum consti-
tutes the total energy E of a system. The total energy of a system on a unit
mass basis is denoted by e and is expressed as
(3–1)
Thermodynamics provides no information about the absolute value of the
total energy. It deals only with the change of the total energy, which is what
matters in engineering problems. Thus the total energy of a system can be
assigned a value of zero (E  0) at some convenient reference point. The
change in total energy of a system is independent of the reference point
selected. The decrease in the potential energy of a falling rock, for example,
depends on only the elevation difference and not the reference level
selected.
In thermodynamic analysis, it is often helpful to classify the various
forms of energy that make up the total energy of a system into two groups:
macroscopic and microscopic. The macroscopic forms of energy are those a
system possesses as a whole with respect to some outside reference frame,
such as kinetic and potential energies (Fig. 3–3). The microscopic forms of
energy are those related to the molecular structure of a system and the
degree of the molecular activity, and they are independent of outside refer-
ence frames. The sum of all the microscopic forms of energy is called the
internal energy of a system and is denoted by U.
The term energy was coined in 1807 by Thomas Young, and its use in
thermodynamics was proposed in 1852 by Lord Kelvin. The term internal
energy and its symbol U first appeared in the works of Rudolph Clausius
and William Rankine in the second half of the nineteenth century, and it
eventually replaced the alternative terms inner work, internal work, and
intrinsic energy commonly used at the time.
The macroscopic energy of a system is related to motion and the influ-
ence of some external effects such as gravity, magnetism, electricity, and
surface tension. The energy that a system possesses as a result of its motion
relative to some reference frame is called kinetic energy (KE). When all
parts of a system move with the same velocity, the kinetic energy is
expressed as
(3–2)
KE  m V 2
2   
1kJ2
e  E
m  
1kJ>kg2
Chapter 3
|
59
FIGURE 3–3
The macroscopic energy of an object
changes with velocity and elevation.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
65
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
or, on a unit mass basis,
(3–3)
where V denotes the magnitude of the velocity of the system relative to
some fixed reference frame. The kinetic energy of a rotating solid body is
given by Iv2 where I is the moment of inertia of the body and v is the
angular velocity magnitude.
The energy that a system possesses as a result of its elevation in a gravita-
tional field is called potential energy (PE) and is expressed as
(3–4)
or, on a unit mass basis,
(3–5)
where g is the gravitational acceleration and z is the elevation of the center
of gravity of a system relative to some arbitrarily selected reference level.
The magnetic, electric, and surface tension effects are significant only in
some specialized cases and are usually ignored. In the absence of such
effects, the total energy of a system consists of the kinetic, potential, and
internal energies and is expressed as
(3–6)
or, on a unit mass basis,
(3–7)
Most closed systems remain stationary during a process and thus experi-
ence no change in their kinetic and potential energies. Closed systems
whose velocity and elevation of the center of gravity remain constant during
a process are frequently referred to as stationary systems. The change in
the total energy E of a stationary system is identical to the change in its
internal energy U. In this text, a closed system is assumed to be stationary
unless stated otherwise.
Control volumes typically involve fluid flow for long periods of time, and
it is convenient to express the energy flow associated with a fluid stream in
the rate form. This is done by incorporating the mass flow rate m., which is
the amount of mass flowing through a cross section per unit time. It is
related to the volume flow rate V., which is the volume of a fluid flowing
through a cross section per unit time, by
Mass flow rate:
(3–8)
which is analogous to m  rV. Here r is the fluid density, Ac is the cross-
sectional area of flow, and Vavg is the average flow velocity normal to Ac.
The dot over a symbol is used to indicate time rate throughout the book.
Then the energy flow rate associated with a fluid flowing at a rate of m. is
(Fig. 3–4)
Energy flow rate:
(3–9)
which is analogous to E  me.
E#  m# e  
1kJ>s or kW2
m#  rV
#
 rAcVavg  
1kg>s2
e  u  ke  pe  u  V 2
2  gz  
1kJ>kg2
E  U  KE  PE  U  m V2
2  mgz  
1kJ2
pe  gz  
1kJ>kg2
PE  mgz  
1kJ2
1
2
ke  V 2
2   
1kJ>kg2
60
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
D
Steam
Vavg
Ac = pD2/4
m = rAcVavg
E = me
•
•
•
FIGURE 3–4
Mass and energy flow rates associated
with the flow of steam in a pipe of
inner diameter D with an average
velocity of Vavg.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
66
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Some Physical Insight to Internal Energy
Internal energy is defined earlier as the sum of all the microscopic forms of
energy of a system. It is related to the molecular structure and the degree of
molecular activity and can be viewed as the sum of the kinetic and potential
energies of the molecules.
To have a better understanding of internal energy, let us examine a system
at the molecular level. The molecules of a gas move through space with
some velocity, and thus possess some kinetic energy. This is known as the
translational energy. The atoms of polyatomic molecules rotate about an
axis, and the energy associated with this rotation is the rotational kinetic
energy. The atoms of a polyatomic molecule may also vibrate about their
common center of mass, and the energy associated with this back-and-forth
motion is the vibrational kinetic energy. For gases, the kinetic energy is
mostly due to translational and rotational motions, with vibrational motion
becoming significant at higher temperatures. The electrons in an atom rotate
about the nucleus, and thus possess rotational kinetic energy. Electrons at
outer orbits have larger kinetic energies. Electrons also spin about their
axes, and the energy associated with this motion is the spin energy. Other
particles in the nucleus of an atom also possess spin energy. The portion of
the internal energy of a system associated with the kinetic energies of the
molecules is called the sensible energy (Fig. 3–5). The average velocity and
the degree of activity of the molecules are proportional to the temperature of
the gas. Therefore, at higher temperatures, the molecules possess higher
kinetic energies, and as a result the system has a higher internal energy.
The internal energy is also associated with various binding forces between
the molecules of a substance, between the atoms within a molecule, and
between the particles within an atom and its nucleus. The forces that bind the
molecules to each other are, as one would expect, strongest in solids and
weakest in gases. If sufficient energy is added to the molecules of a solid or
liquid, the molecules overcome these molecular forces and break away, turn-
ing the substance into a gas. This is a phase-change process. Because of this
added energy, a system in the gas phase is at a higher internal energy level
than it is in the solid or the liquid phase. The internal energy associated with
the phase of a system is called the latent energy. The phase-change process
can occur without a change in the chemical composition of a system. Most
practical problems fall into this category, and one does not need to pay any
attention to the forces binding the atoms in a molecule to each other.
An atom consists of neutrons and positively charged protons bound
together by very strong nuclear forces in the nucleus, and negatively
charged electrons orbiting around it. The internal energy associated with the
atomic bonds in a molecule is called chemical energy. During a chemical
reaction, such as a combustion process, some chemical bonds are destroyed
while others are formed. As a result, the internal energy changes. The
nuclear forces are much larger than the forces that bind the electrons to the
nucleus. The tremendous amount of energy associated with the strong bonds
within the nucleus of the atom itself is called nuclear energy (Fig. 3–6).
Obviously, we need not be concerned with nuclear energy in thermodynam-
ics unless, of course, we deal with fusion or fission reactions. A chemical
reaction involves changes in the structure of the electrons of the atoms, but
a nuclear reaction involves changes in the core or nucleus. Therefore, an
Chapter 3
|
61
+
–
+
–
Molecular
translation
Molecular
rotation
Electron
translation
Molecular
vibration
Electron
spin
Nuclear
spin
FIGURE 3–5
The various forms of microscopic
energies that make up sensible energy.
Nuclear
energy
Chemical
energy
Sensible
and latent 
energy
FIGURE 3–6
The internal energy of a system is the
sum of all forms of the microscopic
energies.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
67
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
atom preserves its identity during a chemical reaction but loses it during a
nuclear reaction. Atoms may also possess electric and magnetic dipole-
moment energies when subjected to external electric and magnetic fields
due to the twisting of the magnetic dipoles produced by the small electric
currents associated with the orbiting electrons.
The forms of energy already discussed, which constitute the total energy
of a system, can be contained or stored in a system, and thus can be viewed
as the static forms of energy. The forms of energy not stored in a system
can be viewed as the dynamic forms of energy or as energy interactions.
The dynamic forms of energy are recognized at the system boundary as they
cross it, and they represent the energy gained or lost by a system during a
process. The only two forms of energy interactions associated with a closed
system are heat transfer and work. An energy interaction is heat transfer if
its driving force is a temperature difference. Otherwise it is work, as
explained in the next section. A control volume can also exchange energy
via mass transfer since any time mass is transferred into or out of a system,
the energy content of the mass is also transferred with it.
In daily life, we frequently refer to the sensible and latent forms of inter-
nal energy as heat, and we talk about heat content of bodies. In thermody-
namics, however, we usually refer to those forms of energy as thermal
energy to prevent any confusion with heat transfer.
Distinction should be made between the macroscopic kinetic energy of an
object as a whole and the microscopic kinetic energies of its molecules that
constitute the sensible internal energy of the object (Fig. 3–7). The kinetic
energy of an object is an organized form of energy associated with the
orderly motion of all molecules in one direction in a straight path or around
an axis. In contrast, the kinetic energies of the molecules are completely
random and highly disorganized. As you will see in later chapters, the orga-
nized energy is much more valuable than the disorganized energy, and a
major application area of thermodynamics is the conversion of disorganized
energy (heat) into organized energy (work). You will also see that the orga-
nized energy can be converted to disorganized energy completely, but only a
fraction of disorganized energy can be converted to organized energy by
specially built devices called heat engines (like car engines and power
plants). A similar argument can be given for the macroscopic potential
energy of an object as a whole and the microscopic potential energies of the
molecules.
More on Nuclear Energy
The best known fission reaction involves the split of the uranium atom (the
U-235 isotope) into other elements and is commonly used to generate elec-
tricity in nuclear power plants (443 of them in 2006, generating 370,000
MW worldwide), to power nuclear submarines, aircraft carriers, and even to
power spacecraft.
The percentage of electricity produced by nuclear power is 78 percent in
France, 25 percent in Japan, 28 percent in Germany, and 20 percent in the
United States. The first nuclear chain reaction was achieved by Enrico
Fermi in 1942, and the first large-scale nuclear reactors were built in
1944 for the purpose of producing material for nuclear weapons. When a
62
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Water
Dam
Macroscopic kinetic energy
(turns the wheel)
Microscopic kinetic 
energy of molecules
(does not turn the wheel)
FIGURE 3–7
The macroscopic kinetic energy is an
organized form of energy and is much
more useful than the disorganized
microscopic kinetic energies of the
molecules.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
68
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
uranium-235 atom absorbs a neutron and splits during a fission process, it
produces a cesium-140 atom, a rubidium-93 atom, 3 neutrons, and 3.2 
1011 J of energy. In practical terms, the complete fission of 1 kg of ura-
nium-235 releases 6.73 
 1010 kJ of heat, which is more than the heat
released when 3000 tons of coal are burned. Therefore, for the same amount
of fuel, a nuclear fission reaction releases several million times more energy
than a chemical reaction. The safe disposal of used nuclear fuel, however,
remains a concern.
Nuclear energy by fusion is released when two small nuclei combine into
a larger one. The huge amount of energy radiated by the sun and the other
stars is thought to originate from such a fusion process that involves the
combination of two hydrogen atoms into a helium atom. When two heavy
hydrogen (deuterium) nuclei combine during a fusion process, they produce
a helium-3 atom, a free neutron, and 5.1 
 1013 J of energy (Fig. 3–8).
Fusion reactions are much more difficult to achieve in practice because of
the strong repulsion between the positively charged nuclei, called the
Coulomb repulsion. To overcome this repulsive force and to enable the
two nuclei to fuse together, the energy level of the nuclei must be raised by
heating them to about 100 million °C. But such high temperatures are found
only in the stars or in exploding atomic bombs (the A-bomb). In fact, the
uncontrolled fusion reaction in a hydrogen bomb (the H-bomb) is initiated
by a small atomic bomb. The uncontrolled fusion reaction was achieved in
the early 1950s, but all the efforts since then to achieve controlled fusion by
massive lasers, powerful magnetic fields, and electric currents to generate a
net production of power have failed.
EXAMPLE 3–1
A Car Powered by Nuclear Fuel
An average car consumes about 5 L of gasoline a day, and the capacity of the
fuel tank of a car is about 50 L. Therefore, the car needs to be refueled once
every 10 days. Also, the density of gasoline ranges from 0.68 to 0.78 kg/L,
and its lower heating value is about 44,000 kJ/kg (that is, 44,000 kJ of heat
is released when 1 kg of gasoline is completely burned). Suppose all the prob-
lems associated with the radioactivity and waste disposal of nuclear fuels are
resolved, and a car is to be powered by U-235. If a new car comes equipped
with 0.1-kg of the nuclear fuel U-235, determine if this car will ever need
refueling under average driving conditions (Fig. 3–9).
Solution
A car powered by nuclear energy comes equipped with nuclear
fuel. It is to be determined if this car will ever need refueling.
Assumptions
1 Gasoline is an incompressible substance with an average den-
sity of 0.75 kg/L. 2 Nuclear fuel is completely converted to thermal energy.
Analysis
The mass of gasoline used per day by the car is
Noting that the heating value of gasoline is 44,000 kJ/kg, the energy sup-
plied to the car per day is
 13.75 kg>day2 144,000 kJ>kg2  165,000 kJ>day
   
#
E  1 #mgasoline2 1Heating value2
#mgasoline  1r
#V 2 gasoline  10.75 kg>L2 15 L>day2  3.75 kg>day
Chapter 3
|
63
U-235
3.2 × 10 –11 J
3 neutrons
neutron
(a) Fission of uranium
Uranium
Ce-140
Rb-93
n
n
n
n
5.1 × 10 –13 J
neutron
(b) Fusion of hydrogen
He-3
n
H-2
H-2
FIGURE 3–8
The fission of uranium and the fusion
of hydrogen during nuclear reactions,
and the release of nuclear energy.
Nuclear
fuel
FIGURE 3–9
Schematic for Example 3–1.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
69
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The complete fission of 0.1 kg of uranium-235 releases
of heat, which is sufficient to meet the energy needs of the car for
which is equivalent to about 112 years. Considering that no car will last more
than 100 years, this car will never need refueling. It appears that nuclear fuel
of the size of a cherry is sufficient to power a car during its lifetime.
Discussion
Note that this problem is not quite realistic since the necessary
critical mass cannot be achieved with such a small amount of fuel. Further,
all of the uranium cannot be converted in fission, again because of the criti-
cal mass problems after partial conversion.
Mechanical Energy
Many engineering systems are designed to transport a fluid from one loca-
tion to another at a specified flow rate, velocity, and elevation difference,
and the system may generate mechanical work in a turbine or it may con-
sume mechanical work in a pump or fan during this process. These systems
do not involve the conversion of nuclear, chemical, or thermal energy to
mechanical energy. Also, they do not involve heat transfer in any signifi-
cant amount, and they operate essentially at constant temperature. Such sys-
tems can be analyzed conveniently by considering the mechanical forms of
energy only and the frictional effects that cause the mechanical energy to be
lost (i.e., to be converted to thermal energy that usually cannot be used for
any useful purpose).
The mechanical energy can be defined as the form of energy that can be
converted to mechanical work completely and directly by an ideal mechani-
cal device such as an ideal turbine. Kinetic and potential energies are the
familiar forms of mechanical energy. Thermal energy is not mechanical
energy, however, since it cannot be converted to work directly and com-
pletely (the second law of thermodynamics).
A pump transfers mechanical energy to a fluid by raising its pressure, and
a turbine extracts mechanical energy from a fluid by dropping its pressure.
Therefore, the pressure of a flowing fluid is also associated with its mechan-
ical energy. In fact, the pressure unit Pa is equivalent to Pa  N/m2  N ·
m/m3  J/m3, which is energy per unit volume, and the product Pv or its
equivalent P/r has the unit J/kg, which is energy per unit mass. Note that
pressure itself is not a form of energy. But a pressure force acting on a fluid
through a distance produces work, called flow work, in the amount of P/r
per unit mass. Flow work is expressed in terms of fluid properties, and it is
convenient to view it as part of the energy of a flowing fluid and call it flow
energy. Therefore, the mechanical energy of a flowing fluid can be
expressed on a unit mass basis as
(3–10)
emech  P
r  V 2
2  gz
No. of days  Energy content of fuel
Daily energy use
 6.73 
 109 kJ
165,000 kJ>day  40,790 days
16.73 
 1010 kJ>kg2 10.1 kg2  6.73 
 109 kJ
64
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
70
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where P/r is the flow energy, V 2/2 is the kinetic energy, and gz is the poten-
tial energy of the fluid, all per unit mass. It can also be expressed in rate
form as
(3–11)
where m. is the mass flow rate of the fluid. Then the mechanical energy
change of a fluid during incompressible (r  constant) flow becomes
(3–12)
and
(3–13)
Therefore, the mechanical energy of a fluid does not change during flow if its
pressure, density, velocity, and elevation remain constant. In the absence of any
losses, the mechanical energy change represents the mechanical work supplied
to the fluid (if emech  0) or extracted from the fluid (if emech  0).
EXAMPLE 3–2
Wind Energy
A site evaluated for a wind farm is observed to have steady winds at a speed
of 8.5 ms (Fig. 3–10). Determine the wind energy (a) per unit mass, (b) for
a mass of 10 kg, and (c) per second for a flow rate of 1154 kg/s for air.
Solution
A site with a specified wind speed is considered. Wind energy per
unit mass, for a specified mass, and for a given mass flow rate of air are to
be determined.
Assumptions
Wind flows steadily at the specified speed.
Analysis
The only harvestable form of energy of atmospheric air is the
kinetic energy, which is captured by a wind turbine.
(a) Wind energy per unit mass of air is
(b) Wind energy for an air mass of 10 kg is
(c) Wind power (energy per unit time) for a mass flow rate of 1154 kg/s is
Discussion
It can be shown that the specified mass flow rate corresponds to
a 12-m diameter flow section when the air density is 1.2 kg/m3. Therefore, a
wind turbine with a wind span diameter of 12 m has a power generation
potential of 41.7 kW. Real wind turbines convert only about one-third of this
potential to electric power, due to inefﬁciencies.
E#  m# e  11154 kg>s2 136.1 J>kg2 a
1 kW
1000 J>s b  41.7 kW
E  me  110 kg2 136.1 J>kg2  361 J
e  ke  V 2
2 
18.5 m>s2 2
2
a
1 J>kg
1 m2>s2 b  36.1 J>kg
¢E
#
mech  m# ¢emech  m# a P2  P1
r
 V 2
2  V 2
1
2
 g1z2  z12 b
1kW2
¢emech  P2  P1
r
 V 2
2  V 2
1
2
 g1z2  z12
1kJ>kg2
E#
mech  m# emech  m# a P
r  V 2
2  gz b
Chapter 3
|
65
FIGURE 3–10
Potential site for a wind farm as
discussed in Example 3–2.
© Vol. 36/PhotoDisc
—
8.5 ms

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
71
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
66
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
CLOSED
SYSTEM
(m = constant)
Work
Heat
System boundary
FIGURE 3–11
Energy can cross the boundaries of a
closed system in the form of heat and
work.
Room air
25°C
No heat
transfer
Heat
Heat
25°C
5°C
8 J/s
16 J/s
15°C
FIGURE 3–12
Temperature difference is the driving
force for heat transfer. The larger the
temperature difference, the higher is
the rate of heat transfer.
3–3
■ENERGY TRANSFER BY HEAT
Energy can cross the boundary of a closed system in two distinct forms:
heat and work (Fig. 3–11). It is important to distinguish between these two
forms of energy. Therefore, they will be discussed first, to form a sound
basis for the development of the laws of thermodynamics.
We know from experience that a can of cold soda left on a table eventu-
ally warms up and that a hot baked potato on the same table cools down.
When a body is left in a medium that is at a different temperature, energy
transfer takes place between the body and the surrounding medium until
thermal equilibrium is established, that is, the body and the medium reach
the same temperature. The direction of energy transfer is always from the
higher temperature body to the lower temperature one. Once the tempera-
ture equality is established, energy transfer stops. In the processes described
above, energy is said to be transferred in the form of heat.
Heat is defined as the form of energy that is transferred between two
systems (or a system and its surroundings) by virtue of a temperature
difference (Fig. 3–12). That is, an energy interaction is heat only if it
takes place because of a temperature difference. Then it follows that there
cannot be any heat transfer between two systems that are at the same
temperature.
Several phrases in common use today—such as heat flow, heat addition,
heat rejection, heat absorption, heat removal, heat gain, heat loss, heat
storage, heat generation, electrical heating, resistance heating, frictional
heating, gas heating, heat of reaction, liberation of heat, specific heat, sensi-
ble heat, latent heat, waste heat, body heat, process heat, heat sink, and heat
source—are not consistent with the strict thermodynamic meaning of the
term heat, which limits its use to the transfer of thermal energy during a
process. However, these phrases are deeply rooted in our vocabulary, and
they are used by both ordinary people and scientists without causing any
misunderstanding since they are usually interpreted properly instead of
being taken literally. (Besides, no acceptable alternatives exist for some of
these phrases.) For example, the phrase body heat is understood to mean
the thermal energy content of a body. Likewise, heat flow is understood
to mean the transfer of thermal energy, not the flow of a fluidlike substance
called heat, although the latter incorrect interpretation, which is based on
the caloric theory, is the origin of this phrase. Also, the transfer of heat
into a system is frequently referred to as heat addition and the transfer of
heat out of a system as heat rejection. Perhaps there are thermodynamic rea-
sons for being so reluctant to replace heat by thermal energy: It takes less
time and energy to say, write, and comprehend heat than it does thermal
energy.
Heat is energy in transition. It is recognized only as it crosses the bound-
ary of a system. Consider the hot baked potato one more time. The potato
contains energy, but this energy is heat transfer only as it passes through
the skin of the potato (the system boundary) to reach the air, as shown in
Fig. 3–13. Once in the surroundings, the transferred heat becomes part of
the internal energy of the surroundings. Thus, in thermodynamics, the term
heat simply means heat transfer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
72
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
A process during which there is no heat transfer is called an adiabatic
process (Fig. 3–14). The word adiabatic comes from the Greek word
adiabatos, which means not to be passed. There are two ways a process
can be adiabatic: Either the system is well insulated so that only a negligible
amount of heat can pass through the boundary, or both the system and
the surroundings are at the same temperature and therefore there is no
driving force (temperature difference) for heat transfer. An adiabatic process
should not be confused with an isothermal process. Even though there is
no heat transfer during an adiabatic process, the energy content and thus
the temperature of a system can still be changed by other means such
as work.
As a form of energy, heat has energy units, kJ (or Btu) being the most
common one. The amount of heat transferred during the process between
two states (states 1 and 2) is denoted by Q12, or just Q. Heat transfer per
unit mass of a system is denoted q and is determined from
(3–14)
Sometimes it is desirable to know the rate of heat transfer (the amount of
heat transferred per unit time) instead of the total heat transferred over some
time interval (Fig. 3–15). The heat transfer rate is denoted Q., where the
overdot stands for the time derivative, or “per unit time.” The heat transfer
rate Q. has the unit kJs, which is equivalent to kW. When Q. varies with
time, the amount of heat transfer during a process is determined by integrat-
ing Q. over the time interval of the process:
(3–15)
When Q. remains constant during a process, this relation reduces to
(3–16)
where t  t2  t1 is the time interval during which the process takes place.
Historical Background on Heat
Heat has always been perceived to be something that produces in us a sensa-
tion of warmth, and one would think that the nature of heat is one of the first
things understood by mankind. However, it was only in the middle of the
nineteenth century that we had a true physical understanding of the nature of
heat, thanks to the development at that time of the kinetic theory, which
treats molecules as tiny balls that are in motion and thus possess kinetic
energy. Heat is then defined as the energy associated with the random motion
of atoms and molecules. Although it was suggested in the eighteenth and
early nineteenth centuries that heat is the manifestation of motion at the
molecular level (called the live force), the prevailing view of heat until the
middle of the nineteenth century was based on the caloric theory proposed
by the French chemist Antoine Lavoisier (1744–1794) in 1789. The caloric
theory asserts that heat is a fluidlike substance called the caloric that is a
massless, colorless, odorless, and tasteless substance that can be poured from
one body into another (Fig. 3–16). When caloric was added to a body, its
Q  Q
#
¢t  
1kJ2
Q  
t2
t1
Q
#
dt  
1kJ2
q  Q
m  
1kJ>kg2
Chapter 3
|
67
SURROUNDING
AIR
HEAT
BAKED POTATO
2 kJ
thermal
energy
2 kJ
thermal
energy
2 kJ
heat
System
boundary
FIGURE 3–13
Energy is recognized as heat transfer
only as it crosses the system boundary.
Q = 0
Insulation
ADIABATIC
SYSTEM
FIGURE 3–14
During an adiabatic process, a system
exchanges no heat with its surroundings.
Q = 30 kJ
m = 2 kg
t = 5 s
Δ
Q = 6 kW
q = 15 kJ/kg
30 kJ
heat
FIGURE 3–15
The relationships among q, Q, and Q
.
.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
73
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
temperature increased; and when caloric was removed from a body, its tem-
perature decreased. When a body could not contain any more caloric, much
the same way as when a glass of water could not dissolve any more salt or
sugar, the body was said to be saturated with caloric. This interpretation gave
rise to the terms saturated liquid and saturated vapor that are still in use
today.
The caloric theory came under attack soon after its introduction. It main-
tained that heat is a substance that could not be created or destroyed. Yet it
was known that heat can be generated indefinitely by rubbing one’s hands
together or rubbing two pieces of wood together. In 1798, the American
Benjamin Thompson (Count Rumford) (1754–1814) showed in his papers
that heat can be generated continuously through friction. The validity of the
caloric theory was also challenged by several others. But it was the careful
experiments of the Englishman James P. Joule (1818–1889) published in
1843 that finally convinced the skeptics that heat was not a substance after
all, and thus put the caloric theory to rest. Although the caloric theory was
totally abandoned in the middle of the nineteenth century, it contributed
greatly to the development of thermodynamics and heat transfer.
Heat is transferred by three mechanisms: conduction, convection, and
radiation. Conduction is the transfer of energy from the more energetic par-
ticles of a substance to the adjacent less energetic ones as a result of interac-
tion between particles. Convection is the transfer of energy between a solid
surface and the adjacent fluid that is in motion, and it involves the combined
effects of conduction and fluid motion. Radiation is the transfer of energy
due to the emission of electromagnetic waves (or photons).
3–4
■ENERGY TRANSFER BY WORK
Work, like heat, is an energy interaction between a system and its surround-
ings. As mentioned earlier, energy can cross the boundary of a closed sys-
tem in the form of heat or work. Therefore, if the energy crossing the
boundary of a closed system is not heat, it must be work. Heat is easy to
recognize: Its driving force is a temperature difference between the system
and its surroundings. Then we can simply say that an energy interaction that
is not caused by a temperature difference between a system and its sur-
roundings is work. More specifically, work is the energy transfer associated
with a force acting through a distance. A rising piston, a rotating shaft, and
an electric wire crossing the system boundaries are all associated with work
interactions.
Work is also a form of energy transferred like heat and, therefore, has
energy units such as kJ. The work done during a process between states 1
and 2 is denoted by W12, or simply W. The work done per unit mass of a
system is denoted by w and is expressed as
(3–17)
The work done per unit time is called power and is denoted W. (Fig. 3–17).
The unit of power is kJ/s, or kW.
w  W
m  
1kJ>kg2
68
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Hot
body
Cold
body
Contact
surface
Caloric
FIGURE 3–16
In the early nineteenth century, heat
was thought to be an invisible fluid
called the caloric that flowed from
warmer bodies to the cooler ones.
W = 30 kJ
m = 2 kg
t = 5 s
W = 6 kW
w = 15 kJ/kg
30 kJ
work
Δ
FIGURE 3–17
The relationships among w, W, and .
W
#

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
74
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Heat and work are directional quantities, and thus the complete descrip-
tion of a heat or work interaction requires the specification of both the mag-
nitude and direction. One way of doing that is to adopt a sign convention.
The generally accepted formal sign convention for heat and work interac-
tions is as follows: heat transfer to a system and work done by a system are
positive; heat transfer from a system and work done on a system are nega-
tive. Another way is to use the subscripts in and out to indicate direction
(Fig. 3–18). For example, a work input of 5 kJ can be expressed as Win 
5 kJ, while a heat loss of 3 kJ can be expressed as Qout  3 kJ. When the
direction of a heat or work interaction is not known, we can simply assume a
direction for the interaction (using the subscript in or out) and solve for it. A
positive result indicates the assumed direction is right. A negative result, on
the other hand, indicates that the direction of the interaction is the opposite
of the assumed direction. This is just like assuming a direction for an
unknown force when solving a statics problem, and reversing the direction
when a negative result is obtained for the force. We will use this intui-
tive approach in this book as it eliminates the need to adopt a formal
sign convention and the need to carefully assign negative values to some
interactions.
Note that a quantity that is transferred to or from a system during an
interaction is not a property since the amount of such a quantity depends on
more than just the state of the system. Heat and work are energy transfer
mechanisms between a system and its surroundings, and there are many
similarities between them:
1. Both are recognized at the boundaries of a system as they cross the
boundaries. That is, both heat and work are boundary phenomena.
2. Neither can be possessed by a system. Systems possess energy, but not
heat or work.
3. Both are associated with a process, not a state. Unlike properties, heat
or work has no meaning at a state.
4. Both are path functions (i.e., their magnitudes depend on the path fol-
lowed during a process as well as the end states).
Path functions have inexact differentials designated by the symbol d.
Therefore, a differential amount of heat or work is represented by dQ or
dW, respectively, instead of dQ or dW. Properties, however, are point func-
tions (i.e., they depend on the state only, and not on how a system reaches
that state), and they have exact differentials designated by the symbol d. A
small change in volume, for example, is represented by dV, and the total
volume change during a process between states 1 and 2 is
That is, the volume change during process 1–2 is always the volume at state
2 minus the volume at state 1, regardless of the path followed (Fig. 3–19).
The total work done during process 1–2, however, is

2
1
dW  W12  
1not ¢W2

2
1
dV  V2  V1  ¢V
Chapter 3
|
69
System
Surroundings
Qin
Qout
Win
Wout
FIGURE 3–18
Specifying the directions of heat and
work.
V
P
5 m3 
2 m3 
2
1
Process B
Process A
ΔVA = 3 m3; WA = 8 kJ 
ΔVB = 3 m3; WB = 12 kJ 
FIGURE 3–19
Properties are point functions; but heat
and work are path functions (their
magnitudes depend on the path
followed).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
75
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
70
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(Insulation)
Room
FIGURE 3–20
Schematic for Example 3–3.
(Insulation)
OVEN
Heat
POTATO
25°C
200°C
FIGURE 3–21
Schematic for Example 3–4.
That is, the total work is obtained by following the process path and adding
the differential amounts of work (dW) done along the way. The integral of
dW is not W2  W1 (i.e., the work at state 2 minus work at state 1), which is
meaningless since work is not a property and systems do not possess work
at a state.
EXAMPLE 3–3
Burning of a Candle in an Insulated Room
A candle is burning in a well-insulated room. Taking the room (the air plus
the candle) as the system, determine (a) if there is any heat transfer during
this burning process and (b) if there is any change in the internal energy of
the system.
Solution
A candle burning in a well-insulated room is considered. It is to
be determined whether there is any heat transfer and any change in internal
energy.
Analysis
(a) The interior surfaces of the room form the system boundary, as
indicated by the dashed lines in Fig. 3–20. As pointed out earlier, heat is
recognized as it crosses the boundaries. Since the room is well insulated, we
have an adiabatic system and no heat passes through the boundaries. There-
fore, Q  0 for this process.
(b) The internal energy involves energies that exist in various forms (sensible,
latent, chemical, nuclear). During the process just described, part of the
chemical energy is converted to sensible energy. Since there is no increase
or decrease in the total internal energy of the system, U  0 for this
process.
Discussion
There is heat transfer from the candle ﬂame to the air, but not
across the system boundary.
EXAMPLE 3–4
Heating of a Potato in an Oven
A potato initially at room temperature (25°C) is being baked in an oven that
is maintained at 200°C, as shown in Fig. 3–21. Is there any heat transfer
during this baking process?
Solution
A potato is being baked in an oven. It is to be determined
whether there is any heat transfer during this process.
Analysis
This is not a well-defined problem since the system is not speci-
fied. Let us assume that we are observing the potato, which will be our sys-
tem. Then the skin of the potato can be viewed as the system boundary. Part
of the energy in the oven will pass through the skin to the potato. Since the
driving force for this energy transfer is a temperature difference, this is a
heat transfer process.
Discussion
The oven air itself must be heated somehow.
EXAMPLE 3–5
Heating of an Oven by Work Transfer
A well-insulated electric oven is being heated through its heating element. If
the entire oven, including the heating element, is taken to be the system,
determine whether this is a heat or work interaction.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
76
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
71
System boundary
Electric oven
Heating element
FIGURE 3–22
Schematic for Example 3–5.
System boundary
Electric oven
Heating element
FIGURE 3–23
Schematic for Example 3–6.
Solution
A well-insulated electric oven is being heated by its heating ele-
ment. It is to be determined whether this is a heat or work interaction.
Analysis
For this problem, the interior surfaces of the oven form the system
boundary, as shown in Fig. 3–22. The energy content of the oven obviously
increases during this process, as evidenced by a rise in temperature. This
energy transfer to the oven is not caused by a temperature difference between
the oven and the surrounding air. Instead, it is caused by electrons crossing the
system boundary and thus doing work. Therefore, this is a work interaction.
Discussion
There is heat transfer from the heating element to the oven air,
but this heat does not cross the system boundary.
EXAMPLE 3–6
Heating of an Oven by Heat Transfer
Answer the question in Example 3–5 if the system is taken as only the air in
the oven without the heating element.
Solution
The question in Example 3–5 is to be reconsidered by taking the
system to be only the air in the oven.
Analysis
This time, the system boundary includes the outer surface of the
heating element and does not cut through it, as shown in Fig. 3–23. There-
fore, no electrons cross the system boundary at any point. Instead, the
energy generated in the interior of the heating element is transferred 
to the air around it as a result of the temperature difference between the
heating element and the air in the oven. Therefore, this is a heat transfer
process.
Discussion
For both cases, the amount of energy transfer to the air is the
same. These two examples show that an energy transfer can be heat or work,
depending on how the system is selected.
Electrical Work
It was pointed out in Example 3–5 that electrons crossing the system boundary
do electrical work on the system. In an electric field, electrons in a wire move
under the effect of electromotive forces, doing work. When N coulombs of elec-
trical charge move through a potential difference V, the electrical work done is
which can also be expressed in the rate form as
(3–18)
where W
.
e is the electrical power and I is the number of electrical charges flow-
ing per unit time, that is, the current (Fig. 3–24). In general, both V and I vary
with time, and the electrical work done during a time interval t is expressed as
(3–19)
When both V and I remain constant during the time interval t, it reduces to
(3–20)
We  VI ¢t  
1kJ2
We  
2
1
VI dt  
1kJ2
W#
e  VI  
1W2
We  VN
V
I
R
We = VI
= I 2R
= V2/R
FIGURE 3–24
Electrical power in terms of resistance
R, current I, and potential difference V.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
77
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
3–5
■MECHANICAL FORMS OF WORK
There are several different ways of doing work, each in some way related to
a force acting through a distance (Fig. 3–25). In elementary mechanics, the
work done by a constant force F on a body displaced a distance s in the
direction of the force is given by
(3–21)
If the force F is not constant, the work done is obtained by adding (i.e.,
integrating) the differential amounts of work,
(3–22)
Obviously one needs to know how the force varies with displacement to
perform this integration. Equations 3–21 and 3–22 give only the magnitude
of the work. The sign is easily determined from physical considerations:
The work done on a system by an external force acting in the direction of
motion is negative, and work done by a system against an external force act-
ing in the opposite direction to motion is positive.
There are two requirements for a work interaction between a system and
its surroundings to exist: (1) there must be a force acting on the boundary,
and (2) the boundary must move. Therefore, the presence of forces on the
boundary without any displacement of the boundary does not constitute a
work interaction. Likewise, the displacement of the boundary without any
force to oppose or drive this motion (such as the expansion of a gas into an
evacuated space) is not a work interaction since no energy is transferred.
In many thermodynamic problems, mechanical work is the only form of
work involved. It is associated with the movement of the boundary of a
system or with the movement of the entire system as a whole (Fig. 3–26).
Some common forms of mechanical work are discussed next.
Shaft Work
Energy transmission with a rotating shaft is very common in engineering
practice (Fig. 3–27). Often the torque T applied to the shaft is constant,
which means that the force F applied is also constant. For a specified con-
stant torque, the work done during n revolutions is determined as follows: A
force F acting through a moment arm r generates a torque T of (Fig. 3–28)
(3–23)
This force acts through a distance s, which is related to the radius r by
(3–24)
Then the shaft work is determined from
(3–25)
The power transmitted through the shaft is the shaft work done per unit
time, which can be expressed as
(3–26)
where n. is the number of revolutions per unit time.
W
#
sh  2pn# T  
1kW2
Wsh  Fs  a T
r b 12prn2  2pnT  
1kJ2
s  12pr2n
T  Fr 
S
F  T
r
W  
2
1
F ds  
1kJ2
W  Fs  
1kJ2
72
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
F
F
s
FIGURE 3–25
The work done is proportional to the
force applied (F ) and the distance
traveled (s).
FIGURE 3–26
If there is no movement, no work is
done.
© Reprinted with special permission of King
Features Syndicate.
Engine
Boat
FIGURE 3–27
Energy transmission through rotating
shafts is commonly encountered in
practice.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
78
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
73
T = 200 N • m
n = 4000 rpm
·
FIGURE 3–29
Schematic for Example 3–7.
Rest
position
dx
x
F
FIGURE 3–30
Elongation of a spring under the
influence of a force.
EXAMPLE 3–7
Power Transmission by the Shaft of a Car
Determine the power transmitted through the shaft of a car when the torque
applied is 200 N · m and the shaft rotates at a rate of 4000 revolutions per
minute (rpm).
Solution
The torque and the rpm for a car engine are given. The power
transmitted is to be determined.
Analysis
A sketch of the car is given in Fig. 3–29. The shaft power is deter-
mined directly from
Discussion
Note that the power transmitted by a shaft is proportional to the
torque and the rotational speed.
Spring Work
It is common knowledge that when a force is applied on a spring, the length
of the spring changes (Fig. 3–30). When the length of the spring changes by
a differential amount dx under the influence of a force F, the work done is
(3–27)
To determine the total spring work, we need to know a functional relation-
ship between F and x. For linear elastic springs, the displacement x is pro-
portional to the force applied (Fig. 3–31). That is,
(3–28)
where k is the spring constant and has the unit kN/m. The displacement x is
measured from the undisturbed position of the spring (that is, x  0 when
F  0). Substituting Eq. 3–28 into Eq. 3–27 and integrating yield
(3–29)
where x1 and x2 are the initial and the final displacements of the spring,
respectively, measured from the undisturbed position of the spring.
There are many other forms of mechanical work. Next we introduce some
of them briefly.
Work Done on Elastic Solid Bars
Solids are often modeled as linear springs because under the action of a
force they contract or elongate, as shown in Fig. 3–32, and when the force
is lifted, they return to their original lengths, like a spring. This is true as
long as the force is in the elastic range, that is, not large enough to cause
permanent (plastic) deformations. Therefore, the equations given for a linear
spring can also be used for elastic solid bars. Alternately, we can determine
Wspring  1
2k 1x2
2  x2
12
1kJ2
F  kx  
1kN2
dWspring  F dx
 83.8 kW  
1or 112 hp2
W#
sh  2pn# T  12p2 a 4000
1
min b 1200 N # m2 a 1 min
60 s b a
1 kJ
1000 N # m b
Wsh = 2πnT
r
F
n
Torque = Fr
·
·
·
FIGURE 3–28
Shaft power is proportional to the
torque applied and the number of
revolutions of the shaft per unit time.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
79
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the work associated with the expansion or contraction of an elastic solid bar
by replacing pressure P by its counterpart in solids, normal stress sn  F/A,
in the work expression:
(3–30)
where A is the cross-sectional area of the bar. Note that the normal stress
has pressure units.
Work Associated with the Stretching of a Liquid Film
Consider a liquid film such as soap film suspended on a wire frame
(Fig. 3–33). We know from experience that it takes some force to stretch this
film by the movable portion of the wire frame. This force is used to over-
come the microscopic forces between molecules at the liquid–air interfaces.
These microscopic forces are perpendicular to any line in the surface, and the
force generated by these forces per unit length is called the surface tension
ss, whose unit is Nm. Therefore, the work associated with the stretching of
a film is also called surface tension work. It is determined from
(3–31)
where dA  2b dx is the change in the surface area of the film. The factor 2
is due to the fact that the film has two surfaces in contact with air. The force
acting on the movable wire as a result of surface tension effects is F  2bss
where ss is the surface tension force per unit length.
Work Done to Raise or to Accelerate a Body
When a body is raised in a gravitational field, its potential energy increases.
Likewise, when a body is accelerated, its kinetic energy increases. The con-
servation of energy principle requires that an equivalent amount of energy
must be transferred to the body being raised or accelerated. Remember that
energy can be transferred to a given mass by heat and work, and the energy
transferred in this case obviously is not heat since it is not driven by a tem-
perature difference. Therefore, it must be work. Then we conclude that
(1) the work transfer needed to raise a body is equal to the change in the
potential energy of the body, and (2) the work transfer needed to accelerate
a body is equal to the change in the kinetic energy of the body (Fig. 3–34).
Similarly, the potential or kinetic energy of a body represents the work that
can be obtained from the body as it is lowered to the reference level or
decelerated to zero velocity.
This discussion together with the consideration for friction and other
losses form the basis for determining the required power rating of motors
used to drive devices such as elevators, escalators, conveyor belts, and ski
lifts. It also plays a primary role in the design of automotive and aircraft
engines, and in the determination of the maximum amount of hydroelectric
power that can be produced from a given water reservoir, which is simply
the potential energy of the water relative to the location of the hydraulic
turbine.
Wsurface  
2
1
ss dA  
1kJ2
Welastic  
2
1
F dx  
2
1
sn A dx  
1kJ2
74
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
x
F
FIGURE 3–32
Solid bars behave as springs under the
influence of a force.
dx
F
Movable
wire
Rigid wire frame
Surface of film
b
x
FIGURE 3–33
Stretching a liquid film with a
movable wire.
x1 = 1 mm
Rest
position
F1 = 300 N
x2 = 2 mm
F2 = 600 N
FIGURE 3–31
The displacement of a linear spring
doubles when the force is doubled.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
80
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
75
Elevator
car
Motor
FIGURE 3–34
The energy transferred to a body while
being raised is equal to the change in
its potential energy.
90 km/h
30°
m = 1200 kg
FIGURE 3–35
Schematic for Example 3–8.
m = 900 kg
0
80 kmh
FIGURE 3–36
Schematic for Example 3–9.
EXAMPLE 3–8
Power Needs of a Car to Climb a Hill
Consider a 1200-kg car cruising steadily on a level road at 90 kmh. Now
the car starts climbing a hill that is sloped 30° from the horizontal 
(Fig. 3–35). If the velocity of the car is to remain constant during climbing,
determine the additional power that must be delivered by the engine.
Solution
A car is to climb a hill while maintaining a constant velocity. The
additional power needed is to be determined.
Analysis
The additional power required is simply the work that needs to be
done per unit time to raise the elevation of the car, which is equal to the
change in the potential energy of the car per unit time:
Discussion
Note that the car engine will have to produce almost 200 hp of
additional power while climbing the hill if the car is to maintain its velocity.
EXAMPLE 3–9
Power Needs of a Car to Accelerate
Determine the average power required to accelerate a 900-kg car shown in
Fig. 3–36 from rest to a velocity of 80 kmh in 20 s on a level road.
Solution
The average power required to accelerate a car to a specified ve-
locity is to be determined.
Analysis
The work needed to accelerate a body is simply the change in the
kinetic energy of the body,
The average power is determined from
Discussion
This is in addition to the power required to overcome friction,
rolling resistance, and other irreversibilities.
Nonmechanical Forms of Work
The treatment in Section 3–5 represents a fairly comprehensive coverage of
mechanical forms of work except the moving boundary work that is covered
in Chap. 5. But some work modes encountered in practice are not mechani-
cal in nature. However, these nonmechanical work modes can be treated in a
similar manner by identifying a generalized force F acting in the direction
W
#
a  Wa
¢t  222 kJ
20 s
 11.1 kW  
1or 14.9 hp2
 222 kJ
Wa  1
2m1V 2
2  V 2
12  1
2 1900 kg2 c a 80,000 m
3600 s b
2
 02d a
1 kJ>kg
1000 m2>s2 b
 147 kJ>s  147 kW  
1or 197 hp2
 11200 kg2 19.81 m>s22 190 km>h2 1sin 30°2 a
1 m>s
3.6 km>h b a
1 kJ>kg
1000 m2>s2 b
W#
g  mg ¢z>¢t  mgVvertical

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
81
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
of a generalized displacement x. Then the work associated with the differen-
tial displacement under the influence of this force is determined from dW 
Fdx.
Some examples of nonmechanical work modes are electrical work,
where the generalized force is the voltage (the electrical potential) and
the generalized displacement is the electrical charge, as discussed earlier;
magnetic work, where the generalized force is the magnetic field strength
and the generalized displacement is the total magnetic dipole moment; and
electrical polarization work, where the generalized force is the electric
field strength and the generalized displacement is the polarization of the
medium (the sum of the electric dipole rotation moments of the molecules).
Detailed consideration of these and other nonmechanical work modes can
be found in specialized books on these topics.
3–6
■THE FIRST LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
So far, we have considered various forms of energy such as heat Q, work W,
and total energy E individually, and no attempt is made to relate them to
each other during a process. The first law of thermodynamics, also known as
the conservation of energy principle, provides a sound basis for studying the
relationships among the various forms of energy and energy interactions.
Based on experimental observations, the first law of thermodynamics states
that energy can be neither created nor destroyed during a process; it can
only change forms. Therefore, every bit of energy should be accounted for
during a process.
We all know that a rock at some elevation possesses some potential energy,
and part of this potential energy is converted to kinetic energy as the rock falls
(Fig. 3–37). Experimental data show that the decrease in potential energy
(mg z) exactly equals the increase in kinetic energy 
when
the air resistance is negligible, thus confirming the conservation of energy
principle for mechanical energy.
Consider a system undergoing a series of adiabatic processes from a
specified state 1 to another specified state 2. Being adiabatic, these
processes obviously cannot involve any heat transfer, but they may involve
several kinds of work interactions. Careful measurements during these
experiments indicate the following: For all adiabatic processes between two
specified states of a closed system, the net work done is the same regardless
of the nature of the closed system and the details of the process. Consider-
ing that there are an infinite number of ways to perform work interactions
under adiabatic conditions, this statement appears to be very powerful, with
a potential for far-reaching implications. This statement, which is largely
based on the experiments of Joule in the first half of the nineteenth century,
cannot be drawn from any other known physical principle and is recognized
as a fundamental principle. This principle is called the first law of thermo-
dynamics or just the first law.
A major consequence of the first law is the existence and the definition 
of the property total energy E. Considering that the net work is the same for
all adiabatic processes of a closed system between two specified states,
the value of the net work must depend on the end states of the system only,
and thus it must correspond to a change in a property of the system. This 
3m 1V2
2  V2
12>24
76
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
PE1 = 10 kJ
m
KE1 = 0
PE2 = 7 kJ
m
KE2 = 3 kJ
Δ z
FIGURE 3–37
Energy cannot be created or
destroyed; it can only change forms.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
82
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
property is the total energy. Note that the first law makes no reference to the
value of the total energy of a closed system at a state. It simply states that
the change in the total energy during an adiabatic process must be equal to
the net work done. Therefore, any convenient arbitrary value can be
assigned to total energy at a specified state to serve as a reference point.
Implicit in the first law statement is the conservation of energy. Although
the essence of the first law is the existence of the property total energy, the
first law is often viewed as a statement of the conservation of energy princi-
ple. Next we develop the first law or the conservation of energy relation
with the help of some familiar examples using intuitive arguments.
First, we consider some processes that involve heat transfer but no work
interactions. The potato baked in the oven is a good example for this case
(Fig. 3–38). As a result of heat transfer to the potato, the energy of the
potato increases. If we disregard any mass transfer (moisture loss from the
potato), the increase in the total energy of the potato becomes equal to 
the amount of heat transfer. That is, if 5 kJ of heat is transferred to the
potato, the energy increase of the potato must also be 5 kJ.
As another example, consider the heating of water in a pot on top of a
range (Fig. 3–39). If 15 kJ of heat is transferred to the water from the heat-
ing element and 3 kJ of it is lost from the water to the surrounding air, the
increase in energy of the water is equal to the net heat transfer to water,
which is 12 kJ.
Now consider a well-insulated (i.e., adiabatic) room heated by an electric
heater as our system (Fig. 3–40). As a result of electrical work done, the
energy of the system increases. Since the system is adiabatic and cannot
have any heat transfer to or from the surroundings (Q  0), the conservation
of energy principle dictates that the electrical work done on the system must
equal the increase in energy of the system.
Next, let us replace the electric heater with a paddle wheel (Fig. 3–41). As
a result of the stirring process, the energy of the system increases. Again,
since there is no heat interaction between the system and its surroundings
(Q  0), the shaft work done on the system must show up as an increase in
the energy of the system.
Many of you have probably noticed that the temperature of air rises when
it is compressed (Fig. 3–42). This is because energy is transferred to the air
in the form of boundary work. In the absence of any heat transfer (Q  0),
the entire boundary work will be stored in the air as part of its total energy.
The conservation of energy principle again requires that the increase in the
energy of the system be equal to the boundary work done on the system.
We can extend these discussions to systems that involve various heat and
work interactions simultaneously. For example, if a system gains 12 kJ of
heat during a process while 6 kJ of work is done on it, the increase in the
energy of the system during that process is 18 kJ (Fig. 3–43). That is, the
change in the energy of a system during a process is simply equal to the net
energy transfer to (or from) the system.
Energy Balance
In the light of the preceding discussions, the conservation of energy princi-
ple can be expressed as follows: The net change (increase or decrease) in
the total energy of the system during a process is equal to the difference
Chapter 3
|
77
Qin = 5 kJ
POTATO
ΔE = 5 kJ
FIGURE 3–38
The increase in the energy of a potato
in an oven is equal to the amount of
heat transferred to it.
ΔE = Q net = 12 kJ
Qout = 3 kJ
Qin = 15 kJ
FIGURE 3–39
In the absence of any work
interactions, the energy change of a
system is equal to the net heat transfer.
Win = 5 kJ
(Adiabatic)
Battery
ΔE = 5 kJ
–
+
FIGURE 3–40
The work (e.g., electrical) done on 
an adiabatic system is equal to the
increase in the energy of the system.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
83
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
between the total energy entering and the total energy leaving the system
during that process. That is,
or
This relation is often referred to as the energy balance and is applicable to
any kind of system undergoing any kind of process. The successful use of
this relation to solve engineering problems depends on understanding the
various forms of energy and recognizing the forms of energy transfer.
Energy Change of a System, Esystem
The determination of the energy change of a system during a process
involves the evaluation of the energy of the system at the beginning and at
the end of the process, and taking their difference. That is,
or
(3–32)
Note that energy is a property, and the value of a property does not change
unless the state of the system changes. Therefore, the energy change of a
system is zero if the state of the system does not change during the process.
Also, energy can exist in numerous forms such as internal (sensible, latent,
chemical, and nuclear), kinetic, potential, electric, and magnetic, and their
sum constitutes the total energy E of a system. In the absence of electric,
magnetic, and surface tension effects (i.e., for simple compressible sys-
tems), the change in the total energy of a system during a process is the sum
of the changes in its internal, kinetic, and potential energies and can be
expressed as
(3–33)
where
When the initial and final states are specified, the values of the specific
internal energies u1 and u2 can be determined directly from the property
tables or thermodynamic property relations.
Most systems encountered in practice are stationary, that is, they do 
not involve any changes in their velocity or elevation during a process 
(Fig. 3–44). Thus, for stationary systems, the changes in kinetic and poten-
tial energies are zero (that is, KE  PE  0), and the total energy
change relation in Eq. 3–33 reduces to E  U for such systems. Also,
¢PE  mg 1z2  z12
¢KE  1
2 m1V 2
2  V 2
1 2
¢U  m1u2  u12
¢E  ¢U  ¢KE  ¢PE
¢Esystem  Efinal  Einitial  E2  E1
Energy change  Energy at final state  Energy at initial state
Ein  Eout  ¢Esystem
a
Total energy
entering the systemb  a
Total energy
leaving the systemb  a Change in the total
energy of the systemb
78
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Wsh, in = 8 kJ
(Adiabatic)
ΔE = 8 kJ
FIGURE 3–41
The work (shaft) done on an adiabatic
system is equal to the increase in the
energy of the system.
Wb,in = 10 kJ
(Adiabatic)
ΔE = 10 kJ
FIGURE 3–42
The work (boundary) done on an
adiabatic system is equal to the
increase in the energy of the system.
Qout = 3 kJ
Qin = 15 kJ
ΔE = (15 – 3) + 6
= 18 kJ
Wsh, in = 6 kJ
FIGURE 3–43
The energy change of a system during
a process is equal to the net work and
heat transfer between the system and
its surroundings.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
84
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the energy of a system during a process changes even if only one form of its
energy changes while the other forms of energy remain unchanged.
Mechanisms of Energy Transfer, Ein and Eout
Energy can be transferred to or from a system in three forms: heat, work,
and mass flow. Energy interactions are recognized at the system boundary as
they cross it, and they represent the energy gained or lost by a system dur-
ing a process. The only two forms of energy interactions associated with a
fixed mass or closed system are heat transfer and work.
1. Heat Transfer, Q Heat transfer to a system (heat gain) increases the
energy of the molecules and thus the internal energy of the system, and
heat transfer from a system (heat loss) decreases it since the energy
transferred out as heat comes from the energy of the molecules of the
system.
2. Work Transfer, W An energy interaction that is not caused by a tem-
perature difference between a system and its surroundings is work. A
rising piston, a rotating shaft, and an electrical wire crossing the system
boundaries are all associated with work interactions. Work transfer to a
system (i.e., work done on a system) increases the energy of the system,
and work transfer from a system (i.e., work done by the system)
decreases it since the energy transferred out as work comes from the
energy contained in the system. Car engines and hydraulic, steam, or
gas turbines produce work while compressors, pumps, and mixers con-
sume work.
3. Mass Flow, m Mass flow in and out of the system serves as an addi-
tional mechanism of energy transfer. When some mass enters a system,
the energy of the system increases because mass carries energy with it.
Likewise, when some mass leaves the system, the energy contained
within the system decreases because the leaving mass takes out some
energy with it. For example, when some hot water is taken out of a
water heater and is replaced by the same amount of cold water, the
energy content of the hot-water tank (the control volume) decreases as a
result of this mass interaction (Fig. 3–45).
Noting that energy can be transferred in the forms of heat, work, and
mass, and that the net transfer of a quantity is equal to the difference
between the amounts transferred in and out, the energy balance can be writ-
ten more explicitly as
(2–34)
where the subscripts “in” and “out” denote quantities that enter and leave
the system, respectively. All six quantities on the right side of the equation
represent “amounts,” and thus they are positive quantities. The direction of
any energy transfer is described by the subscripts “in” and “out.”
The heat transfer Q is zero for adiabatic systems, the work transfer W is
zero for systems that involve no work interactions, and the energy transport
with mass Emass is zero for systems that involve no mass flow across their
boundaries (i.e., closed systems).
Ein  Eout  1Q in  Q out2  1Win  Wout2  1Emass,in  Emass,out2  ¢Esystem
Chapter 3
|
79
Stationary Systems
z1 = z 2
←
ΔPE = 0
V1 = V2
←
ΔKE = 0
ΔE = ΔU
FIGURE 3–44
For stationary systems, KE  PE
 0; thus E  U.
Control
volume
Q
Mass
in
Mass
out
W
FIGURE 3–45
The energy content of a control
volume can be changed by mass flow
as well as heat and work interactions.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
85
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
80
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
P
V
Qnet = Wnet
FIGURE 3–46
For a cycle E  0, thus Q  W.
Wsh, in = 100 kJ
U1 = 800 kJ
Qout = 500 kJ
U2 = ?
Fluid
FIGURE 3–47
Schematic for Example 3–10.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
The energy balance for any system undergoing any kind of process can be
expressed more compactly as
(3–35)
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
or, in the rate form, as
(3–36)
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal,
by heat, work, and mass
kinetic, potential, etc., energies
For constant rates, the total quantities during a time interval t are related to
the quantities per unit time as
(3–37)
The energy balance can be expressed on a per unit mass basis as
(3–38)
which is obtained by dividing all the quantities in Eq. 3–35 by the mass m of
the system. Energy balance can also be expressed in the differential form as
(3–39)
For a closed system undergoing a cycle, the initial and final states are iden-
tical, and thus Esystem  E2  E1  0. Then the energy balance for a cycle
simplifies to Ein  Eout  0 or Ein  Eout. Noting that a closed system does
not involve any mass flow across its boundaries, the energy balance for a
cycle can be expressed in terms of heat and work interactions as
(3–40)
That is, the net work output during a cycle is equal to net heat input 
(Fig. 3–46).
EXAMPLE 3–10
Cooling of a Hot Fluid in a Tank
A rigid tank contains a hot fluid that is cooled while being stirred by a pad-
dle wheel. Initially, the internal energy of the fluid is 800 kJ. During the
cooling process, the fluid loses 500 kJ of heat, and the paddle wheel does
100 kJ of work on the fluid. Determine the final internal energy of the fluid.
Neglect the energy stored in the paddle wheel.
Solution
A fluid in a rigid tank looses heat while being stirred. The final
internal energy of the fluid is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The tank is stationary and thus the kinetic and potential
energy changes are zero, KE  PE  0. Therefore, E  U and internal
energy is the only form of the system’s energy that may change during this
process. 2 Energy stored in the paddle wheel is negligible.
Analysis
Take the contents of the tank as the system (Fig. 3–47). This is a
closed system since no mass crosses the boundary during the process. We
observe that the volume of a rigid tank is constant, and thus there is no
moving boundary work. Also, heat is lost from the system and shaft work is
done on the system. Applying the energy balance on the system gives
Wnet,out  Q net,in or W
#
net,out  Q
#
net,in  
1for a cycle2
dEin  dEout  dEsystem or dein  deout  desystem
ein  eout  ¢esystem  
1kJ>kg2
Q  Q# ¢t, W  W
#
¢t, and ¢E  1dE>dt2 ¢t  
1kJ2
E.
in  E.
out 

dEsystem>dt  
1kW2
Ein  Eout 
 
 ¢Esystem  
1kJ2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
86
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Therefore, the final internal energy of the system is 400 kJ.
EXAMPLE 3–11
Acceleration of Air by a Fan
A fan that consumes 20 W of electric power when operating is claimed to
discharge air from a ventilated room at a rate of 1.0 kgs at a discharge
velocity of 8 ms (Fig. 3–48). Determine if this claim is reasonable.
Solution
A fan is claimed to increase the velocity of air to a specified value
while consuming electric power at a specified rate. The validity of this claim
is to be investigated.
Assumptions
The ventilating room is relatively calm, and air velocity in it is
negligible.
Analysis
First, let’s examine the energy conversions involved: The motor of
the fan converts part of the electrical power it consumes to mechanical
(shaft) power, which is used to rotate the fan blades in air. The blades are
shaped such that they impart a large fraction of the mechanical power of the
shaft to air by mobilizing it. In the limiting ideal case of no losses (no con-
version of electrical and mechanical energy to thermal energy) in steady
operation, the electric power input is equal to the rate of increase of the
kinetic energy of air. Therefore, for a control volume that encloses the fan-
motor unit, the energy balance can be written as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Solving for Vout and substituting gives the maximum air outlet velocity to be
which is less than 8 ms. Therefore, the claim is false.
Discussion
The conservation of energy principle requires the energy to be
preserved as it is converted from one form to another, and it does not allow
any energy to be created or destroyed during a process. From the first law
point of view, there is nothing wrong with the conversion of the entire electri-
cal energy into kinetic energy. Therefore, the first law has no objection to 
air velocity reaching 6.3 ms—but this is the upper limit. Any claim of higher
velocity is in violation of the first law, and thus impossible. In reality, the air
velocity will be considerably lower than 6.3 ms because of the losses associ-
ated with the conversion of electrical energy to mechanical shaft energy, and
the conversion of mechanical shaft energy to kinetic energy of air.
Vout  B
2W
#
elect,in
m#
air
 B
2 120 J>s2
1.0 kg>s a
1 m2>s2
1 J>kg b  6.3 m>s
W
#
elect, in  m#
air keout  m#
air
V2
out
2
E
#
in  E
#
out       dEsystem > dt   0 1steady2  0  S   E
#
in  E
#
out
U2  400 kJ
 100 kJ  500 kJ  U2  800 kJ
Wsh,in  Q out  ¢U  U2  U1
Ein  Eout 
 
 ˚
 
  ¢Esystem
Chapter 3
|
81
Air
8 ms
Fan
FIGURE 3–48
Schematic for Example 3–11.
© Vol. 0557/PhotoDisc
→
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
87
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
EXAMPLE 3–12
Heating Effect of a Fan
A room is initially at the outdoor temperature of 25°C. Now a large fan
that consumes 200 W of electricity when running is turned on (Fig. 3–49).
The heat transfer rate between the room and the outdoor air is given as 
Q·  UA(Ti  To) where U  6 W/m2 · °C is the overall heat transfer coefficient,
A  30 m2 is the exposed surface area of the room, and Ti and To are the
indoor and outdoor air temperatures, respectively. Determine the indoor air
temperature when steady operating conditions are established.
Solution
A large fan is turned on and kept on in a room that loses heat to
the outdoors. The indoor air temperature is to be determined when steady
operation is reached.
Assumptions
1 Heat transfer through the floor is negligible. 2 There are no
other energy interactions involved.
Analysis
The electricity consumed by the fan is energy input for the room,
and thus the room gains energy at a rate of 200 W. As a result, the room air
temperature tends to rise. But as the room air temperature rises, the rate of
heat loss from the room increases until the rate of heat loss equals the elec-
tric power consumption. At that point, the temperature of the room air, and
thus the energy content of the room, remains constant, and the conservation
of energy for the room becomes
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Substituting,
which yields
Therefore, the room air temperature will remain constant after it reaches
26.1°C.
Discussion
Note that a 200-W fan heats a room just like a 200-W resis-
tance heater. In the case of a fan, the motor converts part of the electric
energy it draws into mechanical energy in the form of a rotating shaft while
the remaining part is dissipated as heat to the room air because of the motor
inefficiency (no motor converts 100 percent of the electric energy it receives
to mechanical energy, although some large motors come close with a conver-
sion efficiency of over 97 percent). Part of the mechanical energy of the
shaft is converted to kinetic energy of air through the blades, which is then
converted to thermal energy as air molecules slow down because of friction.
At the end, the entire electric energy drawn by the fan motor is converted to
thermal energy of air, which manifests itself as a rise in temperature.
EXAMPLE 3–13
Annual Lighting Cost of a Classroom
The lighting needs of a classroom are met by 30 fluorescent lamps, each
consuming 80 W of electricity (Fig. 3–50). The lights in the classroom are
kept on for 12 hours a day and 250 days a year. For a unit electricity cost of
Ti  26.1°C
200 W  16 W>m2 # °C2 130 m22 1Ti  25°C2
W
#
elect,in  Q
#
out  UA 1Ti  To2
E
#
in  E
#
out       dEsystem > dt   0 1steady2  0  S   E
#
in  E
#
out
82
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Fan
Room
Qout
Welect. in
•
•
FIGURE 3–49
Schematic for Example 3–12.
FIGURE 3–50
Fluorescent lamps lighting a classroom
as discussed in Example 3–13.
© Vol. 24/PhotoDisc
→
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
88
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
83
7 cents per kWh, determine annual energy cost of lighting for this class-
room. Also, discuss the effect of lighting on the heating and air-conditioning
requirements of the room.
Solution
The lighting of a classroom by fluorescent lamps is considered.
The annual electricity cost of lighting for this classroom is to be deter-
mined, and the lighting’s effect on the heating and air-conditioning require-
ments is to be discussed.
Assumptions
The effect of voltage fluctuations is negligible so that each fluo-
rescent lamp consumes its rated power.
Analysis
The electric power consumed by the lamps when all are on and
the number of hours they are kept on per year are
Then the amount and cost of electricity used per year become
Light is absorbed by the surfaces it strikes and is converted to thermal energy.
Disregarding the light that escapes through the windows, the entire 2.4 kW of
electric power consumed by the lamps eventually becomes part of thermal
energy of the classroom. Therefore, the lighting system in this room reduces
the heating requirements by 2.4 kW, but increases the air-conditioning load by
2.4 kW.
Discussion
Note that the annual lighting cost of this classroom alone is over
$500. This shows the importance of energy conservation measures. If incan-
descent light bulbs were used instead of fluorescent tubes, the lighting costs
would be four times as much since incandescent lamps use four times as
much power for the same amount of light produced. However, the heating
requirements would also be reduced proportionally, and there would be no
net change in overall energy cost in the winter.
EXAMPLE 3–14
Conservation of Energy for an Oscillating 
Steel Ball
The motion of a steel ball in a hemispherical bowl of radius h shown in 
Fig. 3–51 is to be analyzed. The ball is initially held at the highest location
at point A, and then it is released. Obtain relations for the conservation of
energy of the ball for the cases of frictionless and actual motions.
Solution
A steel ball is released in a bowl. Relations for the energy balance
are to be obtained.
Assumptions
The motion is frictionless, and thus friction between the ball,
the bowl, and the air is negligible.
Analysis
When the ball is released, it accelerates under the influence of
gravity, reaches a maximum velocity (and minimum elevation) at point B at
 17200 kWh>year2 1$0.07>kWh2  $504>year
 Lighting cost  1Lighting energy2 1Unit cost2
 12.4 kW2 13000 h>year2  7200 kWh>year
 Lighting energy  1Lighting power2 1Operating hours2
 Operating hours  112 h>day2 1250 days>year2  3000 h>year
 2400 W  2.4 kW
 180 W>lamp2 130 lamps2
 Lighting power  1Power consumed per lamp2 
 1No. of lamps2
Steel
ball
z
h
A
B
1
2
C
0
FIGURE 3–51
Schematic for Example 3–14.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
89
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
84
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 3–52
The definition of performance is not
limited to thermodynamics only. 
© Reprinted with special permission of King
Features Syndicate.
the bottom of the bowl, and moves up toward point C on the opposite side.
In the ideal case of frictionless motion, the ball oscillates between points A
and C. The actual motion involves the conversion of the kinetic and potential
energies of the ball to each other, together with overcoming resistance to
motion due to friction (doing frictional work). The general energy balance for
any system undergoing any process is
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Then the energy balance for the ball for a process from point 1 to point 2
becomes
or
since there is no energy transfer by heat or mass and no change in the internal
energy of the ball (the heat generated by frictional heating is dissipated to the
surrounding air). The frictional work term wfriction is often expressed as eloss to
represent the loss (conversion) of mechanical energy into thermal energy.
For the idealized case of frictionless motion, the last relation reduces to
where the value of the constant is C  gh. That is, when the frictional
effects are negligible, the sum of the kinetic and potential energies of the
ball remains constant.
Discussion
This is certainly a more intuitive and convenient form of the
conservation of energy equation for this and other similar processes such as
the swinging motion of the pendulum of a wall clock.
3–7
■ENERGY CONVERSION EFFICIENCIES
Efficiency is one of the most frequently used terms in thermodynamics, and
it indicates how well an energy conversion or transfer process is accom-
plished. Efficiency is also one of the most frequently misused terms in ther-
modynamics and a source of misunderstandings. This is because efficiency
is often used without being properly defined first. Here we clarify this fur-
ther, and define some efficiencies commonly used in practice.
Performance or efficiency, in general, can be expressed in terms of the
desired output and the required input as (Fig. 3–52)
(3–41)
If you are shopping for a water heater, a knowledgeable salesperson will
tell you that the efficiency of a conventional electric water heater is about
90 percent (Fig. 3–53). You may find this confusing, since the heating ele-
ments of electric water heaters are resistance heaters, and the efficiency of
Performance  Desired output
Required input
V 2
1
2  gz1  V 2
2
2  gz2 or V 2
2  gz  C  constant
V 2
1
2  gz1  V 2
2
2  gz2  wfriction
wfriction  1ke2  pe22  1ke1  pe12
Ein  Eout 
 
   ¢Esystem
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
90
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
85
all resistance heaters is 100 percent as they convert all the electrical energy
they consume into thermal energy. A knowledgeable salesperson will clarify
this by explaining that the heat losses from the hot-water tank to the sur-
rounding air amount to 10 percent of the electrical energy consumed, and
the efficiency of a water heater is defined as the ratio of the energy deliv-
ered to the house by hot water to the energy supplied to the water heater. A
clever salesperson may even talk you into buying a more expensive water
heater with thicker insulation that has an efficiency of 94 percent. If you are
a knowledgeable consumer and have access to natural gas, you will proba-
bly purchase a gas water heater whose efficiency is only 55 percent since a
gas unit costs about the same as an electric unit to purchase and install, but
the annual energy cost of a gas unit is much less than that of an electric
unit. Even though the efﬁciency is lower, natural gas is a less expensive
source of energy compared to electricity.
Perhaps you are wondering how the efficiency for a gas water heater is
defined, and why it is much lower than the efficiency of an electric heater.
As a general rule, the efficiency of equipment that involves the combustion
of a fuel is based on the heating value of the fuel, which is the amount of
heat released when a unit amount of fuel at room temperature is completely
burned and the combustion products are cooled to the room temperature
(Fig. 3–54). Then the performance of combustion equipment can be charac-
terized by combustion efficiency, defined as
(3–42)
A combustion efficiency of 100 percent indicates that the fuel is burned
completely and the stack gases leave the combustion chamber at room tem-
perature, and thus the amount of heat released during a combustion process
is equal to the heating value of the fuel.
Most fuels contain hydrogen, which forms water when burned, and the
heating value of a fuel will be different, depending on whether the water in
combustion products is in the liquid or vapor form. The heating value is
called the lower heating value, or LHV, when the water leaves as a vapor,
and the higher heating value, or HHV, when the water in the combustion
gases is completely condensed and thus the heat of vaporization is also
recovered. The difference between these two heating values is equal to the
product of the amount of water and the enthalpy of vaporization of water at
room temperature. For example, the lower and higher heating values of gaso-
line are 44,000 kJkg and 47,300 kJkg, respectively. An efficiency defini-
tion should make it clear whether it is based on the higher or lower heating
value of the fuel. Efficiencies of cars and jet engines are normally based on
lower heating values since water normally leaves as a vapor in the exhaust
gases, and it is not practical to try to recuperate the heat of vaporization. Effi-
ciencies of furnaces, on the other hand, are based on higher heating values.
The efficiency of space heating systems of residential and commercial
buildings is usually expressed in terms of the annual fuel utilization effi-
ciency, or AFUE, which accounts for the combustion efficiency as well as
other losses such as heat losses to unheated areas and start-up and cool-
down losses. The AFUE of most new heating systems is about 85 percent,
although the AFUE of some old heating systems is under 60 percent. The
hcombustion  Q
HV  Amount of heat released during combustion
Heating value of the fuel burned
Combustion
chamber
Combustion gases
25°C
CO2, H2O, etc.
Air
25°C
1 kg
Gasoline
25°C
LHV = 44,000 kJ/kg
FIGURE 3–54
The definition of the heating value of
gasoline.
Type
Efficiency
Gas, conventional
Gas, high-efficiency
Electric, conventional
Electric, high-efficiency
55%
90%
90%
94%
Water
heater
FIGURE 3–53
Typical efficiencies of conventional
and high-efficiency electric and
natural gas water heaters.
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Jill Braaten,
photographer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
91
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
AFUE of some new high-efficiency furnaces exceeds 96 percent, but the
high cost of such furnaces cannot be justified for locations with mild to
moderate winters. Such high efficiencies are achieved by reclaiming most of
the heat in the flue gases, condensing the water vapor, and discharging the
flue gases at temperatures as low as 38°C (or 100°F) instead of about 200°C
(or 400°F) for the conventional models.
For car engines, the work output is understood to be the power delivered
by the crankshaft. But for power plants, the work output can be the mechan-
ical power at the turbine exit, or the electrical power output of the generator.
A generator is a device that converts mechanical energy to electrical
energy, and the effectiveness of a generator is characterized by the generator
efficiency, which is the ratio of the electrical power output to the mechanical
power input. The thermal efficiency of a power plant, which is of primary
interest in thermodynamics, is usually defined as the ratio of the net shaft
work output of the turbine to the heat input to the working fluid. The effects
of other factors are incorporated by defining an overall efficiency for the
power plant as the ratio of the net electrical power output to the rate of fuel
energy input. That is,
(3–43)
The overall efficiencies are about 26–30 percent for gasoline automotive
engines, 34–40 percent for diesel engines, and up to 60 percent for large
power plants.
We are all familiar with the conversion of electrical energy to light by
incandescent lightbulbs, fluorescent tubes, and high-intensity discharge
lamps. The efficiency for the conversion of electricity to light can be defined
as the ratio of the energy converted to light to the electrical energy consumed.
For example, common incandescent lightbulbs convert about 10 percent of
the electrical energy they consume to light; the rest of the energy consumed is
dissipated as heat, which adds to the cooling load of the air conditioner in
summer. (But it reduces the heating load in the winter.) However, it is more
common to express the effectiveness of this conversion process by lighting
efficacy, which is defined as the amount of light output in lumens per W of
electricity consumed.
The efficacy of different lighting systems is given in Table 3–1. Note that
a compact fluorescent lightbulb produces about four times as much light as 
an incandescent lightbulb per W, and thus a 15-W fluorescent bulb can
replace a 60-W incandescent lightbulb (Fig. 3–55). Also, a compact fluores-
cent bulb lasts about 10,000 h, which is 10 times as long as an incandescent
bulb, and it plugs directly into the socket of an incandescent lamp. There-
fore, despite their higher initial cost, compact fluorescents reduce the light-
ing costs considerably through reduced electricity consumption. Sodium-
filled high-intensity discharge lamps provide the most efficient lighting, but
their use is limited to outdoor use because of their yellowish light.
We can also define efficiency for cooking appliances since they convert
electrical or chemical energy to heat for cooking. The efficiency of a cook-
ing appliance is defined as the ratio of the useful energy transferred to the
hoverall  hcombustion hthermal hgenerator 
W
#
net,electric
HHV 
 m#
net
86
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 3–1
The efficacy of different lighting
systems
Efficacy,
Type of lighting
lumens/W
Combustion
Candle
0.2
Incandescent
Ordinary
6–20
Halogen
16–25
Fluorescent
Ordinary
40–60
High output
70–90
Compact
50–80
High-intensity discharge
Mercury vapor
50–60
Metal halide
56–125
High-pressure sodium
100–150
Low-pressure sodium
up to 200
15 W
60 W
FIGURE 3–55
A 15-W compact fluorescent lamp
provides as much light as a 60-W
incandescent lamp.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
92
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
87
food to the energy consumed by the appliance (Fig. 3–56). Electric ranges
are more efficient than gas ranges, but it is much cheaper to cook with nat-
ural gas than with electricity because of the lower unit cost of natural gas
(Table 3–2).
The cooking efficiency depends on user habits as well as the individual
appliances. Convection and microwave ovens are inherently more efficient
than conventional ovens. On average, convection ovens save about one-third
and microwave ovens save about two-thirds of the energy used by conven-
tional ovens. The cooking efficiency can be increased by using the smallest
oven for baking, using a pressure cooker, using an electric slow cooker for
stews and soups, using the smallest pan that will do the job, using the
smaller heating element for small pans on electric ranges, using flat-
bottomed pans on electric burners to assure good contact, keeping burner
drip pans clean and shiny, defrosting frozen foods in the refrigerator before
cooking, avoiding preheating unless it is necessary, keeping the pans cov-
ered during cooking, using timers and thermometers to avoid overcooking,
using the self-cleaning feature of ovens right after cooking, and keeping
inside surfaces of microwave ovens clean.
Using energy-efficient appliances and practicing energy conservation
measures help our pocketbooks by reducing our utility bills. It also helps
the environment by reducing the amount of pollutants emitted to the atmo-
sphere during the combustion of fuel at home or at the power plants where
electricity is generated. The combustion of each therm of natural gas (see
Example 3–15) produces 6.4 kg of carbon dioxide, which causes global cli-
mate change; 4.7 g of nitrogen oxides and 0.54 g of hydrocarbons, which
cause smog; 2.0 g of carbon monoxide, which is toxic; and 0.030 g of sulfur
dioxide, which causes acid rain. Each therm of natural gas saved eliminates
the emission of these pollutants while saving $0.60 for the average con-
sumer in the United States. Each kWh of electricity conserved saves 0.4 kg
of coal and 1.0 kg of CO2 and 15 g of SO2 from a coal power plant.
TABLE 3–2
Energy costs of cooking a casserole with different appliances*
[From A. Wilson and J. Morril, Consumer Guide to Home Energy Savings, Washington, DC: 
American Council for an Energy-Efficient Economy, 1996, p. 192.]
Cooking
Cooking
Energy
Cost of
Cooking appliance
temperature
time
used
energy
Electric oven
350F (177C)
1 h
2.0 kWh
$0.16
Convection oven (elect.)
325F (163C)
45 min
1.39 kWh
$0.11
Gas oven
350F (177C)
1 h
0.112 therm
$0.07
Frying pan
420F (216C)
1 h
0.9 kWh
$0.07
Toaster oven
425F (218C)
50 min
0.95 kWh
$0.08
Electric slow cooker
200F (93C)
7 h
0.7 kWh
$0.06
Microwave oven
“High”
15 min
0.36 kWh
$0.03
*Assumes a unit cost of $0.08/kWh for electricity and $0.60/therm for gas.
5 kW
3 kW
2 kW
Efficiency =
Energy utilized
Energy supplied to appliance
3 kWh
5 kWh
=
= 0.60
FIGURE 3–56
The efficiency of a cooking appliance
represents the fraction of the energy
supplied to the appliance that is
transferred to the food.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
93
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
EXAMPLE 3–15
Cost of Cooking with Electric and Gas Ranges
The efficiency of cooking appliances affects the internal heat gain from them
since an inefficient appliance consumes a greater amount of energy for the
same task, and the excess energy consumed shows up as heat in the living
space. The efficiency of open burners is determined to be 73 percent for
electric units and 38 percent for gas units (Fig. 3–57). Consider a 2-kW
electric burner at a location where the unit costs of electricity and natural
gas are $0.09/kWh and $0.55/therm, respectively. Determine the rate of
energy consumption by the burner and the unit cost of utilized energy for
both electric and gas burners.
Solution
The operation of electric and gas ranges is considered. The rate of
energy consumption and the unit cost of utilized energy are to be deter-
mined.
Analysis
The efficiency of the electric heater is given to be 73 percent.
Therefore, a burner that consumes 2 kW of electrical energy supplies
of useful energy. The unit cost of utilized energy is inversely proportional to
the efficiency, and is determined from
Noting that the efficiency of a gas burner is 38 percent, the energy input
to a gas burner that supplies utilized energy at the same rate (1.46 kW) is
since 1 kW  3412 Btuh. Therefore, a gas burner should have a rating of
at least 13,100 Btuh to perform as well as the electric unit.
Noting that 1 therm  29.3 kWh, the unit cost of utilized energy in the
case of a gas burner is determined to be
Discussion
The cost of utilized gas is less than half of the unit cost of uti-
lized electricity. Therefore, despite its higher efficiency, cooking with an
electric burner would cost more than twice as much compared to a gas
burner in this case. This explains why cost-conscious consumers always ask
for gas appliances, and it is not wise to use electricity for heating purposes.
Efficiencies of Mechanical and Electrical Devices
The transfer of mechanical energy is usually accomplished by a rotating
shaft, and thus mechanical work is often referred to as shaft work. A pump
or a fan receives shaft work (usually from an electric motor) and transfers it
to the fluid as mechanical energy (less frictional losses). A turbine, on the
other hand, converts the mechanical energy of a fluid to shaft work. In the
absence of any irreversibilities such as friction, mechanical energy can be
 $0.049>kWh
 Cost of utilized energy  Cost of energy input
Efficiency

$0.55>29.3 kWh
0.38
Q
#
input, gas 
Q
#
utilized
Efficiency  1.46 kW
0.38
 3.84 kW  
1  13,100 Btu>h2
Cost of utilized energy  Cost of energy input
Efficiency

$0.09>kWh
0.73
 $0.123>kWh
Q
#
utilized  1Energy input2 
 1Efficiency2  12 kW2 10.732  1.46 kW
88
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Gas Range
Electric Range
73%
38%
FIGURE 3–57
Schematic of the 73 percent efficient
electric heating unit and 38 percent
efficient gas burner discussed in
Example 3–15.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
94
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
89
converted entirely from one mechanical form to another, and the mechani-
cal efficiency of a device or process can be defined as (Fig. 3–58)
(3–44)
A conversion efficiency of less than 100 percent indicates that conversion is
less than perfect and some losses have occurred during conversion. A
mechanical efficiency of 97 percent indicates that 3 percent of the mechanical
energy input is converted to thermal energy as a result of frictional heating,
and this manifests itself as a slight rise in the temperature of the fluid.
In fluid systems, we are usually interested in increasing the pressure,
velocity, and/or elevation of a fluid. This is done by supplying mechanical
energy to the fluid by a pump, a fan, or a compressor (we will refer to all of
them as pumps). Or we are interested in the reverse process of extracting
mechanical energy from a fluid by a turbine and producing mechanical
power in the form of a rotating shaft that can drive a generator or any other
rotary device. The degree of perfection of the conversion process between
the mechanical work supplied or extracted and the mechanical energy of the
fluid is expressed by the pump efficiency and turbine efficiency, defined as
(3–45)
where 
is the rate of increase in the mechan-
ical energy of the fluid, which is equivalent to the useful pumping power
supplied to the fluid, and
(3–46)
where 
is the rate of decrease in the
mechanical energy of the fluid, which is equivalent to the mechanical power
extracted from the fluid by the turbine 
, and we use the absolute
value sign to avoid negative values for efficiencies. A pump or turbine effi-
ciency of 100 percent indicates perfect conversion between the shaft work
and the mechanical energy of the fluid, and this value can be approached
(but never attained) as the frictional effects are minimized.
Electrical energy is commonly converted to rotating mechanical energy
by electric motors to drive fans, compressors, robot arms, car starters, and
so forth. The effectiveness of this conversion process is characterized by the
motor efficiency hmotor, which is the ratio of the mechanical energy output of
the motor to the electrical energy input. The full-load motor efficiencies
range from about 35 percent for small motors to over 97 percent for large
high-efficiency motors. The difference between the electrical energy con-
sumed and the mechanical energy delivered is dissipated as waste heat.
The mechanical efficiency should not be confused with the motor effi-
ciency and the generator efficiency, which are defined as
Motor:
(3–47)
hmotor  Mechanical power output
Electric power input

W#
shaft,out
W
#
elect,in
W#
turbine,e
0¢E#
mech,fluid0  E#
mech,in  E#
mech,out
hturbine 
Mechanical energy output
Mechanical energy decrease of the fluid 
W
#
shaft,out
0¢E
#
mech,fluid0
 W
#
turbine
W
#
turbine,e
W#
pump,u
¢E#
mech,fluid  E#
mech,out  E#
mech,in
hpump  Mechanical energy increase of the fluid
Mechanical energy input

¢E
#
mech,fluid
W
#
shaft,in

W
#
pump,u
W
#
pump
hmech  Mechanical energy output
Mechanical energy input 
Emech,out
Emech,in
 1 
Emech,loss
Emech,in
m = 0.50 kg/s
Fan
50 W
·
1
2
= 0,
V1
= 12 m/s
= z2
z1
= P2
P1
=
=
= 0.72
• mech, fan
=
ΔEmech,fluid
––––––––––
Wshaft,in
(0.50 kg/s)(12 m/s)2/2
–––––––––––––––––
50 W
·
·
mV 2
2/2
–––––––
Wshaft,in
·
·
V2
FIGURE 3–58
The mechanical efficiency of a fan is
the ratio of the kinetic energy of air at
the fan exit to the mechanical power
input.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
95
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
90
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Generator
=
= 0.75 × 0.97 
= 0.73
Turbine
turbine–gen
= 0.75 
turbine
= 0.97 
generator
turbine generator
•
•
•
•
•
FIGURE 3–59
The overall efficiency of a
turbine–generator is the product of the
efficiency of the turbine and the
efficiency of the generator, and
represents the fraction of the
mechanical energy of the fluid
converted to electric energy.
Generator
Turbine
1862 kW
m = 5000 kg/s
h = 50 m
·
Lake
= 0.95
generator
•
FIGURE 3–60
Schematic for Example 3–16.
and
Generator:
(3–48)
A pump is usually packaged together with its motor, and a turbine with its
generator. Therefore, we are usually interested in the combined or overall
efficiency of pump–motor and turbine–generator combinations (Fig. 3–59),
which are defined as
(3–49)
and
(3–50)
All the efficiencies just defined range between 0 and 100 percent. The
lower limit of 0 percent corresponds to the conversion of the entire mechani-
cal or electric energy input to thermal energy, and the device in this case
functions like a resistance heater. The upper limit of 100 percent corresponds
to the case of perfect conversion with no friction or other irreversibilities,
and thus no conversion of mechanical or electric energy to thermal energy.
EXAMPLE 3–16
Performance of a Hydraulic Turbine–Generator
The water in a large lake is to be used to generate electricity by the installa-
tion of a hydraulic turbine–generator at a location where the depth of the
water is 50 m (Fig. 3–60). Water is to be supplied at a rate of 5000 kg/s. If
the electric power generated is measured to be 1862 kW and the generator
efficiency is 95 percent, determine (a) the overall efficiency of the turbine–
generator, (b) the mechanical efficiency of the turbine, and (c) the shaft
power supplied by the turbine to the generator.
Solution
A hydraulic turbine–generator is to generate electricity from the
water of a lake. The overall efficiency, the turbine efficiency, and the turbine
shaft power are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The elevation of the lake remains constant. 2 The mechani-
cal energy of water at the turbine exit is negligible.
Properties
The density of water can be taken to be r  1000 kg/m3.
Analysis
(a) We take the bottom of the lake as the reference level for conve-
nience. Then the potential energy of water at the surface becomes gh. Con-
sidering that the kinetic energy of water at the lake surface and the turbine
exit are negligible and the pressure at both locations is the atmospheric
pressure, the change in the mechanical energy of water between lake surface
and the turbine exit becomes
 0.491 kJ>kg
emech,in  emech,out  gh  0  gh  19.81 m>s22 150 m2 a
1 kJ>kg
1000 m2>s2 b
hturbinegen  hturbinehgenerator 
W
#
elect,out
W
#
turbine,e

W
#
elect,out
0¢E
#
mech,fluid
hpumpmotor  hpumphmotor 
W#
pump,u
W#
elect,in

¢E#
mech,fluid
W#
elect,in
hgenerator 
Electric power output
Mechanical power input 
W#
elect,out
W#
shaft,in

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
96
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
91
Standard Motor
60 hp
•  = 89.0%
High-Efficiency Motor
60 hp
•  = 93.2%
FIGURE 3–61
Schematic for Example 3–17.
Then the rate at which mechanical energy is supplied to the turbine by the
fluid and the overall efficiency become
(b) Knowing the overall and generator efficiencies, the mechanical efficiency
of the turbine is determined from
(c) The shaft power output is determined from the definition of mechanical
efficiency,
Discussion
Note that the lake supplies 2455 kW of mechanical energy to
the turbine, which converts 1964 kW of it to shaft work that drives the gen-
erator, which generates 1862 kW of electric power. There are losses associ-
ated with each component.
EXAMPLE 3–17
Cost Savings Associated with High-Efficiency
Motors
A 60-hp electric motor (a motor that delivers 60 hp of shaft power at full
load) that has an efficiency of 89.0 percent is worn out and is to be
replaced by a 93.2 percent efficient high-efficiency motor (Fig. 3–61). The
motor operates 3500 hours a year at full load. Taking the unit cost of elec-
tricity to be $0.08kWh, determine the amount of energy and money saved
as a result of installing the high-efficiency motor instead of the standard
motor. Also, determine the simple payback period if the purchase prices of
the standard and high-efficiency motors are $4520 and $5160, respectively.
Solution
A worn-out standard motor is to be replaced by a high-efficiency
one. The amount of electrical energy and money saved as well as the simple
payback period are to be determined.
Assumptions
The load factor of the motor remains constant at 1 (full load)
when operating.
Analysis
The electric power drawn by each motor and their difference can
be expressed as
 1Rated power2 1Load factor2 11>hst  1>heff2
 Power savings  W#
electric in,standard  W
#
electric in,efficient
W
#
electric in,efficient  W
#
shaft>heff  1Rated power2 1Load factor2>heff
W#
electric in,standard  W#
shaft>hst  1Rated power2 1Load factor2>hst
W
#
shaft,out  hturbine0¢E
#
mech,fluid0  10.802 12455 kW2  1964 kW
hturbinegen  hturbinehgenerator S hturbine 
hturbinegen
hgenerator
 0.76
0.95  0.80
hoverall  hturbinegen 
W#
elect,out
0¢E#
mech,fluid0
 1862 kW
2455 kW  0.76
0¢E#
mech,fluid0  m# 1emech,in  emech,out2  15000 kg>s2 10.491 kJ>kg2  2455 kW

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
97
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
92
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 3–62
Energy conversion processes are often
accompanied by environmental
pollution.
© Corbis Royalty Free
where hst is the efficiency of the standard motor, and heff is the efficiency of
the comparable high-efficiency motor. Then the annual energy and cost sav-
ings associated with the installation of the high-efficiency motor become
Also,
This gives a simple payback period of
Discussion
Note that the high-efficiency motor pays for its price differential
within about one year from the electrical energy it saves. Considering that
the service life of electric motors is several years, the purchase of the higher
efficiency motor is definitely indicated in this case. Be careful, however. If
the motor is used in the winter, the “wasted” heat is not really wasted, since
it heats the building, reducing the heating load. In the summer, however, the
savings are enhanced by reducing the cooling load.
3–8
■ENERGY AND ENVIRONMENT
The conversion of energy from one form to another often affects the 
environment and the air we breathe in many ways, and thus the study of
energy is not complete without considering its impact on the environment 
(Fig. 3–62). Fossil fuels such as coal, oil, and natural gas have been power-
ing the industrial development and the amenities of modern life that we
enjoy since the 1700s, but this has not been without any undesirable side
effects. From the soil we farm and the water we drink to the air we breathe,
the environment has been paying a heavy toll for it. Pollutants emitted dur-
ing the combustion of fossil fuels are responsible for smog, acid rain, and
global warming and climate change. The environmental pollution has
reached such high levels that it became a serious threat to vegetation, wild
life, and human health. Air pollution has been the cause of numerous health
problems including asthma and cancer. It is estimated that over 60,000 peo-
ple in the United States alone die each year due to heart and lung diseases
related to air pollution.
Hundreds of elements and compounds such as benzene and formaldehyde
are known to be emitted during the combustion of coal, oil, natural gas, and
wood in electric power plants, engines of vehicles, furnaces, and even fire-
places. Some compounds are added to liquid fuels for various reasons (such
as MTBE to raise the octane number of the fuel and also to oxygenate the
Simple payback period  Excess initial cost
Annual cost savings 
$640
$634>year  1.01 year
Excess initial cost  Purchase price differential  $5160  $4520  $640
 $634>year
 17929 kWh>year2 1$0.08> kWh2
 Cost savings  1Energy savings2 1Unit cost of energy2
 7929 kWh>year
 160 hp2 10.7457 kW>hp2 13500 h>year2 112 11>0.89  1>0.93.22
 1Rated power2 1Operating hours2 1Load factor2 11>hst  1>heff2
 Energy savings  1Power savings2 1Operating hours2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
98
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
93
fuel in winter months to reduce urban smog). The largest source of air pol-
lution is the motor vehicles, and the pollutants released by the vehicles are
usually grouped as hydrocarbons (HC), nitrogen oxides (NOx), and carbon
monoxide (CO) (Fig. 3–63). The HC emissions are a large component of
volatile organic compounds (VOCs) emissions, and the two terms are gener-
ally used interchangeably for motor vehicle emissions. A significant portion
of the VOC or HC emissions are caused by the evaporation of fuels during
refueling or spillage during spitback or by evaporation from gas tanks with
faulty caps that do not close tightly. The solvents, propellants, and house-
hold cleaning products that contain benzene, butane, or other HC products
are also significant sources of HC emissions.
The increase of environmental pollution at alarming rates and the rising
awareness of its dangers made it necessary to control it by legislation and
international treaties. In the United States, the Clean Air Act of 1970 (whose
passage was aided by the 14-day smog alert in Washington that year) set
limits on pollutants emitted by large plants and vehicles. These early stan-
dards focused on emissions of hydrocarbons, nitrogen oxides, and carbon
monoxide. The new cars were required to have catalytic converters in their
exhaust systems to reduce HC and CO emissions. As a side benefit, the
removal of lead from gasoline to permit the use of catalytic converters led to
a significant reduction in toxic lead emissions.
Emission limits for HC, NOx, and CO from cars have been declining
steadily since 1970. The Clean Air Act of 1990 made the requirements on
emissions even tougher, primarily for ozone, CO, nitrogen dioxide, and par-
ticulate matter (PM). As a result, today’s industrial facilities and vehicles
emit a fraction of the pollutants they used to emit a few decades ago. The
HC emissions of cars, for example, decreased from about 8 gpm (grams per
mile) in 1970 to 0.4 gpm in 1980 and about 0.1 gpm in 1999. This is a sig-
nificant reduction since many of the gaseous toxics from motor vehicles and
liquid fuels are hydrocarbons.
Children are most susceptible to the damages caused by air pollutants
since their organs are still developing. They are also exposed to more pollu-
tion since they are more active, and thus they breathe faster. People with
heart and lung problems, especially those with asthma, are most affected by
air pollutants. This becomes apparent when the air pollution levels in their
neighborhoods rise to high levels.
Ozone and Smog
If you live in a metropolitan area such as Los Angeles, you are probably
familiar with urban smog—the dark yellow or brown haze that builds up in
a large stagnant air mass and hangs over populated areas on calm hot sum-
mer days. Smog is made up mostly of ground-level ozone (O3), but it also
contains numerous other chemicals, including carbon monoxide (CO), par-
ticulate matter such as soot and dust, volatile organic compounds (VOCs)
such as benzene, butane, and other hydrocarbons. The harmful ground-level
ozone should not be confused with the useful ozone layer high in the
stratosphere that protects the earth from the sun’s harmful ultraviolet rays.
Ozone at ground level is a pollutant with several adverse health effects.
The primary source of both nitrogen oxides and hydrocarbons is motor
vehicles. Hydrocarbons and nitrogen oxides react in the presence of sunlight
on hot calm days to form ground-level ozone, which is the primary compo-
NOx
CO
HC
FIGURE 3–63
Motor vehicles are the largest source
of air pollution.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
99
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
nent of smog (Fig. 3–64). The smog formation usually peaks in late after-
noons when the temperatures are highest and there is plenty of sunlight.
Although ground-level smog and ozone form in urban areas with heavy traf-
fic or industry, the prevailing winds can transport them several hundred
miles to other cities. This shows that pollution knows no boundaries, and it
is a global problem.
Ozone irritates eyes and damages the air sacs in the lungs where oxygen
and carbon dioxide are exchanged, causing eventual hardening of this soft
and spongy tissue. It also causes shortness of breath, wheezing, fatigue,
headaches, and nausea, and aggravates respiratory problems such as asthma.
Every exposure to ozone does a little damage to the lungs, just like cigarette
smoke, eventually reducing the individual’s lung capacity. Staying indoors
and minimizing physical activity during heavy smog minimizes damage.
Ozone also harms vegetation by damaging leaf tissues. To improve the air
quality in areas with the worst ozone problems, reformulated gasoline
(RFG) that contains at least 2 percent oxygen was introduced. The use of
RFG has resulted in significant reduction in the emission of ozone and other
pollutants, and its use is mandatory in many smog-prone areas.
The other serious pollutant in smog is carbon monoxide, which is a color-
less, odorless, poisonous gas. It is mostly emitted by motor vehicles, and it
can build to dangerous levels in areas with heavy congested traffic. It
deprives the body’s organs from getting enough oxygen by binding with the
red blood cells that would otherwise carry oxygen. At low levels, carbon
monoxide decreases the amount of oxygen supplied to the brain and other
organs and muscles, slows body reactions and reflexes, and impairs judg-
ment. It poses a serious threat to people with heart disease because of the
fragile condition of the circulatory system and to fetuses because of the
oxygen needs of the developing brain. At high levels, it can be fatal, as evi-
denced by numerous deaths caused by cars that are warmed up in closed
garages or by exhaust gases leaking into the cars.
Smog also contains suspended particulate matter such as dust and soot
emitted by vehicles and industrial facilities. Such particles irritate the eyes
and the lungs since they may carry compounds such as acids and metals.
Acid Rain
Fossil fuels are mixtures of various chemicals, including small amounts of
sulfur. The sulfur in the fuel reacts with oxygen to form sulfur dioxide
(SO2), which is an air pollutant. The main source of SO2 is the electric
power plants that burn high-sulfur coal. The Clean Air Act of 1970 has lim-
ited the SO2 emissions severely, which forced the plants to install SO2
scrubbers, to switch to low-sulfur coal, or to gasify the coal and recover the
sulfur. Motor vehicles also contribute to SO2 emissions since gasoline and
diesel fuel also contain small amounts of sulfur. Volcanic eruptions and hot
springs also release sulfur oxides (the cause of the rotten egg smell).
The sulfur oxides and nitric oxides react with water vapor and other
chemicals high in the atmosphere in the presence of sunlight to form sulfu-
ric and nitric acids (Fig. 3–65). The acids formed usually dissolve in the
suspended water droplets in clouds or fog. These acid-laden droplets, which
can be as acidic as lemon juice, are washed from the air on to the soil by
rain or snow. This is known as acid rain. The soil is capable of neutralizing
94
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
SMOG
O3
NOx
HC
SUN
FIGURE 3–64
Ground-level ozone, which is the
primary component of smog, forms
when HC and NOx react in the
presence of sunlight in hot calm days.
FIGURE 3–65
Sulfuric acid and nitric acid are
formed when sulfur oxides and nitric
oxides react with water vapor and
other chemicals high in the
atmosphere in the presence of
sunlight.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
100
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
95
a certain amount of acid, but the amounts produced by the power plants
using inexpensive high-sulfur coal has exceeded this capability, and as a
result many lakes and rivers in industrial areas such as New York, Pennsyl-
vania, and Michigan have become too acidic for fish to grow. Forests in
those areas also experience a slow death due to absorbing the acids through
their leaves, needles, and roots. Even marble structures deteriorate due to
acid rain. The magnitude of the problem was not recognized until the early
1970s, and serious measures have been taken since then to reduce the sulfur
dioxide emissions drastically by installing scrubbers in plants and by desul-
furizing coal before combustion.
The Greenhouse Effect: 
Global Warming and Climate Change
You have probably noticed that when you leave your car under direct sun-
light on a sunny day, the interior of the car gets much warmer than the air
outside, and you may have wondered why the car acts like a heat trap. This
is because glass at thicknesses encountered in practice transmits over 
90 percent of radiation in the visible range and is practically opaque (non-
transparent) to radiation in the longer wavelength infrared regions. There-
fore, glass allows the solar radiation to enter freely but blocks the infrared
radiation emitted by the interior surfaces. This causes a rise in the interior
temperature as a result of the thermal energy buildup in the car. This heating
effect is known as the greenhouse effect, since it is utilized primarily in
greenhouses.
The greenhouse effect is also experienced on a larger scale on earth. The
surface of the earth, which warms up during the day as a result of the
absorption of solar energy, cools down at night by radiating part of its
energy into deep space as infrared radiation. Carbon dioxide (CO2), water
vapor, and trace amounts of some other gases such as methane and nitrogen
oxides act like a blanket and keep the earth warm at night by blocking the
heat radiated from the earth (Fig. 3–66). Therefore, they are called “green-
house gases,” with CO2 being the primary component. Water vapor is usu-
ally taken out of this list since it comes down as rain or snow as part of the
water cycle and human activities in producing water (such as the burning of
fossil fuels) do not make much difference on its concentration in the atmo-
sphere (which is mostly due to evaporation from rivers, lakes, oceans, etc.).
CO2 is different, however, in that people’s activities do make a difference in
CO2 concentration in the atmosphere.
The greenhouse effect makes life on earth possible by keeping the earth
warm (about 30°C warmer). However, excessive amounts of these gases dis-
turb the delicate balance by trapping too much energy, which causes the
average temperature of the earth to rise and the climate at some localities to
change. These undesirable consequences of the greenhouse effect are
referred to as global warming or global climate change.
The global climate change is due, in part, to the excessive use of fossil
fuels such as coal, petroleum products, and natural gas in electric power
generation, transportation, buildings, and manufacturing, and it has been a
concern in recent decades. In 1995, a total of 6.5 billion tons of carbon was
released to the atmosphere as CO2. The current concentration of CO2 in the
Some infrared
radiation emitted
by earth is absorbed
by greenhouse
gases and
emitted back
Solar radiation
passes through
and is mostly
absorbed
by earth’s
surface
SUN
Greenhouse
gases
FIGURE 3–66
The greenhouse effect on earth.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
101
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
atmosphere is about 360 ppm (or 0.36 percent). This is 20 percent higher
than the level a century ago, and it is projected to increase to over 700 ppm
by the year 2100. Under normal conditions, vegetation consumes CO2 and
releases O2 during the photosynthesis process, and thus keeps the CO2 con-
centration in the atmosphere in check. A mature, growing tree consumes
about 12 kg of CO2 a year and exhales enough oxygen to support a family
of four. However, deforestation and the huge increase in the CO2 production
in recent decades disturbed this balance.
In a 1995 report, the world’s leading climate scientists concluded that the
earth has already warmed about 0.5°C during the last century, and they esti-
mate that the earth’s temperature will rise another 2°C by the year 2100. A
rise of this magnitude is feared to cause severe changes in weather patterns
with storms and heavy rains and flooding at some parts and drought in oth-
ers, major floods due to the melting of ice at the poles, loss of wetlands and
coastal areas due to rising sea levels, variations in water supply, changes in
the ecosystem due to the inability of some animal and plant species to
adjust to the changes, increases in epidemic diseases due to the warmer
temperatures, and adverse side effects on human health and socioeconomic
conditions in some areas.
The seriousness of these threats has moved the United Nations to estab-
lish a committee on climate change. A world summit in 1992 in Rio de
Janeiro, Brazil, attracted world attention to the problem. The agreement pre-
pared by the committee in 1992 to control greenhouse gas emissions was
signed by 162 nations. In the 1997 meeting in Kyoto (Japan), the world’s
industrialized countries adopted the Kyoto protocol and committed to
reduce their CO2 and other greenhouse gas emissions by 5 percent below
the 1990 levels by 2008 to 2012. This can be done by increasing conserva-
tion efforts and improving conversion efficiencies, while meeting new
energy demands by the use of renewable energy (such as hydroelectric,
solar, wind, and geothermal energy) rather than by fossil fuels.
The United States is the largest contributor of greenhouse gases, with over
5 tons of carbon emissions per person per year. A major source of green-
house gas emissions is transportation. Each liter of gasoline burned by a
vehicle produces about 2.5 kg of CO2 (or, each gallon of gasoline burned
produces about 20 lbm of CO2). An average car in the United States is 
driven about 12,000 miles a year, and it consumes about 600 gallons of
gasoline. Therefore, a car emits about 12,000 lbm of CO2 to the atmosphere
a year, which is about four times the weight of a typical car (Fig. 3–67).
This and other emissions can be reduced significantly by buying an energy-
efficient car that burns less fuel over the same distance, and by driving sen-
sibly. Saving fuel also saves money and the environment. For example,
choosing a vehicle that gets 30 rather than 20 miles per gallon will prevent
2 tons of CO2 from being released to the atmosphere every year while
reducing the fuel cost by $500 per year (under average driving conditions of
12,000 miles a year and at a fuel cost of $2.50gal).
It is clear from these discussions that considerable amounts of pollutants
are emitted as the chemical energy in fossil fuels is converted to thermal,
mechanical, or electrical energy via combustion, and thus power plants,
motor vehicles, and even stoves take the blame for air pollution. In contrast,
no pollution is emitted as electricity is converted to thermal, chemical, or
96
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 3–67
The average car produces several
times its weight in CO2 every year (it
is driven 12,000 miles a year,
consumes 600 gallons of gasoline, and
produces 20 lbm of CO2 per gallon).
© Vol. 39/PhotoDisc

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
102
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
97
mechanical energy, and thus electric cars are often touted as “zero emis-
sion” vehicles and their widespread use is seen by some as the ultimate
solution to the air pollution problem. It should be remembered, however,
that the electricity used by the electric cars is generated somewhere else
mostly by burning fuel and thus emitting pollution. Therefore, each time an
electric car consumes 1 kWh of electricity, it bears the responsibility for the
pollutions emitted as 1 kWh of electricity (plus the conversion and transmis-
sion losses) is generated elsewhere. The electric cars can be claimed to be
zero emission vehicles only when the electricity they consume is generated
by emission-free renewable resources such as hydroelectric, solar, wind, and
geothermal energy (Fig. 3–68). Therefore, the use of renewable energy
should be encouraged worldwide, with incentives, as necessary, to make the
earth a better place in which to live. The advancements in thermodynamics
have contributed greatly in recent decades to improve conversion efficien-
cies (in some cases doubling them) and thus to reduce pollution. As individ-
uals, we can also help by practicing energy conservation measures and by
making energy efficiency a high priority in our purchases.
EXAMPLE 3–18
Reducing Air Pollution by Geothermal Heating
A geothermal power plant in Nevada is generating electricity using geother-
mal water extracted at 180°C, and reinjected back to the ground at 85°C. It
is proposed to utilize the reinjected brine for heating the residential and
commercial buildings in the area, and calculations show that the geothermal
heating system can save 18 million therms of natural gas a year. Determine
the amount of NOx and CO2 emissions the geothermal system will save a
year. Take the average NOx and CO2 emissions of gas furnaces to be 0.0047
kg/therm and 6.4 kg/therm, respectively.
Solution
The gas heating systems in an area are being replaced by a geo-
thermal district heating system. The amounts of NOx and CO2 emissions
saved per year are to be determined.
Analysis
The amounts of emissions saved per year are equivalent to the
amounts emitted by furnaces when 18 million therms of natural gas are
burned,
Discussion
A typical car on the road generates about 8.5 kg of NOx and
6000 kg of CO2 a year. Therefore the environmental impact of replacing the
gas heating systems in the area by the geothermal heating system is equiva-
lent to taking 10,000 cars off the road for NOx emission and taking 20,000
cars off the road for CO2 emission. The proposed system should have a sig-
nificant effect on reducing smog in the area.
 1.2 
 108 kg>year
 16.4 kg>therm2 118 
 106 therm>year2
 CO2 savings  1CO2 emission per therm2 1No. of therms per year2
 8.5 
 104 kg>year
 10.0047 kg>therm2 118 
 106 therm>year2
 NOx savings  1NOx emission per therm2 1No. of therms per year2
FIGURE 3–68
Renewable energies such as wind are
called “green energy” since they emit
no pollutants or greenhouse gases.
© Corbis Royalty Free

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
103
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
98
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
The sum of all forms of energy of a system is called total
energy, which consists of internal, kinetic, and potential
energy for simple compressible systems. Internal energy rep-
resents the molecular energy of a system and may exist in
sensible, latent, chemical, and nuclear forms.
Mass flow rate m. is defined as the amount of mass flowing
through a cross section per unit time. It is related to the vol-
ume flow rate V., which is the volume of a fluid flowing
through a cross section per unit time, by
The energy flow rate associated with a fluid flowing at a rate
of m. is
which is analogous to E  me.
The mechanical energy is defined as the form of energy
that can be converted to mechanical work completely and
directly by a mechanical device such as an ideal turbine. It is
expressed on a unit mass basis and rate form as
and
where P/r is the flow energy, V 2/2 is the kinetic energy, and
gz is the potential energy of the fluid per unit mass.
Energy can cross the boundaries of a closed system in the
form of heat or work. For control volumes, energy can also
be transported by mass. If the energy transfer is due to a tem-
perature difference between a closed system and its surround-
ings, it is heat; otherwise, it is work.
Work is the energy transferred as a force acts on a system
through a distance. Various forms of work are expressed as
follows:
Electrical work:
Shaft work:
Spring work:
Wspring  1
2 k 1x 2
2  x 2
12
Wsh  2pnT
We  VI ¢t
E
#
mech  m# emech  m# a P
r  V 2
2  gzb
emech  P
r  V 2
2  gz
E
#
 m# e
m#  rV#  rAcVavg
The first law of thermodynamics is essentially an expres-
sion of the conservation of energy principle, also called the
energy balance. The general mass and energy balances for
any system undergoing any process can be expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
It can also be expressed in the rate form as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, 
by heat, work, and mass
kinetic, potential, etc., energies
The efficiencies of various devices are defined as
The conversion of energy from one form to another is often
associated with adverse effects on the environment, and envi-
ronmental impact should be an important consideration in the
conversion and utilization of energy.
hturbine–gen  hturbinehgenerator 
W
#
elect,out
0¢E
#
mech,fluid0
hpumpmotor  hpumphmotor 
¢E
#
mech,fluid
W#
elect,in
hgenerator 
Electric power output
Mechanical power input 
W
#
elect,out
W
#
shaft,in
hmotor  Mechanical power output
Electric power input

W
#
shaft,out
W
#
elect,in
hturbine 
W
#
shaft,out
0¢E
#
mech,fluid0
 W
#
turbine
W
#
turbine,e
hpump 
¢E
#
mech,fluid
W
#
shaft,in

W
#
pump,u
W
#
pump
E.
in  E.
out 
   
   dEsystem>dt
Ein  Eout 
 
   
¢Esystem
SUMMARY
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
1. ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals. SI version.
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993.
2. Y. A. Çengel. “An Intuitive and Unified Approach to
Teaching Thermodynamics.” ASME International
Mechanical Engineering Congress and Exposition,
Atlanta, Georgia, AES-Vol. 36, pp. 251–260, November
17–22, 1996.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
104
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
99
Forms of Energy
3–1C
Consider the falling of a rock off a cliff into seawater,
and eventually settling at the bottom of the sea. Starting with
the potential energy of the rock, identify the energy transfers
and transformations involved during this process.
3–2C
Natural gas, which is mostly methane CH4, is a fuel
and a major energy source. Can we say the same about hydro-
gen gas, H2?
3–3C
What is the difference between the macroscopic and
microscopic forms of energy?
3–4C
What is total energy? Identify the different forms of
energy that constitute the total energy.
3–5C
How are heat, internal energy, and thermal energy
related to each other?
3–6C
What is mechanical energy? How does it differ from
thermal energy? What are the forms of mechanical energy of
a fluid stream?
3–7E
The specific kinetic energy of a moving mass is given
by ke  V 22, where V is the velocity of the mass. Deter-
mine the specific kinetic energy of a mass whose velocity is
100 fts, in Btu/lbm.
Answer: 0.2 Btu/lbm
3–8
Determine the specific kinetic energy of a mass whose
velocity is 30 ms, in kJkg.
3–9E
Calculate the total potential energy, in Btu, of an ob-
ject that is 20 ft below a datum level at a location where g 
31.7 ft/s2 and which has a mass of 100 lbm.
3–10
Determine the specific potential energy, in kJkg, of an
object 50 m above a datum in a location where g  9.8 ms2.
3–11
An object whose mass is 100 kg is located 20 m above
a datum level in a location where standard gravitational ac-
celeration exists. Determine the total potential energy, in kJ,
of this object.
3–12
Consider a river flowing toward a lake at an average
velocity of 3 m/s at a rate of 500 m3s at a location 90 m
above the lake surface. Determine the total mechanical
energy of the river water per unit mass and the power genera-
tion potential of the entire river at that location.
FIGURE P3–12
3–13
Electric power is to be generated by installing a
hydraulic turbine–generator at a site 120 m below the free sur-
face of a large water reservoir that can supply water at a rate of
1500 kgs steadily. Determine the power generation potential.
3–14
At a certain location, wind is blowing steadily at 10 ms.
Determine the mechanical energy of air per unit mass and the
power generation potential of a wind turbine with 60-m-diameter
blades at that location. Take the air density to be 1.25 kgm3.
3–15
A water jet that leaves a nozzle at 60 m/s at a flow
rate of 120 kg/s is to be used to generate power by striking
the buckets located on the perimeter of a wheel. Determine
the power generation potential of this water jet.
3–16
Two sites are being considered for wind power gener-
ation. In the first site, the wind blows steadily at 7 ms for
3000 hours per year, whereas in the second site the wind
blows at 10 ms for 2000 hours per year. Assuming the wind
velocity is negligible at other times for simplicity, determine
which is a better site for wind power generation. Hint: Note
that the mass flow rate of air is proportional to wind velocity.
3–17
A river flowing steadily at a rate of 240 m3s is con-
sidered for hydroelectric power generation. It is determined
that a dam can be built to collect water and release it from an
elevation difference of 50 m to generate power. Determine
how much power can be generated from this river water after
the dam is filled.
3–18
A person gets into an elevator at the lobby level of a
hotel together with his 30-kg suitcase, and gets out at the
10th floor 35 m above. Determine the amount of energy con-
sumed by the motor of the elevator that is now stored in the
suitcase.
Energy Transfer by Heat and Work
3–19C
In what forms can energy cross the boundaries of a
closed system?
3–20C
When is the energy crossing the boundaries of a
closed system heat and when is it work?
3–21C
What is an adiabatic process? What is an adiabatic
system?
3–22C
What are point and path functions? Give some
examples.
River
3 m/s
90 m
PROBLEMS*
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems with
the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete solutions together
with parametric studies are included on the enclosed DVD. Problems
with the 
icon are comprehensive in nature, and are intended to be
solved with a computer, preferably using the EES software that
accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
105
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
100
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
3–23C
What is the caloric theory? When and why was it
abandoned?
3–24C
Consider an automobile traveling at a constant speed
along a road. Determine the direction of the heat and work
interactions, taking the following as the system: (a) the car
radiator, (b) the car engine, (c) the car wheels, (d) the road,
and (e) the air surrounding the car.
3–25C
The length of a spring can be changed by (a) apply-
ing a force to it or (b) changing its temperature (i.e., thermal
expansion). What type of energy interaction between the sys-
tem (spring) and surroundings is required to change the length
of the spring in these two ways?
3–26C
Consider an electric refrigerator located in a room.
Determine the direction of the work and heat interactions (in
or out) when the following are taken as the system: (a) the
contents of the refrigerator, (b) all parts of the refrigerator in-
cluding the contents, and (c) everything contained within the
room during a winter day.
FIGURE P3–26C
© PhotoDisc/Punchstock
3–27C
A personal computer is to be examined from a ther-
modynamic perspective. Determine the direction of the work
and heat transfers (in or out) when the (a) keyboard, (b) mon-
itor, (c) processing unit, and (d) all of these are taken as the
system.
3–28
A small electrical motor produces 10 W of mechanical
power. What is this power in (a) N, m, and s units; and (b) kg,
m, and s units?
Answers: (a) 10 N · m/s, (b) 10 kg · m2/s3
3–29E
A model aircraft internal-combustion engine pro-
duces 10 W of power. How much power is this in (a) lbf · ft/s
and (b) hp?
Mechanical Forms of Work
3–30C
A car is accelerated from rest to 85 km/h in 10 s.
Would the energy transferred to the car be different if it were
accelerated to the same speed in 5 s?
3–31
Determine the energy required to accelerate an 800-kg
car from rest to 100 km/h on a level road.
Answer: 309 kJ
3–32E
A construction crane lifts a prestressed concrete
beam weighing 2 tons from the ground to the top of piers that
are 18 ft above the ground. Determine the amount of work
done considering (a) the beam and (b) the crane as the sys-
tem. Express your answers in both lbf · ft and Btu.
3–33
A man whose mass is 100 kg pushes a cart whose
mass, including its contents, is 100 kg up a ramp that is
inclined at an angle of 20° from the horizontal. The local
gravitational acceleration is 9.8 m/s2. Determine the work, in
kJ, needed to move along this ramp a distance of 100 m con-
sidering (a) the man and (b) the cart and its contents as the
system.
FIGURE P3–33
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc./Lars A. Niki, photographer
3–34E
The force F required to compress a spring a distance
x is given by F  F0  kx where k is the spring constant and
F0 is the preload. Determine the work required to compress a
spring whose spring constant is k  200 lbf/in a distance 
of one inch starting from its free length where F0  0 lbf.
Express your answer in both lbf · ft and Btu.
FIGURE P3–34E
3–35
As a spherical ammonia vapor bubble rises in liquid
ammonia, its diameter changes from 1 cm to 3 cm. Calculate
the amount of work produced by this bubble, in kJ, if the 
surface-tension of ammonia is 0.02 N/m.
Answer: 5.03 
108 kJ
3–36
A steel rod of 0.5 cm diameter and 10 m length is
stretched 3 cm. Young’s modulus for this steel is 21 kN/cm2.
How much work, in kJ, is required to stretch this rod?
3–37E
A spring whose spring constant is 200 lbf/in has an
initial force of 100 lbf acting on it. Determine the work, in
Btu, required to compress it another 1 inch.
x
F

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
106
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
101
with less resistance, and highway tests at 65 mph showed 
that tires with the lowest rolling resistance can improve the
fuel efficiency by nearly 2 mpg (miles per gallon). Consider 
a car that gets 25 mpg on high rolling resistance tires and is
driven 15,000 miles per year. For a fuel cost of $2.20/gal, de-
termine how much money will be saved per year by switch-
ing to low rolling resistance tires.
3–46
An adiabatic closed system is accelerated from 0 m/s
to 30 m/s. Determine the specific energy change of this sys-
tem, in kJ/kg.
3–47
An adiabatic closed system is raised 100 m at a loca-
tion where the gravitational acceleration is 9.8 m/s2. Deter-
mine the energy change of this system, in kJ/kg.
3–48E
A water pump increases the water pressure from 10
psia to 50 psia. Determine the power input required, in hp, to
pump 1.2 ft3/s of water. Does the water temperature at the
inlet have any significant effect on the required flow power?
Answer: 12.6 hp
3–49
An automobile moving through the air causes the air
velocity (measured with respect to the car) to decrease and fill
a larger flow channel. An automobile has an effective flow
channel area of 3 m2. The car is traveling at 90 km/h on a day
when the barometric pressure is 75 cm of mercury and the
temperature is 30°C. Behind the car, the air velocity (with re-
spect to the car) is measured to be 82 km/h, and the tempera-
ture is 30°C. Determine the power required to move this car
through the air and the area of the effective flow channel
behind the car.
FIGURE P3–49
3–50
A classroom that normally contains 40 people is to be
air-conditioned with window air-conditioning units of 5-kW
cooling capacity. A person at rest may be assumed to dissi-
pate heat at a rate of about 360 kJ/h. There are 10 lightbulbs
in the room, each with a rating of 100 W. The rate of heat
transfer to the classroom through the walls and the windows
is estimated to be 15,000 kJ/h. If the room air is to be main-
tained at a constant temperature of 21°C, determine the num-
ber of window air-conditioning units required.
Answer: 2 units
3–51
The lighting needs of a storage room are being met by
6 fluorescent light fixtures, each fixture containing four lamps
rated at 60 W each. All the lamps are on during operating
Flow
channel
3–38
How much work, in kJ, can a spring whose spring con-
stant is 3 kN/cm produce after it has been compressed 3 cm
from its unloaded length?
3–39
A ski lift has a one-way length of 1 km and a vertical
rise of 200 m. The chairs are spaced 20 m apart, and each
chair can seat three people. The lift is operating at a steady
speed of 10 km/h. Neglecting friction and air drag and assum-
ing that the average mass of each loaded chair is 250 kg,
determine the power required to operate this ski lift. Also esti-
mate the power required to accelerate this ski lift in 5 s to its
operating speed when it is first turned on.
3–40
Determine the power required for a 2000-kg car to
climb a 100-m-long uphill road with a slope of 30° (from
horizontal) in 10 s (a) at a constant velocity, (b) from rest to
a final velocity of 30 m/s, and (c) from 35 m/s to a final
velocity of 5 m/s. Disregard friction, air drag, and rolling
resistance.
Answers: (a) 98.1 kW, (b) 188 kW, (c) 21.9 kW
FIGURE P3–40
3–41
A damaged 1200-kg car is being towed by a truck.
Neglecting the friction, air drag, and rolling resistance, deter-
mine the extra power required (a) for constant velocity on a
level road, (b) for constant velocity of 50 km/h on a 30°
(from horizontal) uphill road, and (c) to accelerate on a level
road from stop to 90 km/h in 12 s.
Answers: (a) 0, (b) 81.7
kW, (c) 31.3 kW
The First Law of Thermodynamics
3–42C
For a cycle, is the net work necessarily zero? For
what kind of systems will this be the case?
3–43C
On a hot summer day, a student turns his fan on
when he leaves his room in the morning. When he returns in
the evening, will the room be warmer or cooler than the
neighboring rooms? Why? Assume all the doors and win-
dows are kept closed.
3–44C
What are the different mechanisms for transferring
energy to or from a control volume?
3–45E
One way to improve the fuel efficiency of a car is to
use tires that have a lower rolling resistance—tires that roll
2000 kg
100 m
30°

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
107
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
102
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
hours of the facility, which are 6 AM to 6 PM 365 days a year.
The storage room is actually used for an average of 3 h a day.
If the price of electricity is $0.08/kWh, determine the amount
of energy and money that will be saved as a result of installing
motion sensors. Also, determine the simple payback period if
the purchase price of the sensor is $32 and it takes 1 hour to
install it at a cost of $40.
3–52
A university campus has 200 classrooms and 400 fac-
ulty offices. The classrooms are equipped with 12 fluorescent
tubes, each consuming 110 W, including the electricity used
by the ballasts. The faculty offices, on average, have half as
many tubes. The campus is open 240 days a year. The class-
rooms and faculty offices are not occupied an average of 4 h
a day, but the lights are kept on. If the unit cost of electricity
is $0.082/kWh, determine how much the campus will save a
year if the lights in the classrooms and faculty offices are
turned off during unoccupied periods.
3–53
Consider a room that is initially at the outdoor tem-
perature of 20°C. The room contains a 100-W lightbulb, a
110-W TV set, a 200-W refrigerator, and a 1000-W iron.
Assuming no heat transfer through the walls, determine the
rate of increase of the energy content of the room when all of
these electric devices are on.
3–54
A fan is to accelerate quiescent air to a velocity of 
10 m/s at a rate of 4 m3/s. Determine the minimum power
that must be supplied to the fan. Take the density of air to be
1.18 kg/m3.
Answer: 236 W
3–55E
Consider a fan located in a 3 ft 
 3 ft square duct.
Velocities at various points at the outlet are measured, and
the average flow velocity is determined to be 22 ft/s. Taking
the air density to 0.075 lbm/ft3, estimate the minimum elec-
tric power consumption of the fan motor.
3–56
The driving force for fluid flow is the pressure
difference, and a pump operates by raising the
pressure of a fluid (by converting the mechanical shaft work
to flow energy). A gasoline pump is measured to consume
5.2 kW of electric power when operating. If the pressure dif-
ferential between the outlet and inlet of the pump is mea-
sured to be 5 kPa and the changes in velocity and elevation
are negligible, determine the maximum possible volume flow
rate of gasoline.
FIGURE P3–56
3–57
An escalator in a shopping center is designed to move
30 people, 75 kg each, at a constant speed of 0.8 m/s at 45°
ΔP = 5 kPa
Pump
slope. Determine the minimum power input needed to drive
this escalator. What would your answer be if the escalator
velocity were to be doubled?
Energy Conversion Efficiencies
3–58C
What is mechanical efficiency? What does a
mechanical efficiency of 100 percent mean for a hydraulic
turbine?
3–59C
How is the combined pump–motor efficiency of a
pump and motor system defined? Can the combined pump–
motor efficiency be greater than either the pump or the motor
efficiency?
3–60C
Define turbine efficiency, generator efficiency, and
combined turbine–generator efficiency.
3–61C
Can the combined turbine-generator efficiency be
greater than either the turbine efficiency or the generator effi-
ciency? Explain.
3–62
Consider a 3-kW hooded electric open burner in an
area where the unit costs of electricity and natural gas are
$0.07/kWh and $1.20/therm (1 therm  105,500 kJ), respec-
tively. The efficiency of open burners can be taken to be 
73 percent for electric burners and 38 percent for gas burners.
Determine the rate of energy consumption and the unit cost
of utilized energy for both electric and gas burners.
3–63
A 75-hp (shaft output) motor that has an efficiency of
91.0 percent is worn out and is replaced by a high-efficiency
75-hp motor that has an efficiency of 95.4 percent. Determine
the reduction in the heat gain of the room due to higher effi-
ciency under full-load conditions.
3–64
A 90-hp (shaft output) electric car is powered by an
electric motor mounted in the engine compartment. If the
motor has an average efficiency of 91 percent, determine the
rate of heat supply by the motor to the engine compartment
at full load.
3–65
A 75-hp (shaft output) motor that has an efficiency
of 91.0 percent is worn out and is to be replaced by a high-
efficiency motor that has an efficiency of 95.4 percent. The
motor operates 4368 hours a year at a load factor of 0.75.
Taking the cost of electricity to be $0.08/kWh, determine the
amount of energy and money saved as a result of installing
the high-efficiency motor instead of the standard motor. Also,
determine the simple payback period if the purchase prices of
the standard and high-efficiency motors are $5449 and
$5520, respectively.
3–66E
The steam requirements of a manufacturing facility
are being met by a boiler whose rated heat input is 3.6 
 106
Btu/h. The combustion efficiency of the boiler is measured to
be 0.7 by a hand-held flue gas analyzer. After tuning up the
boiler, the combustion efficiency rises to 0.8. The boiler oper-
ates 1500 hours a year intermittently. Taking the unit cost of
energy to be $4.35/106 Btu, determine the annual energy and
cost savings as a result of tuning up the boiler.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
108
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
103
and the diameter vary from 20 to 80 m in increments of 
20 m. Tabulate the results, and discuss their significance.
3–74
A wind turbine is rotating at 15 rpm under steady
winds flowing through the turbine at a rate of 42,000 kg/s.
The tip velocity of the turbine blade is measured to be 250
km/h. If 180 kW power is produced by the turbine, determine
(a) the average velocity of the air and (b) the conversion 
efficiency of the turbine. Take the density of air to be 
1.31 kg/m3.
3–75
Water is pumped from a lake to a storage tank 20 m
above at a rate of 70 L/s while consuming 20.4 kW of elec-
tric power. Disregarding any frictional losses in the pipes and
any changes in kinetic energy, determine (a) the overall effi-
ciency of the pump–motor unit and (b) the pressure differ-
ence between the inlet and the exit of the pump.
FIGURE P3–75
3–76
Large wind turbines with blade span diameters of
over 100 m are available for electric power generation. Con-
sider a wind turbine with a blade span diameter of 100 m
installed at a site subjected to steady winds at 8 m/s. Taking
the overall efficiency of the wind turbine to be 32 percent and
the air density to be 1.25 kg/m3, determine the electric power
generated by this wind turbine. Also, assuming steady winds
of 8 m/s during a 24-hour period, determine the amount of
electric energy and the revenue generated per day for a unit
price of $0.06/kWh for electricity.
3–77E
A water pump delivers 3 hp of shaft power when
operating. If the pressure differential between the outlet and
the inlet of the pump is measured to be 1.2 psi when the flow
rate is 8 ft3/s and the changes in velocity and elevation are
negligible, determine the mechanical efficiency of this pump.
3–78
Water is pumped from a lower reservoir to a higher
reservoir by a pump that provides 20 kW of shaft power. The
free surface of the upper reservoir is 45 m higher than that of
the lower reservoir. If the flow rate of water is measured to
be 0.03 m3/s, determine mechanical power that is converted
to thermal energy during this process due to frictional effects.
Pump
Storage tank
20 m
3–67E
Reconsider Prob. 3–66E. Using EES (or other)
software, study the effects of the unit cost of
energy and combustion efficiency on the annual energy used
and the cost savings. Let the efficiency vary from 0.6 to 0.9,
and the unit cost to vary from $4 to $6 per million Btu. Plot
the annual energy used and the cost savings against the effi-
ciency for unit costs of $4, $5, and $6 per million Btu, and
discuss the results.
3–68
An exercise room has eight weight-lifting machines
that have no motors and four treadmills each equipped with a
2.5-hp (shaft output) motor. The motors operate at an average
load factor of 0.7, at which their efficiency is 0.77. During
peak evening hours, all 12 pieces of exercising equipment are
used continuously, and there are also two people doing light
exercises while waiting in line for one piece of the equip-
ment. Assuming the average rate of heat dissipation from
people in an exercise room is 525 W, determine the rate of
heat gain of the exercise room from people and the equip-
ment at peak load conditions.
3–69
Consider a classroom for 55 students and one instruc-
tor, each generating heat at a rate of 100 W. Lighting is pro-
vided by 18 fluorescent lightbulbs, 40 W each, and the
ballasts consume an additional 10 percent. Determine the rate
of internal heat generation in this classroom when it is fully
occupied.
3–70
A room is cooled by circulating chilled water through
a heat exchanger located in a room. The air is circulated
through the heat exchanger by a 0.25-hp (shaft output) fan.
Typical efficiency of small electric motors driving 0.25-hp
equipment is 54 percent. Determine the rate of heat supply by
the fan–motor assembly to the room.
3–71
Electric power is to be generated by installing a
hydraulic turbine–generator at a site 70 m below the free sur-
face of a large water reservoir that can supply water at a rate
of 1500 kg/s steadily. If the mechanical power output of the
turbine is 800 kW and the electric power generation is 750
kW, determine the turbine efficiency and the combined tur-
bine–generator efficiency of this plant. Neglect losses in the
pipes.
3–72
At a certain location, wind is blowing steadily at 12
m/s. Determine the mechanical energy of air per unit mass
and the power generation potential of a wind turbine with 
50-m-diameter blades at that location. Also determine the
actual electric power generation assuming an overall effi-
ciency of 30 percent. Take the air density to be 1.25 kg/m3.
3–73
Reconsider Prob. 3–72. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of wind velocity
and the blade span diameter on wind power generation. Let
the velocity vary from 5 to 20 m/s in increments of 5 m/s,

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
109
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
104
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P3–78
3–79
The water behind Hoover Dam in Nevada is 206 m
higher than the Colorado River below it. At what rate must wa-
ter pass through the hydraulic turbines of this dam to produce
100 MW of power if the turbines are 100 percent efficient?
FIGURE P3–79
Photo by Lynn Betts, USDA Natural Resources Conservation Service
3–80
An oil pump is drawing 35 kW of electric power
while pumping oil with r  860 kg/m3 at a rate of 0.1 m3/s.
The inlet and outlet diameters of the pipe are 8 cm and 12 cm,
respectively. If the pressure rise of oil in the pump is mea-
sured to be 400 kPa and the motor efficiency is 90 percent,
determine the mechanical efficiency of the pump.
FIGURE P3–80
12 cm
Pump
ΔP = 400 kPa
Motor
35 kW
8 cm
0.1 m3/s
Oil
1
2
45 m
z1 = 0
0.03 m3/s
20 kW
Pump
Control surface
3–81E
A 73-percent efficient pump with a power input of
12 hp is pumping water from a lake to a nearby pool at a rate
of 1.2 ft3/s through a constant-diameter pipe. The free surface
of the pool is 35 ft above that of the lake. Determine the
mechanical power used to overcome frictional effects in
piping.
Answer: 4.0 hp
Energy and Environment
3–82C
How does energy conversion affect the environ-
ment? What are the primary chemicals that pollute the air?
What is the primary source of these pollutants?
3–83C
What is smog? What does it consist of? How does
ground-level ozone form? What are the adverse effects of
ozone on human health?
3–84C
What is acid rain? Why is it called a “rain”? How
do the acids form in the atmosphere? What are the adverse
effects of acid rain on the environment?
3–85C
What is the greenhouse effect? How does the excess
CO2 gas in the atmosphere cause the greenhouse effect?
What are the potential long-term consequences of greenhouse
effect? How can we combat this problem?
3–86C
Why is carbon monoxide a dangerous air pollutant?
How does it affect human health at low and at high levels?
3–87E
A Ford Taurus driven 15,000 miles a year will use
about 715 gallons of gasoline compared to a Ford Explorer
that would use 940 gallons. About 19.7 lbm of CO2, which
causes global warming, is released to the atmosphere when a
gallon of gasoline is burned. Determine the extra amount of
CO2 production a man is responsible for during a 5-year
period if he trades his Taurus for an Explorer.
3–88
When a hydrocarbon fuel is burned, almost all of the
carbon in the fuel burns completely to form CO2 (carbon
dioxide), which is the principal gas causing the greenhouse
effect and thus global climate change. On average, 0.59 kg of
CO2 is produced for each kWh of electricity generated from a
power plant that burns natural gas. A typical new household
refrigerator uses about 700 kWh of electricity per year.
Determine the amount of CO2 production that is due to the
refrigerators in a city with 200,000 households.
3–89
Repeat Prob. 3–88 assuming the electricity is pro-
duced by a power plant that burns coal. The average produc-
tion of CO2 in this case is 1.1 kg per kWh.
3–90E
Consider a household that uses 11,000 kWh of elec-
tricity per year and 1500 gallons of fuel oil during a heating
season. The average amount of CO2 produced is 26.4 lbm/
gallon of fuel oil and 1.54 lbm/kWh of electricity. If this
household reduces its oil and electricity usage by 15 percent
as a result of implementing some energy conservation mea-
sures, determine the reduction in the amount of CO2 emis-
sions by that household per year.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
110
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
105
3–91
A typical car driven 20,000 km a year emits to the
atmosphere about 11 kg per year of NOx (nitrogen oxides),
which cause smog in major population areas. Natural gas
burned in the furnace emits about 4.3 g of NOx per therm
(1 therm  105,500 kJ), and the electric power plants emit
about 7.1 g of NOx per kWh of electricity produced. Consider a
household that has two cars and consumes 9000 kWh of elec-
tricity and 1200 therms of natural gas. Determine the amount
of NOx emission to the atmosphere per year for which this
household is responsible.
FIGURE P3–91
Review Problems
3–92
Consider a homeowner who is replacing his 25-year-
old natural gas furnace that has an efficiency of 55 percent.
The homeowner is considering a conventional furnace that
has an efficiency of 82 percent and costs $1600 and a high-
efficiency furnace that has an efficiency of 95 percent and
costs $2700. The homeowner would like to buy the high-
efficiency furnace if the savings from the natural gas pay for
the additional cost in less than 8 years. If the homeowner
presently pays $1200 a year for heating, determine if he
should buy the conventional or high-efficiency model.
3–93
Wind energy has been used since 4000 BC to power sail-
boats, grind grain, pump water for farms, and, more recently,
generate electricity. In the United States alone, more than
6 million small windmills, most of them under 5 hp, have
been used since the 1850s to pump water. Small windmills
have been used to generate electricity since 1900, but the
development of modern wind turbines occurred only recently
in response to the energy crises in the early 1970s. The cost
of wind power has dropped an order of magnitude from about
$0.50/kWh in the early 1980s to about $0.05/kWh in
the mid-1990s, which is about the price of electricity gener-
ated at coal-fired power plants. Areas with an average wind
speed of 6 m/s (or 14 mph) are potential sites for economical
wind power generation. Commercial wind turbines generate
from 100 kW to 3.2 MW of electric power each at peak
design conditions. The blade span (or rotor) diameter of the
3.2 MW wind turbine built by Boeing Engineering is 320 ft
(97.5 m). The rotation speed of rotors of wind turbines is
usually under 40 rpm (under 20 rpm for large turbines). Alta-
mont Pass in California is the world’s largest wind farm with
15,000 modern wind turbines. This farm and two others in
11 kg NOx
per year
California produced 2.8 billion kWh of electricity in 1991,
which is enough power to meet the electricity needs of San
Francisco.
In 2003, 8133 MW of new wind energy generating
capacity were installed worldwide, bringing the world’s total
wind energy capacity to 39,294 MW. The United States, Ger-
many, Denmark, and Spain account for over 75 percent of cur-
rent wind energy generating capacity worldwide. Denmark uses
wind turbines to supply 10 percent of its national electricity.
Many wind turbines currently in operation have just
two blades. This is because at tip speeds of 100 to 200 mph,
the efficiency of the two-bladed turbine approaches the theo-
retical maximum, and the increase in the efficiency by adding
a third or fourth blade is so little that they do not justify the
added cost and weight.
Consider a wind turbine with an 80-m-diameter rotor
that is rotating at 20 rpm under steady winds at an average
velocity of 30 km/h. Assuming the turbine has an efficiency
of 35 percent (i.e., it converts 35 percent of the kinetic energy
of the wind to electricity), determine (a) the power produced,
in kW; (b) the tip speed of the blade, in km/h; and (c) the
revenue generated by the wind turbine per year if the electric
power produced is sold to the utility at $0.06/kWh. Take the
density of air to be 1.20 kg/m3.
FIGURE P3–93
© Vol. 57/PhotoDisc
3–94
Repeat Prob. 3–93 for an average wind velocity of 
25 kmh.
3–95E
The energy contents, unit costs, and typical conver-
sion efficiencies of various energy sources for use in water
heaters are given as follows: 1025 Btuft3, $0.012ft3, and 
55 percent for natural gas; 138,700 Btugal, $1.15gal, and
55 percent for heating oil; and 1 kWhkWh, $0.084kWh,
and 90 percent for electric heaters, respectively. Determine
the lowest-cost energy source for water heaters.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
111
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
106
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
3–102E
Water is pumped from a 200-ft-deep well into a
100-ft-high storage tank. Determine the power, in kW, that
would be required to pump 200 gallons per minute.
3–103
A grist mill of the 1800s employed a water wheel
that was 10 m high; 400 liters per minute of water flowed on
to the wheel near the top. How much power, in kW, could
this water wheel have produced?
Answer: 0.654 kW
3–104
Windmills slow the air and cause it to fill a larger
channel as it passes through the blades. Consider a circular
windmill with a 7-m-diameter rotor in a 10 m/s wind on a day
when the atmospheric pressure is 100 kPa and the tempera-
ture is 20°C. The wind speed behind the windmill is mea-
sured at 9 m/s. Determine the diameter of the wind channel
downstream from the rotor and the power produced by this
windmill, presuming that the air is incompressible.
FIGURE P3–104
3–105
In a hydroelectric power plant, 100 m3s of water flows
from an elevation of 120 m to a turbine, where electric power is
generated. The overall efficiency of the turbine–generator is 80
percent. Disregarding frictional losses in piping, estimate the
electric power output of this plant.
Answer: 94.2 MW
FIGURE P3–105
100 m3/s
2
1
120 m
Generator
Turbine
• turbine–gen = 80%
Flow channel
W
3–96
A homeowner is considering these heating systems for
heating his house: Electric resistance heating with $0.09/kWh
and 1 kWh  3600 kJ, gas heating with $1.24/therm and 
1 therm  105,500 kJ, and oil heating with $1.25/gal and 1 gal
of oil  138,500 kJ. Assuming efficiencies of 100 percent for
the electric furnace and 87 percent for the gas and oil furnaces,
determine the heating system with the lowest energy cost.
3–97
A typical household pays about $1200 a year on
energy bills, and the U.S. Department of Energy estimates
that 46 percent of this energy is used for heating and cooling,
15 percent for heating water, 15 percent for refrigerating and
freezing, and the remaining 24 percent for lighting, cooking,
and running other appliances. The heating and cooling costs
of a poorly insulated house can be reduced by up to 30 per-
cent by adding adequate insulation. If the cost of insulation is
$200, determine how long it will take for the insulation to
pay for itself from the energy it saves.
3–98
The U.S. Department of Energy estimates that up to 
10 percent of the energy use of a house can be saved by caulk-
ing and weatherstripping doors and windows to reduce air leaks
at a cost of about $50 for materials for an average home with
12 windows and 2 doors. Caulking and weatherstripping every
gas-heated home properly would save enough energy to heat
about 4 million homes. The savings can be increased by
installing storm windows. Determine how long it will take for
the caulking and weatherstripping to pay for itself from the
energy they save for a house whose annual energy use is 
$1100.
3–99
The force F required to compress a spring a distance
x is given by F  F0  kx where k is the spring constant and
F0 is the preload. Determine the work, in kJ, required to com-
press a spring a distance of 1 cm when its spring constant is
300 N/cm and the spring is initially compressed by a force of
100 N.
3–100
The force required to expand the gas in a gas spring
a distance x is given by
where the constant is determined by the geometry of this de-
vice and k is determined by the gas used in the device. Such
a gas spring is arranged to have a constant of 1000 N · m1.3
and k  1.3. Determine the work, in kJ, required to compress
this spring from 0.1 m to 0.3 m. Answer: 1.87 kJ
3–101E
A man weighing 180 lbf pushes a block weighing
100 lbf along a horizontal plane. The dynamic coefficient of
friction between the block and plane is 0.2. Assuming that the
block is moving at constant speed, calculate the work required
to move the block a distance of 100 ft considering (a) the
man and (b) the block as the system. Express your answers in
both lbf · ft and Btu.
F  Constant
x k

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
112
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 3
|
107
3–108
Leaded gasoline contains lead that ends up in the
engine exhaust. Lead is a very toxic engine emission. The use
of leaded gasoline in the United States has been unlawful for
most vehicles since the 1980s. However, leaded gasoline is
still used in some parts of the world. Consider a city with
10,000 cars using leaded gasoline. The gasoline contains 
0.15 gL of lead and 35 percent of lead is exhausted to the
environment. Assuming that an average car travels 15,000 km
per year with a gasoline consumption of 10 L100 km, deter-
mine the amount of lead put into the atmosphere per year in
that city.
Answer: 788 kg
Design and Essay Problems
3–109
An average vehicle puts out nearly 20 lbm of carbon
dioxide into the atmosphere for every gallon of gasoline it
burns, and thus one thing we can do to reduce global warm-
ing is to buy a vehicle with higher fuel economy. A U.S. gov-
ernment publication states that a vehicle that gets 25 rather
than 20 miles per gallon will prevent 10 tons of carbon diox-
ide from being released over the lifetime of the vehicle. Mak-
ing reasonable assumptions, evaluate if this is a reasonable
claim or a gross exaggeration.
3–110
Solar energy reaching the earth is about 1350 W/m2
outside the earth’s atmosphere, and 950 W/m2 on earth’s sur-
face normal to the sun on a clear day. Someone is marketing
2 m 
 3 m photovoltaic cell panels with the claim that a sin-
gle panel can meet the electricity needs of a house. How do
you evaluate this claim? Photovoltaic cells have a conversion
efficiency of about 15 percent.
3–111
Find out the prices of heating oil, natural gas, and
electricity in your area, and determine the cost of each per
kWh of energy supplied to the house as heat. Go through
your utility bills and determine how much money you spent
for heating last January. Also determine how much your Jan-
uary heating bill would be for each of the heating systems if
you had the latest and most efficient system installed.
3–112
Prepare a report on the heating systems available in
your area for residential buildings. Discuss the advantages
and disadvantages of each system and compare their initial
and operating costs. What are the important factors in the
selection of a heating system? Give some guidelines. Identify
the conditions under which each heating system would be the
best choice in your area.
3–113
The performance of a device is defined as the ratio
of the desired output to the required input, and this definition
can be extended to nontechnical fields. For example, your
performance in this course can be viewed as the grade you
earn relative to the effort you put in. If you have been invest-
ing a lot of time in this course and your grades do not reflect
it, you are performing poorly. In that case, perhaps you
should try to find out the underlying cause and how to correct
the problem. Give three other definitions of performance
from nontechnical fields and discuss them.
3–106
The demand for electric power is usually much
higher during the day than it is at night, and utility companies
often sell power at night at much lower prices to encourage
consumers to use the available power generation capacity and
to avoid building new expensive power plants that will be
used only a short time during peak periods. Utilities are also
willing to purchase power produced during the day from pri-
vate parties at a high price.
Suppose a utility company is selling electric power for
$0.03kWh at night and is willing to pay $0.08kWh for
power produced during the day. To take advantage of this
opportunity, an entrepreneur is considering building a large
reservoir 40 m above the lake level, pumping water from the
lake to the reservoir at night using cheap power, and letting
the water flow from the reservoir back to the lake during the
day, producing power as the pump–motor operates as a 
turbine–generator during reverse flow. Preliminary analysis
shows that a water flow rate of 2 m3/s can be used in either
direction. The combined pump–motor and turbine–generator
efficiencies are expected to be 75 percent each. Disregarding
the frictional losses in piping and assuming the system oper-
ates for 10 h each in the pump and turbine modes during a
typical day, determine the potential revenue this pump–turbine
system can generate per year.
FIGURE P3–106
3–107
A diesel engine with an engine volume of 4.0 L and
an engine speed of 2500 rpm operates on an air–fuel ratio of
18 kg air/kg fuel. The engine uses light diesel fuel that con-
tains 750 ppm (parts per million) of sulfur by mass. All of
this sulfur is exhausted to the environment where the sulfur is
converted to sulfurous acid (H2SO3). If the rate of the air
entering the engine is 336 kg/h, determine the mass flow rate
of sulfur in the exhaust. Also, determine the mass flow rate of
sulfurous acid added to the environment if for each kmol of
sulfur in the exhaust, one kmol sulfurous acid will be added
to the environment.
40 m
Pump–
turbine
Reservoir
Lake

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
3. Energy, Energy Transfer, 
and General Energy 
Analysis
113
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
108
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
3–114
Some engineers have suggested that air compressed
into tanks can be used to propel personal transportation vehi-
cles. Current compressed-air tank technology permits us to
compress and safely hold air at up to 4000 psia. Tanks made
of composite materials require about 10 lbm of construction
materials for each 1 ft3 of stored gas. Approximately 0.01 hp
is required per pound of vehicle weight to move a vehicle at
a speed of 30 miles per hour. What is the maximum range
that this vehicle can have? Account for the weight of the
tanks only and assume perfect conversion of the energy in the
compressed air.
3–115
Pressure changes across atmospheric weather fronts
are typically a few centimeters of mercury, while the temper-
ature changes are typically 2-20°C. Develop a plot of front
pressure change versus front temperature change that will
cause a maximum wind velocity of 10 m/s or more.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
114
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
PROPERTIES OF PURE SUBSTANCES
|
109
W
e start this chapter with the introduction of the con-
cept of a pure substance and a discussion of the
physics of phase-change processes. We then illus-
trate the various property diagrams and P-v-T surfaces of
pure substances. After demonstrating the use of the property
tables, the hypothetical substance ideal gas and the ideal-gas
equation of state are discussed. The compressibility factor,
which accounts for the deviation of real gases from ideal-gas
behavior, is introduced, and some of the best-known equa-
tions of state such as the van der Waals, Beattie-Bridgeman,
and Benedict-Webb-Rubin equations are presented.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Introduce the concept of a pure substance.
• Discuss the physics of phase-change processes.
• Illustrate the P-v, T-v, and P-T property diagrams and P-v-T
surfaces of pure substances.
• Demonstrate the procedures for determining
thermodynamic properties of pure substances from tables
of property data.
• Describe the hypothetical substance “ideal gas” and the
ideal-gas equation of state.
• Apply the ideal-gas equation of state in the solution of
typical problems.
• Introduce the compressibility factor, which accounts for the
deviation of real gases from ideal-gas behavior.
• Present some of the most widely used equations of state.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
115
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
4–1
■PURE SUBSTANCE
A substance that has a fixed chemical composition throughout is called a
pure substance. Water, nitrogen, helium, and carbon dioxide, for example,
are all pure substances.
A pure substance does not have to be of a single chemical element or
compound, however. A mixture of various chemical elements or compounds
also qualifies as a pure substance as long as the mixture is homogeneous.
Air, for example, is a mixture of several gases, but it is often considered to
be a pure substance because it has a uniform chemical composition
(Fig. 4–1). However, a mixture of oil and water is not a pure substance.
Since oil is not soluble in water, it collects on top of the water, forming two
chemically dissimilar regions.
A mixture of two or more phases of a pure substance is still a pure sub-
stance as long as the chemical composition of all phases is the same
(Fig. 4–2). A mixture of ice and liquid water, for example, is a pure sub-
stance because both phases have the same chemical composition. A mixture
of liquid air and gaseous air, however, is not a pure substance since the
composition of liquid air is different from the composition of gaseous air,
and thus the mixture is no longer chemically homogeneous. This is due
to different components in air condensing at different temperatures at a
specified pressure.
4–2
■PHASES OF A PURE SUBSTANCE
We all know from experience that substances exist in different phases. At
room temperature and pressure, copper is a solid, mercury is a liquid, and
nitrogen is a gas. Under different conditions, each may appear in a different
phase. Even though there are three principal phases—solid, liquid, and
gas—a substance may have several phases within a principal phase, each
with a different molecular structure. Carbon, for example, may exist as
graphite or diamond in the solid phase. Helium has two liquid phases; iron
has three solid phases. Ice may exist at seven different phases at high pres-
sures. A phase is identified as having a distinct molecular arrangement that
is homogeneous throughout and separated from the others by easily identifi-
able boundary surfaces. The two phases of H2O in iced water (solid and liq-
uid) represent a good example of this.
When studying phases or phase changes in thermodynamics, one does not
need to be concerned with the molecular structure and behavior of different
phases. However, it is very helpful to have some understanding of the mo-
lecular phenomena involved in each phase, and a brief discussion of phase
transformations follows.
Intermolecular bonds are strongest in solids and weakest in gases. One
reason is that molecules in solids are closely packed together, whereas in
gases they are separated by relatively large distances.
The molecules in a solid are arranged in a three-dimensional pattern (lat-
tice) that is repeated throughout (Fig. 4–3). Because of the small distances
between molecules in a solid, the attractive forces of molecules on each
other are large and keep the molecules at fixed positions (Fig. 4–4). Note
that the attractive forces between molecules turn to repulsive forces as the
110
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
N2
AIR
FIGURE 4–1
Nitrogen and gaseous air are pure
substances.
VAPOR
LIQUID
LIQUID
(a) H2O
(b) AIR
VAPOR
FIGURE 4–2
A mixture of liquid and gaseous water
is a pure substance, but a mixture of
liquid and gaseous air is not.
FIGURE 4–3
The molecules in a solid are kept at
their positions by the large springlike
intermolecular forces.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
116
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
distance between the molecules approaches zero, thus preventing the mole-
cules from piling up on top of each other. Even though the molecules in a
solid cannot move relative to each other, they continually oscillate about
their equilibrium positions. The velocity of the molecules during these oscil-
lations depends on the temperature. At sufficiently high temperatures, the
velocity (and thus the momentum) of the molecules may reach a point
where the intermolecular forces are partially overcome and groups of mole-
cules break away (Fig. 4–5). This is the beginning of the melting process.
The molecular spacing in the liquid phase is not much different from that
of the solid phase, except the molecules are no longer at fixed positions rel-
ative to each other and they can rotate and translate freely. In a liquid, the
intermolecular forces are weaker relative to solids, but still relatively strong
compared with gases. The distances between molecules generally experi-
ence a slight increase as a solid turns liquid, with water being a notable
exception.
In the gas phase, the molecules are far apart from each other, and a
molecular order is nonexistent. Gas molecules move about at random, con-
tinually colliding with each other and the walls of the container they are in.
Particularly at low densities, the intermolecular forces are very small, and
collisions are the only mode of interaction between the molecules. Mole-
cules in the gas phase are at a considerably higher energy level than they are
in the liquid or solid phases. Therefore, the gas must release a large amount
of its energy before it can condense or freeze.
4–3
■PHASE-CHANGE PROCESSES
OF PURE SUBSTANCES
There are many practical situations where two phases of a pure substance
coexist in equilibrium. Water exists as a mixture of liquid and vapor in the
boiler and the condenser of a steam power plant. The refrigerant turns from
liquid to vapor in the freezer of a refrigerator. Even though many home
owners consider the freezing of water in underground pipes as the most
Chapter 4
|
111
FIGURE 4–4
In a solid, the attractive and repulsive
forces between the molecules tend to
maintain them at relatively constant
distances from each other.
© Reprinted with special permission of King
Features Syndicate.
(a)
(b)
(c)
FIGURE 4–5
The arrangement of atoms in different phases: (a) molecules are at relatively fixed positions in a solid,
(b) groups of molecules move about each other in the liquid phase, and (c) molecules move about at random
in the gas phase.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
117
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
important phase-change process, attention in this section is focused on the
liquid and vapor phases and their mixture. As a familiar substance, water is
used to demonstrate the basic principles involved. Remember, however, that
all pure substances exhibit the same general behavior.
Compressed Liquid and Saturated Liquid
Consider an ideal frictionless piston–cylinder device containing liquid water
at 20°C and 1 atm pressure (state 1, Fig. 4–6). Under these conditions, water
exists in the liquid phase, and it is called a compressed liquid, or a sub-
cooled liquid, meaning that it is not about to vaporize. Heat is now trans-
ferred to the water until its temperature rises to, say, 40°C. As the
temperature rises, the liquid water expands slightly, and so its specific vol-
ume increases. To accommodate this expansion, the piston moves up
slightly. The pressure in the cylinder remains constant at 1 atm during this
process since it depends on the outside barometric pressure and the weight
of the piston, both of which are constant. Water is still a compressed liquid
at this state since it has not started to vaporize.
As more heat is transferred, the temperature keeps rising until it reaches
100°C (state 2, Fig. 4–7). At this point water is still a liquid, but any further
heat addition would cause some of the liquid to vaporize. That is, a phase-
change process from liquid to vapor is about to take place. A liquid
that is about to vaporize is called a saturated liquid. Therefore, state 2 is a
saturated liquid state.
Saturated Vapor and Superheated Vapor
Once boiling starts, the temperature stops rising until the liquid is com-
pletely vaporized. That is, the temperature remains constant during the
entire phase-change process if the pressure is held constant. This can easily
be verified by placing a thermometer into boiling pure water on top of a
stove. At sea level (P  1 atm), the thermometer will always read 100°C if
the pan is uncovered or covered with a light lid. During a boiling process,
the only change we observe is a large increase in the volume and a steady
decline in the liquid level as a result of more liquid turning to vapor.
Midway about the vaporization line (state 3, Fig. 4–8), the cylinder con-
tains equal amounts of liquid and vapor. As we continue transferring heat,
the vaporization process continues until the last drop of liquid is vaporized
(state 4, Fig. 4–9). At this point, the entire cylinder is filled with vapor that
is on the borderline of the liquid phase. Any heat loss from this vapor would
cause some of the vapor to condense (phase change from vapor to liquid). A
vapor that is about to condense is called a saturated vapor. Therefore, state
4 is a saturated vapor state. A substance at states between 2 and 4 is referred
to as a saturated liquid–vapor mixture since the liquid and vapor phases
coexist in equilibrium at these states.
Once the phase-change process is completed, we are back to a single-
phase region again (this time vapor), and further transfer of heat results in
an increase in both the temperature and the specific volume (Fig. 4–10). At
state 5, the temperature of the vapor is, let us say, 300°C; and if we transfer
some heat from the vapor, the temperature may drop somewhat but no con-
densation takes place as long as the temperature remains above 100°C (for
112
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Heat
P = 1 atm
T = 20°C
STATE 1
FIGURE 4–6
At 1 atm and 20°C, water exists in the
liquid phase (compressed liquid).
Heat
P = 1 atm
T = 100°C
STATE 2
FIGURE 4–7
At 1 atm pressure and 100°C, water
exists as a liquid that is ready to
vaporize (saturated liquid).
P = 1 atm
T = 100°C
STATE 3
Heat
Saturated
vapor
Saturated
liquid
FIGURE 4–8
As more heat is transferred, part of the
saturated liquid vaporizes (saturated
liquid–vapor mixture).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
118
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
P  1 atm). A vapor that is not about to condense (i.e., not a saturated
vapor) is called a superheated vapor. Therefore, water at state 5 is a super-
heated vapor. This constant-pressure phase-change process is illustrated on a
T-v diagram in Fig. 4–11.
If the entire process described here is reversed by cooling the water while
maintaining the pressure at the same value, the water will go back to state 1,
retracing the same path, and in so doing, the amount of heat released will
exactly match the amount of heat added during the heating process.
In our daily life, water implies liquid water and steam implies water
vapor. In thermodynamics, however, both water and steam usually mean
only one thing: H2O.
Saturation Temperature and Saturation Pressure
It probably came as no surprise to you that water started to boil at 100°C.
Strictly speaking, the statement “water boils at 100°C” is incorrect. The cor-
rect statement is “water boils at 100°C at 1 atm pressure.” The only reason
water started boiling at 100°C was because we held the pressure constant 
at 1 atm (101.325 kPa). If the pressure inside the cylinder were raised to
500 kPa by adding weights on top of the piston, water would start boiling at
151.8°C. That is, the temperature at which water starts boiling depends on
the pressure; therefore, if the pressure is fixed, so is the boiling temperature.
At a given pressure, the temperature at which a pure substance changes
phase is called the saturation temperature Tsat. Likewise, at a given tem-
perature, the pressure at which a pure substance changes phase is called the
saturation pressure Psat. At a pressure of 101.325 kPa, Tsat is 99.97°C.
Conversely, at a temperature of 99.97°C, Psat is 101.325 kPa. (At 100.00°C,
Psat is 101.42 kPa in the ITS-90 discussed in Chap. 2.)
Saturation tables that list the saturation pressure against the tempera-
ture (or the saturation temperature against the pressure) are available for
practically all substances. A partial listing of such a table is given in
Chapter 4
|
113
STATE 4
Heat
P = 1 atm
T = 100°C
FIGURE 4–9
At 1 atm pressure, the temperature
remains constant at 100°C until the
last drop of liquid is vaporized
(saturated vapor).
STATE 5
Heat
P = 1 atm
T = 300°C
FIGURE 4–10
As more heat is transferred, the
temperature of the vapor starts to rise
(superheated vapor).
2
Saturated
mixture
4
5
Superheated
T, °C
300
100
20
1
vapor
3
Compressed
liquid
P = 1 atm
v
FIGURE 4–11
T-v diagram for the heating process of water at constant pressure.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
119
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Table 4–1 for water. This table indicates that the pressure of water changing
phase (boiling or condensing) at 25°C must be 3.17 kPa, and the pressure of
water must be maintained at 3976 kPa (about 40 atm) to have it boil at
250°C. Also, water can be frozen by dropping its pressure below 0.61 kPa,
as discussed in more detail in Section 4.4.
It takes a large amount of energy to melt a solid or vaporize a liquid. The
amount of energy absorbed or released during a phase-change process is
called the latent heat. More specifically, the amount of energy absorbed
during melting is called the latent heat of fusion and is equivalent to the
amount of energy released during freezing. Similarly, the amount of energy
absorbed during vaporization is called the latent heat of vaporization and
is equivalent to the energy released during condensation. The magnitudes of
the latent heats depend on the temperature or pressure at which the phase
change occurs. At 1 atm pressure, the latent heat of fusion of water is 
333.7 kJkg and the latent heat of vaporization is 2256.5 kJkg.
During a phase-change process, pressure and temperature are obviously
dependent properties, and there is a definite relation between them, that is,
Tsat  f(Psat). A plot of Tsat versus Psat, such as the one given for water in
Fig. 4–12, is called a liquid–vapor saturation curve. A curve of this kind
is characteristic of all pure substances.
It is clear from Fig. 4–12 that Tsat increases with Psat. Thus, a substance
at higher pressure boils at a higher temperature. In the kitchen, higher boil-
ing temperatures mean shorter cooking times and energy savings. A beef
stew, for example, may take 1 to 2 h to cook in a regular pan that operates
at 1 atm pressure, but only 20 min in a pressure cooker operating at 3 atm
absolute pressure (corresponding boiling temperature: 134°C).
The atmospheric pressure, and thus the boiling temperature of water,
decreases with elevation. Therefore, it takes longer to cook at higher alti-
tudes than it does at sea level (unless a pressure cooker is used). For exam-
ple, the standard atmospheric pressure at an elevation of 2000 m is 79.50 kPa,
which corresponds to a boiling temperature of 93.3°C as opposed to 100°C
at sea level (zero elevation). The variation of the boiling temperature of
water with altitude at standard atmospheric conditions is given in Table 4–2.
For each 1000 m increase in elevation, the boiling temperature drops by 
a little over 3°C. Note that the atmospheric pressure at a location, and thus
114
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 4–1
Saturation (boiling) pressure of
water at various temperatures
Saturation
Temperature, 
pressure,
T, °C
Psat, kPa
10
0.26
5
0.40
0
0.61
5
0.87
10
1.23
15
1.71
20
2.34
25
3.17
30
4.25
40
7.39
50
12.35
100
101.4
150
476.2
200
1555
250
3976
300
8588
400
200
00
200
150
100
50
600
Tsat,°C
Psat, kPa
FIGURE 4–12
The liquid–vapor saturation curve of a
pure substance (numerical values are
for water).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
120
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the boiling temperature, changes slightly with the weather conditions. 
But the corresponding change in the boiling temperature is no more than
about 1°C.
Some Consequences of Tsat and Psat Dependence
We mentioned earlier that a substance at a specified pressure boils at the
saturation temperature corresponding to that pressure. This phenomenon
allows us to control the boiling temperature of a substance by simply con-
trolling the pressure, and it has numerous applications in practice. Below we
give some examples. The natural drive to achieve phase equilibrium by
allowing some liquid to evaporate is at work behind the scenes.
Consider a sealed can of liquid refrigerant-134a in a room at 25°C. If the
can has been in the room long enough, the temperature of the refrigerant in
the can is also 25°C. Now, if the lid is opened slowly and some refrigerant
is allowed to escape, the pressure in the can starts dropping until it reaches
the atmospheric pressure. If you are holding the can, you will notice its tem-
perature dropping rapidly, and even ice forming outside the can if the air is
humid. A thermometer inserted in the can would register 26°C when the
pressure drops to 1 atm, which is the saturation temperature of refrigerant-
134a at that pressure. The temperature of the liquid refrigerant remains at
26°C until the last drop of it vaporizes.
Another aspect of this interesting physical phenomenon is that a liquid
cannot vaporize unless it absorbs energy in the amount of the latent heat of
vaporization, which is 217 kJkg for refrigerant-134a at 1 atm. Therefore,
the rate of vaporization of the refrigerant depends on the rate of heat trans-
fer to the can: the larger the rate of heat transfer, the higher the rate of
vaporization. The rate of heat transfer to the can and thus the rate of vapor-
ization of the refrigerant can be minimized by insulating the can heavily. In
the limiting case of no heat transfer, the refrigerant would remain in the can
as a liquid at 26°C indefinitely.
The boiling temperature of nitrogen at atmospheric pressure is 196°C
(see Table A–3a). This means the temperature of liquid nitrogen exposed to
the atmosphere must be 196°C since some nitrogen will be evaporating.
The temperature of liquid nitrogen remains constant at 196°C until it is
depleted. For this reason, nitrogen is commonly used in low-temperature
scientific studies (such as superconductivity) and cryogenic applications to
maintain a test chamber at a constant temperature of 196°C. This is done by
placing the test chamber into a liquid nitrogen bath that is open to the atmo-
sphere. Any heat transfer from the environment to the test section is absorbed
by the nitrogen, which evaporates isothermally and keeps the test chamber
temperature constant at 196°C (Fig. 4–13). The entire test section must be
insulated heavily to minimize heat transfer and thus liquid nitrogen con-
sumption. Liquid nitrogen is also used for medical purposes to burn off
unsightly spots (e.g., warts) on the skin. This is done by soaking a cotton
swab in liquid nitrogen and wetting the target area with it. As the nitrogen
evaporates, it freezes the affected skin by rapidly absorbing heat from it.
A practical way of cooling leafy vegetables is vacuum cooling, which is
based on reducing the pressure of the sealed cooling chamber to the satura-
tion pressure at the desired low temperature, and evaporating some water
Chapter 4
|
115
TABLE 4–2
Variation of the standard
atmospheric pressure and the
boiling (saturation) temperature of
water with altitude
Atmospheric Boiling
Elevation,
pressure,
tempera-
m
kPa
ture, °C
0
101.33
100.0
1,000
89.55
96.5
2,000
79.50
93.3
5,000
54.05
83.3
10,000
26.50
66.3
20,000
5.53
34.7
25°C
Liquid N2
–196°C
N2 vapor
–196°C
Insulation
Test
chamber
–196°C
FIGURE 4–13
The temperature of liquid nitrogen
exposed to the atmosphere remains
constant at 196°C, and thus it
maintains the test chamber at 196°C.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
121
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
from the products to be cooled. The heat of vaporization during evaporation
is absorbed from the products, which lowers the products’ temperature. The
saturation pressure of water at 0°C is 0.61 kPa, and the products can be
cooled to 0°C by lowering the pressure to this level. The cooling rate can be
increased by lowering the pressure below 0.61 kPa, but this is not desirable
because of the danger of freezing and the added cost.
In vacuum cooling, there are two distinct stages. In the first stage, the
products at ambient temperature, say at 25°C, are loaded into the chamber,
and the operation begins. The temperature in the chamber remains constant
until the saturation pressure is reached, which is 3.17 kPa at 25°C. In the
second stage that follows, saturation conditions are maintained inside at pro-
gressively lower pressures and the corresponding lower temperatures until
the desired temperature is reached (Fig. 4–14).
Vacuum cooling is usually more expensive than the conventional refriger-
ated cooling, and its use is limited to applications that result in much faster
cooling. Products with large surface area per unit mass and a high tendency
to release moisture such as lettuce and spinach are well-suited for vacuum
cooling. Products with low surface area to mass ratio are not suitable, espe-
cially those that have relatively impervious peels such as tomatoes and
cucumbers. Some products such as mushrooms and green peas can be vac-
uum cooled successfully by wetting them first.
The vacuum cooling just described becomes vacuum freezing if the
vapor pressure in the vacuum chamber is dropped below 0.61 kPa, the satu-
ration pressure of water at 0°C. The idea of making ice by using a vacuum
pump is nothing new. Dr. William Cullen actually made ice in Scotland in
1775 by evacuating the air in a water tank (Fig. 4–15).
Package icing is commonly used in small-scale cooling applications to
remove heat and keep the products cool during transit by taking advantage
of the large latent heat of fusion of water, but its use is limited to products
that are not harmed by contact with ice. Also, ice provides moisture as well
as refrigeration.
4–4
■PROPERTY DIAGRAMS FOR PHASE-CHANGE
PROCESSES
The variations of properties during phase-change processes are best studied
and understood with the help of property diagrams. Next, we develop and
discuss the T-v, P-v, and P-T diagrams for pure substances.
1
The T-v Diagram
The phase-change process of water at 1 atm pressure was described in detail
in the last section and plotted on a T-v diagram in Fig. 4–11. Now we repeat
this process at different pressures to develop the T-v diagram.
Let us add weights on top of the piston until the pressure inside the cylin-
der reaches 1 MPa. At this pressure, water has a somewhat smaller specific
volume than it does at 1 atm pressure. As heat is transferred to the water at
this new pressure, the process follows a path that looks very much like the
process path at 1 atm pressure, as shown in Fig. 4–16, but there are some
noticeable differences. First, water starts boiling at a much higher tempera-
116
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Pressure, kPa
End of cooling
(0°C, 0.61 kPa)
Start of cooling
(25°C, 100 kPa)
Temperature,
°C
25
0
100
10
3.17
0.61
0
1
FIGURE 4–14
The variation of the temperature of
fruits and vegetables with pressure
during vacuum cooling from 25C to
0C.
Water
Ice
vapor
Evaporation
Low vapor pressure
Insulation
Air + Vapor
pressure
High
Vacuum
pump
FIGURE 4–15
In 1775, ice was made by evacuating
the air space in a water tank.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
122
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
ture (179.9°C) at this pressure. Second, the specific volume of the saturated
liquid is larger and the specific volume of the saturated vapor is smaller
than the corresponding values at 1 atm pressure. That is, the horizontal line
that connects the saturated liquid and saturated vapor states is much shorter.
As the pressure is increased further, this saturation line continues to
shrink, as shown in Fig. 4–16, and it becomes a point when the pressure
reaches 22.06 MPa for the case of water. This point is called the critical
point, and it is defined as the point at which the saturated liquid and satu-
rated vapor states are identical.
The temperature, pressure, and specific volume of a substance at the criti-
cal point are called, respectively, the critical temperature Tcr, critical pres-
sure Pcr, and critical specific volume vcr. The critical-point properties of
water are Pcr  22.06 MPa, Tcr  373.95°C, and vcr  0.003106 m3/kg.
For helium, they are 0.23 MPa, 267.85°C, and 0.01444 m3/kg. The critical
properties for various substances are given in Table A–1 in the appendix.
At pressures above the critical pressure, there is not a distinct phase-
change process (Fig. 4–17). Instead, the specific volume of the substance
continually increases, and at all times there is only one phase present. Even-
tually, it resembles a vapor, but we can never tell when the change has
occurred. Above the critical state, there is no line that separates the com-
Chapter 4
|
117
0.003106
373.95
v, m3/kg
Saturated
vapor
Saturated
liquid
Critical point
T, °C
P = 25 MPa
P = 22.06 MPa
P = 15 MPa
P = 8 MPa
P = 1 MPa
P = 0.1 MPa
P = 0.01 MPa
FIGURE 4–16
T-v diagram of constant-pressure phase-change processes of a pure substance at various pressures (numerical values are
for water).
T
LIQUID
Critical
point
P > Pcr
P < Pcr
Pcr
Phase
change
Tcr
vcr
VAPOR
v
FIGURE 4–17
At supercritical pressures (P  Pcr),
there is no distinct phase-change
(boiling) process.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
123
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
pressed liquid region and the superheated vapor region. However, it is cus-
tomary to refer to the substance as superheated vapor at temperatures above
the critical temperature and as compressed liquid at temperatures below the
critical temperature.
The saturated liquid states in Fig. 4–16 can be connected by a line called
the saturated liquid line, and saturated vapor states in the same figure can
be connected by another line, called the saturated vapor line. These two
lines meet at the critical point, forming a dome as shown in Fig. 4–18. All
the compressed liquid states are located in the region to the left of the satu-
rated liquid line, called the compressed liquid region. All the superheated
vapor states are located to the right of the saturated vapor line, called the
superheated vapor region. In these two regions, the substance exists in a
single phase, a liquid or a vapor. All the states that involve both phases in
equilibrium are located under the dome, called the saturated liquid–vapor
mixture region, or the wet region.
2
The P-v Diagram
The general shape of the P-v diagram of a pure substance is very much like
the T-v diagram, but the T  constant lines on this diagram have a down-
ward trend, as shown in Fig. 4–19.
Consider again a piston–cylinder device that contains liquid water at 
1 MPa and 150°C. Water at this state exists as a compressed liquid. Now the
weights on top of the piston are removed one by one so that the pressure
inside the cylinder decreases gradually (Fig. 4–20). The water is allowed to
exchange heat with the surroundings so its temperature remains constant. As
the pressure decreases, the volume of the water increases slightly. When the
118
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
T
Critical
point
line
liquid
Saturated
line
vapor
Saturated
P2 = const. > P1
P1 = const.
COMPRESSED
LIQUID
REGION
SATURATED
LIQUID–VAPOR
REGION
SUPERHEATED
VAPOR
REGION
v
FIGURE 4–18
T-v diagram of a pure substance.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
124
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
|
119
P
Critical
point
line
liquid
Saturated
line
vapor
Saturated
T2 = const. > T1
T1 = const.
COMPRESSED
LIQUID
REGION
SATURATED
LIQUID–VAPOR
REGION
SUPERHEATED
VAPOR
REGION
v
FIGURE 4–19
P-v diagram of a pure substance.
pressure reaches the saturation-pressure value at the specified temperature
(0.4762 MPa), the water starts to boil. During this vaporization process, heat
is being added, but both the temperature and the pressure remain constant,
and the specific volume increases. Once the last drop of liquid is vaporized,
further reduction in pressure results in a further increase in specific volume.
Notice that during the phase-change process, we did not remove any weights.
Doing so would cause the pressure and therefore the temperature to drop
[since Tsat  f (Psat)], and the process would no longer be isothermal.
When the process is repeated for other temperatures, similar paths are
obtained for the phase-change processes. Connecting the saturated liquid
and the saturated vapor states by a curve, we obtain the P-v diagram of a
pure substance, as shown in Fig. 4–19.
Extending the Diagrams to Include 
the Solid Phase
The two equilibrium diagrams developed so far represent the equilibrium
states involving the liquid and the vapor phases only. However, these dia-
grams can easily be extended to include the solid phase as well as the
solid–liquid and the solid–vapor saturation regions. The basic principles dis-
cussed in conjunction with the liquid–vapor phase-change process apply
equally to the solid–liquid and solid–vapor phase-change processes. Most
substances contract during a solidification (i.e., freezing) process. Others,
like water, expand as they freeze. The P-v diagrams for both groups of sub-
stances are given in Figs. 4–21 and 4–22. These two diagrams differ only in
Heat
P = 1 MPa
T = 150°C
FIGURE 4–20
The pressure in a piston–cylinder
device can be reduced by reducing the
weight of the piston.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
125
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the solid–liquid saturation region. The T-v diagrams look very much like the
P-v diagrams, especially for substances that contract on freezing.
The fact that water expands upon freezing has vital consequences in
nature. If water contracted on freezing as most other substances do, the ice
formed would be heavier than the liquid water, and it would settle to the
bottom of rivers, lakes, and oceans instead of floating at the top. The sun’s
120
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
P
Critical
point
LIQUID + VAPOR 
VAPOR
LIQUID
SOLID + LIQUID
SOLID
Triple line
SOLID + VAPOR
v
FIGURE 4–21
P-v diagram of a substance that
contracts on freezing.
P
Critical
point
LIQUID + VAPOR 
VAPOR
LIQUID
SOLID + LIQUID
SOLID
Triple line
SOLID + VAPOR
v
FIGURE 4–22
P-v diagram of a substance that
expands on freezing (such as water).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
126
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
rays would never reach these ice layers, and the bottoms of many rivers,
lakes, and oceans would be covered with ice at times, seriously disrupting
marine life.
We are all familiar with two phases being in equilibrium, but under some
conditions all three phases of a pure substance coexist in equilibrium
(Fig. 4–23). On P-v or T-v diagrams, these triple-phase states form a line
called the triple line. The states on the triple line of a substance have the
same pressure and temperature but different specific volumes. The triple
line appears as a point on the P-T diagrams and, therefore, is often called
the triple point. The triple-point temperatures and pressures of various sub-
stances are given in Table 4–3. For water, the triple-point temperature and
pressure are 0.01°C and 0.6117 kPa, respectively. That is, all three phases of
water coexist in equilibrium only if the temperature and pressure have pre-
cisely these values. No substance can exist in the liquid phase in stable
equilibrium at pressures below the triple-point pressure. The same can
be said for temperature for substances that contract on freezing. However,
Chapter 4
|
121
VAPOR
LIQUID
SOLID
FIGURE 4–23
At triple-point pressure and
temperature, a substance exists in
three phases in equilibrium.
TABLE 4–3
Triple-point temperatures and pressures of various substances
Substance
Formula
Ttp, K
Ptp, kPa
Acetylene
C2H2
192.4
120
Ammonia
NH3
195.40
6.076
Argon
A
83.81
68.9
Carbon (graphite)
C
3900
10,100
Carbon dioxide
CO2
216.55
517
Carbon monoxide
CO
68.10
15.37
Deuterium
D2
18.63
17.1
Ethane
C2H6
89.89
8 
 104
Ethylene
C2H4
104.0
0.12
Helium 4 (l point)
He
2.19
5.1
Hydrogen
H2
13.84
7.04
Hydrogen chloride
HCl
158.96
13.9
Mercury
Hg
234.2
1.65 
 107
Methane
CH4
90.68
11.7
Neon
Ne
24.57
43.2
Nitric oxide
NO
109.50
21.92
Nitrogen
N2
63.18
12.6
Nitrous oxide
N2O
182.34
87.85
Oxygen
O2
54.36
0.152
Palladium
Pd
1825
3.5 
 103
Platinum
Pt
2045
2.0 
 104
Sulfur dioxide
SO2
197.69
1.67
Titanium
Ti
1941
5.3 
 103
Uranium hexafluoride
UF6
337.17
151.7
Water
H2O
273.16
0.61
Xenon
Xe
161.3
81.5
Zinc
Zn
692.65
0.065
Source: Data from National Bureau of Standards (U.S.) Circ., 500 (1952).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
127
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
substances at high pressures can exist in the liquid phase at temperatures
below the triple-point temperature. For example, water cannot exist in liquid
form in equilibrium at atmospheric pressure at temperatures below 0°C, but
it can exist as a liquid at 20°C at 200 MPa pressure. Also, ice exists at
seven different solid phases at pressures above 100 MPa.
There are two ways a substance can pass from the solid to vapor phase:
either it melts first into a liquid and subsequently evaporates, or it evapo-
rates directly without melting first. The latter occurs at pressures below the
triple-point value, since a pure substance cannot exist in the liquid phase at
those pressures (Fig. 4–24). Passing from the solid phase directly into the
vapor phase is called sublimation. For substances that have a triple-point
pressure above the atmospheric pressure such as solid CO2 (dry ice), subli-
mation is the only way to change from the solid to vapor phase at atmos-
pheric conditions.
3
The P-T Diagram
Figure 4–25 shows the P-T diagram of a pure substance. This diagram is
often called the phase diagram since all three phases are separated from
each other by three lines. The sublimation line separates the solid and vapor
regions, the vaporization line separates the liquid and vapor regions, and the
melting (or fusion) line separates the solid and liquid regions. These three
lines meet at the triple point, where all three phases coexist in equilibrium.
The vaporization line ends at the critical point because no distinction can be
made between liquid and vapor phases above the critical point. Substances
that expand and contract on freezing differ only in the melting line on the 
P-T diagram.
122
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
VAPOR
SOLID
FIGURE 4–24
At low pressures (below the triple-
point value), solids evaporate without
melting first (sublimation).
T
P
Critical
point
Triple point
Sublimation
Melting
Melting
Vaporization
LIQUID
VAPOR
Substances
that expand
on freezing
Substances
that contract
on freezing
SOLID
FIGURE 4–25
P-T diagram of pure substances.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
128
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The P-v-T Surface
The state of a simple compressible substance is fixed by any two indepen-
dent, intensive properties. Once the two appropriate properties are fixed, all
the other properties become dependent properties. Remembering that any
equation with two independent variables in the form z  z(x, y) represents a
surface in space, we can represent the P-v-T behavior of a substance as a
surface in space, as shown in Figs. 4–26 and 4–27. Here T and v may be
Chapter 4
|
123
Critical
point
Solid
Solid–Liquid
Solid–Vapor
Temperature
Volume
Triple line
Liquid–
Vapor
Vapor
Gas
Liquid
Pressure
FIGURE 4–26
P-v-T surface of a substance that
contracts on freezing.
Critical
point
Solid
Solid–Vapor
Temperature
Volume
Triple line
Liquid–
Vapor
Vapor
Gas
Liquid
Pressure
FIGURE 4–27
P-v-T surface of a substance that
expands on freezing (like water).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
129
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
viewed as the independent variables (the base) and P as the dependent vari-
able (the height).
All the points on the surface represent equilibrium states. All states along
the path of a quasi-equilibrium process lie on the P-v-T surface since such a
process must pass through equilibrium states. The single-phase regions
appear as curved surfaces on the P-v-T surface, and the two-phase regions
as surfaces perpendicular to the P-T plane. This is expected since the pro-
jections of two-phase regions on the P-T plane are lines.
All the two-dimensional diagrams we have discussed so far are merely
projections of this three-dimensional surface onto the appropriate planes. A
P-v diagram is just a projection of the P-v-T surface on the P-v plane, and
a T-v diagram is nothing more than the bird’s-eye view of this surface. The
P-v-T surfaces present a great deal of information at once, but in a thermo-
dynamic analysis it is more convenient to work with two-dimensional dia-
grams, such as the P-v and T-v diagrams.
4–5
■PROPERTY TABLES
For most substances, the relationships among thermodynamic properties are
too complex to be expressed by simple equations. Therefore, properties are
frequently presented in the form of tables. Some thermodynamic properties
can be measured easily, but others cannot and are calculated by using the
relations between them and measurable properties. The results of these mea-
surements and calculations are presented in tables in a convenient format. In
the following discussion, the steam tables are used to demonstrate the use of
thermodynamic property tables. Property tables of other substances are used
in the same manner.
For each substance, the thermodynamic properties are listed in more than
one table. In fact, a separate table is prepared for each region of interest
such as the superheated vapor, compressed liquid, and saturated (mixture)
regions. Property tables are given in the appendix in both SI and English
units. The tables in English units carry the same number as the correspond-
ing tables in SI, followed by an identifier E. Tables A–6 and A–6E, for
example, list properties of superheated water vapor, the former in SI and the
latter in English units. Before we get into the discussion of property tables,
we define a new property called enthalpy.
Enthalpy—A Combination Property
A person looking at the tables will notice two new properties: enthalpy
h and entropy s. Entropy is a property associated with the second law of
thermodynamics, and we do not use it until it is properly defined in Chap. 8.
However, it is appropriate to introduce enthalpy at this point.
In the analysis of certain types of processes, particularly in power genera-
tion and refrigeration (Fig. 4–28), we frequently encounter the combination
of properties u  Pv. For the sake of simplicity and convenience, this com-
bination is defined as a new property, enthalpy, and given the symbol h:
(4–1)
h  u  Pv  
1kJ>kg2
124
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Control
volume
u1
P1v1
u2
P2v2
FIGURE 4–28
The combination u  Pv is frequently
encountered in the analysis of control
volumes.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
130
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
or,
(4–2)
Both the total enthalpy H and specific enthalpy h are simply referred to
as enthalpy since the context clarifies which one is meant. Notice that
the equations given above are dimensionally homogeneous. That is, the unit
of the pressure–volume product may differ from the unit of the internal
energy by only a factor (Fig. 4–29). For example, it can be easily shown
that 1 kPa · m3  1 kJ. In some tables encountered in practice, the internal
energy u is frequently not listed, but it can always be determined from
u  h  Pv.
The widespread use of the property enthalpy is due to Professor Richard
Mollier, who recognized the importance of the group u  Pv in the analysis
of steam turbines and in the representation of the properties of steam in tab-
ular and graphical form (as in the famous Mollier chart). Mollier referred to
the group u  Pv as heat content and total heat. These terms were not quite
consistent with the modern thermodynamic terminology and were replaced
in the 1930s by the term enthalpy (from the Greek word enthalpien, which
means to heat).
1a
Saturated Liquid and Saturated Vapor States
The properties of saturated liquid and saturated vapor for water are listed in
Tables A–4 and A–5. Both tables give the same information. The only dif-
ference is that in Table A–4 properties are listed under temperature and in
Table A–5 under pressure. Therefore, it is more convenient to use Table A–4
when temperature is given and Table A–5 when pressure is given. The use
of Table A–4 is illustrated in Fig. 4–30.
The subscript f is used to denote properties of a saturated liquid, and the
subscript g to denote the properties of saturated vapor. These symbols are
commonly used in thermodynamics and originated from the German words
for liquid and vapor. Another subscript commonly used is fg, which denotes
the difference between the saturated vapor and saturated liquid values of the
same property. For example,
The quantity hfg is called the enthalpy of vaporization (or latent heat
of vaporization). It represents the amount of energy needed to vaporize a
unit mass of saturated liquid at a given temperature or pressure. It decreases
as the temperature or pressure increases and becomes zero at the critical
point.
vfg  difference between vg and vf 1that is, vfg  vg  vf2
vg  specific volume of saturated vapor
vf  specific volume of saturated liquid
H  U  PV  
1kJ2
Chapter 4
|
125
kPa · m3
kPa · m3/kg
bar · m3
MPa · m3
psi · ft3
 ≡ kJ
 ≡ kJ/kg
 ≡ 100 kJ
 ≡ 1000 kJ
 ≡ 0.18505 Btu 
FIGURE 4–29
The product pressure 
 volume has
energy units, and the product pres-
sure 
 speciﬁc volume has energy per
unit mass units.
Temperature
Specific
volume of
saturated
liquid
Corresponding
saturation
pressure
Specific
volume of
saturated
vapor
85       57.868
90       70.183
95       84.609
0.001032     2.8261
0.001036     2.3593
0.001040     1.9808
Sat.
Temp.
°C
T
Specific volume
m3/kg
Sat.
liquid
vf
Sat.
vapor
vg
press.
kPa
Psat
FIGURE 4–30
A partial list of Table A–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
131
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
126
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 4–1
Pressure of Saturated Liquid in a Tank
A rigid tank contains 50 kg of saturated liquid water at 90°C. Determine the
pressure in the tank and the volume of the tank.
Solution
A rigid tank contains saturated liquid water. The pressure and vol-
ume of the tank are to be determined.
Analysis
The state of the saturated liquid water is shown on a T-v diagram
in Fig. 4–31. Since saturation conditions exist in the tank, the pressure
must be the saturation pressure at 90°C:
The specific volume of the saturated liquid at 90°C is
Then the total volume of the tank becomes
Discussion
Only one property (T ) is needed since we are told that the state
is a saturated liquid.
V  mv  150 kg2 10.001036 m3>kg2  0.0518 m3
v  vf @ 90°C  0.001036 m3>kg  
1Table A–42
P  Psat @ 90°C  70.183 kPa  
1Table A–42
EXAMPLE 4–2
Temperature of Saturated Vapor in a Cylinder
A piston–cylinder device contains 2 ft3 of saturated water vapor at 50-psia
pressure. Determine the temperature and the mass of the vapor inside the
cylinder.
Solution
A cylinder contains saturated water vapor. The temperature and
the mass of vapor are to be determined.
Analysis
The state of the saturated water vapor is shown on a P-v diagram
in Fig. 4–32. Since the cylinder contains saturated vapor at 50 psia, the
temperature inside must be the saturation temperature at this pressure:
The specific volume of the saturated vapor at 50 psia is
Then the mass of water vapor inside the cylinder becomes
Discussion
Along the saturated vapor line, temperature is a unique function
of pressure.
m  V
v 
2 ft3
8.5175 ft3>lbm  0.235 lbm
v  vg @ 50 psia  8.5175 ft3>lbm 
1Table A–5E2
T  Tsat @ 50 psia  280.99°F  
1Table A–5E2
EXAMPLE 4–3
Volume and Energy Change during Evaporation
A mass of 200 g of saturated liquid water is completely vaporized at a con-
stant pressure of 100 kPa. Determine (a) the volume change and (b) the
amount of energy transferred to the water.
P
=
7
0
.
1
8
3
kPa
T,°C
vf
v
90
Sat. liquid
T = 90°C
FIGURE 4–31
Schematic and T-v diagram for
Example 4–1.
P, psia
vg
v
50
Saturated
vapor
P = 50 psia
V = 2 ft3
T = 280.99F
FIGURE 4–32
Schematic and P-v diagram for
Example 4–2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
132
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
1b
Saturated Liquid–Vapor Mixture
During a vaporization process, a substance exists as part liquid and part
vapor. That is, it is a mixture of saturated liquid and saturated vapor
(Fig. 4–34). To analyze this mixture properly, we need to know the propor-
tions of the liquid and vapor phases in the mixture. This is done by defining
a new property called the quality x as the ratio of the mass of vapor to the
total mass of the mixture:
(4–3)
where
Quality has significance for saturated mixtures only. It has no meaning in
the compressed liquid or superheated vapor regions. Its value is between 0
and 1. The quality of a system that consists of saturated liquid is 0 (or 
0 percent), and the quality of a system consisting of saturated vapor is 1 (or
100 percent). In saturated mixtures, quality can serve as one of the two
independent intensive properties needed to describe a state. Note that the
properties of the saturated liquid are the same whether it exists alone or in
a mixture with saturated vapor. During the vaporization process, only the
amount of saturated liquid changes, not its properties. The same can be said
about a saturated vapor.
mtotal  mliquid  mvapor  mf  mg
x 
mvapor
mtotal
Chapter 4
|
127
P, kPa
100
vf
vg
v
Sat. liquid
P = 100 kPa
Sat. vapor
P = 100 kPa
FIGURE 4–33
Schematic and P-v diagram for
Example 4–3.
Solution
Saturated liquid water is vaporized at constant pressure. The vol-
ume change and the energy transferred are to be determined.
Analysis
(a) The process described is illustrated on a P-v diagram in
Fig. 4–33. The volume change per unit mass during a vaporization process is
vfg, which is the difference between vg and vf. Reading these values from
Table A–5 at 100 kPa and substituting yield
Thus,
(b) The amount of energy needed to vaporize a unit mass of a substance at a
given pressure is the enthalpy of vaporization at that pressure, which is hfg 
2257.5 kJ/kg for water at 100 kPa. Thus, the amount of energy transferred is
Discussion
Note that we have considered the first four decimal digits of vfg
and disregarded the rest. This is because vg has significant numbers to the
first four decimal places only, and we do not know the numbers in the other
decimal places. Copying all the digits from the calculator would mean that
we are assuming vg  1.694100, which is not necessarily the case. It could
very well be that vg  1.694138 since this number, too, would truncate to
1.6941. All the digits in our result (1.6931) are significant. But if we did
not truncate the result, we would obtain vfg  1.693057, which falsely
implies that our result is accurate to the sixth decimal place.
mhfg  10.2 kg2 12257.5 kJ>kg2  451.5 kJ
¢V  mvfg  10.2 kg2 11.6931 m3>kg2  0.3386 m3
vfg  vg  vf  1.6941  0.001043  1.6931 m3>kg
Saturated l
iquid
sta
te
s
S
at
ura
ted va
po
r
sta
tes
P or T
Critical point
Sat. liquid
Sat. vapor
v
FIGURE 4–34
The relative amounts of liquid and
vapor phases in a saturated mixture are
specified by the quality x.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
133
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
A saturated mixture can be treated as a combination of two subsystems:
the saturated liquid and the saturated vapor. However, the amount of mass
for each phase is usually not known. Therefore, it is often more convenient
to imagine that the two phases are well mixed, forming a homogeneous
mixture (Fig. 4–35). Then the properties of this “mixture” are simply the
average properties of the saturated liquid–vapor mixture under consider-
ation. Here is how it is done.
Consider a tank that contains a saturated liquid–vapor mixture. The vol-
ume occupied by saturated liquid is Vf, and the volume occupied by satu-
rated vapor is Vg. The total volume V is the sum of the two:
Dividing by mt yields
since x  mg/mt. This relation can also be expressed as
(4–4)
where vfg  vg  vf. Solving for quality, we obtain
(4–5)
Based on this equation, quality is related to the horizontal distances on a
P-v or T-v diagram (Fig. 4–36). At a given temperature or pressure, the
numerator of Eq. 4–5 is the distance between the actual state and the satu-
rated liquid state, and the denominator is the length of the entire horizontal
line that connects the saturated liquid and saturated vapor states. A state of
50 percent quality lies in the middle of this horizontal line.
The analysis given above can be repeated for internal energy and enthalpy
with the following results:
(4–6)
(4–7)
All the results are of the same format, and they can be summarized in a sin-
gle equation as
where y is v, u, or h. The subscript “avg” (for “average”) is usually dropped
for simplicity. The values of the average properties of the mixtures are
always between the values of the saturated liquid and the saturated vapor
properties (Fig. 4–37). That is,
Finally, all the saturated-mixture states are located under the saturation
curve, and to analyze saturated mixtures, all we need are saturated liquid
and saturated vapor data (Tables A–4 and A–5 in the case of water).
yf  yavg  yg
yavg  yf  xyfg
havg  hf  xhfg  
1kJ>kg2
uavg  uf  xufg  
1kJ>kg2
x 
vavg  vf
vfg
vavg  vf  xvfg  
1m3>kg2
vavg  11  x2vf  xvg
mf  mt  mg ¡ mtvavg  1mt  mg2vf  mgvg
V  mv ¡ mtvavg  mfvf  mgvg
V  Vf  Vg
128
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
vg
v f
Saturated liquid
Saturated vapor
Saturated
liquid–vapor
mixture
≡
avg
v
FIGURE 4–35
A two-phase system can be treated as a
homogeneous mixture for convenience.
P or T
vavg – vf
A
B
AB
AC
x =
C
vfg
vf
v
vg
vavg
FIGURE 4–36
Quality is related to the horizontal
distances on P-v and T-v diagrams.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
134
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
|
129
< < 
Sat. liquid
vf
Sat. liquid
vg
P or T
vf
vg
vg
v
v
vf
FIGURE 4–37
The v value of a saturated
liquid–vapor mixture lies between the
vf and vg values at the specified T or P.
EXAMPLE 4–4
Pressure and Volume of a Saturated Mixture
A rigid tank contains 10 kg of water at 90°C. If 8 kg of the water is in the
liquid form and the rest is in the vapor form, determine (a) the pressure in
the tank and (b) the volume of the tank.
Solution
A rigid tank contains a saturated mixture of water. The pressure
and the volume of the tank are to be determined.
Analysis
(a) The state of the saturated liquid–vapor mixture is shown in 
Fig. 4–38. Since the two phases coexist in equilibrium, we have a saturated
mixture, and the pressure must be the saturation pressure at the given 
temperature:
(b) At 90°C, we have vf  0.001036 m3/kg and vg  2.3593 m3/kg (Table
A–4). One way of finding the volume of the tank is to determine the volume
occupied by each phase and then add them:
Another way is to first determine the quality x, then the average specific vol-
ume v, and finally the total volume:
and
Discussion
The first method appears to be easier in this case since the
masses of each phase are given. In most cases, however, the masses of each
phase are not available, and the second method becomes more convenient.
Also note that we have dropped the “avg” subscript for convenience.
V  mv  110 kg2 10.473 m3>kg2  4.73 m3
 0.473 m3>kg
 0.001036 m3>kg  10.22 3 12.3593  0.0010362 m3>kg4
v  vf  xvfg
x 
mg
mt
 2 kg
10 kg  0.2
 4.73 m3
 18 kg2 10.001036 m3>kg2  12 kg2 12.3593 m3>kg2
V  Vf  Vg  mfvf  mgvg
P  Psat @ 90°C  70.183 kPa  
1Table A–42
EXAMPLE 4–5
Properties of Saturated Liquid–Vapor Mixture
An 80-L vessel contains 4 kg of refrigerant-134a at a pressure of 160 kPa.
Determine (a) the temperature, (b) the quality, (c) the enthalpy of the refrig-
erant, and (d) the volume occupied by the vapor phase.
Solution
A vessel is filled with refrigerant-134a. Some properties of the
refrigerant are to be determined.
Analysis
(a) The state of the saturated liquid–vapor mixture is shown in
Fig. 4–39. At this point we do not know whether the refrigerant is in the
compressed liquid, superheated vapor, or saturated mixture region. This can 
T,°C
90
T
mg
 = 90°C
 = 2 kg
mf = 8 kg
vf = 0.001036
vg = 2.3593
v, m3/kg
P
= 7
0
.
183
kPa
FIGURE 4–38
Schematic and T-v diagram for
Example 4–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
135
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Property tables are also available for saturated solid–vapor mixtures.
Properties of saturated ice–water vapor mixtures, for example, are listed in
Table A–8. Saturated solid–vapor mixtures can be handled just as saturated
liquid–vapor mixtures.
2
Superheated Vapor
In the region to the right of the saturated vapor line and at temperatures
above the critical point temperature, a substance exists as superheated vapor.
Since the superheated region is a single-phase region (vapor phase only),
temperature and pressure are no longer dependent properties and they can
conveniently be used as the two independent properties in the tables. The
format of the superheated vapor tables is illustrated in Fig. 4–40.
In these tables, the properties are listed against temperature for selected
pressures starting with the saturated vapor data. The saturation temperature
is given in parentheses following the pressure value.
130
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
be determined by comparing a suitable property to the saturated liquid and
saturated vapor values. From the information given, we determine the spe-
cific volume:
At 160 kPa, we read
(Table A–12)
Obviously, vf  v  vg, and the refrigerant is in the saturated mixture region.
Thus, the temperature must be the saturation temperature at the specified
pressure:
(b) The quality is determined from
(c) At 160 kPa, we also read from Table A–12 that hf  31.21 kJ/kg and hfg 
209.90 kJ/kg. Then,
(d) The mass of the vapor is
and the volume occupied by the vapor phase is
Discussion
The rest of the volume (2.5 L) is occupied by the liquid.
Vg  mgvg  10.628 kg2 10.12348 m3>kg2  0.0775 m3 1or 77.5 L2
mg  xmt  10.1572 14 kg2  0.628 kg
 64.2 kJ>kg
 31.21 kJ>kg  10.1572 1209.90 kJ>kg2
h  hf  xhfg
x 
v  vf
vfg

0.02  0.0007437
0.12348  0.0007437  0.157
T  Tsat @ 160 kPa  15.60°C
vg  0.12348 m3>kg
vf  0.0007437 m3>kg
v  V
m  0.080 m3
4 kg
 0.02 m3>kg
P, kPa
vf = 0.0007437
P = 160 kPa
T = 15.60C
m = 4 kg
160
vg = 0.12348
hf = 31.21
hg = 241.11
h, kJ/kg
R-134a
v, m3/kg
FIGURE 4–39
Schematic and P-v diagram for
Example 4–5.
m3/kg
P = 0.5 MPa (151.83°C)
P = 0.1 MPa (99.61°C)
T,°C
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
h
u
Sat.
100
150
1300
Sat.
200
250
…
1.6941
1.6959
1.9367
7.2605
0.37483
0.42503
0.47443
…
2505.6
2506.2
2582.9
4687.2
2560.7
2643.3
2723.8
…
2675.0
2675.8
2776.6
5413.3
2748.1
2855.8
2961.0
…
v
FIGURE 4–40
A partial listing of Table A–6.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
136
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Compared to saturated vapor, superheated vapor is characterized by
Lower pressures (P  Psat at a given T)
Higher tempreatures (T  Tsat at a given P)
Higher specific volumes (v  vg at a given P or T)
Higher internal energies (u  ug at a given P or T)
Higher enthalpies (h  hg at a given P or T)
Chapter 4
|
131
EXAMPLE 4–6
Internal Energy of Superheated Vapor
Determine the internal energy of water at 20 psia and 400°F.
Solution
The internal energy of water at a specified state is to be deter-
mined.
Analysis
At 20 psia, the saturation temperature is 227.92°F. Since T 
Tsat, the water is in the superheated vapor region. Then the internal energy at
the given temperature and pressure is determined from the superheated
vapor table (Table A–6E) to be
Discussion
In problems like this, interpolation is usually required, since the
tables do not list all probable combinations of temperature and pressure.
u  1145.1 Btu>lbm
EXAMPLE 4–7
Temperature of Superheated Vapor
Determine the temperature of water at a state of P  0.5 MPa and h 
2890 kJ/kg.
Solution
The temperature of water at a specified state is to be determined.
Analysis
At 0.5 MPa, the enthalpy of saturated water vapor is hg  2748.1
kJ/kg. Since h  hg, as shown in Fig. 4–41, we again have superheated
vapor. Under 0.5 MPa in Table A–6 we read
T, °C
h, kJ/kg
200
2855.8
250
2961.0
Obviously, the temperature is between 200 and 250°C. By linear interpola-
tion it is determined to be
Discussion
It is also obvious from Fig. 4–41 that T  Tsat at the given 
pressure.
T  216.3°C
3
Compressed Liquid
Compressed liquid tables are not as commonly available, and Table A–7 is
the only compressed liquid table in this text. The format of Table A–7 is very
much like the format of the superheated vapor tables. One reason for the lack
of compressed liquid data is the relative independence of compressed liquid
properties from pressure. Variation of properties of compressed liquid with
pressure is very mild. Increasing the pressure 100 times often causes proper-
ties to change less than 1 percent.
h
T
0.5 MPa
h > hg
hg
FIGURE 4–41
At a specified P, superheated vapor
exists at a higher h than the saturated
vapor (Example 4–7).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
137
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
In general, a compressed liquid (also called a subcooled liquid) is charac-
terized by
Higher pressures (P  Psat at a given T)
Lower tempreatures (T  Tsat at a given P)
Lower specific volumes (v  vf at a given P or T)
Lower internal energies (u  uf at a given P or T)
Lower enthalpies (h  hf at a given P or T)
But unlike superheated vapor, the compressed liquid properties are not
much different from the corresponding saturated liquid values.
In the absence of compressed liquid data, a general approximation is to
treat compressed liquid as saturated liquid at the given temperature (Fig.
4–42). This is because the compressed liquid properties depend on tempera-
ture much more strongly than they do on pressure. Thus,
y ≅ yf @ T
(4–8)
for compressed liquids, where y is v, u, or h. Of these three properties, the
property whose value is most sensitive to variations in the pressure is the
enthalpy h. Although the above approximation results in negligible error in
v and u, the error in h may reach undesirable levels. However, the error in h
at low to moderate pressures and temperatures can be reduced significantly
by evaluating it from
h ≅ hf @ T  vf @ T (P  Psat @T)
(4–9)
instead of taking it to be just hf. Note, however, that the approximation in
Eq. 4–9 does not yield any significant improvement at moderate to high
temperatures and pressures, and it may even backfire and result in greater
error due to overcorrection at very high temperatures and pressures (see
Kostic, Ref. 4).
132
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Given: P and T
~=vf @T
u
uf @T
=~
h
hf @T
=~
v
FIGURE 4–42
A compressed liquid may be
approximated as a saturated liquid at
the given temperature.
u
T, °C
5 MPa
T = 80°C
P= 5 MPa
80
u ≅ uf @ 80°C
FIGURE 4–43
Schematic and T-u diagram for
Example 4–8.
EXAMPLE 4–8
Approximating Compressed Liquid 
as Saturated Liquid
Determine the internal energy of compressed liquid water at 80°C and 
5 MPa, using (a) data from the compressed liquid table and (b) saturated
liquid data. What is the error involved in the second case?
Solution
The exact and approximate values of the internal energy of liquid
water are to be determined.
Analysis
At 80°C, the saturation pressure of water is 47.416 kPa, and since
5 MPa  Psat, we obviously have compressed liquid, as shown in Fig. 4–43.
(a) From the compressed liquid table (Table A–7)
(b) From the saturation table (Table A–4), we read
The error involved is
Discussion
Here, P is more than 100 times greater than Psat, yet the error
in u is less than 1 percent.
334.97  333.82
333.82

 100  0.34%
u  uf @ 80°C  334.97 kJ>kg
P  5 MPa
T  80°C f
u  333.82 kJ>kg

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
138
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Reference State and Reference Values
The values of u, h, and s cannot be measured directly, and they are calcu-
lated from measurable properties using the relations between thermody-
namic properties. However, those relations give the changes in properties,
not the values of properties at specified states. Therefore, we need to choose
a convenient reference state and assign a value of zero for a convenient
property or properties at that state. For water, the state of saturated liquid at
0.01°C is taken as the reference state, and the internal energy and entropy
are assigned zero values at that state. For refrigerant-134a, the state of satu-
rated liquid at 40°C is taken as the reference state, and the enthalpy and
entropy are assigned zero values at that state. Note that some properties may
have negative values as a result of the reference state chosen.
It should be mentioned that sometimes different tables list different values
for some properties at the same state as a result of using a different reference
state. However, in thermodynamics we are concerned with the changes in
properties, and the reference state chosen is of no consequence in calcula-
tions as long as we use values from a single consistent set of tables or charts.
Chapter 4
|
133
EXAMPLE 4–9
The Use of Steam Tables to Determine Properties
Determine the missing properties and the phase descriptions in the following
table for water:
T, °C
P, kPa
u, kJ/kg
x
Phase description
(a)
200
0.6
(b) 
125
1600
(c)
1000
2950
(d)
75
500
(e)
850
0.0
Solution
Properties and phase descriptions of water are to be determined
at various states.
Analysis
(a) The quality is given to be x  0.6, which implies that 60 per-
cent of the mass is in the vapor phase and the remaining 40 percent is in
the liquid phase. Therefore, we have saturated liquid–vapor mixture at a
pressure of 200 kPa. Then the temperature must be the saturation tempera-
ture at the given pressure:
At 200 kPa, we also read from Table A–5 that uf  504.50 kJ/kg and ufg 
2024.6 kJ/kg. Then the average internal energy of the mixture is
(b) This time the temperature and the internal energy are given, but we do
not know which table to use to determine the missing properties because we
have no clue as to whether we have a saturated mixture, compressed liquid,
or superheated vapor. To determine the region we are in, we first go to the
 1719.26 kJ>kg
 504.50 kJ>kg  10.62 12024.6 kJ>kg2
u  uf  xufg
T  Tsat @ 200 kPa  120.21°C  
1Table A–52

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
139
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
134
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
saturation table (Table A–4) and determine the uf and ug values at the given
temperature. At 125°C, we read uf  524.83 kJ/kg and ug  2534.3 kJ/kg.
Next we compare the given u value to these uf and ug values, keeping in
mind that
In our case the given u value is 1600, which falls between the uf and ug val-
ues at 125°C. Therefore, we have a saturated liquid–vapor mixture. Then the
pressure must be the saturation pressure at the given temperature:
The quality is determined from
The criteria above for determining whether we have a compressed liquid,
saturated mixture, or superheated vapor can also be used when enthalpy h or
specific volume v is given instead of internal energy u, or when pressure is
given instead of temperature.
(c) This is similar to case (b), except pressure is given instead of temperature.
Following the argument given above, we read the uf and ug values at the spec-
ified pressure. At 1 MPa, we have uf  761.39 kJ/kg and ug  2582.8 kJ/kg.
The specified u value is 2950 kJ/kg, which is greater than the ug value at
1 MPa. Therefore, we have a superheated vapor, and the temperature at this
state is determined from the superheated vapor table by interpolation to be
We would leave the quality column blank or write “NA” (not applicable) in
this case since quality has no meaning for a superheated vapor.
(d) In this case the temperature and pressure are given, but again we cannot
tell which table to use to determine the missing properties because we do
not know whether we have a saturated mixture, compressed liquid, or super-
heated vapor. To determine the region we are in, we go to the saturation
table (Table A–5) and determine the saturation temperature value at the
given pressure. At 500 kPa, we have Tsat  151.83°C. We then compare the
given T value to this Tsat value, keeping in mind that
In our case, the given T value is 75°C, which is less than the Tsat value at
the specified pressure. Therefore, we have a compressed liquid (Fig. 4–44),
and normally we would determine the internal energy value from the com-
pressed liquid table. But in this case the given pressure is much lower than
the lowest pressure value in the compressed liquid table (which is 5 MPa),
and therefore we are justified to treat the compressed liquid as saturated liq-
uid at the given temperature (not pressure):
u  uf @ 75°C  313.99 kJ>kg  
1Table A–42
 if  
T 7 Tsat @ given P  
we have a superheated vapor
 if  
T  Tsat @ given P  
we have a saturated mixture
 if  
T 6 Tsat @ given P  
we have a compressed liquid
T  395.2°C  
1Table A–62
x 
u  uf
ufg
 1600  524.83
2009.5
 0.535
P  Psat @ 125°C  232.23 kPa  
1Table A–42
 if  
u 7 ug  
 we have a superheated vapor
 if  
uf  u  ug  
 we have a saturated mixture
 if  
u 6 uf  
 we have a compressed liquid
u
T, °C
P = 500 kPa
75
151.83
u = uf @ 75°C
   ~
FIGURE 4–44
At a given P and T, a pure substance
exists as a compressed liquid if 
T  Tsat @ P.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
140
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
4–6
■THE IDEAL-GAS EQUATION OF STATE
Property tables provide very accurate information about the properties, but
they are bulky and vulnerable to typographical errors. A more practical and
desirable approach would be to have some simple relations among the prop-
erties that are sufficiently general and accurate.
Any equation that relates the pressure, temperature, and specific volume
of a substance is called an equation of state. Property relations that involve
other properties of a substance at equilibrium states are also referred to as
equations of state. There are several equations of state, some simple and
others very complex. The simplest and best-known equation of state for
substances in the gas phase is the ideal-gas equation of state. This equation
predicts the P-v-T behavior of a gas quite accurately within some properly
selected region.
Gas and vapor are often used as synonymous words. The vapor phase of a
substance is customarily called a gas when it is above the critical tempera-
ture. Vapor usually implies a gas that is not far from a state of condensation.
In 1662, Robert Boyle, an Englishman, observed during his experiments
with a vacuum chamber that the pressure of gases is inversely proportional
to their volume. In 1802, Frenchmen J. Charles and J. Gay-Lussac experi-
mentally determined that at low pressures the volume of a gas is propor-
tional to its temperature. That is,
or
(4–10)
where the constant of proportionality R is called the gas constant. Equation
4–10 is called the ideal-gas equation of state, or simply the ideal-gas rela-
tion, and a gas that obeys this relation is called an ideal gas (formerly, it
had been called a perfect gas). In this equation, P is the absolute pressure,
T is the absolute temperature, and v is the specific volume.
The gas constant R is different for each gas (Fig. 4–45) and is determined
from
where Ru is the universal gas constant and M is the molar mass (also
R  Ru
M  
1kJ>kg # K or kPa # m3>kg # K2
Pv  RT
P  Ra T
v b
Chapter 4
|
135
We would leave the quality column blank or write “NA” in this case since
quality has no meaning in the compressed liquid region.
(e) The quality is given to be x  0, and thus we have saturated liquid at the
specified pressure of 850 kPa. Then the temperature must be the saturation
temperature at the given pressure, and the internal energy must have the
saturated liquid value:
Discussion
You would do well to practice “ﬁlling in the blanks” for other
cases.
u  uf @ 850 kPa  731.00 kJ>kg  
1Table A–52
T  Tsat @ 850 kPa  172.94°C
Substance
0.2870
2.0769
0.2081
0.2968
Air
Helium
Argon
Nitrogen
R, kJ/kg·K
FIGURE 4–45
Different substances have different gas
constants.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
141
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
called molecular weight) of the gas. The constant Ru is the same for all sub-
stances, and its value is
(4–11)
The molar mass M can simply be defined as the mass of one mole (also
called a gram-mole, abbreviated gmol) of a substance in grams, or the mass
of one kmol (also called a kilogram-mole, abbreviated kgmol) in kilograms.
In English units, it is the mass of 1 lbmol in lbm. Notice that the molar
mass of a substance has the same numerical value in both unit systems
because of the way it is defined. When we say the molar mass of nitrogen is
28, it simply means the mass of 1 kmol of nitrogen is 28 kg, or the mass of
1 lbmol of nitrogen is 28 lbm. That is, M  28 kg/kmol  28 lbm/lbmol.
The mass of a system is equal to the product of its molar mass M and the
mole number (number of moles) N:
(4–12)
The values of R and M for several substances are given in Table A–1.
The ideal-gas equation of state can be written in several different forms:
(4–13)
(4–14)
(4–15)
where 
is the molar specific volume, that is, the volume per unit mole (in
m3/kmol or ft3/lbmol). A bar above a property denotes values on a unit-mole
basis throughout this text (Fig. 4–46).
By writing Eq. 4–13 twice for a fixed mass and simplifying, the proper-
ties of an ideal gas at two different states are related to each other by
(4–16)
An ideal gas is an imaginary substance that obeys the relation Pv  RT
(Fig. 4–47). It has been experimentally observed that the ideal-gas relation
given closely approximates the P-v-T behavior of real gases at low densi-
ties. At low pressures and high temperatures, the density of a gas decreases,
and the gas behaves as an ideal gas under these conditions. What constitutes
low pressure and high temperature is explained later.
In the range of practical interest, many familiar gases such as air, nitro-
gen, oxygen, hydrogen, helium, argon, neon, krypton, and even heavier
gases such as carbon dioxide can be treated as ideal gases with negligible
error (often less than 1 percent). Dense gases such as water vapor in steam
power plants and refrigerant vapor in refrigerators, however, should not be
treated as ideal gases. Instead, the property tables should be used for these
substances.
P1V1
T1
 P2V2
T2
v
V  Nv ¡ Pv  RuT
mR  1MN2R  NRu ¡ PV  NRuT
V  mv ¡ PV  mRT
m  MN  
1kg2
8.31447 kJ>kmol # K
8.31447 kPa # m3>kmol # K
0.0831447 bar # m3>kmol # K
1.98588 Btu>lbmol # R
10.7316 psia # ft3>lbmol # R
1545.37 ft # lbf>lbmol # R
136
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Per unit mass
v, m3/kg
, kJ/kg
, kJ/kg
u
h
Per unit mole
v, m3/kmol
, kJ/kmol
, kJ/kmol
u
h
FIGURE 4–46
Properties per unit mole (or kmol) are
denoted with a bar on the top.
FIGURE 4–47
The ideal-gas relation often is not
applicable to real gases; thus, care
should be exercised when using it. 
© Reprinted with special permission of King
Features Syndicate.
789
Ru 

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
142
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
|
137
6 m
5 m
4 m
AIR
P =
T =
m =
 100 kPa
 25°C
 ?
FIGURE 4–48
Schematic for Example 4–10.
EXAMPLE 4–10
Mass of Air in a Room
Determine the mass of the air in a vacant room whose dimensions are 4 m 
5 m 
 6 m at 100 kPa and 25°C.
Solution
The mass of air in a room is to be determined.
Analysis
A sketch of the room is given in Fig. 4–48. Air at specified condi-
tions can be treated as an ideal gas. From Table A–1, the gas constant of air
is R  0.287 kPa · m3/kg · K, and the absolute temperature is T  25°C 
273  298 K. The volume of the room is
The mass of air in the room is determined from the ideal-gas relation to be
Discussion
This is about the same mass as two average men!
m  PV
RT 
1100 kPa2 1120 m32
10.287 kPa # m3>kg # K2 1298 K2  140.3 kg
V  14 m2 15 m2 16 m2  120 m3
Is Water Vapor an Ideal Gas?
This question cannot be answered with a simple yes or no. The error
involved in treating water vapor as an ideal gas is calculated and plotted in
Fig. 4–49. It is clear from this figure that at pressures below 10 kPa, water
vapor can be treated as an ideal gas, regardless of its temperature, with neg-
ligible error (less than 0.1 percent). At higher pressures, however, the ideal-
gas assumption yields unacceptable errors, particularly in the vicinity of the
critical point and the saturated vapor line (over 100 percent error). There-
fore, in air-conditioning applications, the water vapor in the air can be
treated as an ideal gas with essentially no error since the pressure of the
water vapor is very low. In steam power plant applications, however, the
pressures involved are usually very high; therefore, ideal-gas relations
should not be used.
4–7
■COMPRESSIBILITY FACTOR—A MEASURE 
OF DEVIATION FROM IDEAL-GAS BEHAVIOR
The ideal-gas equation is very simple and thus very convenient to use. How-
ever, as illustrated in Fig. 4–49, gases deviate from ideal-gas behavior sig-
nificantly at states near the saturation region and the critical point. This
deviation from ideal-gas behavior at a given temperature and pressure can
accurately be accounted for by the introduction of a correction factor called
the compressibility factor Z defined as
(4–17)
or
(4–18)
Pv  ZRT
Z  Pv
RT

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
143
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
It can also be expressed as
(4–19)
where videal  RT/P. Obviously, Z  1 for ideal gases. For real gases Z can
be greater than or less than unity (Fig. 4–50). The farther away Z is from
unity, the more the gas deviates from ideal-gas behavior.
We have said that gases follow the ideal-gas equation closely at low pres-
sures and high temperatures. But what exactly constitutes low pressure or
high temperature? Is 100°C a low temperature? It definitely is for most
substances but not for air. Air (or nitrogen) can be treated as an ideal gas at
this temperature and atmospheric pressure with an error under 1 percent.
This is because nitrogen is well over its critical temperature (147°C) and
away from the saturation region. At this temperature and pressure, however,
most substances would exist in the solid phase. Therefore, the pressure or
temperature of a substance is high or low relative to its critical temperature
or pressure.
Z  vactual
videal
138
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
ZZ = 1
Z
> 1
= 1
< 1
IDEAL
GAS
REAL
GASES
FIGURE 4–50
The compressibility factor is unity for
ideal gases.
v, m3/kg
T, °C
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
0.001
0.0
0.0
1.6
0.0
0.0
0.5
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.1
0.0
0.0
0.5
2.4
5.0
10.8
17.3
0.8
4.1
20.8
37.1
8.8
1.3
7.4
17.6
271.0
56.2
2.6
16.7
152.7
49.5
25.7
6.0
0.0
20 MPa
10 MPa
5 MPa
1 MPa
100 kPa
10 kPa
0.8 kPa
0.1
7.6
30 MPa
I D E A L       G A S
0.0
FIGURE 4–49
Percentage of error to one decimal
place ([|vtable  videal|/vtable] 
 100)
involved in assuming steam to be 
an ideal gas, and the region where
steam can be treated as an ideal gas
with less than 1 percent error.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
144
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Gases behave differently at a given temperature and pressure, but they
behave very much the same at temperatures and pressures normalized with
respect to their critical temperatures and pressures. The normalization is
done (always using absolute pressure and temperature) as
(4–20)
Here PR is called the reduced pressure and TR the reduced temperature.
The Z factor for all gases is approximately the same at the same reduced
pressure and temperature. This is called the principle of corresponding
states. In Fig. 4–51, the experimentally determined Z values are plotted
against PR and TR for several gases. The gases seem to obey the principle of
corresponding states reasonably well. By curve-fitting all the data, we
PR  P
Pcr and TR  T
Tcr
Chapter 4
|
139
0.1
1.1
7.0
0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
Z = Pv
RT
Legend:
Methane
Ethylene
Ethane
Propane
n-Butane
Iso-pentane
n-Heptane
Nitrogen
Carbon dioxide
Water
Average curve based on data on
hydrocarbons
6.5
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
4.0
3.5
3.0
2.5
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
TR = 2.00
TR = 1.50
TR = 1.30
TR = 1.20
TR = 1.10
TR = 1.00
Reduced pressure PR
FIGURE 4–51
Comparison of Z factors for various gases.
Source: Gour-Jen Su, “Modified Law of Corresponding States,” Ind. Eng. Chem. (international ed.) 38 (1946), p. 803.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
145
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
obtain the generalized compressibility chart that can be used for all gases
(Fig. A–28).
The following observations can be made from the generalized compress-
ibility chart:
1. At very low pressures (PR  1), a gas behaves as an ideal gas regard-
less of temperature (Fig. 4–52),
2. At high temperatures (TR  2), ideal-gas behavior can be approximated
with good accuracy regardless of pressure (except when PR  1).
3. The deviation of a gas from ideal-gas behavior is greatest in the vicinity
of the critical point (Fig. 4–53).
140
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
P
0
IDEAL
GAS
REAL
GAS
as
FIGURE 4–52
At very low pressures, all gases
approach ideal-gas behavior
(regardless of their temperature).
T
C
Nonideal-gas
behavior
Ideal-gas
behavior
Ideal-gas
behavior
v
FIGURE 4–53
Gases deviate from the ideal-gas
behavior the most in the neighborhood
of the critical point.
EXAMPLE 4–11
The Use of Generalized Charts
Determine the specific volume of refrigerant-134a at 1 MPa and 50°C, using
(a) the ideal-gas equation of state and (b) the generalized compressibility
chart. Compare the values obtained to the actual value of 0.021796 m3/kg
and determine the error involved in each case.
Solution
The specific volume of refrigerant-134a is to be determined
assuming ideal- and nonideal-gas behavior.
Analysis
The gas constant, the critical pressure, and the critical tempera-
ture of refrigerant-134a are determined from Table A–1 to be
(a) The specific volume of refrigerant-134a under the ideal-gas assumption
is
Therefore, treating the refrigerant-134a vapor as an ideal gas would result in
an error of (0.026325  0.021796)/0.021796  0.208, or 20.8 percent in
this case.
(b) To determine the correction factor Z from the compressibility chart, we
first need to calculate the reduced pressure and temperature:
Thus
Discussion
The error in this result is less than 2 percent. Therefore, in the
absence of tabulated data, the generalized compressibility chart can be used
with confidence.
v  Zvideal  10.842 10.026325 m3>kg2  0.022113 m3>kg
PR  P
Pcr

1 MPa
4.059 MPa  0.246
TR  T
Tcr
 323 K
374.2 K  0.863
∂ Z  0.84
v  RT
P 
10.0815 kPa # m3>kg # K2 1323 K2
1000 kPa
 0.026325 m3>kg
Tcr  374.2 K
Pcr  4.059 MPa
R  0.0815 kPa # m3>kg # K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
146
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
When P and v, or T and v, are given instead of P and T, the generalized
compressibility chart can still be used to determine the third property, but it
would involve tedious trial and error. Therefore, it is necessary to define one
more reduced property called the pseudo-reduced specific volume vR as
(4–21)
Note that vR is defined differently from PR and TR. It is related to Tcr and Pcr
instead of vcr. Lines of constant vR are also added to the compressibility
charts, and this enables one to determine T or P without having to resort to
time-consuming iterations (Fig. 4–54).
vR 
vactual
RTcr>Pcr
Chapter 4
|
141
(Fig. A–28)
P
PR = Pcr
vR = RTcr/Pcr
Z =…
v
FIGURE 4–54
The compressibility factor can also be
determined from a knowledge of PR
and vR.
H2O
T = 600°F
v = 0.51431 ft3/lbm
P = ?
FIGURE 4–55
Schematic for Example 4–12.
EXAMPLE 4–12
Using Generalized Charts to Determine Pressure
Determine the pressure of water vapor at 600°F and 0.51431 ft3/lbm, using
(a) the steam tables, (b) the ideal-gas equation, and (c) the generalized com-
pressibility chart.
Solution
The pressure of water vapor is to be determined in three different
ways.
Analysis
A sketch of the system is given in Fig. 4–55. The gas constant,
the critical pressure, and the critical temperature of steam are determined
from Table A–1E to be
(a) The pressure at the specified state is determined from Table A–6E to be
This is the experimentally determined value, and thus it is the most
accurate.
(b) The pressure of steam under the ideal-gas assumption is determined
from the ideal-gas relation to be
Therefore, treating the steam as an ideal gas would result in an error of
(1228  1000)/1000  0.228, or 22.8 percent in this case.
(c) To determine the correction factor Z from the compressibility chart (Fig.
A–28), we first need to calculate the pseudo-reduced specific volume and
the reduced temperature:
vR 
vactual
RTcr>Pcr

10.51431 ft3>lbm2 13200 psia2
10.5956 psia # ft3>lbm # R2 11164.8 R2  2.372
TR  T
Tcr
 1060 R
1164.8 R  0.91
∂
PR  0.33
P  RT
v 
10.5956 psia # ft3>lbm # R2 11060 R2
0.51431 ft3>lbm
 1228 psia
v  0.51431 ft3>lbm
T  600°F
f
P  1000 psia
Tcr  1164.8 R
Pcr  3200 psia
R  0.5956 psia # ft3>lbm # R

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
147
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
4–8
■OTHER EQUATIONS OF STATE
The ideal-gas equation of state is very simple, but its range of applicability
is limited. It is desirable to have equations of state that represent the P-v-T
behavior of substances accurately over a larger region with no limitations.
Such equations are naturally more complicated. Several equations have been
proposed for this purpose (Fig. 4–57), but we shall discuss only three: the
van der Waals equation because it is one of the earliest, the Beattie-Bridge-
man equation of state because it is one of the best known and is reasonably
accurate, and the Benedict-Webb-Rubin equation because it is one of the
more recent and is very accurate.
Van der Waals Equation of State
The van der Waals equation of state was proposed in 1873, and it has two
constants that are determined from the behavior of a substance at the critical
point. It is given by
(4–22)
Van der Waals intended to improve the ideal-gas equation of state by
including two of the effects not considered in the ideal-gas model: the inter-
molecular attraction forces and the volume occupied by the molecules them-
selves. The term a/v2 accounts for the intermolecular forces, and b accounts
for the volume occupied by the gas molecules. In a room at atmospheric
pressure and temperature, the volume actually occupied by molecules is
only about one-thousandth of the volume of the room. As the pressure
increases, the volume occupied by the molecules becomes an increasingly
significant part of the total volume. Van der Waals proposed to correct this
by replacing v in the ideal-gas relation with the quantity v  b, where b
represents the volume occupied by the gas molecules per unit mass.
The determination of the two constants appearing in this equation is based
on the observation that the critical isotherm on a P-v diagram has a horizon-
tal inflection point at the critical point (Fig. 4–58). Thus, the first and the
second derivatives of P with respect to v at the critical point must be zero.
That is,
a 0P
0v b
TTcrconst
 0 and 
a 02P
0v2 b
TTcrconst
 0
aP  a
v 2 b 1v  b2  RT
142
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Thus,
Discussion
Using the compressibility chart reduced the error from 22.8 to
5.6 percent, which is acceptable for most engineering purposes (Fig. 4–56).
A bigger chart, of course, would give better resolution and reduce the read-
ing errors. Notice that we did not have to determine Z in this problem since
we could read PR directly from the chart.
P  PRPcr  10.332 13200 psia2  1056 psia
Z chart           1056
P, psia
Exact             1000
Ideal gas        1228
(from Example 4-12)
FIGURE 4–56
Results obtained by using the
compressibility chart are usually
within a few percent of actual values.
van der Waals
Berthelet
Redlich-Kwang
Beattie-Bridgeman
Benedict-Webb-Rubin
Strobridge
Virial
FIGURE 4–57
Several equations of state have been
proposed throughout history.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
148
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
By performing the differentiations and eliminating vcr, the constants a and b
are determined to be
(4–23)
The constants a and b can be determined for any substance from the critical-
point data alone (Table A–1).
The accuracy of the van der Waals equation of state is often inadequate,
but it can be improved by using values of a and b that are based on the
actual behavior of the gas over a wider range instead of a single point.
Despite its limitations, the van der Waals equation of state has a historical
value in that it was one of the first attempts to model the behavior of real
gases. The van der Waals equation of state can also be expressed on a unit-
mole basis by replacing the v in Eq. 4–22 by 
and the R in Eqs. 4–22 and
4–23 by Ru.
Beattie-Bridgeman Equation of State
The Beattie-Bridgeman equation, proposed in 1928, is an equation of state
based on five experimentally determined constants. It is expressed as
(4–24)
where
(4–25)
The constants appearing in the above equation are given in Table 4–4 for
various substances. The Beattie-Bridgeman equation is known to be reason-
ably accurate for densities up to about 0.8rcr, where rcr is the density of the
substance at the critical point.
Benedict-Webb-Rubin Equation of State
Benedict, Webb, and Rubin extended the Beattie-Bridgeman equation in
1940 by raising the number of constants to eight. It is expressed as
(4–26)
The values of the constants appearing in this equation are given in
Table 4–4. This equation can handle substances at densities up to about
2.5rcr. In 1962, Strobridge further extended this equation by raising the
number of constants to 16 (Fig. 4–59).
Virial Equation of State
The equation of state of a substance can also be expressed in a series form
as
(4–27)
P  RT
v 
a 1T2
v 2

b 1T2
v 3

c1T2
v 4

d1T2
v 5
 . . .
P  RuT
v
 aB0RuT  A0  C0
T 2 b 1
v 2  bRuT  a
v 3
 aa
v 6 
c
v 3T 2 a1  g
v 2 beg>v 2
A  A0a 1  a
v b
and B  B0a1  b
v b
P  RuT
v 2 a 1 
c
v T 3 b 1v  B2  A
v 2
v
a  27R 2T 2
cr
64Pcr  and b  RTcr
8Pcr
Chapter 4
|
143
P
Critical point
Tcr = constant
v
FIGURE 4–58
The critical isotherm of a pure
substance has an inflection point at 
the critical state.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
149
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
This and similar equations are called the virial equations of state, and the
coefficients a(T), b(T), c(T), and so on, that are functions of temperature
alone are called virial coefficients. These coefficients can be determined
experimentally or theoretically from statistical mechanics. Obviously, as the
pressure approaches zero, all the virial coefficients vanish and the equation
reduces to the ideal-gas equation of state. The P-v-T behavior of a substance
can be represented accurately with the virial equation of state over a wider
range by including a sufficient number of terms. The equations of state dis-
cussed here are applicable to the gas phase of the substances only, and thus
should not be used for liquids or liquid–vapor mixtures.
Complex equations represent the P-v-T behavior of substances reasonably
well and are very suitable for digital computer applications. For hand calcu-
lations, however, it is suggested that the reader use the property tables or the
simpler equations of state for convenience. This is particularly true for 
specific-volume calculations since all the earlier equations are implicit in v
and require a trial-and-error approach. The accuracy of the van der Waals,
144
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 4–4
Constants that appear in the Beattie-Bridgeman and the Benedict-Webb-Rubin equations of state
(a) When P is in kPa, v– is in m3/kmol, T is in K, and Ru  8.314 kPa · m3/kmol · K, the five constants in the Beattie-
Bridgeman equation are as follows:
Gas
A0
a
B0
b
c
Air
131.8441
0.01931
0.04611
0.001101
4.34 
 104
Argon, Ar 
130.7802
0.02328
0.03931
0.0
5.99 
 104
Carbon dioxide, CO2
507.2836
0.07132
0.10476
0.07235
6.60 
 105
Helium, He
2.1886
0.05984
0.01400
0.0
40
Hydrogen, H2
20.0117
0.00506
0.02096
0.04359
504
Nitrogen, N2
136.2315
0.02617
0.05046
0.00691
4.20 
 104
Oxygen, O2
151.0857
0.02562
0.04624
0.004208
4.80 
 104
Source: Gordon J. Van Wylen and Richard E. Sonntag, Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics, English/SI Version, 3rd ed. (New York: John Wiley & Sons,
1986), p. 46, table 4.3.
(b) When P is in kPa, v– is in m3/kmol, T is in K, and Ru  8.314 kPa · m3/kmol · K, the eight constants in the Benedict-
Webb-Rubin equation are as follows:
Gas
a
A0
b
B0
c
C0
a
g
n-Butane, 
190.68
1021.6
0.039998
0.12436
3.205 
 107
1.006 
 108
1.101 
 103
0.0340
C4H10
Carbon
dioxide, CO2
13.86
277.30
0.007210
0.04991
1.511 
 106
1.404 
 107
8.470 
 105
0.00539
Carbon
monoxide, CO
3.71
135.87
0.002632
0.05454
1.054 
 105
8.673 
 105
1.350 
 104
0.0060
Methane, CH4
5.00
187.91
0.003380
0.04260
2.578 
 105
2.286 
 106
1.244 
 104
0.0060
Nitrogen, N2
2.54
106.73
0.002328
0.04074
7.379 
 104
8.164 
 105
1.272 
 104
0.0053
Source: Kenneth Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983), p. 815, table A-21M. Originally published in H. W. Cooper and J. C.
Goldfrank, Hydrocarbon Processing 46, no. 12 (1967), p. xxx.
van der Waals: 2 constants.
Accurate over a limited range.
Strobridge: 16 constants.
More suitable for
computer calculations.
Virial: may vary.
Accuracy depends on the
number of terms used.
Beattie-Bridgeman: 5 constants.
Accurate for     < 0.8• cr.
ρ
Benedict-Webb-Rubin: 8 constants.
Accurate for     < 2.5• cr.
ρ
FIGURE 4–59
Complex equations of state represent
the P-v-T behavior of gases more
accurately over a wider range.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
150
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Beattie-Bridgeman, and Benedict-Webb-Rubin equations of state is illus-
trated in Fig. 4–60. It is apparent from this figure that the Benedict-Webb-
Rubin equation of state is usually the most accurate.
Chapter 4
|
145
v, m3/kmol
T, K
300
200
100
0
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
20.7%
14.1%
2.1%
11.6%
6.3%
1.2%
3.2%
0.1%
1.0%
0.4%
0.1%
0.4%
0.1%
0.0%
0.2%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
5.7%
59.3%
18.7%
15.2%
74.5%
51.0%
7.9%
0.7%
5.2%
5.2%
0.6%
3.7%
3.3%
0.4%
2.5%
1.6%
0.2%
1.3%
0.8%
0.1%
0.8%
0.4%
0.1%
0.3%
>100%
>100%
>100%
0.9%
0.1%
0.1%
0.4%
0.1%
0.1%
0.1 MPa
0.2 MPa
1 MPa
2 MPa
4 MPa
10 MPa
20 MPa
0.0125 MPa
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.5%
0.0%
0.0%
1.0%
0.1%
0.1%
1.9%
0.1%
0.1%
4.2%
0.1%
0.2%
4.7%
0.2%
0.2%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.1%
0.0%
0.0%
0.5%
0.0%
0.0%
0.5%
0.1%
0.0%
1.1%
0.1%
0.0%
2.3%
0.1%
0.0%
5.3%
0.1%
0.1%
3.7%
0.1%
0.4%
1.2%
0.1%
0.1%
2.8%
0.1%
0.1%
6.7%
0.7%
0.1%
2.9%
0.3%
0.7%
Van der Waals (top)
Beattie-Bridgeman (middle)
Benedict-Webb-Rubin (bottom)
FIGURE 4–60
Percentage of error involved in various equations of state for nitrogen (% error  [(|vtable  vequation|)/vtable] 
 100).
EXAMPLE 4–13
Different Methods of Evaluating Gas Pressure
Predict the pressure of nitrogen gas at T  175 K and v  0.00375 m3/kg
on the basis of (a) the ideal-gas equation of state, (b) the van der Waals
equation of state, (c) the Beattie-Bridgeman equation of state, and (d) the
Benedict-Webb-Rubin equation of state. Compare the values obtained to the
experimentally determined value of 10,000 kPa.
Solution
The pressure of nitrogen gas is to be determined using four differ-
ent equations of state.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
151
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
146
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Properties
The gas constant of nitrogen gas is 0.2968 kPa  m3/kg  K
(Table A–1).
Analysis
(a) Using the ideal-gas equation of state, the pressure is found to be
which is in error by 38.5 percent.
(b) The van der Waals constants for nitrogen are determined from Eq. 4–23
to be
From Eq. 4–22,
which is in error by 5.3 percent.
(c) The constants in the Beattie-Bridgeman equation are determined from
Table 4–4 to be
Also, v–  Mv  (28.013 kg/mol)(0.00375 m3/kg)  0.10505 m3/kmol. Sub-
stituting these values into Eq. 4–24, we obtain
which is in error by 1.1 percent.
(d) The constants in the Benedict-Webb-Rubin equation are determined from
Table 4–4 to be
Substituting these values into Eq. 4–26 gives
which is in error by only 0.09 percent. Thus, the accuracy of the Benedict-
Webb-Rubin equation of state is rather impressive in this case.
Discussion
Many modern computer codes (such as EES) have built-in prop-
erty functions and eliminate the need for this kind of manual calculation.
 10,009 kPa
 aa
v 6 
c
v 3T 2 a1  g
v 2 beg>v2
P  RuT
v
 aB0RuT  A0  C0
T 2 b 1
v 2  bRuT  a
v 3
g  0.0053
a  1.272 
 104
C0  8.164 
 105
c  7.379 
 104
B0  0.04074
b  0.002328
A0  106.73
a  2.54
P  RuT
v 2 a1 
c
vT 3 b 1v  B2  A
v 2  10,110 kPa
c  4.2 
 104
B  0.05378
A  102.29
P 
RT
v  b  a
v 2  9471 kPa
b  0.00138 m3>kg
a  0.175 m6 # kPa>kg2
P  RT
v 
10.2968 kPa # m3>kg # K2 1175 K2
0.00375 m3>kg
 13,851 kPa

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
152
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
|
147
A substance that has a fixed chemical composition through-
out is called a pure substance. A pure substance exists in dif-
ferent phases depending on its energy level. In the liquid
phase, a substance that is not about to vaporize is called a
compressed or subcooled liquid. In the gas phase, a substance
that is not about to condense is called a superheated vapor.
During a phase-change process, the temperature and pressure
of a pure substance are dependent properties. At a given pres-
sure, a substance changes phase at a fixed temperature, called
the saturation temperature. Likewise, at a given temperature,
the pressure at which a substance changes phase is called the
saturation pressure. During a boiling process, both the liquid
and the vapor phases coexist in equilibrium, and under this
condition the liquid is called saturated liquid and the vapor
saturated vapor.
In a saturated liquid–vapor mixture, the mass fraction of
vapor is called the quality and is expressed as
Quality may have values between 0 (saturated liquid) and 1
(saturated vapor). It has no meaning in the compressed liquid
or superheated vapor regions. In the saturated mixture region,
the average value of any intensive property y is determined
from
where f stands for saturated liquid and g for saturated vapor.
In the absence of compressed liquid data, a general approx-
imation is to treat a compressed liquid as a saturated liquid at
the given temperature (not pressure),
where y stands for v, u, or h.
The state beyond which there is no distinct vaporization
process is called the critical point. At supercritical pressures,
a substance gradually and uniformly expands from the liquid
to vapor phase. All three phases of a substance coexist in
equilibrium at states along the triple line characterized by
triple-line temperature and pressure. The compressed liquid
has lower v, u, and h values than the saturated liquid at the
same T or P. Likewise, superheated vapor has higher v, u,
and h values than the saturated vapor at the same T or P.
Any relation among the pressure, temperature, and specific
volume of a substance is called an equation of state. The sim-
plest and best-known equation of state is the ideal-gas equa-
tion of state, given as
where R is the gas constant. Caution should be exercised in
using this relation since an ideal gas is a fictitious substance.
Pv  RT
y  yf @ T
y  yf  xyfg
x 
mvapor
mtotal
SUMMARY
Real gases exhibit ideal-gas behavior at relatively low pres-
sures and high temperatures.
The deviation from ideal-gas behavior can be properly
accounted for by using the compressibility factor Z, defined
as
The Z factor is approximately the same for all gases at the
same reduced temperature and reduced pressure, which are
defined as
where Pcr and Tcr are the critical pressure and temperature,
respectively. This is known as the principle of corresponding
states. When either P or T is unknown, it can be determined
from the compressibility chart with the help of the pseudo-
reduced specific volume, defined as
The P-v-T behavior of substances can be represented more
accurately by more complex equations of state. Three of the
best known are
van der Waals:
where
Beattie-Bridgeman:
where
Benedict-Webb-Rubin:
where Ru is the universal gas constant and v– is the molar spe-
cific volume.

c
v 3T 2 a1  g
v 2 beg>v2
P  RuT
v
 aB0RuT  A0  C0
T 2 b 1
v 2  bRuT  a
v 3
 aa
v 6
A  A0 a1  a
v b
and B  B0a1  b
v b
P  RuT
v 2 a1 
c
v T 3 b 1v  B2  A
v 2
a  27R2T cr
2
64Pcr  and b  RTcr
8Pcr
aP  a
v 2 b 1v  b2  RT
vR 
vactual
RTcr>Pcr
TR  T
Tcr and PR  P
Pcr
Z  Pv
RT or Z  vactual
videal

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
153
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
148
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1. ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals. SI version.
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993.
2. ASHRAE Handbook of Refrigeration. SI version. Atlanta,
GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-
Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1994.
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
3. A. Bejan. Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics.
3rd ed. New York: Wiley, 2006.
4. “M. Kostic. Analysis of Enthalpy Approximation for
Compressed Liquid Water, Journal of Heat Transfer,
Vol. 128, p. 421–426, May 2006.”
PROBLEMS*
Pure Substances, Phase-Change Processes, Property
Diagrams
4–1C
A propane tank is ﬁlled with a mixture of liquid and
vapor propane. Can the contents of this tank be considered a
pure substance? Explain.
4–2C
What is the difference between saturated liquid and
compressed liquid?
4–3C
What is the difference between saturated vapor and
superheated vapor?
4–4C
Is there any difference between the intensive proper-
ties of saturated vapor at a given temperature and the vapor
of a saturated mixture at the same temperature?
4–5C
If the pressure of a substance is increased during a
boiling process, will the temperature also increase or will it
remain constant? Why?
4–6C
Why are the temperature and pressure dependent
properties in the saturated mixture region?
4–7C
What is the difference between the critical point and
the triple point?
4–8C
Is it possible to have water vapor at 10°C?
4–9C
A househusband is cooking beef stew for his family
in a pan that is (a) uncovered, (b) covered with a light lid,
and (c) covered with a heavy lid. For which case will the
cooking time be the shortest? Why?
4–10C
How does the boiling process at supercritical pres-
sures differ from the boiling process at subcritical pressures?
Property Tables
4–11C
A perfectly fitting pot and its lid often stick after
cooking, and it becomes very difficult to open the lid when
the pot cools down. Explain why this happens and what you
would do to open the lid.
4–12C
It is well known that warm air in a cooler environ-
ment rises. Now consider a warm mixture of air and gasoline
on top of an open gasoline can. Do you think this gas mixture
will rise in a cooler environment?
4–13C
In 1775, Dr. William Cullen made ice in Scotland
by evacuating the air in a water tank. Explain how that device
works, and discuss how the process can be made more effi-
cient.
4–14C
Does the amount of heat absorbed as 1 kg of satu-
rated liquid water boils at 100°C have to be equal to the
amount of heat released as 1 kg of saturated water vapor con-
denses at 100°C?
4–15C
Does the reference point selected for the properties
of a substance have any effect on thermodynamic analysis?
Why?
4–16C
What is the physical significance of hfg? Can it be
obtained from a knowledge of hf and hg? How?
4–17C
Is it true that it takes more energy to vaporize 1 kg
of saturated liquid water at 100°C than it would at 120°C?
4–18C
What is quality? Does it have any meaning in the
superheated vapor region?
4–19C
Which process requires more energy: completely
vaporizing 1 kg of saturated liquid water at 1 atm pressure or
completely vaporizing 1 kg of saturated liquid water at 8 atm
pressure?
4–20C
Does hfg change with pressure? How?
4–21C
Can quality be expressed as the ratio of the volume
occupied by the vapor phase to the total volume? Explain.
4–22C
In the absence of compressed liquid tables, how is
the specific volume of a compressed liquid at a given P and T
determined?
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems with
the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete solutions together
with parametric studies are included on the enclosed DVD. Problems
with the 
icon are comprehensive in nature, and are intended to be
solved with a computer, preferably using the EES software that
accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
154
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
|
149
4–23
Complete this table for H2O:
T, °C
P, kPa
v, m3/kg
Phase description
50
4.16
200
Saturated vapor
250
400
110
600
4–24
Reconsider Prob. 4–23. Using EES (or other)
software, determine the missing properties of
water. Repeat the solution for refrigerant-134a, refrigerant-22,
and ammonia.
4–25E
Complete this table for H2O:
T, °F
P, psia
u, Btu/lbm
Phase description
300
782
40
Saturated liquid
500
120
400
400
4–26E
Reconsider Prob. 4–25E. Using EES (or other)
software, determine the missing properties of
water. Repeat the solution for refrigerant-134a, refrigerant-22,
and ammonia.
4–27
Complete this table for H2O:
T, °C
P, kPa
h, kJ/kg
x
Phase description
200
0.7
140
1800
950
0.0
80
500
800
3162.2
4–28
Complete this table for refrigerant-134a:
T, °C
P, kPa
v, m3/kg
Phase description
8
320
30
0.015
180
Saturated vapor
80
600
4–29
Complete this table for refrigerant-134a:
T, °C
P, kPa
u, kJ/kg
Phase description
20
95
12
Saturated liquid
400
300
8
600
4–30E
Complete this table for refrigerant-134a:
T, °F
P, psia
h, Btu/lbm
x
Phase description
80
78
15
0.6
10
70
180
129.46
110
1.0
4–31
A piston–cylinder device contains 0.85 kg of refriger-
ant-134a at 10°C. The piston that is free to move has a
mass of 12 kg and a diameter of 25 cm. The local atmos-
pheric pressure is 88 kPa. Now, heat is transferred to refriger-
ant-134a until the temperature is 15°C. Determine (a) the
final pressure, (b) the change in the volume of the cylinder,
and (c) the change in the enthalpy of the refrigerant-134a.
FIGURE P4–31
4–32E
One pound-mass of water ﬁlls a 2.29-ft 3 rigid con-
tainer at an initial pressure of 250 psia. The container is then
cooled to 100F. Determine the initial temperature and ﬁnal
pressure of the water.
FIGURE P4–32E
4–33
One kilogram of R-134a ﬁlls a 0.14-m 3 weighted
piston-cylinder device at a temperature of –26.4C. The con-
tainer is now heated until the temperature is 100C. Deter-
mine the ﬁnal volume of the R-134a.
Answer: 0.3014 m 3
4–34
One kilogram of water vapor at 200 kPa ﬁlls the
1.1989-m 3 left chamber of a partitioned system shown in
Fig. P4–34. The right chamber has twice the volume of the
left and is initially evacuated. Determine the pressure of the
water after the partition has been removed and enough heat
has been transferred so that the temperature of the water 
is 3C.
H2O
250 psia
1 lbm
2.29 ft3
Q
R-134a
0.85 kg
–10°C
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
155
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
150
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P4–41
4–42
100-kg of R-134a at 200 kPa are contained in a
piston-cylinder device whose volume is 12.322 m 3. The pis-
ton is now moved until the volume is one-half its original
size. This is done such that the pressure of the R-134a does
not change. Determine the ﬁnal temperature and the change
in the total internal energy of the R-134a.
4–43
The spring-loaded piston-cylinder device shown in
Fig. P4–43 is ﬁlled with 0.5 kg of water vapor that is initially
at 4 MPa and 400C. Initially, the spring exerts no force
against the piston. The spring constant in the spring force
relation F  kx is k  0.9 kN/cm and the piston diameter is
D  20 cm. The water now undergoes a process until its vol-
ume is one-half of the original volume. Calculate the ﬁnal
temperature and the speciﬁc enthalpy of the water.
Answers:
220C, 1721 kJ/kg
FIGURE P4–43
4–44E
The atmospheric pressure at a location is usually
specified at standard conditions, but it changes with the
weather conditions. As the weather forecasters frequently
state, the atmospheric pressure drops during stormy weather
and it rises during clear and sunny days. If the pressure dif-
ference between the two extreme conditions is given to be 0.3
in of mercury, determine how much the boiling temperatures
of water will vary as the weather changes from one extreme
to the other.
Fluid
D
Spring
R-134a
300 kPa
10 kg
14 L
Q
FIGURE P4–34
4–35E
One pound-mass of water ﬁlls a 2.3615-ft 3 weighted
piston-cylinder device at a temperature of 400F. The piston-
cylinder device is now cooled until its temperature is 100F.
Determine the ﬁnal pressure of water, in psia, and the vol-
ume, in ft 3.
Answers: 200 psia, 0.01613 ft 3
4–36
Ten kilograms of R-134a ﬁll a 1.595-m 3 weighted
piston-cylinder device at a temperature of –26.4C. The con-
tainer is now heated until the temperature is 100C. Deter-
mine the ﬁnal volume of the R-134a.
FIGURE P4–36
4–37
What is the speciﬁc internal energy of water at 50 kPa
and 200C?
4–38
What is the speciﬁc volume of water at 5 MPa
and 100C? What would it be if the incompressible-
liquid approximation is used? Determine the accuracy of this
approximation.
4–39E
One pound-mass of water ﬁlls a container whose
volume is 2 ft 3. The pressure in the container is 100 psia.
Calculate the total internal energy and enthalpy in the con-
tainer.
Answers: 661 Btu, 698 Btu
4–40
Three kilograms of water in a container have a pres-
sure of 100 kPa and temperature of 360C. What is the vol-
ume of this container?
4–41
10-kg of R-134a at 300 kPa ﬁlls a rigid container
whose volume is 14 L. Determine the temperature and total
enthalpy in the container. The container is now heated until
the pressure is 600 kPa. Determine the temperature and total
enthalpy when the heating is completed.
R-134a
–26.4°C
10 kg
1.595 m3
Q
Water
1 kg
1.1989 m3
200 kPa
Evacuated

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
156
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
|
151
4–45
A person cooks a meal in a 30-cm-diameter pot that is
covered with a well-fitting lid and lets the food cool to the
room temperature of 20°C. The total mass of the food and the
pot is 8 kg. Now the person tries to open the pan by lifting
the lid up. Assuming no air has leaked into the pan during
cooling, determine if the lid will open or the pan will move
up together with the lid.
4–46
Water is boiled at 1 atm pressure in a 25-cm-internal-
diameter stainless steel pan on an electric range. If it is
observed that the water level in the pan drops by 10 cm in 
45 min, determine the rate of heat transfer to the pan.
4–47
Repeat Prob. 4–46 for a location at 2000-m elevation
where the standard atmospheric pressure is 79.5 kPa.
4–48
Saturated steam coming off the turbine of a steam
power plant at 30°C condenses on the outside of a 3-cm-
outer-diameter, 35-m-long tube at a rate of 45 kg/h. Deter-
mine the rate of heat transfer from the steam to the cooling
water flowing through the pipe.
4–49
Water in a 5-cm-deep pan is observed to boil at 98°C.
At what temperature will the water in a 40-cm-deep pan boil?
Assume both pans are full of water.
4–50
Water is being heated in a vertical piston–cylinder
device. The piston has a mass of 20 kg and a cross-sectional
area of 100 cm2. If the local atmospheric pressure is 100 kPa,
determine the temperature at which the water starts boiling.
4–51
A rigid tank with a volume of 2.5 m3 contains 15 kg
of saturated liquid–vapor mixture of water at 75°C. Now the
water is slowly heated. Determine the temperature at which
the liquid in the tank is completely vaporized. Also, show the
process on a T-v diagram with respect to saturation lines.
Answer: 187.0°C
4–52
A rigid vessel contains 2 kg of refrigerant-134a at 
800 kPa and 120°C. Determine the volume of the vessel and
the total internal energy.
Answers: 0.0753 m3, 655.7 kJ
4–53
A 0.5-m3 vessel contains 10 kg of refrigerant-134a at
20°C. Determine (a) the pressure, (b) the total internal
energy, and (c) the volume occupied by the liquid phase.
Answers: (a) 132.82 kPa, (b) 904.2 kJ, (c) 0.00489 m3
4–54
A piston–cylinder device contains 0.1 m3 of liq-
uid water and 0.9 m3 of water vapor in equilib-
rium at 800 kPa. Heat is transferred at constant pressure until
the temperature reaches 350°C.
(a)
What is the initial temperature of the water?
(b)
Determine the total mass of the water.
(c)
Calculate the final volume.
(d)
Show the process on a P-v diagram with respect to 
saturation lines.
FIGURE P4–54
4–55
Reconsider Prob. 4–54. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of pressure on the
total mass of water in the tank. Let the pressure vary from 
0.1 MPa to 1 MPa. Plot the total mass of water against pres-
sure, and discuss the results. Also, show the process in Prob.
4–54 on a P-v diagram using the property plot feature of EES.
4–56E
Superheated water vapor at 180 psia and 500°F is
allowed to cool at constant volume until the temperature
drops to 250°F. At the final state, determine (a) the pressure,
(b) the quality, and (c) the enthalpy. Also, show the process
on a T-v diagram with respect to saturation lines.
Answers:
(a) 29.84 psia, (b) 0.219, (c) 426.0 Btu/lbm
4–57E
Reconsider Prob. 4–56E. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of initial pres-
sure on the quality of water at the final state. Let the pressure
vary from 100 psi to 300 psi. Plot the quality against initial
pressure, and discuss the results. Also, show the process in
Prob. 4–56E on a T-v diagram using the property plot feature
of EES.
4–58
A 0.3-m3 rigid vessel initially contains saturated 
liquid–vapor mixture of water at 150°C. The water is now
heated until it reaches the critical state. Determine the mass
of the liquid water and the volume occupied by the liquid at
the initial state.
Answers: 96.10 kg, 0.105 m3
4–59
Determine the specific volume, internal energy, and
enthalpy of compressed liquid water at 100°C and 
15 MPa using the saturated liquid approximation. Compare
these values to the ones obtained from the compressed liquid
tables.
4–60
Reconsider Prob. 4–59. Using EES (or other)
software, determine the indicated properties of
compressed liquid, and compare them to those obtained using
the saturated liquid approximation.
4–61
A piston–cylinder device contains 0.8 kg of steam at
300°C and 1 MPa. Steam is cooled at constant pressure until
one-half of the mass condenses.
P = 800 kPa
H2O
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
157
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
152
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
4–68
100 grams of R-134a initially ﬁll a weighted piston-
cylinder device at 60 kPa and 20C. The device is then
heated until the temperature is 100C. Determine the change
in the device’s volume as a result of the heating.
Answer:
0.0168 m3
FIGURE P4–68
4–69
Pressure-enthalpy state diagrams are useful for
studying refrigeration and like systems. Using
EES (or other) software and actual property data, plot a pres-
sure-enthalpy diagram for R-134a that includes the saturation
lines. Also, sketch isothermal and constant-entropy processes
on this diagram.
Ideal Gas
4–70C
Propane and methane are commonly used for heat-
ing in winter, and the leakage of these fuels, even for short
periods, poses a fire danger for homes. Which gas leakage do
you think poses a greater risk for fire? Explain.
4–71C
Under what conditions is the ideal-gas assumption
suitable for real gases?
4–72C
What is the difference between R and Ru? How are
these two related?
4–73C
What is the difference between mass and molar
mass? How are these two related?
4–74E
What is the speciﬁc volume of oxygen at 25 psia
and 80F?
4–75
A 100-L container is ﬁlled with 1 kg of air at a tem-
perature of 27C. What is the pressure in the container?
4–76E
A mass of 1-lbm of argon is maintained at 200 psia
and 100F in a tank. What is the volume of the tank?
4–77
A spherical balloon with a diameter of 6 m is filled
with helium at 20°C and 200 kPa. Determine the mole num-
ber and the mass of the helium in the balloon.
Answers:
9.28 kmol, 37.15 kg
4–78
Reconsider Prob. 4–77. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the balloon
diameter on the mass of helium contained in the balloon for
the pressures of (a) 100 kPa and (b) 200 kPa. Let the diame-
ter vary from 5 m to 15 m. Plot the mass of helium against
the diameter for both cases.
R-134a
60 kPa
–20C
100 g
Q
(a)
Show the process on a T-v diagram.
(b)
Find the final temperature.
(c)
Determine the volume change.
4–62
A rigid tank contains water vapor at 250°C and an
unknown pressure. When the tank is cooled to 150°C, the
vapor starts condensing. Estimate the initial pressure in the
tank.
Answer: 0.60 MPa
4–63
A piston-cylinder device initially contains 1.4-kg sat-
urated liquid water at 200°C. Now heat is transferred to the
water until the volume quadruples and the cylinder contains
saturated vapor only. Determine (a) the volume of the tank,
(b) the final temperature and pressure, and (c) the internal
energy change of the water.
FIGURE P4–63
4–64
A piston–cylinder device initially contains steam at
3.5 MPa, superheated by 5°C. Now, steam loses heat to the
surroundings and the piston moves down hitting a set of stops
at which point the cylinder contains saturated liquid water.
The cooling continues until the cylinder contains water at
200°C. Determine (a) the initial temperature, (b) the enthalpy
change per unit mass of the steam by the time the piston first
hits the stops, and (c) the final pressure and the quality (if
mixture).
FIGURE P4–64
4–65E
How much error would one expect in determining
the speciﬁc enthalpy by applying the incompressible-liquid
approximation to water at 1500 psia and 400F?
4–66
How much error would result in calculating the spe-
ciﬁc volume and enthalpy of water at 10 MPa and 100C by
using the incompressible-liquid approximation?
4–67
What is the speciﬁc volume of R-134a at 20C and
700 kPa? What is the internal energy at that state?
Steam
3.5 MPa
Q
Water
1.4 kg
200°C
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
158
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
|
153
4–84
Argon in the amount of 0.2 kg ﬁlls a 0.05-m 3 piston-
cylinder device at 400 kPa. The piston is now moved by
changing the weights until the volume is twice its original
size. During this process, argon’s temperature is maintained
constant. Determine the ﬁnal pressure in the device.
Compressibility Factor
4–85C
What is the physical significance of the compress-
ibility factor Z?
4–86C
What is the principle of corresponding states?
4–87C
How are the reduced pressure and reduced tempera-
ture defined?
4–88
Determine the specific volume of superheated water
vapor at 10 MPa and 400°C, using (a) the ideal-gas equation,
(b) the generalized compressibility chart, and (c) the steam
tables. Also determine the error involved in the first two cases.
Answers: (a) 0.03106 m3/kg, 17.6 percent; (b) 0.02609 m3/kg,
1.2 percent; (c) 0.02644 m3/kg
4–89
Reconsider Prob. 4–88. Solve the problem using
the generalized compressibility factor feature of
the EES software. Again using EES, compare the specific
volume of water for the three cases at 10 MPa over the tem-
perature range of 325 to 600°C in 25°C intervals. Plot the
percent error involved in the ideal-gas approximation against
temperature, and discuss the results.
4–90
Determine the specific volume of refrigerant-134a
vapor at 0.9 MPa and 70°C based on (a) the ideal-gas equa-
tion, (b) the generalized compressibility chart, and (c) data
from tables. Also, determine the error involved in the first
two cases.
4–91
Determine the specific volume of nitrogen gas at
10 MPa and 150 K based on (a) the ideal-gas equation and
(b) the generalized compressibility chart. Compare these
results with the experimental value of 0.002388 m3/kg, and
determine the error involved in each case.
Answers: (a)
0.004452 m3/kg, 86.4 percent; (b) 0.002404 m3/kg, 0.7 percent
4–92
Determine the specific volume of superheated water
vapor at 3.5 MPa and 450°C based on (a) the ideal-gas equa-
tion, (b) the generalized compressibility chart, and (c) the
steam tables. Determine the error involved in the first two
cases.
4–93E
Ethane in a rigid vessel is to be heated from 50 psia
and 100F until its temperature is 600F. What is the ﬁnal
pressure of the ethane as predicted by the compressibility
chart?
4–94
Ethylene is heated at constant pressure from 5 MPa
and 20C to 200C. Using the compressibility chart, determine
the change in the ethylene’s speciﬁc volume as a result of this
heating.
Answer: 0.0172 m 3/kg
4–95
Saturated water vapor at 350C is heated at constant
pressure until its volume has doubled. Determine the ﬁnal
4–79
The pressure in an automobile tire depends on the
temperature of the air in the tire. When the air temperature is
25°C, the pressure gage reads 210 kPa. If the volume of the
tire is 0.025 m3, determine the pressure rise in the tire when
the air temperature in the tire rises to 50°C. Also, determine
the amount of air that must be bled off to restore pressure to
its original value at this temperature. Assume the atmospheric
pressure is 100 kPa.
FIGURE P4–79
4–80
A 1-m3 tank containing air at 25°C and 500 kPa is
connected through a valve to another tank containing 5 kg of
air at 35°C and 200 kPa. Now the valve is opened, and the
entire system is allowed to reach thermal equilibrium with
the surroundings, which are at 20°C. Determine the volume
of the second tank and the final equilibrium pressure of air.
Answers: 2.21 m3, 284.1 kPa
4–81E
In an informative article in a magazine it is stated
that tires lose roughly 1 psi of pressure for every 10F drop in
outside temperature. Investigate if this is a valid statement.
4–82
A mass of 10-g of oxygen ﬁll a weighted piston-
cylinder device at 20 kPa and 100C. The device is now
cooled until the temperature is 0C. Determine the change of
the volume of the device during this cooling.
4–83
A mass of 0.1 kg of helium ﬁlls a 0.2 m 3 rigid vessel
at 350 kPa. The vessel is heated until the pressure is 700 kPa.
Calculate the temperature change of helium (in C and K) as
a result of this heating.
Answers: 337C, 337 K
FIGURE P4–83
Helium
0.1 kg
0.2 m3
350 kPa
Q
AIR
V = 0.025 m3
T = 25°C
Pg = 210 kPa

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
159
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
154
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
temperature using the ideal gas equation of state, the com-
pressibility charts, and the steam tables.
4–96E
Saturated water vapor at 400F is heated at constant
pressure until its volume has doubled. Determine the ﬁnal
temperature using the ideal gas equation of state, the com-
pressibility charts, and the steam tables.
4–97
Methane at 8 MPa and 300 K is heated at constant
pressure until its volume has increased by 50 percent. Deter-
mine the ﬁnal temperature using the ideal gas equation of
state and the compressibility factor. Which of these two results
is more accurate?
4–98
What is the percentage of error involved in treating
carbon dioxide at 3 MPa and 10°C as an ideal gas?
Answer: 25 percent
4–99
Carbon dioxide gas enters a pipe at 3 MPa and 500 K
at a rate of 2 kg/s. CO2 is cooled at constant pressure as it
flows in the pipe and the temperature of CO2 drops to 450 K
at the exit. Determine the volume flow rate and the density of
carbon dioxide at the inlet and the volume flow rate at the exit
of the pipe using (a) the ideal-gas equation and (b) the gener-
alized compressibility chart. Also, determine (c) the error
involved in the first case.
FIGURE P4–99
Other Equations of State
4–100C
What is the physical significance of the two con-
stants that appear in the van der Waals equation of state? On
what basis are they determined?
4–101E
1-lbm of carbon dioxide is heated in a constant
pressure apparatus. Initially, the carbon dioxide is at 1000
psia and 200F and it is heated until its temperature becomes
800F. Determine the ﬁnal volume of the carbon dioxide
treating it as (a) an ideal gas and (b) a Benedict-Webb-Rubin
gas.
4–102
Methane is heated in a rigid container from 100 kPa
and 20C to 400C. Determine the ﬁnal pressure of the meth-
ane treating it as (a) an ideal gas and (b) a Benedict-Webb-
Rubin gas.
4–103E
Carbon monoxide is heated in a rigid container
from 14.7 psia and 70F to 800F. Determine the ﬁnal pres-
sure of the carbon monoxide treating it as (a) an ideal gas
and (b) a Benedict-Webb-Rubin gas.
4–104
1-kg of carbon dioxide is compressed from 1 MPa
and 200C to 3 MPa in a piston-cylinder device arranged 
to execute a polytropic process for which PV 1.2  constant.
3 MPa
500 K
2 kg/s
CO2
450 K
Determine the ﬁnal temperature treating the carbon dioxide
as (a) an ideal gas and (b) a van der Waals gas.
4–105E
Refrigerant-134a at 100 psia has a specific volume
of 0.54022 ft3/lbm. Determine the temperature of the refriger-
ant based on (a) the ideal-gas equation, (b) the van der Waals
equation, and (c) the refrigerant tables.
4–106
Nitrogen at 150 K has a specific volume of
0.041884 m3/kg. Determine the pressure of the
nitrogen, using (a) the ideal-gas equation and (b) the Beattie-
Bridgeman equation. Compare your results to the experimen-
tal value of 1000 kPa.
Answers: (a) 1063 kPa, (b) 1000.4 kPa
4–107
Reconsider Prob. 4–106. Using EES (or other)
software, compare the pressure results of the
ideal-gas and Beattie-Bridgeman equations with nitrogen data
supplied by EES. Plot temperature versus specific volume for
a pressure of 1000 kPa with respect to the saturated
liquid and saturated vapor lines of nitrogen over the range of
110 K  T  150 K.
Review Problems
4–108
The combustion in a gasoline engine may be approx-
imated by a constant volume heat addition process. There
exists the air–fuel mixture in the cylinder before the combus-
tion and the combustion gases after it, and both may be
approximated as air, an ideal gas. In a gasoline engine, the
cylinder conditions are 1.8 MPa and 450°C before the com-
bustion and 1300°C after it. Determine the pressure at the
end of the combustion process.
Answer: 3916 kPa
FIGURE P4–108
4–109
A rigid tank contains an ideal gas at 300 kPa and
600 K. Now half of the gas is withdrawn from the tank and
the gas is found at 100 kPa at the end of the process. 
Determine (a) the final temperature of the gas and (b) the
final pressure if no mass was withdrawn from the tank and
the same final temperature was reached at the end of the
process.
Combustion
chamber
1.8 MPa
450°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
160
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 4
|
155
FIGURE P4–113E
4–114
The piston diameters in Fig. P4–114 are D1  10 cm
and D2  4 cm. Chamber 1 contains 1 kg of helium, chamber
2 is ﬁlled with condensing water vapor, and chamber 3 is
evacuated. The entire assembly is placed in an environment
whose temperature is 200C. Determine the volume of cham-
ber 1 when thermodynamic equilibrium has been established.
Answer: 3.95 m 3
FIGURE P4–114
4–115
Liquid propane is commonly used as a fuel for heat-
ing homes, powering vehicles such as forklifts, and filling
portable picnic tanks. Consider a propane tank that initially
contains 5 L of liquid propane at the environment tempera-
ture of 20°C. If a hole develops in the connecting tube of a
propane tank and the propane starts to leak out, determine the
temperature of propane when the pressure in the tank drops
to 1 atm. Also, determine the total amount of heat transfer
from the environment to the tank to vaporize the entire
propane in the tank.
P1
P2
P3
D1
D2
Water
1 lbm
2.649 ft3
400°F
Q
FIGURE P4–109
4–110
Carbon-dioxide gas at 3 MPa and 500 K flows
steadily in a pipe at a rate of 0.4 kmol/s. Determine
(a) the volume and mass flow rates and the density of carbon
dioxide at this state. If CO2 is cooled at constant pressure as
it flows in the pipe so that the temperature of CO2 drops to
450 K at the exit of the pipe, determine (b) the volume flow
rate at the exit of the pipe.
FIGURE P4–110
4–111
Combustion in a diesel engine may be modeled as a
constant-pressure heat addition process with air in the cylin-
der before and after combustion. Consider a diesel engine
with cylinder conditions of 950 K and 75 cm3 before com-
bustion, and 150 cm3 after it. The engine operates with an
air–fuel ratio of 22 kg air/kg fuel (the mass of the air divided
by the mass of the fuel). Determine the temperature after the
combustion process.
FIGURE P4–111
4–112
One kilogram of R-134a ﬁlls a 0.1450 m 3 rigid con-
tainer at an initial temperature of 40C. The container is
then heated until the pressure is 200 kPa. Determine the ini-
tial pressure and ﬁnal temperature.
Answers: 51.25 kPa, 90C
4–113E
One pound-mass of water ﬁlls a 2.649 ft 3 weighted
piston-cylinder device at a temperature of 400F. The piston-
cylinder device is now cooled until its temperature is 100F.
Determine the ﬁnal pressure and volume of the water.
Combustion
chamber
950 K
75 cm3
3 MPa
500 K
0.4 kmol/s
CO2
450 K
Ideal gas
300 kPa
600 K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
4. Properties of Pure 
Substances
161
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
FIGURE P4–115
4–116
Repeat Prob. 4–115 for isobutane.
4–117
A tank contains helium at 100°C and 10 kPa gage.
The helium is heated in a process by heat transfer from the
surroundings such that the helium reaches a final equilibrium
state at 300°C. Determine the final gage pressure of the
helium. Assume atmospheric pressure is 100 kPa.
Design and Essay Problems
4–118
In an article on tire maintenance, it is stated that tires
lose air over time, and pressure losses as high as 90 kPa 
Propane
Leak
156
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(13 psi) per year are measured. The article recommends
checking tire pressure at least once a month to avoid low tire
pressure that hurts fuel efﬁciency and causes uneven thread
wear on tires. Taking the beginning tire pressure to be 220
kPa (gage) and the atmospheric pressure to be 100 kPa,
determine the fraction of air that can be lost from a tire per
year.
4–119
It is well known that water freezes at 0°C at atmo-
spheric pressure. The mixture of liquid water and ice at 0°C
is said to be at stable equilibrium since it cannot undergo any
changes when it is isolated from its surroundings. However,
when water is free of impurities and the inner surfaces of the
container are smooth, the temperature of water can be low-
ered to 2°C or even lower without any formation of ice at
atmospheric pressure. But at that state even a small distur-
bance can initiate the formation of ice abruptly, and the water
temperature stabilizes at 0°C following this sudden change.
The water at 2°C is said to be in a metastable state. Write
an essay on metastable states and discuss how they differ
from stable equilibrium states.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
162
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
ENERGY ANALYSIS OF CLOSED SYSTEMS
|
157
I
n Chap. 3, we considered various forms of energy and
energy transfer, and we developed a general relation for
the conservation of energy principle or energy balance.
Then in Chap. 4, we learned how to determine the thermody-
namics properties of substances. In this chapter, we apply
the energy balance relation to systems that do not involve any
mass flow across their boundaries; that is, closed systems.
We start this chapter with a discussion of the moving
boundary work or P dV work commonly encountered in recip-
rocating devices such as automotive engines and compres-
sors. We continue by applying the general energy balance
relation, which is simply expressed as Ein  Eout  Esystem,
to systems that involve a pure substance. Then we define
specific heats, obtain relations for the internal energy and
enthalpy of ideal gases in terms of specific heats and temper-
ature changes, and perform energy balances on various sys-
tems that involve ideal gases. We repeat this for systems that
involve solids and liquids, which are approximated as incom-
pressible substances.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Examine the moving boundary work or P dV work
commonly encountered in reciprocating devices such as
automotive engines and compressors.
• Identify the first law of thermodynamics as simply a
statement of the conservation of energy principle for closed
(fixed mass) systems.
• Develop the general energy balance applied to closed
systems.
• Define the specific heat at constant volume and the specific
heat at constant pressure.
• Relate the specific heats to the calculation of the changes
in internal energy and enthalpy of ideal gases.
• Describe incompressible substances and determine the
changes in their internal energy and enthalpy.
• Solve energy balance problems for closed (fixed mass)
systems that involve heat and work interactions for general
pure substances, ideal gases, and incompressible
substances.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
163
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
5–1
 MOVING BOUNDARY WORK
One form of mechanical work frequently encountered in practice is associ-
ated with the expansion or compression of a gas in a piston–cylinder device.
During this process, part of the boundary (the inner face of the piston) moves
back and forth. Therefore, the expansion and compression work is often
called moving boundary work, or simply boundary work (Fig. 5–1). Some
call it the P dV work for reasons explained later. Moving boundary work is
the primary form of work involved in automobile engines. During their
expansion, the combustion gases force the piston to move, which in turn
forces the crankshaft to rotate.
The moving boundary work associated with real engines or compressors
cannot be determined exactly from a thermodynamic analysis alone because
the piston usually moves at very high speeds, making it difficult for the gas
inside to maintain equilibrium. Then the states through which the system
passes during the process cannot be specified, and no process path can be
drawn. Work, being a path function, cannot be determined analytically with-
out a knowledge of the path. Therefore, the boundary work in real engines
or compressors is determined by direct measurements.
In this section, we analyze the moving boundary work for a quasi-
equilibrium process, a process during which the system remains nearly in
equilibrium at all times. A quasi-equilibrium process, also called a quasi-
static process, is closely approximated by real engines when the piston
moves at low velocities. Under identical conditions, the work output of the
engines is found to be a maximum, and the work input to the compressors
to be a minimum when quasi-equilibrium processes are used in place of
nonquasi-equilibrium processes. Below, the work associated with a moving
boundary is evaluated for a quasi-equilibrium process.
Consider the gas enclosed in the piston–cylinder device shown in Fig.
5–2. The initial pressure of the gas is P, the total volume is V, and the cross-
sectional area of the piston is A. If the piston is allowed to move a distance
ds in a quasi-equilibrium manner, the differential work done during this
process is
(5–1)
That is, the boundary work in the differential form is equal to the product of
the absolute pressure P and the differential change in the volume dV of the
system. This expression also explains why the moving boundary work is
sometimes called the P dV work.
Note in Eq. 5–1 that P is the absolute pressure, which is always positive.
However, the volume change dV is positive during an expansion process
(volume increasing) and negative during a compression process (volume
decreasing). Thus, the boundary work is positive during an expansion
process and negative during a compression process. Therefore, Eq. 5–1 can
be viewed as an expression for boundary work output, Wb,out. A negative
result indicates boundary work input (compression).
The total boundary work done during the entire process as the piston
moves is obtained by adding all the differential works from the initial state
to the final state:
(5–2)
Wb  
2
1
 PdV  
1kJ2
dWb  F ds  PA ds  P dV
158
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
boundary
The moving
GAS
FIGURE 5–1
The work associated with a moving
boundary is called boundary work.
P
GAS
A
F
ds
FIGURE 5–2
A gas does a differential amount of
work dWb as it forces the piston to
move by a differential amount ds.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
164
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
This integral can be evaluated only if we know the functional relationship
between P and V during the process. That is, P  f (V) should be 
available. Note that P  f (V) is simply the equation of the process path on
a P-V diagram.
The quasi-equilibrium expansion process described is shown on a P-V
diagram in Fig. 5–3. On this diagram, the differential area dA is equal to
P dV, which is the differential work. The total area A under the process
curve 1–2 is obtained by integration:
(5–3)
A comparison of this equation with Eq. 5–2 reveals that the area under
the process curve on a P-V diagram is equal, in magnitude, to the work
done during a quasi-equilibrium expansion or compression process of a
closed system. (On the P-v diagram, it represents the boundary work done
per unit mass.)
A gas can follow several different paths as it expands from state 1 to state
2. In general, each path has a different area underneath it, and since this
area represents the magnitude of the work, the work done is different for
each process (Fig. 5–4). This is expected, since work is a path function
(i.e., it depends on the path followed as well as the end states). If work were
not a path function, no cyclic devices (car engines, power plants) could
operate as work-producing devices. The work produced by these devices
during one part of the cycle would have to be consumed during another
part, and there would be no net work output. The cycle shown in Fig. 5–5
produces a net work output because the work done by the system during the
expansion process (area under path A) is greater than the work done on the
system during the compression part of the cycle (area under path B), and the
difference between these two is the net work done during the cycle (the col-
ored area).
If the relationship between P and V during an expansion or a compression
process is given in terms of experimental data instead of in a functional
form, obviously we cannot perform the integration analytically. But we can
always plot the P-V diagram of the process, using these data points, and cal-
culate the area underneath graphically to determine the work done.
Strictly speaking, the pressure P in Eq. 5–2 is the pressure at the inner
surface of the piston. It becomes equal to the pressure of the gas in the
cylinder only if the process is quasi-equilibrium and thus the entire gas in
the cylinder is at the same pressure at any given time. Equation 5–2 can
also be used for nonquasi-equilibrium processes provided that the pressure
at the inner face of the piston is used for P. (Besides, we cannot speak of
the pressure of a system during a nonquasi-equilibrium process since prop-
erties are defined for equilibrium states only.) Therefore, we generalize the
boundary work relation by expressing it as
(5–4)
where Pi is the pressure at the inner face of the piston.
Note that work is a mechanism for energy interaction between a system
and its surroundings, and Wb represents the amount of energy transferred
from the system during an expansion process (or to the system during a
Wb  
2
1
Pi dV
Area  A  
2
1
 dA  
2
1
 P dV
Chapter 5
|
159
Process path
2
1
P
dV
V
dA = P dV
P
V1
V2
FIGURE 5–3
The area under the process curve on a
P-V diagram represents the boundary
work.
V2
WA = 10 kJ
1
2
P
V
V1
A
B
C
WB = 8 kJ
WC = 5 kJ
FIGURE 5–4
The boundary work done during a
process depends on the path followed
as well as the end states.
Wnet
2
1
P
V
V2
V1
A
B
FIGURE 5–5
The net work done during a cycle is
the difference between the work done
by the system and the work done on
the system.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
165
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
compression process). Therefore, it has to appear somewhere else and we
must be able to account for it since energy is conserved. In a car engine, for
example, the boundary work done by the expanding hot gases is used to
overcome friction between the piston and the cylinder, to push atmospheric
air out of the way, and to rotate the crankshaft. Therefore,
(5–5)
Of course the work used to overcome friction appears as frictional heat and
the energy transmitted through the crankshaft is transmitted to other compo-
nents (such as the wheels) to perform certain functions. But note that the
energy transferred by the system as work must equal the energy received by
the crankshaft, the atmosphere, and the energy used to overcome friction.
The use of the boundary work relation is not limited to the quasi-equilibrium
processes of gases only. It can also be used for solids and liquids.
Wb  Wfriction  Watm  Wcrank  
2
1
1Ffriction  Patm A  Fcrank2 dx
160
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 5–1
Boundary Work for a Constant-Volume Process
A rigid tank contains air at 500 kPa and 150°C. As a result of heat transfer
to the surroundings, the temperature and pressure inside the tank drop to
65°C and 400 kPa, respectively. Determine the boundary work done during
this process.
Solution
Air in a rigid tank is cooled, and both the pressure and tempera-
ture drop. The boundary work done is to be determined.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the P-V diagram of the process
are shown in Fig. 5–6. The boundary work can be determined from Eq. 5–2
to be
Discussion
This is expected since a rigid tank has a constant volume and
dV  0 in this equation. Therefore, there is no boundary work done during
this process. That is, the boundary work done during a constant-volume
process is always zero. This is also evident from the P-V diagram of the
process (the area under the process curve is zero).
Wb  
2
1
P dV˛  0
2
1
P, kPa
V
400
500
P1 = 500 kPa
Heat
AIR
T1 = 150°C
P2 = 400 kPa
T2 = 65°C
FIGURE 5–6
Schematic and P-V diagram for
Example 5–1.
¡
0

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
166
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
161
EXAMPLE 5–2
Boundary Work for a Constant-Pressure Process
A frictionless piston–cylinder device contains 10 lbm of steam at 60 psia
and 320F. Heat is now transferred to the steam until the temperature
reaches 400F. If the piston is not attached to a shaft and its mass is con-
stant, determine the work done by the steam during this process.
Solution
Steam in a piston cylinder device is heated and the temperature
rises at constant pressure. The boundary work done is to be determined.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the P-v diagram of the process are
shown in Fig. 5–7.
Assumption
The expansion process is quasi-equilibrium.
Analysis
Even though it is not explicitly stated, the pressure of the steam
within the cylinder remains constant during this process since both the
atmospheric pressure and the weight of the piston remain constant. There-
fore, this is a constant-pressure process, and, from Eq. 5–2
(5–6)
or
since V  mv. From the superheated vapor table (Table A–6E), the specific
volumes are determined to be v1  7.4863 ft3/lbm at state 1 (60 psia,
320F) and v2  8.3548 ft3/lbm at state 2 (60 psia, 400F). Substituting
these values yields
Discussion
The positive sign indicates that the work is done by the
system. That is, the steam uses 96.4 Btu of its energy to do this work. The
magnitude of this work could also be determined by calculating the area under
the process curve on the P-V diagram, which is simply P0 V for this case.
 96.4 Btu
Wb  110 lbm2 160 psia2 3 18.3548  7.48632 ft3>lbm4 a
1 Btu
5.404 psia # ft3 b
Wb  mP0 1v2  v12
Wb  
2
1
PdV  P0 
2
1
dV  P01V2  V12
P = 60 psia
2
1
P, psia
v, ft3/lbm
60
Heat
m = 10 lbm
H2O
P0 = 60 psia
Area = wb
v2 = 8.3548
v1 = 7.4863
FIGURE 5–7
Schematic and P-v diagram for
Example 5–2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
167
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
162
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 5–3
Isothermal Compression of an Ideal Gas
A piston–cylinder device initially contains 0.4 m3 of air at 100 kPa and 80°C.
The air is now compressed to 0.1 m3 in such a way that the temperature
inside the cylinder remains constant. Determine the work done during this
process.
Solution
Air in a piston–cylinder device is compressed isothermally. The
boundary work done is to be determined.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the P-V diagram of the process are
shown in Fig. 5–8.
Assumptions
1 The compression process is quasi-equilibrium. 2 At specified
conditions, air can be considered to be an ideal gas since it is at a high tem-
perature and low pressure relative to its critical-point values.
Analysis
For an ideal gas at constant temperature T0,
where C is a constant. Substituting this into Eq. 5–2, we have
(5–7)
In Eq. 5–7, P1V1 can be replaced by P2V2 or mRT0. Also, V2/V1 can be
replaced by P1/P2 for this case since P1V1  P2V2.
Substituting the numerical values into Eq. 5–7 yields
Discussion
The negative sign indicates that this work is done on the system
(a work input), which is always the case for compression processes.
 55.5 kJ
Wb  1100 kPa2 10.4 m32 aln 0.1
0.4 b a
1 kJ
1 kPa # m3 b
Wb  
2
1
P dV  
2
1
C
V dV  C 
2
1
dV
V
 C  ln V2
V1
 P1V1 ln V2
V1
PV  mRT0  C or P  C
V
2
1
P
V, m3
P1 = 100 kPa
AIR
T0 = 80°C = const.
0.4
0.1
T0 = 80°C = const.
V1 = 0.4 m3
FIGURE 5–8
Schematic and P-V diagram for Example 5–3.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
168
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Polytropic Process
During actual expansion and compression processes of gases, pressure and
volume are often related by PV n  C, where n and C are constants. A
process of this kind is called a polytropic process (Fig. 5–9). Below we
develop a general expression for the work done during a polytropic process.
The pressure for a polytropic process can be expressed as
(5–8)
Substituting this relation into Eq. 5–2, we obtain
(5–9)
since 
. For an ideal gas (PV  mRT), this equation can
also be written as
(5–10)
For the special case of n  1 the boundary work becomes
For an ideal gas this result is equivalent to the isothermal process discussed
in the previous example.
Wb  
2
1
P dV  
2
1
CV 1 dV  PV ln a V2
V1
b
Wb 
mR 1T2  T12
1  n
  n  1  
1kJ2
C  P1V1
n  P2V2
n
Wb  
2
1
PdV  
2
1
CV n dV  C V 2
n1  V 1
n1
n  1
 P2V2  P1V1
1  n
P  CV n
Chapter 5
|
163
PVn = const.
2
1
P
V
GAS
P1
P2
V1
V2
PVn = C = const.
P1V1 = P2V 2
n
n
FIGURE 5–9
Schematic and P-V diagram for a
polytropic process.
EXAMPLE 5–4
Expansion of a Gas against a Spring
A piston–cylinder device contains 0.05 m3 of a gas initially at 200 kPa. At
this state, a linear spring that has a spring constant of 150 kN/m is touching
the piston but exerting no force on it. Now heat is transferred to the gas,
causing the piston to rise and to compress the spring until the volume inside
the cylinder doubles. If the cross-sectional area of the piston is 0.25 m2,
determine (a) the final pressure inside the cylinder, (b) the total work done by

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
169
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
164
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
the gas, and (c) the fraction of this work done against the spring to 
compress it.
Solution
A gas in a piston–cylinder device equipped with a linear spring
expands as a result of heating. The final gas pressure, the total work done, and
the fraction of the work done to compress the spring are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The expansion process is quasi-equilibrium. 2 The spring is
linear in the range of interest.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the P-V diagram of the process are
shown in Fig. 5–10.
(a) The enclosed volume at the final state is
Then the displacement of the piston (and of the spring) becomes
The force applied by the linear spring at the final state is
The additional pressure applied by the spring on the gas at this state is
Without the spring, the pressure of the gas would remain constant at
200 kPa while the piston is rising. But under the effect of the spring, the
pressure rises linearly from 200 kPa to
at the final state.
(b) An easy way of finding the work done is to plot the process on a 
P-V diagram and find the area under the process curve. From Fig. 5–10 the
area under the process curve (a trapezoid) is determined to be
W  area 
1200  3202 kPa
2
 3 10.1  0.052 m34 a
1 kJ
1 kPa # m3 b  13 kJ
200  120  320 kPa
P  F
A  30 kN
0.25 m2  120 kPa
F  kx  1150 kN>m2 10.2 m2  30 kN
x  ¢V
A 
10.1  0.052 m3
0.25 m2
 0.2 m
V2  2V1  122 10.05 m32  0.1 m3
P, kPa
V, m3
P1 = 200 kPa
II
0.1
0.05
V1 = 0.05 m3
I
320
200
Heat
A = 0.25 m2
k = 150 kN/m
FIGURE 5–10
Schematic and P-V diagram for
Example 5–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
170
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
5–2
 ENERGY BALANCE FOR CLOSED SYSTEMS
Energy balance for any system undergoing any kind of process was
expressed as (see Chap. 3)
(5–11)
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
or, in the rate form, as
(5–12)
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal,
by heat, work, and mass
kinetic, potential, etc., energies
For constant rates, the total quantities during a time interval t are related to
the quantities per unit time as
(5–13)
The energy balance can be expressed on a per unit mass basis as
(5–14)
which is obtained by dividing all the quantities in Eq. 5–11 by the mass m
of the system. Energy balance can also be expressed in the differential
form as
(5–15)
For a closed system undergoing a cycle, the initial and final states are iden-
tical, and thus Esystem  E2  E1  0. Then the energy balance for a cycle
simplifies to Ein  Eout  0 or Ein  Eout. Noting that a closed system does
not involve any mass flow across its boundaries, the energy balance for a
cycle can be expressed in terms of heat and work interactions as
(5–16)
That is, the net work output during a cycle is equal to net heat input 
(Fig. 5–11).
Wnet,out  Q net,in or W
#
net,out  Q
#
net,in  
1for a cycle2
dEin  dEout  dEsystem or dein  deout  desystem
ein  eout  ¢esystem  
1kJ>kg2
Q  Q
#
¢t, W  W
#
¢t, and ¢E  1dE>dt2¢t  
1kJ2
E.
in  E.
out 

dEsystem>dt  
1kW2
Ein  Eout 
 
 ¢Esystem  
1kJ2
Chapter 5
|
165
P
V
Qnet = Wnet
FIGURE 5–11
For a cycle E  0, thus Q  W.
Note that the work is done by the system.
(c) The work represented by the rectangular area (region I) is done against
the piston and the atmosphere, and the work represented by the triangular
area (region II) is done against the spring. Thus,
Discussion
This result could also be obtained from
Wspring  1
2k 1x2
2  x2
12  1
2 1150 kN>m2 3 10.2 m2 2  024 a
1 kJ
1 kN # m b  3.00 kJ
Wspring  1
23 1320  2002 kPa4 10.05 m32 a
1 kJ
1 kPa # m3 b  3.00 kJ
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
171
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The energy balance (or the first-law) relations already given are intuitive
in nature and are easy to use when the magnitudes and directions of heat
and work transfers are known. However, when performing a general analyt-
ical study or solving a problem that involves an unknown heat or work
interaction, we need to assume a direction for the heat or work interactions.
In such cases, it is common practice to use the classical thermodynamics
sign convention and to assume heat to be transferred into the system (heat
input) in the amount of Q and work to be done by the system (work output)
in the amount of W, and then to solve the problem. The energy balance rela-
tion in that case for a closed system becomes
(5–17)
where Q  Qnet,in  Qin  Qout is the net heat input and W  Wnet,out 
Wout  Win is the net work output. Obtaining a negative quantity for Q or W
simply means that the assumed direction for that quantity is wrong and
should be reversed. Various forms of this “traditional” first-law relation for
closed systems are given in Fig. 5–12.
The first law cannot be proven mathematically, but no process in nature is
known to have violated the first law, and this should be taken as sufficient
evidence of its validity. Note that if it were possible to prove the first law on
the basis of other physical principles, the first law then would be a conse-
quence of those principles instead of being a fundamental physical law itself.
As energy quantities, heat and work are not that different, and you proba-
bly wonder why we keep distinguishing them. After all, the change in the
energy content of a system is equal to the amount of energy that crosses the
system boundaries, and it makes no difference whether the energy crosses
the boundary as heat or work. It seems as if the first-law relations would be
much simpler if we had just one quantity that we could call energy interac-
tion to represent both heat and work. Well, from the first-law point of view,
heat and work are not different at all. From the second-law point of view,
however, heat and work are very different, as is discussed in later chapters.
Q net,in  Wnet,out  ¢Esystem or Q  W  ¢E
166
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
General Q – W = ΔE
Stationary systems Q – W = ΔU
Per unit mass q – w = Δe
Differential form δq – δw = de
FIGURE 5–12
Various forms of the first-law relation
for closed systems.
EXAMPLE 5–5
Electric Heating of a Gas at Constant Pressure
A piston–cylinder device contains 25 g of saturated water vapor that is main-
tained at a constant pressure of 300 kPa. A resistance heater within the
cylinder is turned on and passes a current of 0.2 A for 5 min from a 120-V
source. At the same time, a heat loss of 3.7 kJ occurs. (a) Show that for a
closed system the boundary work Wb and the change in internal energy U
in the first-law relation can be combined into one term, H, for a constant-
pressure process. (b) Determine the final temperature of the steam.
Solution
Saturated water vapor in a piston–cylinder device expands at con-
stant pressure as a result of heating. It is to be shown that U  Wb  H,
and the final temperature is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The tank is stationary and thus the kinetic and potential
energy changes are zero, KE  PE  0. Therefore, E  U and internal
energy is the only form of energy of the system that may change during this
process. 2 Electrical wires constitute a very small part of the system, and
thus the energy change of the wires can be neglected.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
172
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
167
Analysis
We take the contents of the cylinder, including the resistance wires,
as the system (Fig. 5–13). This is a closed system since no mass crosses the
system boundary during the process. We observe that a piston–cylinder device
typically involves a moving boundary and thus boundary work Wb. The pres-
sure remains constant during the process and thus P2  P1. Also, heat is lost
from the system and electrical work We is done on the system.
(a) This part of the solution involves a general analysis for a closed system
undergoing a quasi-equilibrium constant-pressure process, and thus we con-
sider a general closed system. We take the direction of heat transfer Q to be
into the system and the work W to be done by the system. We also express
the work as the sum of boundary and other forms of work (such as electrical
and shaft). Then the energy balance can be expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
For a constant-pressure process, the boundary work is given as Wb 
P0(V2  V1). Substituting this into the preceding relation gives
However,
Also H  U  PV, and thus
(5–18)
which is the desired relation (Fig. 5–14). This equation is very convenient to
use in the analysis of closed systems undergoing a constant-pressure quasi-
equilibrium process since the boundary work is automatically taken care of
by the enthalpy terms, and one no longer needs to determine it separately.
Q  Wother  H2  H1  
1kJ2
P0  P2  P1 S
Q  Wother  1U2  P2V22  1U1  P1V12
Q  Wother  P01V2  V12  U2  U1
Q  Wother  Wb  U2  U1
Q  W  ¢U  ¢KE  ¢PE
Ein  Eout 
 

 
  ¢Esystem
Qout = 3.7 kJ
H2O
5 min
120 V
0.2 A
2
P, kPa
300
1
P1
 = 300 kPa 
= P2
m = 25 g
Sat. vapor
v
FIGURE 5–13
Schematic and P-v diagram for Example 5–5.
¡
0
¡
0
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
ΔH
Q – W other
P = const.
Q – W other = ΔH
 =
Wb
ΔU
–
FIGURE 5–14
For a closed system undergoing a
quasi-equilibrium, P  constant
process, U  Wb  H.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
173
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
168
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(b) The only other form of work in this case is the electrical work, which can
be determined from
State 1:
The enthalpy at the final state can be determined directly from Eq. 5–18 by
expressing heat transfer from the system and work done on the system as
negative quantities (since their directions are opposite to the assumed direc-
tions). Alternately, we can use the general energy balance relation with the
simplification that the boundary work is considered automatically by replac-
ing U by H for a constant-pressure expansion or compression process:
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Now the final state is completely specified since we know both the pressure
and the enthalpy. The temperature at this state is
State 2:
Therefore, the steam will be at 200°C at the end of this process.
Discussion
Strictly speaking, the potential energy change of the steam is
not zero for this process since the center of gravity of the steam rose some-
what. Assuming an elevation change of 1 m (which is rather unlikely), the
change in the potential energy of the steam would be 0.0002 kJ, which is
very small compared to the other terms in the first-law relation. Therefore, in
problems of this kind, the potential energy term for gases is always neglected.
P2  300 kPa
h2  2864.9 kJ>kgf
T2  200°C  
1Table A–62
h2  2864.9 kJ>kg
 7.2 kJ  3.7 kJ  10.025 kg2 1h2  2724.92 kJ>kg
We,in  Q out  ¢H  m1h2  h12
1since P  constant2
We,in  Q out  Wb  ¢U
Ein  Eout 
 

 
  ¢Esystem
P1  300 kPa
sat. vapor
f
h1  hg @ 300 kPa  2724.9 kJ>kg  
1Table A–52
We  VI ¢t  1120 V2 10.2 A2 1300 s2 a
1 kJ>s
1000 VA b  7.2 kJ
EXAMPLE 5–6
Unrestrained Expansion of Water
A rigid tank is divided into two equal parts by a partition. Initially, one side of
the tank contains 5 kg of water at 200 kPa and 25°C, and the other side is
evacuated. The partition is then removed, and the water expands into the entire
tank. The water is allowed to exchange heat with its surroundings until the tem-
perature in the tank returns to the initial value of 25°C. Determine (a) the vol-
ume of the tank, (b) the final pressure, and (c) the heat transfer for this process.
Solution
One half of a rigid tank is filled with liquid water while the other
side is evacuated. The partition between the two parts is removed and
water is allowed to expand and fill the entire tank while the temperature is
maintained constant. The volume of tank, the final pressure, and the heat
transfer are to be to determined.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
174
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
169
Evacuated
space
2
P, kPa
1
P1 = 200 kPa
3.17
T1 = 25°C
200
System boundary
Partition
m = 5 kg
H2O
Qin
v
FIGURE 5–15
Schematic and P-v diagram for Example 5–6.
Assumptions
1 The system is stationary and thus the kinetic and potential
energy changes are zero, KE  PE  0 and E  U. 2 The direction of
heat transfer is to the system (heat gain, Qin). A negative result for Qin indi-
cates the assumed direction is wrong and thus it is a heat loss. 3 The vol-
ume of the rigid tank is constant, and thus there is no energy transfer as
boundary work. 4 There is no electrical, shaft, or any other kind of work
involved.
Analysis
We take the contents of the tank, including the evacuated space, as
the system (Fig. 5–15). This is a closed system since no mass crosses the
system boundary during the process. We observe that the water fills the entire
tank when the partition is removed (possibly as a liquid–vapor mixture).
(a) Initially the water in the tank exists as a compressed liquid since its pres-
sure (200 kPa) is greater than the saturation pressure at 25°C (3.1698 kPa).
Approximating the compressed liquid as a saturated liquid at the given tem-
perature, we find
Then the initial volume of the water is
The total volume of the tank is twice this amount:
(b) At the final state, the specific volume of the water is
which is twice the initial value of the specific volume. This result is expected
since the volume doubles while the amount of mass remains constant.
Since vf  v2  vg, the water is a saturated liquid–vapor mixture at the final
state, and thus the pressure is the saturation pressure at 25°C:
P2  Psat @ 25°C  3.1698 kPa  
1Table A–42
At 25°C: vf  0.001003 m3>kg and vg  43.340 m3>kg 
1Table A–42
v2  V2
m  0.01 m3
5 kg
 0.002 m3>kg
Vtank  122 10.005 m32  0.01 m3
V1  mv1  15 kg2 10.001 m3>kg2  0.005 m3
v1  vf @ 25°C  0.001003 m3>kg  0.001 m3>kg  
1Table A–42

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
175
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
5–3
 SPECIFIC HEATS
We know from experience that it takes different amounts of energy to raise
the temperature of identical masses of different substances by one degree.
For example, we need about 4.5 kJ of energy to raise the temperature of 1 kg
of iron from 20 to 30°C, whereas it takes about 9 times this energy (41.8 kJ
to be exact) to raise the temperature of 1 kg of liquid water by the same
amount (Fig. 5–17). Therefore, it is desirable to have a property that will
enable us to compare the energy storage capabilities of various substances.
This property is the specific heat.
The specific heat is defined as the energy required to raise the temperature
of a unit mass of a substance by one degree (Fig. 5–18). In general, this
energy depends on how the process is executed. In thermodynamics, we are
interested in two kinds of specific heats: specific heat at constant volume cv
and specific heat at constant pressure cp.
Physically, the specific heat at constant volume cv can be viewed as the
energy required to raise the temperature of the unit mass of a substance
by one degree as the volume is maintained constant. The energy required to
170
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(c) Under stated assumptions and observations, the energy balance on the
system can be expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Notice that even though the water is expanding during this process, the sys-
tem chosen involves fixed boundaries only (the dashed lines) and therefore
the moving boundary work is zero (Fig. 5–16). Then W  0 since the system
does not involve any other forms of work. (Can you reach the same conclu-
sion by choosing the water as our system?) Initially,
The quality at the final state is determined from the specific volume 
information:
Then
Substituting yields
Discussion
The positive sign indicates that the assumed direction is correct,
and heat is transferred to the water.
Qin  15 kg2 3 1104.88  104.832 kJkg4  0.25 kJ
 104.88 kJ>kg
 104.83 kJ>kg  12.3 
 1052 12304.3 kJ>kg2
u2  uf  x2ufg
x2 
v2  vf
vfg
 0.002  0.001
43.34  0.001  2.3 
 105
u1  uf @ 25°C  104.83 kJ>kg
Qin  ¢U  m1u2  u12
Ein  Eout 
 

¢Esystem
Vacuum
P = 0
W = 0
H
Heat
2O
FIGURE 5–16
Expansion against a vacuum involves
no work and thus no energy transfer.
20     30°C
IRON
1 kg
←
4.5 kJ
20     30°C
WATER
1 kg
←
41.8 kJ
FIGURE 5–17
It takes different amounts of energy to
raise the temperature of different
substances by the same amount.
Specific heat = 5 kJ/kg ·°C
ΔT = 1°C
m = 1 kg
5 kJ
FIGURE 5–18
Specific heat is the energy required to
raise the temperature of a unit mass of
a substance by one degree in a
specified way.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
176
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
do the same as the pressure is maintained constant is the specific heat at
constant pressure cp. This is illustrated in Fig. 5–19. The specific heat
at constant pressure cp is always greater than cv because at constant pressure
the system is allowed to expand and the energy for this expansion work
must also be supplied to the system.
Now we attempt to express the specific heats in terms of other thermody-
namic properties. First, consider a fixed mass in a stationary closed system
undergoing a constant-volume process (and thus no expansion or compression
work is involved). The conservation of energy principle ein  eout  esystem
for this process can be expressed in the differential form as
The left-hand side of this equation represents the net amount of energy
transferred to the system. From the definition of cv, this energy must be
equal to cv dT, where dT is the differential change in temperature. Thus,
or
(5–19)
Similarly, an expression for the specific heat at constant pressure cp can be
obtained by considering a constant-pressure expansion or compression
process. It yields
(5–20)
Equations 5–19 and 5–20 are the defining equations for cv and cp, and their
interpretation is given in Fig. 5–20.
Note that cv and cp are expressed in terms of other properties; thus, they
must be properties themselves. Like any other property, the specific heats of
a substance depend on the state that, in general, is specified by two indepen-
dent, intensive properties. That is, the energy required to raise the tempera-
ture of a substance by one degree is different at different temperatures and
pressures (Fig. 5–21). But this difference is usually not very large.
A few observations can be made from Eqs. 5–19 and 5–20. First, these
equations are property relations and as such are independent of the type of
processes. They are valid for any substance undergoing any process. The
only relevance cv has to a constant-volume process is that cv happens to be
the energy transferred to a system during a constant-volume process per unit
mass per unit degree rise in temperature. This is how the values of cv are
determined. This is also how the name specific heat at constant volume
originated. Likewise, the energy transferred to a system per unit mass per
unit temperature rise during a constant-pressure process happens to be equal
to cp. This is how the values of cp can be determined and also explains the
origin of the name specific heat at constant pressure.
Another observation that can be made from Eqs. 5–19 and 5–20 is that cv
is related to the changes in internal energy and cp to the changes in
enthalpy. In fact, it would be more proper to define cv as the change in the
internal energy of a substance per unit change in temperature at constant
cp  a 0h
0T b
p
cv  a 0u
0T b
v
cv d˛T  du  at constant volume
dein  deout  du
Chapter 5
|
171
ΔT = 1°C
cv = 3.12
kJ
m = 1 kg
3.12 kJ
V = constant
kg.°C
Δ T = 1°C
cp = 5.19
kJ
m = 1 kg
5.19 kJ
P = constant
kg.°C
(1)
(2)
FIGURE 5–19
Constant-volume and constant-
pressure specific heats cv and cp
(values given are for helium gas).
∂T  v
= the change in internal energy
with temperature at
constant volume
cv =(
(
∂u
∂T  p
= the change in enthalpy with
temperature at constant
pressure
cp =(
(
∂h
FIGURE 5–20
Formal definitions of cv and cp.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
177
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
volume. Likewise, cp can be defined as the change in the enthalpy of a sub-
stance per unit change in temperature at constant pressure. In other words,
cv is a measure of the variation of internal energy of a substance with tem-
perature, and cp is a measure of the variation of enthalpy of a substance with
temperature.
Both the internal energy and enthalpy of a substance can be changed
by the transfer of energy in any form, with heat being only one of them.
Therefore, the term specific energy is probably more appropriate than the
term specific heat, which implies that energy is transferred (and stored) in
the form of heat.
A common unit for specific heats is kJ/kg · °C or kJ/kg · K. Notice that
these two units are identical since T(°C)  T(K), and 1°C change in
temperature is equivalent to a change of 1 K. The specific heats are some-
times given on a molar basis. They are then denoted by c–v and c–
p and have
the unit kJ/kmol · °C or kJ/kmol · K.
5–4
 INTERNAL ENERGY, ENTHALPY, 
AND SPECIFIC HEATS OF IDEAL GASES
We defined an ideal gas as a gas whose temperature, pressure, and specific
volume are related by
It has been demonstrated mathematically and experimentally (Joule, 1843)
that for an ideal gas the internal energy is a function of the temperature only.
That is,
(5–21)
In his classical experiment, Joule submerged two tanks connected with a
pipe and a valve in a water bath, as shown in Fig. 5–22. Initially, one tank
contained air at a high pressure and the other tank was evacuated. When
thermal equilibrium was attained, he opened the valve to let air pass from
one tank to the other until the pressures equalized. Joule observed no
change in the temperature of the water bath and assumed that no heat was
transferred to or from the air. Since there was also no work done, he con-
cluded that the internal energy of the air did not change even though the
volume and the pressure changed. Therefore, he reasoned, the internal
energy is a function of temperature only and not a function of pressure or
specific volume. (Joule later showed that for gases that deviate significantly
from ideal-gas behavior, the internal energy is not a function of temperature
alone.)
Using the definition of enthalpy and the equation of state of an ideal gas,
we have
Since R is constant and u  u(T), it follows that the enthalpy of an ideal gas
is also a function of temperature only:
(5–22)
h  h1T2
h  u  Pv
Pv  RT
f
h  u  RT
u  u1T2
Pv  RT
172
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
AIR
(high pressure)
Evacuated
WATER
Thermometer
FIGURE 5–22
Schematic of the experimental
apparatus used by Joule.
300      301 K
AIR
m = 1 kg
←
0.718 kJ
0.855 kJ
AIR
m = 1 kg
1000      1001 K
←
FIGURE 5–21
The specific heat of a substance
changes with temperature.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
178
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Since u and h depend only on temperature for an ideal gas, the specific
heats cv and cp also depend, at most, on temperature only. Therefore, at a
given temperature, u, h, cv, and cp of an ideal gas have fixed values regard-
less of the volume or pressure (Fig. 5–23). Thus, for ideal gases, the partial
derivatives in Eqs. 5–19 and 5–20 can be replaced by ordinary derivatives.
Then the differential changes in the internal energy and enthalpy of an ideal
gas can be expressed as
(5–23)
and
(5–24)
The change in internal energy or enthalpy for an ideal gas during a process
from state 1 to state 2 is determined by integrating these equations:
(5–25)
and
(5–26)
To carry out these integrations, we need to have relations for cv and cp as
functions of temperature.
At low pressures, all real gases approach ideal-gas behavior, and therefore
their specific heats depend on temperature only. The specific heats of real
gases at low pressures are called ideal-gas specific heats, or zero-pressure
specific heats, and are often denoted cp0 and cv0. Accurate analytical expres-
sions for ideal-gas specific heats, based on direct measurements or calcula-
tions from statistical behavior of molecules, are available and are given as
third-degree polynomials in the appendix (Table A–2c) for several gases. A
plot of c–p0(T) data for some common gases is given in Fig. 5–24.
The use of ideal-gas specific heat data is limited to low pressures, but these
data can also be used at moderately high pressures with reasonable accuracy
as long as the gas does not deviate from ideal-gas behavior significantly.
The integrations in Eqs. 5–25 and 5–26 are straightforward but rather
time-consuming and thus impractical. To avoid these laborious calculations,
u and h data for a number of gases have been tabulated over small tempera-
ture intervals. These tables are obtained by choosing an arbitrary reference
point and performing the integrations in Eqs. 5–25 and 5–26 by treating
state 1 as the reference state. In the ideal-gas tables given in the appendix,
zero kelvin is chosen as the reference state, and both the enthalpy and the
internal energy are assigned zero values at that state (Fig. 5–25). The choice
of the reference state has no effect on u or h calculations. The u and h
data are given in kJ/kg for air (Table A–21) and usually in kJ/kmol for other
gases. The unit kJ/kmol is very convenient in the thermodynamic analysis of
chemical reactions.
Some observations can be made from Fig. 5–24. First, the specific heats
of gases with complex molecules (molecules with two or more atoms) are
higher and increase with temperature. Also, the variation of specific heats
¢h  h2  h1  
2
1
cp 1T2 dT  
1kJ>kg2
¢u  u2  u1  
2
1
cv 1T2 dT  
1kJ>kg2
dh  cp1T2 dT
du  cv1T2 dT
Chapter 5
|
173
u = u(T
h = h(T
cv = cv (T
cp = cp(T
)
)
)
)
FIGURE 5–23
For ideal gases, u, h, cv, and cp vary
with temperature only.
1000
20
2000
3000
Temperature, K
Ar, He, Ne, Kr, Xe, Rn
30
40
50
60
CO2
H2O
O2
H2
Air
c p0
kJ/kmol · K
FIGURE 5–24
Ideal-gas constant-pressure specific
heats for some gases (see Table A–2c
for cp equations).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
179
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
with temperature is smooth and may be approximated as linear over small
temperature intervals (a few hundred degrees or less). Therefore the specific
heat functions in Eqs. 5–25 and 5–26 can be replaced by the constant aver-
age specific heat values. Then the integrations in these equations can be per-
formed, yielding
(5–27)
and
(5–28)
The specific heat values for some common gases are listed as a function of
temperature in Table A–2b. The average specific heats cp,avg and cv,avg are
evaluated from this table at the average temperature (T1 + T2)/2, as shown in
Fig. 5–26. If the final temperature T2 is not known, the specific heats may
be evaluated at T1 or at the anticipated average temperature. Then T2 can be
determined by using these specific heat values. The value of T2 can be
refined, if necessary, by evaluating the specific heats at the new average
temperature.
Another way of determining the average specific heats is to evaluate them
at T1 and T2 and then take their average. Usually both methods give reason-
ably good results, and one is not necessarily better than the other.
Another observation that can be made from Fig. 5–24 is that the ideal-gas
specific heats of monatomic gases such as argon, neon, and helium remain
constant over the entire temperature range. Thus, u and h of monatomic
gases can easily be evaluated from Eqs. 5–27 and 5–28.
Note that the u and h relations given previously are not restricted to
any kind of process. They are valid for all processes. The presence of the
constant-volume specific heat cv in an equation should not lead one to
believe that this equation is valid for a constant-volume process only. On the
contrary, the relation u  cv,avg T is valid for any ideal gas undergoing
any process (Fig. 5–27). A similar argument can be given for cp and h.
To summarize, there are three ways to determine the internal energy and
enthalpy changes of ideal gases (Fig. 5–28):
1. By using the tabulated u and h data. This is the easiest and most accu-
rate way when tables are readily available.
2. By using the cv or cp relations as a function of temperature and per-
forming the integrations. This is very inconvenient for hand calculations
but quite desirable for computerized calculations. The results obtained
are very accurate.
3. By using average specific heats. This is very simple and certainly very
convenient when property tables are not available. The results obtained
are reasonably accurate if the temperature interval is not very large.
Specific Heat Relations of Ideal Gases
A special relationship between cp and cv for ideal gases can be obtained by
differentiating the relation h  u  RT, which yields
dh  du  R dT
h2  h1  cp,avg 1T2  T12
1kJ>kg2
u2  u1  cv,avg 1T2  T12
1kJ>kg2
174
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
0              0                  0
T, K
AIR
u, kJ/kg
h, kJ/kg
.               .                   .
.               .                   .
.               .                   .
.               .                   .
300        214.07         300.19
310        221.25         310.24
FIGURE 5–25
In the preparation of ideal-gas tables,
0 K is chosen as the reference
temperature.
Actual
1
T1
Tavg
T2
T
2
Approximation
cp,avg
cp
FIGURE 5–26
For small temperature intervals, the
specific heats may be assumed to vary
linearly with temperature.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
180
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Replacing dh by cp dT and du by cv dT and dividing the resulting expression
by dT, we obtain
(5–29)
This is an important relationship for ideal gases since it enables us to deter-
mine cv from a knowledge of cp and the gas constant R.
When the specific heats are given on a molar basis, R in the above equa-
tion should be replaced by the universal gas constant Ru (Fig. 5–29).
(5–30)
At this point, we introduce another ideal-gas property called the specific
heat ratio k, defined as
(5–31)
The specific ratio also varies with temperature, but this variation is very
mild. For monatomic gases, its value is essentially constant at 1.667. Many
diatomic gases, including air, have a specific heat ratio of about 1.4 at room
temperature.
k 
cp
cv
cp  cv  Ru  
1kJ>kmol # K2
cp  cv  R  
1kJ>kg # K2
Chapter 5
|
175
Δu = cv ΔT
T1 = 20°C
P = constant
AIR
T2 = 30°C
Q2
Q1
T1 = 20°C
V = constant
AIR
T2 = 30°C
= 7.18 kJ/kg
Δu = cv ΔT
= 7.18 kJ/kg
FIGURE 5–27
The relation u  cv T is valid for
any kind of process, constant-volume
or not.
Δu = u 2 – u1  (table)
Δu =
2
1
cv (T) dT
Δu ≅cv,avg ΔT

FIGURE 5–28
Three ways of calculating u.
EXAMPLE 5–7
Evaluation of the u of an Ideal Gas
Air at 300 K and 200 kPa is heated at constant pressure to 600 K. Determine
the change in internal energy of air per unit mass, using (a) data from the air
table (Table A–21), (b) the functional form of the specific heat (Table A–2c),
and (c) the average specific heat value (Table A–2b).
Solution
The internal energy change of air is to be determined in three differ-
ent ways.
Assumptions
At specified conditions, air can be considered to be an ideal
gas since it is at a high temperature and low pressure relative to its critical-
point values.
Analysis
The internal energy change u of ideal gases depends on the ini-
tial and final temperatures only, and not on the type of process. Thus, the
following solution is valid for any kind of process.
(a) One way of determining the change in internal energy of air is to read the
u values at T1 and T2 from Table A–21 and take the difference:
Thus, the exact answer is
(b) The c–
p(T) of air is given in Table A–2c in the form of a third-degree poly-
nomial expressed as
cp 1T2  a  bT  cT 2 dT 3
¢u  u2  u1  1434.78  214.072 kJ>kg  220.71 kJ>kg
u2  u @ 600 K  434.78 kJ>kg
u1  u @ 300 K  214.07 kJ>kg

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
181
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
176
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
where a  28.11, b  0.1967 
 102, c  0.4802 
 105, and
d   1.966 
 109. From Eq. 5–30,
From Eq. 5–25,
Performing the integration and substituting the values, we obtain
The change in the internal energy on a unit-mass basis is determined by
dividing this value by the molar mass of air (Table A–1):
which differs from the tabulated value by 0.8 percent.
(c) The average value of the constant-volume specific heat cv,avg is determined
from Table A–2b at the average temperature of (T1  T2)/2  450 K to be
Thus,
Discussion
This answer differs from the tabulated value (220.71 kJ/kg) by
only 0.4 percent. This close agreement is not surprising since the assump-
tion that cv varies linearly with temperature is a reasonable one at tempera-
ture intervals of only a few hundred degrees. If we had used the cv value at
T1  300 K instead of at Tavg, the result would be 215.4 kJ/kg, which is in
error by about 2 percent. Errors of this magnitude are acceptable for most
engineering purposes.
 220 kJ>kg
¢u  cv,avg1T2  T12  10.733 kJ>kg # K2 3 1600  3002K4
cv,avg  cv @ 450 K  0.733 kJ>kg # K
¢u  ¢u
M 
6447 kJ>kmol
28.97 kg>kmol  222.5 kJ>kg
¢u  6447 kJ>kmol
¢u  
2
1
 cv1T2˚dT  
T2
T1
 3 1a  Ru2  bT  cT 2  dT 34
˚ dT
cv1T2  cp  Ru  1a  Ru2  bT  cT 2 dT3
EXAMPLE 5–8
Heating of a Gas in a Tank by Stirring
An insulated rigid tank initially contains 1.5 lbm of helium at 80°F and
50 psia. A paddle wheel with a power rating of 0.02 hp is operated within
the tank for 30 min. Determine (a) the final temperature and (b) the final
pressure of the helium gas.
Solution
Helium gas in an insulated rigid tank is stirred by a paddle wheel.
The final temperature and pressure of helium are to be determined.
Assumptions
1
Helium is an ideal gas since it is at a very high temperature
relative to its critical-point value of 451°F. 2 Constant specific heats can be
used for helium. 3 The system is stationary and thus the kinetic and potential
energy changes are zero, KE  PE  0 and E  U. 4 The volume of
the tank is constant, and thus there is no boundary work. 5 The system is adi-
abatic and thus there is no heat transfer.
AIR at 300 K
cv = 0.718 kJ/kg · K
R = 0.287 kJ/kg . K
cp = 1.005 kJ/kg . K
{
or
cv  = 20.80 kJ/kmol . K
Ru = 8.314 kJ/kmol . K
cp = 29.114 kJ/kmol . K 
{
FIGURE 5–29
The cp of an ideal gas can be
determined from a knowledge of 
cv and R.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
182
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
177
Analysis
We take the contents of the tank as the system (Fig. 5–30). This is
a closed system since no mass crosses the system boundary during the
process. We observe that there is shaft work done on the system.
(a) The amount of paddle-wheel work done on the system is
Under the stated assumptions and observations, the energy balance on the
system can be expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
As we pointed out earlier, the ideal-gas specific heats of monatomic gases
(helium being one of them) are constant. The cv value of helium is deter-
mined from Table A–2Ea to be cv  0.753 Btu/lbm · °F. Substituting this
and other known quantities into the above equation, we obtain
(b) The final pressure is determined from the ideal-gas relation
where V1 and V2 are identical and cancel out. Then the final pressure
becomes
Discussion
Note that the pressure in the ideal-gas relation is always the
absolute pressure.
P2  52.1 psia
50 psia
180  4602 R 
P2
1102.5  4602R
P1V1
T1
 P2V2
T2
T2  102.5°F
 25.45 Btu  11.5 lbm2 10.753 Btu>lbm # °F2 1T2  80°F2
Wsh,in  ¢U  m 1u2  u12  mcv,avg1T2  T12
Ein  Eout 
 
¢Esystem
Wsh  W#
sh ¢t  10.02 hp2 10.5 h2 a
2545 Btu>h
1 hp
b  25.45 Btu
He
1
P, psia
P2
2
m = 1.5 lbm
50
T1 = 80°F
P1 = 50 psia
V2 = V1
Wsh
V
FIGURE 5–30
Schematic and P-V diagram for
Example 5–8.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
183
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
178
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 5–9
Heating of a Gas by a Resistance Heater
A piston–cylinder device initially contains 0.5 m3 of nitrogen gas at 400 kPa
and 27°C. An electric heater within the device is turned on and is allowed to
pass a current of 2 A for 5 min from a 120-V source. Nitrogen expands at
constant pressure, and a heat loss of 2800 J occurs during the process.
Determine the final temperature of nitrogen.
Solution
Nitrogen gas in a piston–cylinder device is heated by an electric
resistance heater. Nitrogen expands at constant pressure while some heat is
lost. The final temperature of nitrogen is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Nitrogen is an ideal gas since it is at a high temperature and
low pressure relative to its critical-point values of 147°C, and 3.39 MPa.
2 The system is stationary and thus the kinetic and potential energy changes
are zero, KE  PE  0 and E  U. 3 The pressure remains constant
during the process and thus P2  P1. 4 Nitrogen has constant specific heats
at room temperature.
Analysis
We take the contents of the cylinder as the system (Fig. 5–31).
This is a closed system since no mass crosses the system boundary during
the process. We observe that a piston–cylinder device typically involves a
moving boundary and thus boundary work, Wb. Also, heat is lost from the
system and electrical work We is done on the system.
First, let us determine the electrical work done on the nitrogen:
The mass of nitrogen is determined from the ideal-gas relation:
Under the stated assumptions and observations, the energy balance on the
system can be expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
since U  Wb 	 H for a closed system undergoing a quasi-equilibrium
expansion or compression process at constant pressure. From Table A–2a,
cp  1.039 kJ/kg · K for nitrogen at room temperature. The only unknown
quantity in the previous equation is T2, and it is found to be
Discussion
We could also solve this problem by determining the boundary
work and the internal energy change rather than the enthalpy change.
T2  56.7°C
 72 kJ  2.8 kJ  12.245 kg2 11.039 kJ>kg # K2 1T2  27°C2
We,in  Q out  ¢H  m1h2  h12  mcp1T2  T12
We,in  Q out  Wb,out  ¢U
Ein  Eout 
 

¢Esystem
m  P1V1
RT1

1400 kPa2 10.5 m32
10.297 kPa # m3>kg # K2 1300 K2  2.245 kg
We  VI ¢t  1120 V2 12 A2 15 
 60 s2 a
1 kJ>s
1000 VA b  72 kJ
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
184
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
179
1
P, kPa
V, m3
2
400
2800 J
N2
120 V
2 A
P1 = 400 kPa
V1 = 0.5 m 3
0.5
P = const.
T1 = 27°C
FIGURE 5–31
Schematic and P-V diagram for Example 5–9.
EXAMPLE 5–10
Heating of a Gas at Constant Pressure
A piston–cylinder device initially contains air at 150 kPa and 27°C. At this
state, the piston is resting on a pair of stops, as shown in Fig. 5–32, and the
enclosed volume is 400 L. The mass of the piston is such that a 350-kPa
pressure is required to move it. The air is now heated until its volume has
doubled. Determine (a) the final temperature, (b) the work done by the air,
and (c) the total heat transferred to the air.
Solution
Air in a piston–cylinder device with a set of stops is heated until
its volume is doubled. The final temperature, work done, and the total heat
transfer are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Air is an ideal gas since it is at a high temperature and low
pressure relative to its critical-point values. 2 The system is stationary and
thus the kinetic and potential energy changes are zero, KE  PE  0 and
E  U. 3 The volume remains constant until the piston starts moving,
and the pressure remains constant afterwards. 4 There are no electrical,
shaft, or other forms of work involved.
Analysis
We take the contents of the cylinder as the system (Fig. 5–32).
This is a closed system since no mass crosses the system boundary during
the process. We observe that a piston-cylinder device typically involves a
moving boundary and thus boundary work, Wb. Also, the boundary work is
done by the system, and heat is transferred to the system.
(a) The final temperature can be determined easily by using the ideal-gas
relation between states 1 and 3 in the following form:
T3  1400 K
P1V1
T1
 P3V3
T3
¡
1150 kPa2 1V12
300 K

1350 kPa2 12V12
T3

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
185
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
180
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(b) The work done could be determined by integration, but for this case
it is much easier to find it from the area under the process curve on a P-V
diagram, shown in Fig. 5–32:
Therefore,
The work is done by the system (to raise the piston and to push the atmo-
spheric air out of the way), and thus it is work output.
(c) Under the stated assumptions and observations, the energy balance on
the system between the initial and final states (process 1–3) can be
expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
The mass of the system can be determined from the ideal-gas relation:
The internal energies are determined from the air table (Table A–21) to be
Thus,
Discussion
The positive sign verifies that heat is transferred to the system.
Q in  767 kJ
Q in  140 kJ  10.697 kg2 3 11113.52  214.072 kJ>kg4
u3  u @ 1400 K  1113.52 kJ>kg
u1  u @ 300 K  214.07 kJ>kg
m  P1V1
RT1

1150 kPa2 10.4 m32
10.287 kPa # m3>kg # K2 1300 K2  0.697 kg
Q in  Wb,out  ¢U  m1u3  u12
Ein  Eout 
 

¢Esystem
W13  140 kJ
A  1V2  V12P2  10.4 m32 1350 kPa2  140 m3 # kPa
3
P, kPa
V, m3
2
350
Q
AIR
P1 = 150 kPa
V1 = 400 L
0.4
T1 = 27°C
150
1
A
0.8
FIGURE 5–32
Schematic and P-V diagram for
Example 5–10.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
186
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
5–5
 INTERNAL ENERGY, ENTHALPY, AND
SPECIFIC HEATS OF SOLIDS AND LIQUIDS
A substance whose specific volume (or density) is constant is called an
incompressible substance. The specific volumes of solids and liquids
essentially remain constant during a process (Fig. 5–33). Therefore, liquids
and solids can be approximated as incompressible substances without sacri-
ficing much in accuracy. The constant-volume assumption should be taken
to imply that the energy associated with the volume change is negligible
compared with other forms of energy. Otherwise, this assumption would be
ridiculous for studying the thermal stresses in solids (caused by volume
change with temperature) or analyzing liquid-in-glass thermometers.
It can be mathematically shown that the constant-volume and constant-
pressure specific heats are identical for incompressible substances (Fig.
5–34). Therefore, for solids and liquids, the subscripts on cp and cv can be
dropped, and both specific heats can be represented by a single symbol c.
That is,
(5–32)
This result could also be deduced from the physical definitions of constant-
volume and constant-pressure specific heats. Specific heat values for several
common liquids and solids are given in Table A–3.
Internal Energy Changes
Like those of ideal gases, the specific heats of incompressible substances
depend on temperature only. Thus, the partial differentials in the defining
equation of cv can be replaced by ordinary differentials, which yield
(5–33)
The change in internal energy between states 1 and 2 is then obtained by
integration:
(5–34)
The variation of specific heat c with temperature should be known before this
integration can be carried out. For small temperature intervals, a c value at the
average temperature can be used and treated as a constant, yielding
(5–35)
Enthalpy Changes
Using the definition of enthalpy h  u  Pv and noting that v  constant,
the differential form of the enthalpy change of incompressible substances can
be determined by differentiation to be
(5–36)
Integrating,
(5–37)
¢h  ¢u  v ¢P  cavg ¢T  v ¢P  
1kJ>kg2
dh  du  v dP  P dv  du  v dP
¢u  cavg1T2  T12
1kJ>kg2
¢u  u2  u1  
2
1
c 1T2 dT  
1kJ>kg2
du  cv 
˛˛dT  c 1T˛2 dT
cp  cv  c
Chapter 5
|
181
LIQUID
vs = constant
vl = constant
SOLID
FIGURE 5–33
The specific volumes of
incompressible substances remain
constant during a process.
IRON
25°C
c = cv = cp
= 0.45 kJ/kg . °C
FIGURE 5–34
The cv and cp values of incompressible
substances are identical and are
denoted by c.
→
0

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
187
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
For solids, the term v P is insignificant and thus h  u ≅cavgT. For
liquids, two special cases are commonly encountered:
1. Constant-pressure processes, as in heaters (P  0): h  u ≅cavgT
2. Constant-temperature processes, as in pumps (T  0): h  v P
For a process between states 1 and 2, the last relation can be expressed as
h2  h1  v(P2  P1). By taking state 2 to be the compressed liquid state at
a given T and P and state 1 to be the saturated liquid state at the same tem-
perature, the enthalpy of the compressed liquid can be expressed as
(5–38)
as discussed in Chap. 4. This is an improvement over the assumption that
the enthalpy of the compressed liquid could be taken as hf at the given tem-
perature (that is, h@ P,T ≅hf @ T). However, the contribution of the last term is
often very small, and is neglected. (Note that at high temperature and pres-
sures, Eq. 5–38 may overcorrect the enthalpy and result in a larger error
than the approximation h ≅hf @ T.)
h@P,T  hf @ T  vf @ T1P  Psat @ T2
182
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 5–11
Enthalpy of a Compressed Liquid
Determine the enthalpy of liquid water at 100°C and 15 MPa (a) by using
compressed liquid tables, (b) by approximating it as a saturated liquid, and
(c) by using the correction given by Eq. 5–38.
Solution
The enthalpy of liquid water is to be determined exactly and
approximately.
Analysis
At 100°C, the saturation pressure of water is 101.42 kPa, and
since P  Psat, the water exists as a compressed liquid at the specified state.
(a) From compressed liquid tables, we read
This is the exact value.
(b) Approximating the compressed liquid as a saturated liquid at 100°C, as
is commonly done, we obtain
This value is in error by about 2.6 percent.
(c) From Eq. 5–38,
Discussion
Note that the correction term reduced the error from 2.6 to
about 1 percent in this case. However, this improvement in accuracy is often
not worth the extra effort involved.
 434.07 kJ>kg
 1419.17 kJ>kg2  10.001 m3 kg2 3 115,000  101.422 kPa4 a
1 kJ
1 kPa # m3 b
h@P,T  hf @ T  vf @ T1P  Psat @ T2
h  hf @ 100°C  419.17 kJ>kg
P  15 MPa
T  100°C f
h  430.39 kJ>kg  
1Table A–72

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
188
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
183
EXAMPLE 5–12
Cooling of an Iron Block by Water
A 50-kg iron block at 80°C is dropped into an insulated tank that contains
0.5 m3 of liquid water at 25°C. Determine the temperature when thermal
equilibrium is reached.
Solution
An iron block is dropped into water in an insulated tank. The final
temperature when thermal equilibrium is reached is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Both water and the iron block are incompressible sub-
stances. 2 Constant specific heats at room temperature can be used for
water and the iron. 3 The system is stationary and thus the kinetic and
potential energy changes are zero, KE  PE  0 and E  U.
4 There are no electrical, shaft, or other forms of work involved. 5 The sys-
tem is well-insulated and thus there is no heat transfer.
Analysis
We take the entire contents of the tank as the system (Fig. 5–35).
This is a closed system since no mass crosses the system boundary during
the process. We observe that the volume of a rigid tank is constant, and
thus there is no boundary work. The energy balance on the system can be
expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
The total internal energy U is an extensive property, and therefore it can be
expressed as the sum of the internal energies of the parts of the system.
Then the total internal energy change of the system becomes
The specific volume of liquid water at or about room temperature can be
taken to be 0.001 m3/kg. Then the mass of the water is
The specific heats of iron and liquid water are determined from Table A–3 to
be ciron  0.45 kJ/kg · °C and cwater  4.18 kJ/kg · °C. Substituting these val-
ues into the energy equation, we obtain
mwater  V
v 
0.5 m3
0.001 m3>kg  500 kg
3mc 1T2  T12 4 iron  3mc 1T2  T12 4 water  0
¢Usys  ¢Uiron  ¢Uwater  0
 0  ¢U
Ein  Eout 
 

¢Esystem
WATER
25°C
0.5 m 3
IRON
80°C
m = 50 kg
FIGURE 5–35
Schematic for Example 5–12.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
Therefore, when thermal equilibrium is established, both the water and iron
are at 25.6°C.
Discussion
The small rise in water temperature is due to its large mass and
large specific heat.
T2  25.6°C
150 kg2 10.45 kJ>kg # °C2 1T2  80°C2  1500 kg2 14.18 kJ>kg # °C2 1T2  25°C2  0

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
189
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
EXAMPLE 5–13
Temperature Rise due to Slapping
If you ever slapped someone or got slapped yourself, you probably remember
the burning sensation. Imagine you had the unfortunate occasion of being
slapped by an angry person, which caused the temperature of the affected
area of your face to rise by 1.8°C (ouch!). Assuming the slapping hand has a
mass of 1.2 kg and about 0.150 kg of the tissue on the face and the hand
is affected by the incident, estimate the velocity of the hand just before
impact. Take the specific heat of the tissue to be 3.8 kJ/kg · °C.
Solution
The face of a person is slapped. For the specified temperature
rise of the affected part, the impact velocity of the hand is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The hand is brought to a complete stop after the impact.
2 The face takes the blow without significant movement. 3 No heat is trans-
ferred from the affected area to the surroundings, and thus the process is
adiabatic. 4 No work is done on or by the system. 5 The potential energy
change is zero, PE  0 and E  U  KE.
Analysis
We analyze this incident in a professional manner without involv-
ing any emotions. First, we identify the system, draw a sketch of it, and
state our observations about the specifics of the problem. We take the hand
and the affected portion of the face as the system (Fig. 5–36). This is a
closed system since it involves a fixed amount of mass (no mass transfer).
We observe that the kinetic energy of the hand decreases during the process,
as evidenced by a decrease in velocity from initial value to zero, while the
internal energy of the affected area increases, as evidenced by an increase in
the temperature. There seems to be no significant energy transfer between
the system and its surroundings during this process.
Under the stated assumptions and observations, the energy balance on the
system can be expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
That is, the decrease in the kinetic energy of the hand must be equal to the
increase in the internal energy of the affected area. Solving for the velocity
and substituting the given quantities, the impact velocity of the hand is
determined to be
Discussion
Reconstruction of events such as this by making appropriate
assumptions are commonly used in forensic engineering.
 41.4 m>s 1or 149 km>h2
 B
210.15 kg2 13.8 kJ>kg # °C2 11.8°C2
1.2 kg
a
1000 m2>s2
1 kJ>kg
b
Vhand  B
21mc¢T2 affected tissue
mhand
 0  1mc¢T2 affected tissue  3m10  V 22>24 hand
 0  ¢Uaffected tissue  ¢KEhand
Ein  Eout 
 

¢Esystem
184
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 5–36
Schematic for Example 5–13.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
190
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
185
Work is the energy transferred as a force acts on a system
through a distance. The most common form of mechanical
work is the boundary work, which is the work associated
with the expansion and compression of substances. On a P-V
diagram, the area under the process curve represents the
boundary work for a quasi-equilibrium process. Various
forms of boundary work are expressed as follows:
(1) General
(2) Isobaric process
(P1  P2  P0  constant)
(3) Polytropic process
(PV n  constant)
(4) Isothernal process of an ideal gas
(PV  mRT0  constant)
The first law of thermodynamics is essentially an expression
of the conservation of energy principle, also called the energy
balance. The general energy balances for any system under-
going any process can be expressed as
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
It can also be expressed in the rate form as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal,
by heat, work, and mass
kinetic, potential, etc., energies
Taking heat transfer to the system and work done by the
system to be positive quantities, the energy balance for a
closed system can also be expressed as
where
¢PE  mg 1z2  z12
¢KE  1
2m 1V 2
2  V 2
12
¢U  m 1u2  u12
W  Wother  Wb
Q  W  ¢U  ¢KE  ¢PE
E.
in  E.
out  
dEsystem>dt
Ein  Eout 
 
¢Esystem
Wb  P1V1 ln V2
V1
 mRT0 ln V2
V1
Wb  P2V2  P1V1
1  n
 
1n  12
Wb  P01V2  V12
Wb  
2
1
 P dV
For a constant-pressure process, Wb  U  H. Thus,
The amount of energy needed to raise the temperature of a
unit mass of a substance by one degree is called the specific
heat at constant volume cv for a constant-volume process and
the specific heat at constant pressure cp for a constant-
pressure process. They are defined as
For ideal gases u, h, cv, and cp are functions of temperature
alone. The u and h of ideal gases are expressed as
For ideal gases, cv and cp are related by
where R is the gas constant. The specific heat ratio k is
defined as
For incompressible substances (liquids and solids), both the
constant-pressure and constant-volume specific heats are
identical and denoted by c:
The u and h of imcompressible substances are given by
¢h  ¢u  v¢P
¢u  
2
1
 c 1T2 dT  cavg 1T2  T12
cp  cv  c
k 
cp
cv
cp  cv  R
¢h  h2  h1  
2
1
 cp1T2 dT  cp,avg 1T2  T12
¢u  u2  u1  
2
1
 cv1T2 dT  cv,avg1T2  T12
cv  a 0u
0T b
v and cp  a 0h
0T b
p
Q  Wother  ¢H  ¢KE  ¢PE
SUMMARY
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
191
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
186
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1. ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals. SI version.
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993.
2. ASHRAE Handbook of Refrigeration. SI version. Atlanta,
GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-
Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1994.
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
Moving Boundary Work
5–1C
On a P-v diagram, what does the area under the
process curve represent?
5–2C
Is the boundary work associated with constant-vol-
ume systems always zero?
5–3C
An ideal gas at a given state expands to a fixed final
volume first at constant pressure and then at constant temper-
ature. For which case is the work done greater?
5–4C
Show that 1 kPa · m3  1 kJ.
5–5
The volume of 1 kg of helium in a piston-cylinder
device is initially 5 m 3. Now helium is compressed to 3 m 3
while its pressure is maintained constant at 200 kPa. Deter-
mine the initial and ﬁnal temperatures of helium as well as
the work required to compress it, in kJ.
5–6
Calculate the total work, in kJ, for process 1-3 shown
in Fig. P5–6 when the system consists of 2 kg of nitrogen.
FIGURE P5–6
0.5
1
500
400
100
V, m3/kg
P, kPa
1
2
3
5–7E
Calculate the total work, in Btu, produced by the pro-
cess of Fig. P5–7E.
FIGURE P5–7E
5–8
A piston–cylinder device initially contains 0.07 m3 of
nitrogen gas at 130 kPa and 120°C. The nitrogen is now
expanded polytropically to a state of 100 kPa and 100°C.
Determine the boundary work done during this process.
5–9
A piston–cylinder device with a set of stops initially
contains 0.3 kg of steam at 1.0 MPa and 400°C. The location
of the stops corresponds to 60 percent of the initial volume.
Now the steam is cooled. Determine the compression work if
the final state is (a) 1.0 MPa and 250°C and (b) 500 kPa.
(c) Also determine the temperature at the final state in part (b).
FIGURE P5–9
Steam
0.3 kg
1 MPa
400°C
Q
2
4
500
100
V, ft3
P, psia
1
2
PROBLEMS*
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems with
the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete solutions together
with parametric studies are included on the enclosed DVD. Problems
with the 
icon are comprehensive in nature, and are intended to be
solved with a computer, preferably using the EES software that
accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
192
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
187
have been observed to satisfy the relationship PVn  C,
where n and C are constants. Calculate the work done when a
gas expands from 150 kPa and 0.03 m3 to a final volume of
0.2 m3 for the case of n  1.3.
5–18
Reconsider Prob. 5–17. Using the EES (or
other) software, plot the process described in
the problem on a P-V diagram, and investigate the effect of
the polytropic exponent n on the boundary work. Let the
polytropic exponent vary from 1.1 to 1.6. Plot the boundary
work versus the polytropic exponent, and discuss the results.
5–19
A frictionless piston–cylinder device contains 2 kg of
nitrogen at 100 kPa and 300 K. Nitrogen is now compressed
slowly according to the relation PV1.4  constant until it
reaches a final temperature of 360 K. Calculate the work
input during this process.
Answer: 89 kJ
FIGURE P5–19
5–20
The equation of state of a gas is given as (P 
10/
2)  RuT, where the units of 
and P are
m3/kmol and kPa, respectively. Now 0.5 kmol of this gas is
expanded in a quasi-equilibrium manner from 2 to 4 m3 at a
constant temperature of 300 K. Determine (a) the unit of the
quantity 10 in the equation and (b) the work done during this
isothermal expansion process.
5–21
Reconsider Prob. 5–20. Using the integration
feature of the EES software, calculate the work
done, and compare your result with the “hand-calculated”
result obtained in Prob. 5–20. Plot the process described in
the problem on a P-v diagram.
5–22
Carbon dioxide contained in a piston–cylinder device
is compressed from 0.3 to 0.1 m3. During the process,
the pressure and volume are related by P  aV2, where a 
8 kPa · m6. Calculate the work done on the carbon dioxide
during this process.
Answer: 53.3 kJ
5–23
Determine the boundary work done by a gas during
an expansion process if the pressure and volume values at
various states are measured to be 300 kPa, 1 L; 290 kPa,
1.1 L; 270 kPa, 1.2 L; 250 kPa, 1.4 L; 220 kPa, 1.7 L; and
200 kPa, 2 L.
5–24
A piston–cylinder device initially contains 0.25 kg
of nitrogen gas at 130 kPa and 120°C. The nitrogen is
v
v
v
N2
PV1.4 = const.
5–10
A piston–cylinder device initially contains 0.07 m3 of
nitrogen gas at 130 kPa and 120°C. The nitrogen is now
expanded to a pressure of 100 kPa polytropically with a poly-
tropic exponent whose value is equal to the specific heat ratio
(called isentropic expansion). Determine the final temperature
and the boundary work done during this process.
5–11
A mass of 5 kg of saturated water vapor at 300 kPa is
heated at constant pressure until the temperature reaches
200°C. Calculate the work done by the steam during this
process.
Answer: 165.9 kJ
5–12
A frictionless piston–cylinder device initially con-
tains 200 L of saturated liquid refrigerant-134a. The piston is
free to move, and its mass is such that it maintains a pressure
of 900 kPa on the refrigerant. The refrigerant is now heated
until its temperature rises to 70°C. Calculate the work done
during this process.
Answer: 5571 kJ
FIGURE P5–12
5–13
Reconsider Prob. 5–12. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of pressure on
the work done. Let the pressure vary from 400 to 1200 kPa.
Plot the work done versus the pressure, and discuss the
results. Explain why the plot is not linear. Also plot the pro-
cess described in Prob. 5–12 on the P-v diagram.
5–14E
A frictionless piston–cylinder device contains 16 lbm
of superheated water vapor at 40 psia and 600°F. Steam is
now cooled at constant pressure until 70 percent of it, by mass,
condenses. Determine the work done during this process.
5–15
A mass of 2.4 kg of air at 150 kPa and 12°C is con-
tained in a gas-tight, frictionless piston–cylinder device. The
air is now compressed to a final pressure of 600 kPa. During
the process, heat is transferred from the air such that the tem-
perature inside the cylinder remains constant. Calculate the
work input during this process.
Answer: 272 kJ
5–16E
During an expansion process, the pressure of a gas
changes from 15 to 100 psia according to the relation P 
aV  b, where a  5 psia/ft3 and b is a constant. If the initial
volume of the gas is 7 ft3, calculate the work done during the
process.
Answer: 181 Btu
5–17
During some actual expansion and compression
processes in piston–cylinder devices, the gases
R-134a
P = const.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
193
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
188
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
now expanded isothermally to a pressure of 100 kPa. 
Determine the boundary work done during this process.
Answer: 7.65 kJ
FIGURE P5–24
5–25
A piston–cylinder device contains 0.15 kg of air ini-
tially at 2 MPa and 350°C. The air is first expanded iso-
thermally to 500 kPa, then compressed polytropically with a
polytropic exponent of 1.2 to the initial pressure, and finally
compressed at the constant pressure to the initial state. Deter-
mine the boundary work for each process and the net work of
the cycle.
5–26
1-kg of water that is initially at 90C with a quality of
10 percent occupies a spring-loaded piston–cylinder device,
such as that in Fig. P5–26. This device is now heated until 
the pressure rises to 800 kPa and the temperature is 250C.
Determine the total work produced during this process, in kJ.
Answer: 24.5 kJ
FIGURE P5–26
5–27
0.5-kg water that is initially at 1 MPa and 10 percent
quality occupies a spring-loaded piston–cylinder device. This
device is now cooled until the water is a saturated liquid at
100C. Calculate the total work produced during this process,
in kJ.
Fluid
Spring
N2
130 kPa
120°C
5–28
Argon is compressed in a polytropic process with n 
1.2 from 120 kPa and 30C to 1200 kPa in a piston-cylinder
device. Determine the ﬁnal temperature of the argon.
Closed System Energy Analysis
5–29
Saturated water vapor at 200C is isothermally con-
densed to a saturated liquid in a piston–cylinder device. Cal-
culate the heat transfer and the work done during this process,
in kJ/kg.
Answers: 1940 kJ/kg, 196 kJ/kg
FIGURE P5–29
5–30E
A closed system undergoes a process in which there
is no internal energy change. During this process, the system
produces 1.6
10 6 ft lbf of work. Calculate the heat transfer
for this process, in Btu.
5–31
Complete each line of the table below on the basis of
the conservation of energy principle for a closed system.
Qin
Wout
E1
E2
m
e2 – e1
kJ
kJ
kJ
kJ
kg
kJ/kg
280
—
1020
860
3
—
350
130
0550
—
5
—
—
260
0300
—
2
150
300
—
0750
500
1
—
—
200
—
300
2
100
5–32
A substance is contained in a well-insulated rigid con-
tainer that is equipped with a stirring device, as shown in
Fig. P5–32. Determine the change in the internal energy of
this substance when 15 kJ of work is applied to the stirring
device.
FIGURE P5–32
Wsh
#
Water
200C
sat. vapor
Heat

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
194
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
189
ferred to the water while its pressure is held constant. Deter-
mine the final temperature of the water. Also, show the
process on a T-v diagram with respect to saturation lines.
5–39
An insulated piston–cylinder device contains 5 L of
saturated liquid water at a constant pressure of 175 kPa.
Water is stirred by a paddle wheel while a current of 8 A
flows for 45 min through a resistor placed in the water.
If one-half of the liquid is evaporated during this constant-
pressure process and the paddle-wheel work amounts to
400 kJ, determine the voltage of the source. Also, show the
process on a P-v diagram with respect to saturation lines.
Answer: 224 V
FIGURE P5–39
5–40
A piston–cylinder device initially contains
steam at 200 kPa, 200°C, and 0.5 m3. At this
state, a linear spring (F  x) is touching the piston but exerts
no force on it. Heat is now slowly transferred to the steam,
causing the pressure and the volume to rise to 500 kPa and
0.6 m3, respectively. Show the process on a P-v diagram with
respect to saturation lines and determine (a) the final temper-
ature, (b) the work done by the steam, and (c) the total heat
transferred.
Answers: (a) 1132°C, (b) 35 kJ, (c) 808 kJ
FIGURE P5–40
5–41
Reconsider Prob. 5–40. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the initial
temperature of steam on the final temperature, the work done,
200 kPa
Q
H2O
200°C
H2O
We
P= constant
Wsh
5–33
A rigid container equipped with a stirring device con-
tains 1.5 kg of motor oil. Determine the rate of speciﬁc
energy increase when heat is transferred to the oil at a rate of
1 W, and 1.5 W of power is applied to the stirring device.
5–34E
A rigid 1-ft 3 vessel contains R-134a originally at
20F and 27.7 percent quality. The refrigerant is then
heated until its temperature is 100F. Calculate the heat trans-
fer required to do this.
Answer: 84.7 Btu
FIGURE P5–34E
5–35
A well-insulated rigid tank contains 5 kg of a 
saturated liquid–vapor mixture of water at l00 kPa. Initially,
three-quarters of the mass is in the liquid phase. An electric
resistor placed in the tank is connected to a 110-V source,
and a current of 8 A flows through the resistor when the
switch is turned on. Determine how long it will take to
vaporize all the liquid in the tank. Also, show the process on
a T-v diagram with respect to saturation lines.
FIGURE P5–35
5–36
Reconsider Prob. 5–35. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the initial
mass of water on the length of time required to completely
vaporize the liquid. Let the initial mass vary from 1 to 10 kg.
Plot the vaporization time against the initial mass, and dis-
cuss the results.
5–37
A piston–cylinder device contains 5 kg of refrigerant-
134a at 800 kPa and 70°C. The refrigerant is now cooled at
constant pressure until it exists as a liquid at 15°C. Deter-
mine the amount of heat loss and show the process on a T-v
diagram with respect to saturation lines.
Answer: 1173 kJ
5–38E
A piston–cylinder device contains 0.5 lbm of water
initially at 120 psia and 2 ft3. Now 200 Btu of heat is trans-
H2O
We
V = constant
R-134a
1 ft3
–20°F
x = 0.277
Heat

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
195
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
190
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
and the total heat transfer. Let the initial temperature vary
from 150 to 250°C. Plot the final results against the initial
temperature, and discuss the results.
5–42
Two tanks (Tank A and Tank B) are separated by a
partition. Initially Tank A contains 2-kg steam at 1 MPa and
300°C while Tank B contains 3-kg saturated liquid–vapor
mixture at 150°C with a vapor mass fraction of 50 percent.
Now the partition is removed and the two sides are allowed to
mix until the mechanical and thermal equilibrium are estab-
lished. If the pressure at the final state is 300 kPa, determine
(a) the temperature and quality of the steam (if mixture) at
the final state and (b) the amount of heat lost from the tanks.
FIGURE P5–42
5–43
A 30-L electrical radiator containing heating oil is
placed in a 50-m3 room. Both the room and the oil in
the radiator are initially at 10°C. The radiator with a rating
of 1.8 kW is now turned on. At the same time, heat is lost
from the room at an average rate of 0.35 kJ/s. After some
time, the average temperature is measured to be 20°C for the
air in the room, and 50°C for the oil in the radiator. Taking
the density and the specific heat of the oil to be 950 kg/m3
and 2.2 kJ/kg  °C, respectively, determine how long the
heater is kept on. Assume the room is well-sealed so that
there are no air leaks.
FIGURE P5–43
5–44
2-kg of saturated liquid water at 150C is heated at
constant pressure in a piston–cylinder device until it is satu-
rated vapor. Determine the heat transfer required for this
process.
Room
10°C
Radiator
Q
TANK A
2 kg
1 MPa
300°C
TANK B
3 kg
150°C
x = 0.5
Q
5–45
Steam at 75 kPa and 13 percent quality is contained
in a spring-loaded piston–cylinder device, as shown in
Fig. P5–45, with an initial volume of 2 m 3. Steam is now
heated until its volume is 5 m 3 and its pressure is 300 kPa.
Determine the heat transferred to and the work produced by
the steam during this process.
FIGURE P5–45
5–46
Refrigerant-134a at 600 kPa and 150C is contained
in a spring-loaded piston–cylinder device with an initial vol-
ume of 0.3 m 3. The refrigerant is now cooled until its temper-
ature is 30C and its volume is 0.1 m 3. Determine the heat
transferred to and the work produced by the refrigerant dur-
ing this process.
Answers: 1849 kJ heat out, 68.4 kJ work in
5–47E
Saturated R-134a vapor at 100F is condensed at
constant pressure to a saturated liquid in a closed piston–
cylinder system. Calculate the heat transfer and work done
during this process, in Btu/lbm.
5–48
2-kg of saturated liquid R-134a with an initial tem-
perature of 10C is contained in a well-insulated, weighted
piston–cylinder device. This device contains an electrical
resistor, as shown in Fig. P5–48, to which 10 volts are applied
causing a current of 2 amperes to ﬂow through the resistor. 
FIGURE P5–48
I
$V
Steam
Spring

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
196
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
191
Determine the time required for the refrigerant to be con-
verted to a saturated vapor, and the ﬁnal temperature.
Specific Heats, u, and h of Ideal Gases
5–49C
Is the relation u  mcv,avgT restricted to constant-
volume processes only, or can it be used for any kind of
process of an ideal gas?
5–50C
Is the relation h  mcp,avgT restricted to constant-
pressure processes only, or can it be used for any kind of
process of an ideal gas?
5–51C
Show that for an ideal gas c_
p  c_
v Ru.
5–52C
Is the energy required to heat air from 295 to 305 K
the same as the energy required to heat it from 345 to 355 K?
Assume the pressure remains constant in both cases.
5–53C
In the relation u  mcv T, what is the correct
unit of cv — kJ/kg · °C or kJ/kg · K?
5–54C
A fixed mass of an ideal gas is heated from 50 to
80°C at a constant pressure of (a) 1 atm and (b) 3 atm. For
which case do you think the energy required will be greater?
Why?
5–55C
A fixed mass of an ideal gas is heated from 50 to
80°C at a constant volume of (a) 1 m3 and (b) 3 m3. For which
case do you think the energy required will be greater? Why?
5–56C
When undergoing a given temperature change, which
of the two gases—air or oxygen—experiences the largest
change in its (a) enthalpy, h and (b) internal energy, u?
5–57
A mass of 10-g of nitrogen is contained in the spring-
loaded piston–cylinder device shown in Fig. P5–57. The
spring constant is 1 kN/m, and the piston diameter is 10 cm.
When the spring exerts no force against the piston, the nitro-
gen is at 120 kPa and 27C. The device is now heated until
its volume is 10 percent greater than the original volume.
Determine the change in the speciﬁc internal energy and
enthalpy of the nitrogen.
Answers: 46.8 kJ/kg, 65.5 kJ/kg
FIGURE P5–57
Fluid
D
Spring
5–58E
What is the change in the internal energy, in Btu/lbm,
of air as its temperature changes from 100 to 200F? Is there
any difference if the temperature were to change from 0 to
100F?
5–59
The temperature of 2 kg of neon is increased from
20C to 180C. Calculate the change in the total internal
energy of the neon, in kJ. Would the internal energy change
be any different if the neon were replaced with argon?
5–60
Calculate the change in the enthalpy of argon, in
kJ/kg, when it is cooled from 400 to 100C. If neon had
undergone this same change of temperature, would its
enthalpy change have been any different?
5–61
Neon is compressed from 100 kPa and 20C to 500
kPa in an isothermal compressor. Determine the change in
the speciﬁc volume and speciﬁc enthalpy of neon caused by
this compression.
5–62E
Determine the enthalpy change h of oxygen,
in Btu/lbm, as it is heated from 800 to 1500 R, using 
(a) the empirical specific heat equation as a function of tem-
perature (Table A–2Ec), (b) the cp value at the average tem-
perature (Table A–2Eb), and (c) the cp value at room
temperature (Table A–2Ea).
Answers: (a) 170.1 Btu/lbm, (b) 178.5 Btu/lbm, (c) 153.3 Btu/lbm 
5–63
Determine the internal energy change u of hydro-
gen, in kJ/kg, as it is heated from 200 to 800 K, using (a) the
empirical specific heat equation as a function of temperature
(Table A–2c), (b) the cv value at the average temperature
(Table A–2b), and (c) the cv value at room temperature (Table
A–2a).
Closed-System Energy Analysis: Ideal Gases
5–64C
Is it possible to compress an ideal gas isothermally
in an adiabatic piston–cylinder device? Explain.
5–65E
A rigid tank contains 20 lbm of air at 50 psia
and 80°F. The air is now heated until its pressure doubles.
Determine (a) the volume of the tank and (b) the amount of
heat transfer.
Answers: (a) 80 ft3, (b) 1898 Btu
5–66
A 4-m 
 5-m 
 6-m room is to be heated by a base-
board resistance heater. It is desired that the resistance heater
be able to raise the air temperature in the room from 7 to 23°C
within 15 min. Assuming no heat losses from the room and an
atmospheric pressure of 100 kPa, determine the required power
of the resistance heater. Assume constant specific heats at
room temperature.
Answer: 1.91 kW
5–67
A student living in a 4-m 
 6-m 
 6-m dormitory
room turns on her 150-W fan before she leaves the room on a
summer day, hoping that the room will be cooler when she
comes back in the evening. Assuming all the doors and win-
dows are tightly closed and disregarding any heat trans-
fer through the walls and the windows, determine the tem-
perature in the room when she comes back 10 h later. Use
specific heat values at room temperature, and assume the 

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
197
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
192
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P5–67
room to be at 100 kPa and 15°C in the morning when she
leaves.
Answer: 58.2°C
5–68E
A 3-ft 3 adiabatic rigid container is divided into two
equal volumes by a thin membrane, as shown in Fig. P5–68E.
Initially, one of these chambers is ﬁlled with air at 
100 psia and 100F while the other chamber is evacuated.
Determine the internal energy change of the air when the
membrane is ruptured. Also determine the ﬁnal air pressure
in the container.
FIGURE P5–68E
5–69
Nitrogen in a rigid vessel is cooled by rejecting 100
kJ/kg of heat. Determine the internal energy change of the
nitrogen, in kJ/kg.
5–70E
Nitrogen at 100 psia and 300F in a rigid container
is cooled until its pressure is 50 psia. Determine the work
done and the heat transferred during this process, in Btu/lbm.
Answers: 0 Btu/lbm, 67.3 Btu/lbm
5–71
1-kg of oxygen is heated from 25 to 300C. Determine
the amount of heat transfer required when this is done during
a (a) constant-volume process and (b) isobaric process.
FIGURE P5–71
Oxygen
1 kg
T1 = 25°C
T2 = 300°C
Q
Oxygen
1 kg
T1 = 25°C
T2 = 300°C
Q
AIR
1.5 ft3
100 psia
100F
Vacuum
1.5 ft3
4 m × 6 m × 6 m
ROOM
Fan
5–72
A closed system containing 2-kg of air undergoes an
isothermal process from 600 kPa and 200C to 80 kPa. Deter-
mine the initial volume of this system, the work done, and
the heat transfer during this process.
Answers: 0.453 m 3,
547 kJ, 547 kJ
5–73
A piston–cylinder device containing argon gas as the
system undergoes an isothermal process from 200 kPa and
100C to 50 kPa. During the process, 1500 kJ of heat is trans-
ferred to the system. Determine the mass of this system and
the amount of work produced.
5–74
Argon is compressed in a polytropic process with n 
1.2 from 120 kPa and 30C to 1200 kPa in a piston–cylinder
device. Determine the work produced and heat transferred
during this compression process, in kJ/kg.
FIGURE P5–74
5–75E
A piston–cylinder device containing carbon-dioxide
gas undergoes an isobaric process from 15 psia and 80F
to 200F. Determine the work and the heat transfer associ-
ated with this process, in Btu/lbm.
Answers: 5.42 Btu/lbm,
24.4 Btu/lbm
5–76
A spring-loaded piston–cylinder device contains 5 kg
of helium as the system, as shown in Fig. P5–76. This system
is heated from 100 kPa and 20C to 800 kPa and 160C.
Determine the heat transferred to and work produced by this
system.
FIGURE P5–76
Helium
Spring
Argon
120 kPa
30°C
Pvn = constant
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
198
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
193
5–77
Air is contained in a variable-load piston device
equipped with a paddle wheel. Initially, air is at 500 kPa and
27C. The paddle wheel is now turned by an external electric
motor until 50 kJ/kg of work has been transferred to air. Dur-
ing this process, heat is transferred to maintain a constant air
temperature while allowing the gas volume to triple. Calcu-
late the required amount of heat transfer, in kJ/kg.
Answer:
122 kJ/kg
FIGURE P5–77
5–78
A piston–cylinder device whose piston is resting on
top of a set of stops initially contains 0.5 kg of helium gas at
100 kPa and 25°C. The mass of the piston is such that 500
kPa of pressure is required to raise it. How much heat must
be transferred to the helium before the piston starts rising?
Answer: 1857 kJ
5–79
A mass of 15 kg of air in a piston–cylinder device is
heated from 25 to 77°C by passing current through a resistance
heater inside the cylinder. The pressure inside the cylinder is
held constant at 300 kPa during the process, and a heat loss of
60 kJ occurs. Determine the electric energy supplied, in kWh.
Answer: 0.235 kWh
FIGURE P5–79
5–80
An insulated piston–cylinder device initially contains
0.3 m3 of carbon dioxide at 200 kPa and 27°C. An electric
switch is turned on, and a 110-V source supplies current to a
resistance heater inside the cylinder for a period of 10 min.
The pressure is held constant during the process, while the
volume is doubled. Determine the current that passes through
the resistance heater.
AIR
P = constant
We
Q
Air
500 kPa
27°C
Q
Wsh
5–81
A piston–cylinder device contains 0.8 kg of nitrogen
initially at 100 kPa and 27°C. The nitrogen is now com-
pressed slowly in a polytropic process during which PV1.3 
constant until the volume is reduced by one-half. Determine
the work done and the heat transfer for this process.
5–82
Reconsider Prob. 5–81. Using EES (or
other) software, plot the process described in
the problem on a P-V diagram, and investigate the effect of
the polytropic exponent n on the boundary work and heat
transfer. Let the polytropic exponent vary from 1.1 to
1.6. Plot the boundary work and the heat transfer versus the
polytropic exponent, and discuss the results.
5–83
A room is heated by a baseboard resistance heater.
When the heat losses from the room on a winter day amount
to 6500 kJ/h, the air temperature in the room remains constant
even though the heater operates continuously. Determine the
power rating of the heater, in kW.
FIGURE P5–83
5–84
A piston–cylinder device, whose piston is resting on
a set of stops, initially contains 3 kg of air at 200 kPa and
27°C. The mass of the piston is such that a pressure of 400
kPa is required to move it. Heat is now transferred to the air
until its volume doubles. Determine the work done by the air
and the total heat transferred to the air during this process.
Also show the process on a P-v diagram.
Answers: 516 kJ,
2674 kJ
5–85
A piston–cylinder device, with a set of stops on
the top, initially contains 3 kg of air at 200 kPa
and 27°C. Heat is now transferred to the air, and the piston
rises until it hits the stops, at which point the volume is twice
the initial volume. More heat is transferred until the pressure
inside the cylinder also doubles. Determine the work done
and the amount of heat transfer for this process. Also, show
the process on a P-v diagram.
Closed-System Energy Analysis: Solids and Liquids
5–86
A 1-kg block of iron is heated from 20C to 80C.
What is the change in the iron’s total internal energy and
enthalpy?
ROOM
Q
We
Tair = constant
•
•

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
199
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
194
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
5–87E
The state of liquid water is changed from 50 psia and
50F to 2000 psia and 100F. Determine the change in the
internal energy and enthalpy of water on the basis of the 
(a) compressed liquid tables, (b) incompressible substance
approximation and property tables, and (c) speciﬁc-heat
model.
5–88E
During a picnic on a hot summer day, all the cold
drinks disappeared quickly, and the only available drinks
were those at the ambient temperature of 75°F. In an effort to
cool a 12-fluid-oz drink in a can, a person grabs the can and
starts shaking it in the iced water of the chest at 32°F. Using
the properties of water for the drink, determine the mass of
ice that will melt by the time the canned drink cools to 45°F.
5–89
Consider a 1000-W iron whose base plate is made
of 0.5-cm-thick aluminum alloy 2024-T6 (r  2770 kg/m3 and
cp  875 J/kg · °C). The base plate has a surface area of 0.03
m2. Initially, the iron is in thermal equilibrium with the ambient
air at 22°C. Assuming 85 percent of the heat generated in the
resistance wires is transferred to the plate, determine the mini-
mum time needed for the plate temperature to reach 140°C.
FIGURE P5–89
© Vol. 58/PhotoDisc
5–90
Stainless steel ball bearings (r  8085 kg/m3 and cp 
0.480 kJ/kg · °C) having a diameter of 1.2 cm are to be
quenched in water at a rate of 800 per minute. The balls leave
the oven at a uniform temperature of 900°C and are exposed to
air at 25°C for a while before they are dropped into the water.
If the temperature of the balls drops to 850°C prior to quench-
ing, determine the rate of heat transfer from the balls to the air.
5–91
Carbon steel balls (r  7833 kg/m3 and cp  0.465
kJ/kg · °C) 8 mm in diameter are annealed by heating them
first to 900°C in a furnace, and then allowing them to cool
slowly to 100°C in ambient air at 35°C. If 2500 balls are to
be annealed per hour, determine the total rate of heat transfer
from the balls to the ambient air.
Answer: 542 W
FIGURE P5–91
5–92
An electronic device dissipating 30 W has a mass of
20 g and a specific heat of 850 J/kg · °C. The device is lightly
used, and it is on for 5 min and then off for several hours,
during which it cools to the ambient temperature of 25°C.
Determine the highest possible temperature of the device at
the end of the 5-min operating period. What would your
answer be if the device were attached to a 0.2-kg aluminum
heat sink? Assume the device and the heat sink to be nearly
isothermal.
5–93
Reconsider Prob. 5–92. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the mass of the
heat sink on the maximum device temperature. Let the mass
of heat sink vary from 0 to 1 kg. Plot the maximum tempera-
ture against the mass of heat sink, and discuss the results.
5–94
An ordinary egg can be approximated as a 5.5-cm-
diameter sphere. The egg is initially at a uniform temperature
of 8°C and is dropped into boiling water at 97°C. Taking the
properties of the egg to be r  1020 kg/m3 and cp  3.32
kJ/kg · °C, determine how much heat is transferred to the egg
by the time the average temperature of the egg rises to 80°C.
5–95E
ln a production facility, 1.2-in-thick 2-ft 
 2-ft
square brass plates (r  532.5 lbm/ft3 and cp  0.091
Btu/lbm · °F) that are initially at a uniform temperature of
75°F are heated by passing them through an oven at 1300°F
at a rate of 300 per minute. If the plates remain in the oven
until their average temperature rises to 1000°F, determine the
rate of heat transfer to the plates in the furnace.
FIGURE P5–95E
1.2 in
Furnace, 1300°F
Brass
plate, 75°F
Furnace
900°C
100°C
Steel ball
Air, 35°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
200
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
195
5–96
Long cylindrical steel rods (r  7833 kg/m3 and cp 
0.465 kJ/kg · °C) of 10-cm diameter are heat-treated by draw-
ing them at a velocity of 3 m/min through an oven main-
tained at 900°C. If the rods enter the oven at 30°C and leave
at a mean temperature of 700°C, determine the rate of heat
transfer to the rods in the oven.
Review Problems
5–97
Which of the two gases—neon or air—requires the
least amount of work when compressed in a closed system
from P1 to P2 using a polytropic process with n  1.5?
5–98
10-kg of nitrogen is heated from 20C to 250C. Deter-
mine the total amount of heat required when this is done in
(a) a constant-volume process and (b) an isobaric process.
5–99E
Air in the amount of 1 lbm is contained in a well-
insulated, rigid vessel equipped with a stirring paddle wheel.
The initial state of this air is 30 psia and 40F. How much
work, in Btu, must be transferred to the air with the paddle
wheel to raise the air pressure to 50 psia? Also, what is the
ﬁnal temperature of air?
FIGURE P5–99E
5–100
Does the concept of a speciﬁc heat property (either
at constant volume or constant pressure) have a meaning 
for substances that are undergoing a phase change? Why or
why not?
5–101
A rigid tank contains a gas mixture with a speciﬁc
heat of cv  0.748 kJ/kg K. The mixture is cooled from 
200 kPa and 200C until its pressure is 100 kPa. Determine
the heat transfer during this process, in kJ/kg.
5–102
A well-insulated rigid vessel contains 3 kg of satu-
rated liquid water at 40C. The vessel also contains an electri-
cal resistor that draws 10 amperes when 50 volts are applied.
Determine the ﬁnal temperature in the vessel after the resistor
has been operating for 30 minutes.
Answer: 119C
5–103
Derive a general expression for the work produced
by an ideal gas as it undergoes a polytropic process in a
closed system from initial state 1 to ﬁnal state 2. Your result
should be in terms of the initial pressure and temperature and
the ﬁnal pressure as well as the gas constant R and the poly-
tropic exponent n.
#
Wsh
Air
1 lbm
30 psia
40°F
5–104
A frictionless piston–cylinder device initially contains
air at 200 kPa and 0.2 m3. At this state, a linear spring (F ∝x)
is touching the piston but exerts no force on it. The air is
now heated to a final state of 0.5 m3 and 800 kPa. Determine
(a) the total work done by the air and (b) the work done
against the spring. Also, show the process on a P-v diagram.
Answers: (a) 150 kJ, (b) 90 kJ
FIGURE P5–104
5–105
A mass of 5 kg of saturated liquid–vapor mixture of
water is contained in a piston–cylinder device at 125 kPa. Ini-
tially, 2 kg of the water is in the liquid phase and the rest is in
the vapor phase. Heat is now transferred to the water, and the
piston, which is resting on a set of stops, starts moving when
the pressure inside reaches 300 kPa. Heat transfer continues
until the total volume increases by 20 percent. Determine
(a) the initial and final temperatures, (b) the mass of liquid
water when the piston first starts moving, and (c) the work done
during this process. Also, show the process on a P-v diagram.
FIGURE P5–105
5–106E
A spherical balloon contains 10 lbm of air at 
30 psia and 800 R. The balloon material is such that the 
pressure inside is always proportional to the square of the
m = 5 kg
H2O
P1 = 200 kPa
V1 = 0.2 m3
AIR

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
201
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
196
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
5–111
Nitrogen gas is expanded in a polytropic process
with n  1.35 from 2 MPa and 1200 K to 120 kPa in a 
piston–cylinder device. How much work is produced and heat
is transferred during this expansion process, in kJ/kg?
5–112
Which of the two gases—neon or air—produces the
greatest amount of work when expanded from P1 to P2 in a
closed system polytropic process with n  1.2?
5–113
A frictionless piston–cylinder device and a rigid
tank initially contain 12 kg of an ideal gas each at the same
temperature, pressure, and volume. It is desired to raise the
temperatures of both systems by 15°C. Determine the amount
of extra heat that must be supplied to the gas in the cylinder
which is maintained at constant pressure to achieve this
result. Assume the molar mass of the gas is 25.
5–114
A passive solar house that is losing heat to the out-
doors at an average rate of 50,000 kJ/h is maintained at 22°C
at all times during a winter night for 10 h. The house is to be
heated by 50 glass containers each containing 20 L of water
that is heated to 80°C during the day by absorbing solar
energy. A thermostat-controlled 15-kW back-up electric resis-
tance heater turns on whenever necessary to keep the house at
22°C. (a) How long did the electric heating system run that
night? (b) How long would the electric heater run that night if
the house incorporated no solar heating?
Answers: (a) 4.77 h,
(b) 9.26 h
FIGURE P5–114
5–115
An 1800-W electric resistance heating element is
immersed in 40 kg of water initially at 20°C. Determine how
long it will take for this heater to raise the water temperature
to 80°C.
5–116
One ton (1000 kg) of liquid water at 80°C is brought
into a well-insulated and well-sealed 4-m 
 5-m 
 6-m room
initially at 22°C and 100 kPa. Assuming constant specific heats
for both air and water at room temperature, determine the final
equilibrium temperature in the room.
Answer: 78.6°C
Water
80C
Pump
22C
diameter. Determine the work done when the volume of the
balloon doubles as a result of heat transfer.
Answer: 715 Btu
5–107E
Reconsider Prob. 5–106E. Using the integra-
tion feature of the EES software, determine
the work done. Compare the result with your “hand-
calculated” result.
5–108
A mass of 12 kg of saturated refrigerant-134a vapor is
contained in a piston–cylinder device at 240 kPa. Now 300 kJ
of heat is transferred to the refrigerant at constant pressure
while a 110-V source supplies current to a resistor within the
FIGURE P5–108
cylinder for 6 min. Determine the current supplied if the final
temperature is 70°C. Also, show the process on a T-v dia-
gram with respect to the saturation lines.
Answer: 12.8 A
5–109
A mass of 0.2 kg of saturated refrigerant-134a
is contained in a piston–cylinder device at 200 kPa. Initially,
75 percent of the mass is in the liquid phase. Now heat
is transferred to the refrigerant at constant pressure until the
cylinder contains vapor only. Show the process on a P-v
diagram with respect to saturation lines. Determine (a) the
volume occupied by the refrigerant initially, (b) the work
done, and (c) the total heat transfer.
5–110
A piston–cylinder device contains helium gas ini-
tially at 150 kPa, 20°C, and 0.5 m3. The helium is now com-
pressed in a polytropic process (PV n  constant) to 400 kPa
and 140°C. Determine the heat loss or gain during this
process.
Answer: 11.2 kJ loss
FIGURE P5–110
He
PVn = constant
Q
R-134a
We
Q
P = constant

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
202
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 5
|
197
arranged to execute a polytropic process PV 1.5  constant.
Determine the ﬁnal temperature treating the carbon dioxide
as (a) an ideal gas and (b) a van der Waals gas.
Answers:
(a) 682.1 K, (b) 680.9 K
FIGURE P5–122
5–123
Two adiabatic chambers, 2 m 3 each, are intercon-
nected by a valve, as shown in Fig. P5–123, with one cham-
ber containing oxygen at 1000 kPa and 127C and the other
chamber evacuated. The valve is now opened until the oxy-
gen ﬁlls both chambers and both tanks have the same pres-
sure. Determine the total internal energy change and the ﬁnal
pressure in the tanks.
FIGURE P5–123
Design and Essay Problems
5–124
Compressed gases and phase-changing liquids are
used to store energy in rigid containers. What are the advan-
tages and disadvantages of each substance as a means of stor-
ing energy?
5–125
Someone has suggested that the device shown in
Fig. P5–125 be used to move the maximum force F against
the spring, which has a spring constant of k. This is accom-
plished by changing the temperature of the liquid–vapor mix-
ture in the container. You are to design such a device to close
sun-blocking window shutters that require a maximum force
of 0.5 lbf. The piston must move 6 inches to close these shut-
ters completely. You elect to use R-134a as the working ﬂuid
and arrange the liquid–vapor mixture container such that the
temperature changes from 70F when shaded from the sun to
100F when exposed to the full sun. Select the sizes of the
Valve
Chamber A
Chamber B
CO2
1 MPa
200C
PV1.5 = const.
5–117
A 4-m 
 5-m 
 6-m room is to be heated by one
ton (1000 kg) of liquid water contained in a tank that is
placed in the room. The room is losing heat to the outside at
an average rate of 8000 kJ/h. The room is initially at 20°C
and 100 kPa and is maintained at an average temperature of
20°C at all times. If the hot water is to meet the heating
requirements of this room for a 24-h period, determine the
minimum temperature of the water when it is first brought
into the room. Assume constant specific heats for both air
and water at room temperature.
5–118
The energy content of a certain food is to be deter-
mined in a bomb calorimeter that contains 3 kg of water by
burning a 2-g sample of it in the presence of 100 g of air in
the reaction chamber. If the water temperature rises by 3.2°C
when equilibrium is established, determine the energy con-
tent of the food, in kJ/kg, by neglecting the thermal energy
stored in the reaction chamber and the energy supplied by the
mixer. What is a rough estimate of the error involved in
neglecting the thermal energy stored in the reaction chamber?
Answer: 20,060 kJ/kg
FIGURE P5–118
5–119
A 68-kg man whose average body temperature is
39°C drinks 1 L of cold water at 3°C in an effort to cool
down. Taking the average specific heat of the human body to
be 3.6 kJ/kg · °C, determine the drop in the average body
temperature of this person under the influence of this cold
water.
5–120
A 0.2-L glass of water at 20°C is to be cooled with
ice to 5°C. Determine how much ice needs to be added to the
water, in grams, if the ice is at (a) 0°C and (b) 8°C. Also
determine how much water would be needed if the cooling is
to be done with cold water at 0°C. The melting temperature
and the heat of fusion of ice at atmospheric pressure are
0°C and 333.7 kJ/kg, respectively, and the density of water is
1 kg/L.
5–121
Reconsider Prob. 5–120. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the initial
temperature of the ice on the final mass required. Let the ice
temperature vary from –20 to 0°C. Plot the mass of ice
against the initial temperature of ice, and discuss the results.
5–122 One kilogram of carbon dioxide is compressed from 
1 MPa and 200C to 3 MPa in a piston–cylinder device
Reaction
chamber
Food
T = 3.2C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
5. Energy Analysis of 
Closed Systems
203
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
198
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
various components in this system to do this task. Also select
the necessary spring constant and the amount of R-134a to 
be used.
FIGURE P5–125
5–126
Design an experiment complete with instrumenta-
tion to determine the specific heats of a liquid using a resis-
tance heater. Discuss how the experiment will be conducted,
D
F
Vapor
Liquid
what measurements need to be taken, and how the specific
heats will be determined. What are the sources of error in
your system? How can you minimize the experimental error?
How would you modify this system to determine the specific
heat of a solid?
5–127
You are asked to design a heating system for a
swimming pool that is 2 m deep, 25 m long, and 25 m wide.
Your client desires that the heating system be large enough to
raise the water temperature from 20 to 30°C in 3 h. The rate
of heat loss from the water to the air at the outdoor design
conditions is determined to be 960 W/m2, and the heater must
also be able to maintain the pool at 30°C at those conditions.
Heat losses to the ground are expected to be small and can be
disregarded. The heater considered is a natural gas furnace
whose efficiency is 80 percent. What heater size (in kW
input) would you recommend to your client?
5–128
It is claimed that fruits and vegetables are cooled by
6°C for each percentage point of weight loss as moisture
during vacuum cooling. Using calculations, demonstrate if
this claim is reasonable.
5–129
A 1982 U.S. Department of Energy article (FS #204)
states that a leak of one drip of hot water per second can cost
$1.00 per month. Making reasonable assumptions about the
drop size and the unit cost of energy, determine if this claim
is reasonable.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
204
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
MASS AND ENERGY ANALYSIS 
OF CONTROL VOLUMES
|
199
I
n Chap. 5, we applied the general energy balance relation
expressed as Ein  Eout  Esystem to closed systems. In
this chapter, we extend the energy analysis to systems
that involve mass flow across their boundaries i.e., control
volumes, with particular emphasis to steady-flow systems.
We start this chapter with the development of the general
conservation of mass relation for control volumes, and we
continue with a discussion of flow work and the energy of
fluid streams. We then apply the energy balance to systems
that involve steady-flow processes and analyze the common
steady-flow devices such as nozzles, diffusers, compressors,
turbines, throttling devices, mixing chambers, and heat
exchangers. Finally, we apply the energy balance to general
unsteady-flow processes such as the charging and discharg-
ing of vessels.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Develop the conservation of mass principle.
• Apply the conservation of mass principle to various systems
including steady- and unsteady-flow control volumes.
• Apply the first law of thermodynamics as the statement of
the conservation of energy principle to control volumes.
• Identify the energy carried by a fluid stream crossing a
control surface as the sum of internal energy, flow work,
kinetic energy, and potential energy of the fluid and relate
the combination of the internal energy and the flow work to
the property enthalpy.
• Solve energy balance problems for common steady-flow
devices such as nozzles, compressors, turbines, throttling
valves, mixers, heaters, and heat exchangers.
• Apply the energy balance to general unsteady-flow
processes with particular emphasis on the uniform-flow
process as the model for commonly encountered charging
and discharging processes.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
205
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
6–1
■CONSERVATION OF MASS
Conservation of mass is one of the most fundamental principles in nature.
We are all familiar with this principle, and it is not difficult to understand.
As the saying goes, You cannot have your cake and eat it too! A person does
not have to be a scientist to figure out how much vinegar-and-oil dressing is
obtained by mixing 100 g of oil with 25 g of vinegar. Even chemical equa-
tions are balanced on the basis of the conservation of mass principle. When
16 kg of oxygen reacts with 2 kg of hydrogen, 18 kg of water is formed
(Fig. 6–1). In an electrolysis process, the water separates back to 2 kg of
hydrogen and 16 kg of oxygen.
Mass, like energy, is a conserved property, and it cannot be created or
destroyed during a process. However, mass m and energy E can be con-
verted to each other according to the well-known formula proposed by
Albert Einstein (1879–1955):
(6–1)
where c is the speed of light in a vacuum, which is c  2.9979 
 108 m/s.
This equation suggests that the mass of a system changes when its energy
changes. However, for all energy interactions encountered in practice, with
the exception of nuclear reactions, the change in mass is extremely small
and cannot be detected by even the most sensitive devices. For example,
when 1 kg of water is formed from oxygen and hydrogen, the amount of
energy released is 15,879 kJ, which corresponds to a mass of 1.76 
 1010
kg. A mass of this magnitude is beyond the accuracy required by practically
all engineering calculations and thus can be disregarded.
For closed systems, the conservation of mass principle is implicitly used by
requiring that the mass of the system remain constant during a process. For
control volumes, however, mass can cross the boundaries, and so we must
keep track of the amount of mass entering and leaving the control volume.
Mass and Volume Flow Rates
The amount of mass flowing through a cross section per unit time is called
the mass flow rate and is denoted by m. . The dot over a symbol is used to
indicate time rate of change, as explained in Chap. 3.
A fluid usually flows into or out of a control volume through pipes or
ducts. The differential mass flow rate of fluid flowing across a small area
element dAc on a flow cross section is proportional to dAc itself, the fluid
density r, and the component of the flow velocity normal to dAc, which we
denote as Vn, and is expressed as (Fig. 6–2)
(6–2)
Note that both d and d are used to indicate differential quantities, but d is
typically used for quantities (such as heat, work, and mass transfer) that are
path functions and have inexact differentials, while d is used for quantities
(such as properties) that are point functions and have exact differentials. For
flow through an annulus of inner radius r1 and outer radius r2, for example,
but 
(total mass flow rate
through the annulus), not m.
2  m.
1. For specified values of r1 and r2, the
value of the integral of dAc is fixed (thus the names point function and exact

2
1
dm#  m#
total

2
1
dAc  Ac2  Ac1  p1r 2
2  r 1
22
dm#  rVn dAc
E  mc2
200
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
2 kg
H2
16 kg
O2
18 kg
H2O
FIGURE 6–1
Mass is conserved even during
chemical reactions.
→
→
dAc
Vn
V
n
Control surface
FIGURE 6–2
The normal velocity Vn for a surface is
the component of velocity
perpendicular to the surface.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
206
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
differential), but this is not the case for the integral of dm. (thus the names
path function and inexact differential).
The mass flow rate through the entire cross-sectional area of a pipe or
duct is obtained by integration:
(6–3)
While Eq. 6–3 is always valid (in fact it is exact), it is not always practi-
cal for engineering analyses because of the integral. We would like instead
to express mass flow rate in terms of average values over a cross section of
the pipe. In a general compressible flow, both r and Vn vary across the pipe.
In many practical applications, however, the density is essentially uniform
over the pipe cross section, and we can take r outside the integral of 
Eq. 6–3. Velocity, however, is never uniform over a cross section of a pipe
because of the fluid sticking to the surface and thus having zero velocity at
the wall (the no-slip condition). Rather, the velocity varies from zero at the
walls to some maximum value at or near the centerline of the pipe. We
define the average velocity Vavg as the average value of Vn across the entire
cross section (Fig. 6–3),
Average velocity:
(6–4)
where Ac is the area of the cross section normal to the flow direction. Note
that if the velocity were Vavg all through the cross section, the mass flow
rate would be identical to that obtained by integrating the actual velocity
profile. Thus for incompressible flow or even for compressible flow where r
is uniform across Ac, Eq. 6–3 becomes
(6–5)
For compressible flow, we can think of r as the bulk average density
over the cross section, and then Eq. 6–5 can still be used as a reasonable
approximation.
For simplicity, we drop the subscript on the average velocity. Unless 
otherwise stated, V denotes the average velocity in the flow direction. Also,
Ac denotes the cross-sectional area normal to the flow direction.
The volume of the fluid flowing through a cross section per unit time is
called the volume flow rate V
.
(Fig. 6–4) and is given by
(6–6)
An early form of Eq. 6–6 was published in 1628 by the Italian monk
Benedetto Castelli (circa 1577–1644). Note that most fluid mechanics text-
books use Q instead of V
.
for volume flow rate. We use V
.
to avoid confusion
with heat transfer.
The mass and volume flow rates are related by
(6–7)
where v is the specific volume. This relation is analogous to m  rV  V/v,
which is the relation between the mass and the volume of a fluid in a 
container.
m#  rV#  V#
v
V
#
 
Ac
Vn dAc  VavgAc  VAc  
1m3>s2
m#  rVavg Ac  
1kg>s2
Vavg  1
Ac 
Ac
Vn dAc
m#  
Ac
dm#  
Ac
rVn dAc  
1kg>s2
Chapter 6
|
201
Vavg
Cross section
Ac
V = VavgAc
FIGURE 6–4
The volume flow rate is the volume of
fluid flowing through a cross section
per unit time.
Vavg
FIGURE 6–3
The average velocity Vavg is defined as
the average speed through a cross
section.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
207
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Conservation of Mass Principle
The conservation of mass principle for a control volume can be expressed
as: The net mass transfer to or from a control volume during a time interval
t is equal to the net change (increase or decrease) in the total mass within
the control volume during t. That is,
or
(6–8)
where mCV  mfinal  minitial is the change in the mass of the control volume
during the process (Fig. 6–5). It can also be expressed in rate form as
(6–9)
where m.
in and m.
out are the total rates of mass flow into and out of the control
volume, and dmCV/dt is the time rate of change of mass within the control
volume boundaries. Equations 6–8 and 6–9 are often referred to as the mass
balance and are applicable to any control volume undergoing any kind of
process.
Consider a control volume of arbitrary shape, as shown in Fig. 6–6. The
mass of a differential volume dV within the control volume is dm  r dV.
The total mass within the control volume at any instant in time t is deter-
mined by integration to be
Total mass within the CV:
(6–10)
Then the time rate of change of the amount of mass within the control vol-
ume can be expressed as
Rate of change of mass within the CV:
(6–11)
For the special case of no mass crossing the control surface (i.e., the control
volume resembles a closed system), the conservation of mass principle
reduces to that of a system that can be expressed as dmCV/dt  0. This rela-
tion is valid whether the control volume is fixed, moving, or deforming.
Now consider mass flow into or out of the control volume through a differ-
ential area dA on the control surface of a fixed control volume. Let n
→be
the outward unit vector of dA normal to dA and V
→be the flow velocity at dA
relative to a fixed coordinate system, as shown in Fig. 6–6. In general, the
velocity may cross dA at an angle u off the normal of dA, and the mass flow
rate is proportional to the normal component of velocity V
→
n  V
→cos u rang-
ing from a maximum outflow of V
→for u  0 (flow is normal to dA) to a min-
imum of zero for u  90° (flow is tangent to dA) to a maximum inflow of V
→
for u  180° (flow is normal to dA but in the opposite direction). Making use
of the concept of dot product of two vectors, the magnitude of the normal
component of velocity can be expressed as
Normal component of velocity:
(6–12)
The mass flow rate through dA is proportional to the fluid density r, normal
velocity Vn, and the flow area dA, and can be expressed as
Differential mass flow rate:
(6–13)
dm#  rVn dA  r1V cos u2 dA  r1V
S # n
S 2 dA
Vn  V cos u  V
S # n
S
dmCV
dt
 d
dt 
CV
r dV
mCV  
CV
r dV
m#
in  m#
out  dmCV>dt  
1kg>s2
min  mout  ¢mCV  
1kg2
a Total mass entering
the CV during ¢t b  aTotal mass leaving
the CV during ¢t b  a
Net change in mass
within the CV during ¢tb
202
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Water
Δmbathtub = min – mout = 20 kg
min = 50 kg
FIGURE 6–5
Conservation of mass principle for an
ordinary bathtub.
→
→
Control
volume (CV)
Control surface (CS)
dV
dm
dA
n
V
•
FIGURE 6–6
The differential control volume dV and
the differential control surface dA used
in the derivation of the conservation of
mass relation.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
208
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The net flow rate into or out of the control volume through the entire con-
trol surface is obtained by integrating dm. over the entire control surface,
Net mass flow rate:
(6–14)
Note that V
→· n
→ V cos u is positive for u  90° (outflow) and negative for
u  90° (inflow). Therefore, the direction of flow is automatically
accounted for, and the surface integral in Eq. 6–14 directly gives the net
mass flow rate. A positive value for m.
net indicates net outflow, and a nega-
tive value indicates a net inflow of mass.
Rearranging Eq. 6–9 as dmCV/dt  m.
out  m.
in  0, the conservation of
mass relation for a fixed control volume can then be expressed as
General conservation of mass:
(6–15)
It states that the time rate of change of mass within the control volume plus
the net mass flow rate through the control surface is equal to zero.
Splitting the surface integral in Eq. 6–15 into two parts—one for the out-
going flow streams (positive) and one for the incoming streams (negative)—
the general conservation of mass relation can also be expressed as
(6–16)
where A represents the area for an inlet or outlet, and the summation signs
are used to emphasize that all the inlets and outlets are to be considered.
Using the definition of mass flow rate, Eq. 6–16 can also be expressed as
(6–17)
Equations 6–15 and 6–16 are also valid for moving or deforming control vol-
umes provided that the absolute velocity V
→is replaced by the relative velocity
V
→
r , which is the fluid velocity relative to the control surface.
Mass Balance for Steady-Flow Processes
During a steady-flow process, the total amount of mass contained within a
control volume does not change with time (mCV  constant). Then the con-
servation of mass principle requires that the total amount of mass entering a
control volume equal the total amount of mass leaving it. For a garden
hose nozzle in steady operation, for example, the amount of water entering
the nozzle per unit time is equal to the amount of water leaving it per
unit time.
When dealing with steady-flow processes, we are not interested in the
amount of mass that flows in or out of a device over time; instead, we are
interested in the amount of mass flowing per unit time, that is, the mass
flow rate m.. The conservation of mass principle for a general steady-flow
system with multiple inlets and outlets can be expressed in rate form as
(Fig. 6–7)
Steady flow:
(6–18)
a
in
m#  a
out
m# ˚˚1kg>s2
d
dt 
CV
r dV  a
in
m#  a
out
m# ˚or dmCV
dt
 a
in
m#  a
out
m#
d
dt 
CV
r dV  a
out 
A
rVn dA  a
in 
A
rVn dA  0
d
dt 
CV
r dV  
CS
r1V
S# n
S 2 dA  0
m#
net  
CS
dm#  
CS
rVn dA  
CS
r1V
S # n
S 2 dA
Chapter 6
|
203
m
CV
˙ 1 = 2 kg/s
m˙ 2 = 3 kg/s
m3 = m1 + m2 = 5 kg/s
˙
˙
˙
FIGURE 6–7
Conservation of mass principle for a
two-inlet–one-outlet steady-flow
system.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
209
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
It states that the total rate of mass entering a control volume is equal to the
total rate of mass leaving it.
Many engineering devices such as nozzles, diffusers, turbines, compres-
sors, and pumps involve a single stream (only one inlet and one outlet). For
these cases, we denote the inlet state by the subscript 1 and the outlet state
by the subscript 2, and drop the summation signs. Then Eq. 6–18 reduces,
for single-stream steady-flow systems, to
Steady flow (single stream):
(6–19)
Special Case: Incompressible Flow
The conservation of mass relations can be simplified even further when the
fluid is incompressible, which is usually the case for liquids. Canceling the
density from both sides of the general steady-flow relation gives
Steady, incompressible flow:
(6–20)
For single-stream steady-flow systems it becomes
Steady, incompressible flow (single stream):
(6–21)
It should always be kept in mind that there is no such thing as a “conserva-
tion of volume” principle. Therefore, the volume flow rates into and out of a
steady-flow device may be different. The volume flow rate at the outlet of
an air compressor is much less than that at the inlet even though the mass
flow rate of air through the compressor is constant (Fig. 6–8). This is due to
the higher density of air at the compressor exit. For steady flow of liquids,
however, the volume flow rates, as well as the mass flow rates, remain con-
stant since liquids are essentially incompressible (constant-density) sub-
stances. Water flow through the nozzle of a garden hose is an example of
the latter case.
The conservation of mass principle is based on experimental observations
and requires every bit of mass to be accounted for during a process. If you
can balance your checkbook (by keeping track of deposits and withdrawals,
or by simply observing the “conservation of money” principle), you should
have no difficulty applying the conservation of mass principle to engineer-
ing systems.
V
#
1  V
#
2 S V1A1  V2A2
a
in
V
#
 a
out
V
#˚˚1m3>s2
m#
1  m#
2 
S ˚r1V1A1  r2V2A2
204
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
m˙ 1 = 2 kg/s
Air
compressor
m˙ 2 = 2 kg/s
˙V2 = 0.8 m3/s
˙V1 = 1.4 m3/s
FIGURE 6–8
During a steady-flow process,
volume flow rates are not necessarily
conserved although mass flow 
rates are.
Nozzle
Bucket
Garden
hose
FIGURE 6–9
Schematic for Example 6–1.
EXAMPLE 6–1
Water Flow through a Garden Hose Nozzle
A garden hose attached with a nozzle is used to fill a 10-gal bucket. The
inner diameter of the hose is 2 cm, and it reduces to 0.8 cm at the nozzle
exit (Fig. 6–9). If it takes 50 s to fill the bucket with water, determine
(a) the volume and mass flow rates of water through the hose, and (b) the
average velocity of water at the nozzle exit.
Solution
A garden hose is used to fill a water bucket. The volume and
mass flow rates of water and the exit velocity are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Water is an incompressible substance. 2 Flow through the
hose is steady. 3 There is no waste of water by splashing.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
210
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
205
Properties
We take the density of water to be 1000 kg/m3  1 kg/L.
Analysis
(a) Noting that 10 gal of water are discharged in 50 s, the volume
and mass flow rates of water are
(b) The cross-sectional area of the nozzle exit is
The volume flow rate through the hose and the nozzle is constant. Then the
average velocity of water at the nozzle exit becomes
Discussion
It can be shown that the average velocity in the hose is 2.4 m/s.
Therefore, the nozzle increases the water velocity by over six times.
Ve  V
#
Ae

0.757 L/s
0.5027 
 104 m2 a 1 m3
1000 L b  15.1 m/s
Ae  pr e
2  p 10.4 cm2 2  0.5027 cm2  0.5027 
 104 m2
m#  rV#  11 kg>L2 10.757 L>s2  0.757 kg/s
V#  V
¢t  10 gal
50 s a 3.7854 L
1 gal
b  0.757 L/s
Water
Air
0
Dtank
Djet
h2
h0
h
FIGURE 6–10
Schematic for Example 6–2.
EXAMPLE 6–2
Discharge of Water from a Tank
A 4-ft-high, 3-ft-diameter cylindrical water tank whose top is open to the
atmosphere is initially filled with water. Now the discharge plug near the bot-
tom of the tank is pulled out, and a water jet whose diameter is 0.5 in
streams out (Fig. 6–10). The average velocity of the jet is given by 
V 
where h is the height of water in the tank measured from the
center of the hole (a variable) and g is the gravitational acceleration. Deter-
mine how long it will take for the water level in the tank to drop to 2 ft from
the bottom.
Solution
The plug near the bottom of a water tank is pulled out. The time
it takes for half of the water in the tank to empty is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Water is an incompressible substance. 2 The distance
between the bottom of the tank and the center of the hole is negligible com-
pared to the total water height. 3 The gravitational acceleration is 32.2 ft/s2.
Analysis
We take the volume occupied by water as the control volume. The
size of the control volume decreases in this case as the water level drops,
and thus this is a variable control volume. (We could also treat this as a
fixed control volume that consists of the interior volume of the tank by disre-
garding the air that replaces the space vacated by the water.) This is obvi-
ously an unsteady-flow problem since the properties (such as the amount of
mass) within the control volume change with time.
The conservation of mass relation for a control volume undergoing any
process is given in the rate form as
(1)
During this process no mass enters the control volume (m.
in  0), and the
mass flow rate of discharged water can be expressed as
(2)
m#
out  (rVA)out  r22ghAjet
m#
in  m#
out  dmCV
dt
12gh,

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
211
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
6–2
■FLOW WORK AND THE ENERGY 
OF A FLOWING FLUID
Unlike closed systems, control volumes involve mass flow across their
boundaries, and some work is required to push the mass into or out of the
control volume. This work is known as the flow work, or flow energy, and
is necessary for maintaining a continuous flow through a control volume.
To obtain a relation for flow work, consider a fluid element of volume V
as shown in Fig. 6–11. The fluid immediately upstream forces this fluid ele-
ment to enter the control volume; thus, it can be regarded as an imaginary
piston. The fluid element can be chosen to be sufficiently small so that it
has uniform properties throughout.
If the fluid pressure is P and the cross-sectional area of the fluid element
is A (Fig. 6–12), the force applied on the fluid element by the imaginary
piston is
(6–22)
F  PA
206
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
where Ajet  pD2
jet/4 is the cross-sectional area of the jet, which is constant.
Noting that the density of water is constant, the mass of water in the tank at
any time is
(3)
where Atank  pD2
tank/4 is the base area of the cylindrical tank. Substituting
Eqs. 2 and 3 into the mass balance relation (Eq. 1) gives
Canceling the densities and other common terms and separating the vari-
ables give
Integrating from t  0 at which h  h0 to t  t at which h  h2 gives
Substituting, the time of discharge is
Therefore, half of the tank is emptied in 12.6 min after the discharge hole is
unplugged.
Discussion
Using the same relation with h2  0 gives t  43.1 min for the
discharge of the entire amount of water in the tank. Therefore, emptying
the bottom half of the tank takes much longer than emptying the top half.
This is due to the decrease in the average discharge velocity of water with
decreasing h.
t  24 ft  22 ft
232.2/2 ft/s2
 a 3 
 12 in
0.5 in
b
2
 757 s  12.6 min

t
0
dt  
Dtank
2
Djet
2 22g 
h2
h0
dh
2h
S t  2h0  2h2
2g/2
 a Dtank
Djet
b
2
dt  Dtank
2
Djet
2
dh
22gh
r22ghAjet  d(rAtankh)
dt
→r22gh(pDjet
2 /4)  r(pDtank
2 /4) dh
dt
mCV  rV  rAtankh
Imaginary
piston
CV
A
V
P
m
L
F
FIGURE 6–11
Schematic for flow work.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
212
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
To push the entire fluid element into the control volume, this force must act
through a distance L. Thus, the work done in pushing the fluid element
across the boundary (i.e., the flow work) is
(6–23)
The flow work per unit mass is obtained by dividing both sides of this equa-
tion by the mass of the fluid element:
(6–24)
The flow work relation is the same whether the fluid is pushed into or out
of the control volume (Fig. 6–13).
It is interesting that unlike other work quantities, flow work is expressed in
terms of properties. In fact, it is the product of two properties of the fluid. For
that reason, some people view it as a combination property (like enthalpy)
and refer to it as flow energy, convected energy, or transport energy instead
of flow work. Others, however, argue rightfully that the product Pv represents
energy for flowing fluids only and does not represent any form of energy for
nonflow (closed) systems. Therefore, it should be treated as work. This con-
troversy is not likely to end, but it is comforting to know that both arguments
yield the same result for the energy balance equation. In the discussions that
follow, we consider the flow energy to be part of the energy of a flowing
fluid, since this greatly simplifies the energy analysis of control volumes.
Total Energy of a Flowing Fluid
As we discussed in Chap. 3, the total energy of a simple compressible system
consists of three parts: internal, kinetic, and potential energies (Fig. 6–14).
On a unit-mass basis, it is expressed as
(6–25)
where V is the velocity and z is the elevation of the system relative to some
external reference point.
e  u  ke  pe  u  V 2
2  gz  
1kJ>kg2
wflow  Pv  
1kJ>kg2
Wflow  FL  PAL  PV  
1kJ2
Chapter 6
|
207
A
P
F
FIGURE 6–12
In the absence of acceleration, the
force applied on a fluid by a piston is
equal to the force applied on the piston
by the fluid.
(a) Before entering
P
v
wflow
(b) After entering
CV
CV
P
v
wflow
FIGURE 6–13
Flow work is the energy needed to
push a fluid into or out of a control
volume, and it is equal to Pv.
Nonflowing
fluid
e = u +       + gz
V2
2
Flowing
fluid
θ = Pv  + u +      + gz
2
Internal
energy
Potential
energy
Kinetic
energy
Internal
energy
Potential
energy
Kinetic
energy
Flow
energy
V2
FIGURE 6–14
The total energy consists of three parts
for a nonflowing fluid and four parts
for a flowing fluid.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
213
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The fluid entering or leaving a control volume possesses an additional
form of energy—the flow energy Pv, as already discussed. Then the total
energy of a flowing fluid on a unit-mass basis (denoted by u) becomes
(6–26)
But the combination Pv  u has been previously defined as the enthalpy h.
So the relation in Eq. 6–26 reduces to
(6–27)
By using the enthalpy instead of the internal energy to represent the energy
of a flowing fluid, one does not need to be concerned about the flow work.
The energy associated with pushing the fluid into or out of the control vol-
ume is automatically taken care of by enthalpy. In fact, this is the main reason
for defining the property enthalpy. From now on, the energy of a fluid stream
flowing into or out of a control volume is represented by Eq. 6–27, and no
reference will be made to flow work or flow energy.
Energy Transport by Mass
Noting that u is total energy per unit mass, the total energy of a flowing fluid
of mass m is simply mu, provided that the properties of the mass m are uni-
form. Also, when a fluid stream with uniform properties is flowing at a mass
flow rate of m. , the rate of energy flow with that stream is m. u (Fig. 6–15).
That is,
Amount of energy transport:
(6–28)
Rate of energy transport:
(6–29)
When the kinetic and potential energies of a fluid stream are negligible, as
is often the case, these relations simplify to Emass  mh and E.
mass  m. h.
In general, the total energy transported by mass into or out of the control
volume is not easy to determine since the properties of the mass at each
inlet or exit may be changing with time as well as over the cross section.
Thus, the only way to determine the energy transport through an opening as
a result of mass flow is to consider sufficiently small differential masses dm
that have uniform properties and to add their total energies during flow.
Again noting that u is total energy per unit mass, the total energy of a
flowing fluid of mass dm is u dm. Then the total energy transported by mass
through an inlet or exit (miui and meue) is obtained by integration. At an
inlet, for example, it becomes
(6–30)
Most flows encountered in practice can be approximated as being steady
and one-dimensional (with hi, Vi, and zi being average properties.)
Ein,mass  
mi
ui dmi  
mi
ahi  Vi
2
2  gzib dmi
E#
mass  m# u  m# ah  V 2
2  gz b
1kW2
Emass  mu  mah  V 2
2  gzb
1kJ2
u  h  ke  pe  h  V2
2  gz  
1kJ>kg2
u  Pv  e  Pv  1u  ke  pe2
208
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
m˙i, kg/s
CV
θi, kJ/kg
    θi
(kW)
mi˙
FIGURE 6–15
The product m.
iui is the energy
transported into control volume 
by mass per unit time.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
214
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
209
EXAMPLE 6–3
Energy Transport by Mass
Steam is leaving a 4-L pressure cooker whose operating pressure is 150 kPa
(Fig. 6–16). It is observed that the amount of liquid in the cooker has
decreased by 0.6 L in 40 min after the steady operating conditions are
established, and the cross-sectional area of the exit opening is 8 mm2.
Determine (a) the mass flow rate of the steam and the exit velocity, (b) the
total and flow energies of the steam per unit mass, and (c) the rate at which
energy leaves the cooker by steam.
Solution
Steam leaves a pressure cooker at a specified pressure. The veloc-
ity, flow rate, the total and flow energies, and the rate of energy transfer by
mass are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The flow is steady, and the initial start-up period is disre-
garded. 2 The kinetic and potential energies are negligible, and thus they are
not considered. 3 Saturation conditions exist within the cooker at all times
so that steam leaves the cooker as a saturated vapor at the cooker pressure.
Properties
The properties of saturated liquid water and water vapor at 150
kPa are vf  0.001053 m3/kg, vg  1.1594 m3/kg, ug  2519.2 kJ/kg,
and hg  2693.1 kJ/kg (Table A–5).
Analysis
(a) Saturation conditions exist in a pressure cooker at all times after
the steady operating conditions are established. Therefore, the liquid has the
properties of saturated liquid and the exiting steam has the properties of satu-
rated vapor at the operating pressure. The amount of liquid that has evapo-
rated, the mass flow rate of the exiting steam, and the exit velocity are
(b) Noting that h  u  Pv and that the kinetic and potential energies are
disregarded, the flow and total energies of the exiting steam are
Note that the kinetic energy in this case is ke  V 2/2  (34.3 m/s)2/2 
588 m2/s2  0.588 kJ/kg, which is small compared to enthalpy.
(c) The rate at which energy is leaving the cooker by mass is simply the
product of the mass flow rate and the total energy of the exiting steam per
unit mass,
Discussion
The numerical value of the energy leaving the cooker with steam
alone does not mean much since this value depends on the reference point
selected for enthalpy (it could even be negative). The significant quantity is
the difference between the enthalpies of the exiting vapor and the liquid
inside (which is hfg) since it relates directly to the amount of energy supplied
to the cooker.
E
#
mass  m# u  12.37 
 104 kg/s2 12693.1 kJ/kg2  0.638 kJ/s  0.638 kW
u  h  ke  pe  h  2693.1 kJ/kg
eflow  Pv  h  u  2693.1  2519.2  173.9 kJ/kg
V 
m#
rgAc

m# vg
Ac

12.37 
 104 kg>s2 11.1594 m3>kg2
8 
 106 m2
 34.3 m/s
m#  m
¢t  0.570 kg
40 min  0.0142 kg>min  2.37  104 kg/s
m 
¢V liquid
vf

0.6 L
0.001053 m3>kg
 a 1 m3
1000 L b  0.570 kg
150 kPa
Steam
Pressure
Cooker
FIGURE 6–16
Schematic for Example 6–3.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
215
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
6–3
■ENERGY ANALYSIS OF STEADY-FLOW
SYSTEMS
A large number of engineering devices such as turbines, compressors, and
nozzles operate for long periods of time under the same conditions once the
transient start-up period is completed and steady operation is established,
and they are classified as steady-flow devices (Fig. 6–17). Processes involv-
ing such devices can be represented reasonably well by a somewhat ideal-
ized process, called the steady-flow process, which was defined in Chap. 2
as a process during which a fluid flows through a control volume steadily.
That is, the fluid properties can change from point to point within the con-
trol volume, but at any point, they remain constant during the entire process.
(Remember, steady means no change with time.)
During a steady-flow process, no intensive or extensive properties within
the control volume change with time. Thus, the volume V, the mass m, and
the total energy content E of the control volume remain constant (Fig. 6–18).
As a result, the boundary work is zero for steady-flow systems (since VCV 
constant), and the total mass or energy entering the control volume must be
equal to the total mass or energy leaving it (since mCV  constant and ECV 
constant). These observations greatly simplify the analysis.
The fluid properties at an inlet or exit remain constant during a steady-
flow process. The properties may, however, be different at different inlets
and exits. They may even vary over the cross section of an inlet or an exit.
However, all properties, including the velocity and elevation, must remain
constant with time at a fixed point at an inlet or exit. It follows that the mass
flow rate of the fluid at an opening must remain constant during a steady-
flow process (Fig. 6–19). As an added simplification, the fluid properties at
an opening are usually approximated as uniform (at some average value)
over the cross section. Thus, the fluid properties at an inlet or exit may be
specified by the average single values. Also, the heat and work interactions
between a steady-flow system and its surroundings do not change with time.
Thus, the power delivered by a system and the rate of heat transfer to or
from a system remain constant during a steady-flow process.
The mass balance for a general steady-flow system was given in 
Sec. 6–1 as
(6–31)
The mass balance for a single-stream (one-inlet and one-outlet) steady-flow
system was given as
(6–32)
where the subscripts 1 and 2 denote the inlet and the exit states, respec-
tively, r is density, V is the average flow velocity in the flow direction, and
A is the cross-sectional area normal to the flow direction.
During a steady-flow process, the total energy content of a control volume
remains constant (ECV  constant), and thus the change in the total energy
of the control volume is zero (ECV  0). Therefore, the amount of energy
entering a control volume in all forms (by heat, work, and mass) must be
equal to the amount of energy leaving it. Then the rate form of the general
energy balance reduces for a steady-flow process to
m#
1  m#
2 
S ˚r1V1A1  r2V2A2
a
in
m#  a
out
m# ˚˚1kg>s2
210
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Control
volume
m
h1
˙1
m
h2
˙ 2
m
h3
˙ 3
FIGURE 6–19
Under steady-flow conditions, the
fluid properties at an inlet or exit
remain constant (do not change with
time).
Control
volume
Mass
in
Mass
out
mCV = constant
ECV = constant
FIGURE 6–18
Under steady-flow conditions, the
mass and energy contents of a control
volume remain constant.
FIGURE 6–17
Many engineering systems such as
power plants operate under steady
conditions.
© Vol. 57/PhotoDisc

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
216
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
(6–33)
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
or
Energy balance:
(6–34)
Rate of net energy transfer in
Rate of net energy transfer out
by heat, work, and mass
by heat, work, and mass
Noting that energy can be transferred by heat, work, and mass only, the
energy balance in Eq. 6–34 for a general steady-flow system can also be
written more explicitly as
(6–35)
or
(6–36)
since the energy of a flowing fluid per unit mass is u  h  ke  pe  h 
V 2/2  gz. The energy balance relation for steady-flow systems first
appeared in 1859 in a German thermodynamics book written by Gustav
Zeuner.
Consider, for example, an ordinary electric hot-water heater under steady
operation, as shown in Fig. 6–20. A cold-water stream with a mass flow rate
m. is continuously flowing into the water heater, and a hot-water stream of
the same mass flow rate is continuously flowing out of it. The water heater
(the control volume) is losing heat to the surrounding air at a rate of Q.
out,
and the electric heating element is supplying electrical work (heating) to the
water at a rate of W.
in. On the basis of the conservation of energy principle,
we can say that the water stream experiences an increase in its total energy
as it flows through the water heater that is equal to the electric energy sup-
plied to the water minus the heat losses.
The energy balance relation just given is intuitive in nature and is easy to
use when the magnitudes and directions of heat and work transfers are
known. When performing a general analytical study or solving a problem that
involves an unknown heat or work interaction, however, we need to assume a
direction for the heat or work interactions. In such cases, it is common prac-
tice to assume heat to be transferred into the system (heat input) at a rate of Q.,
and work produced by the system (work output) at a rate of W., and then solve
the problem. The first-law or energy balance relation in that case for a general
steady-flow system becomes
(6–37)
Obtaining a negative quantity for Q. or W
.
simply means that the assumed
direction is wrong and should be reversed. For single-stream devices, the
steady-flow energy balance equation becomes
(6–38)
Q#  W#  m# ch2  h1  V 2
2  V 1
2
2
 g1z2  z12 d
Q#  W#  a
out
m# a h  V 2
2  gz b  a
in
m# ah  V 2
2  gz b
Q
#
in  W
#
in  a
in
m# a h  V 2
2  gzb  Q
#
out  W
#
out  a
out
m# a h  V 2
2  gz b
Q#
in  W#
in  a
in
m# u  Q#
out  W#
out  a
out
m# u
E.
in             E.
out        1kW2
E#
in  E#
out         dEsystem>dt          0
Chapter 6
|
211
Q
CV
(Hot-water tank)
m  = m
˙ 2
m˙ 1
Cold
water
in
W˙ in
Electric
heating
element
˙ 1
˙out
Heat
loss
Hot
water
out
FIGURE 6–20
A water heater in steady operation.
0 (steady)
¡
123
for each inlet
for each exit
123
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎬
⎭
⎫
⎬
⎭
123
for each exit
for each inlet
123

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
217
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Dividing Eq. 6–38 by m. gives the energy balance on a unit-mass basis as
(6–39)
where q  Q./m. and w  W. /m. are the heat transfer and work done per unit
mass of the working fluid, respectively. When the fluid experiences negligi-
ble changes in its kinetic and potential energies (that is, ke  0, pe  0),
the energy balance equation is reduced further to
(6–40)
The various terms appearing in the above equations are as follows:
Q.  rate of heat transfer between the control volume and its
surroundings. When the control volume is losing heat (as in the case of
the water heater), Q. is negative. If the control volume is well insulated
(i.e., adiabatic), then Q.  0.
W.  power. For steady-flow devices, the control volume is constant; thus,
there is no boundary work involved. The work required to push mass into
and out of the control volume is also taken care of by using enthalpies for
the energy of fluid streams instead of internal energies. Then W. represents
the remaining forms of work done per unit time (Fig. 6–21). Many steady-
flow devices, such as turbines, compressors, and pumps, transmit power
through a shaft, and W. simply becomes the shaft power for those devices. If
the control surface is crossed by electric wires (as in the case of an electric
water heater), W. represents the electrical work done per unit time. If neither
is present, then W.  0.
h  h2  h1. The enthalpy change of a fluid can easily be determined by
reading the enthalpy values at the exit and inlet states from the tables. For
ideal gases, it can be approximated by h  cp,avg(T2  T1). Note that
(kg/s)(kJ/kg) 	 kW.
ke  (V2
2  V1
2)/2. The unit of kinetic energy is m2/s2, which is equivalent
to J/kg (Fig. 6–22). The enthalpy is usually given in kJ/kg. To add these
two quantities, the kinetic energy should be expressed in kJ/kg. This is
easily accomplished by dividing it by 1000. A velocity of 45 m/s
corresponds to a kinetic energy of only 1 kJ/kg, which is a very small
value compared with the enthalpy values encountered in practice. Thus,
the kinetic energy term at low velocities can usually be neglected. When 
a fluid stream enters and leaves a steady-flow device at about the same
velocity (V1  V2), the change in the kinetic energy is close to zero
regardless of the velocity. Caution should be exercised at high velocities,
however, since small changes in velocities may cause significant changes
in kinetic energy (Fig. 6–23).
pe  g(z2  z1). A similar argument can be given for the potential energy
term. A potential energy change of 1 kJ/kg corresponds to an elevation
difference of 102 m. The elevation difference between the inlet and exit of
most industrial devices such as turbines and compressors is well below
this value, and the potential energy term is nearly always neglected for
these devices. The only time the potential energy term is significant is
when a process involves pumping a fluid to high elevations and we are
interested in the required pumping power.
q  w  h2  h1
q  w  h2  h1  V 2
2  V 1
2
2
 g1z2  z12
212
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
CV
We˙
Wsh
˙
FIGURE 6–21
Under steady operation, shaft work
and electrical work are the only forms
of work a simple compressible system
may involve.
lbm
s2
kg
kg
s2
kg
s2
Also, Btu
≡
J
N.m ≡(kg m
(
m ≡m2
(
(
≡25,037
ft2
FIGURE 6–22
The units m2/s2 and J/kg are
equivalent.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
218
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
6–4
■SOME STEADY-FLOW ENGINEERING DEVICES
Many engineering devices operate essentially under the same conditions
for long periods of time. The components of a steam power plant (turbines,
compressors, heat exchangers, and pumps), for example, operate nonstop for
months before the system is shut down for maintenance (Fig. 6–24). There-
fore, these devices can be conveniently analyzed as steady-flow devices.
In this section, some common steady-flow devices are described, and the
thermodynamic aspects of the flow through them are analyzed. The conser-
vation of mass and the conservation of energy principles for these devices
are illustrated with examples.
1
Nozzles and Diffusers
Nozzles and diffusers are commonly utilized in jet engines, rockets, space-
craft, and even garden hoses. A nozzle is a device that increases the velocity
of a fluid at the expense of pressure. A diffuser is a device that increases
the pressure of a fluid by slowing it down. That is, nozzles and diffusers
perform opposite tasks. The cross-sectional area of a nozzle decreases in the
flow direction for subsonic flows and increases for supersonic flows. The
reverse is true for diffusers.
The rate of heat transfer between the fluid flowing through a nozzle or a
diffuser and the surroundings is usually very small (Q. 
 0) since the fluid has
high velocities, and thus it does not spend enough time in the device for any
significant heat transfer to take place. Nozzles and diffusers typically involve
no work (W.  0) and any change in potential energy is negligible (pe  0).
But nozzles and diffusers usually involve very high velocities, and as a fluid
passes through a nozzle or diffuser, it experiences large changes in its veloc-
ity (Fig. 6–25). Therefore, the kinetic energy changes must be accounted for
in analyzing the flow through these devices (ke  0).
Chapter 6
|
213
m/s
kJ/kg
200     205       1
500     502       1
    0 
45
1
  50       67
1
100     110   
1
m/s
V2
V1
Δke
FIGURE 6–23
At very high velocities, even small
changes in velocities can cause
significant changes in the kinetic
energy of the fluid.
FIGURE 6–24
A modern land-based gas turbine used for electric power production. This is a
General Electric LM5000 turbine. It has a length of 6.2 m, it weighs 12.5 tons,
and produces 55.2 MW at 3600 rpm with steam injection.
Courtesy of GE Power Systems

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
219
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
EXAMPLE 6–4
Deceleration of Air in a Diffuser
Air at 10°C and 80 kPa enters the diffuser of a jet engine steadily with a
velocity of 200 m/s. The inlet area of the diffuser is 0.4 m2. The air leaves
the diffuser with a velocity that is very small compared with the inlet veloc-
ity. Determine (a) the mass flow rate of the air and (b) the temperature of
the air leaving the diffuser.
Solution
Air enters the diffuser of a jet engine steadily at a specified veloc-
ity. The mass flow rate of air and the temperature at the diffuser exit are to
be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0 and ECV  0. 2 Air is an ideal gas
since it is at a high temperature and low pressure relative to its critical-point
values. 3 The potential energy change is zero, pe  0. 4 Heat transfer is
negligible. 5 Kinetic energy at the diffuser exit is negligible. 6 There are no
work interactions.
Analysis
We take the diffuser as the system (Fig. 6–26). This is a control
volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process. We
observe that there is only one inlet and one exit and thus m.
1  m.
2  m..
(a) To determine the mass flow rate, we need to find the specific volume
of the air first. This is determined from the ideal-gas relation at the inlet
conditions:
Then,
Since the flow is steady, the mass flow rate through the entire diffuser
remains constant at this value.
(b) Under stated assumptions and observations, the energy balance for this
steady-flow system can be expressed in the rate form as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
The exit velocity of a diffuser is usually small compared with the inlet 
velocity (V2  V1); thus, the kinetic energy at the exit can be neglected.
The enthalpy of air at the diffuser inlet is determined from the air table
(Table A–21) to be
h1  h @ 283 K  283.14 kJ/kg
h2  h1  V 2
2  V 1
2
2
m# a h1  V 1
2
2 b  m# ah2  V 2
2
2 b˚˚1since Q#  0, W
#
 0, and ¢pe  02
E
#
in  E
#
out
E#
in  E#
out           dEsystem>dt         0
m#  1
v1
 V1A1 
1
1.015 m3/kg
 1200 m/s2 10.4 m22  78.8 kg/s
v1  RT1
P1

10.287 kPa # m3/kg # K2 1283 K2
80 kPa
 1.015 m3/kg
214
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Nozzle
V1
V2
V1
V1
V1
V2
Diffuser
>>
>>
FIGURE 6–25
Nozzles and diffusers are shaped so
that they cause large changes in fluid
velocities and thus kinetic energies.
AIR
T2 = ?
P1 = 80 kPa
T1 = 10°C
V1 = 200 m/s
A1 = 0.4 m2
m = ?
FIGURE 6–26
Schematic for Example 6–4.
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
220
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
215
STEAM
V2 = 900 ft/s
P2 = 200 psia
T1 = 700°F
P1 = 250 psia
A1 = 0.2 ft2
m = 10 lbm/s
qout = 1.2 Btu/lbm
FIGURE 6–26A
Schematic for Example 6–5.
Substituting, we get
From Table A–21, the temperature corresponding to this enthalpy value is
Discussion
This result shows that the temperature of the air increases by
about 20°C as it is slowed down in the diffuser. The temperature rise of the
air is mainly due to the conversion of kinetic energy to internal energy.
EXAMPLE 6–5
Acceleration of Steam in a Nozzle
Steam at 250 psia and 700°F steadily enters a nozzle whose inlet area is
0.2 ft2. The mass flow rate of steam through the nozzle is 10 lbm/s. Steam
leaves the nozzle at 200 psia with a velocity of 900 ft/s. Heat losses from
the nozzle per unit mass of the steam are estimated to be 1.2 Btu/lbm.
Determine (a) the inlet velocity and (b) the exit temperature of the steam.
Solution
Steam enters a nozzle steadily at a specified flow rate and velocity.
The inlet velocity of steam and the exit temperature are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0 and ECV  0. 2 There are no work
interactions. 3 The potential energy change is zero, pe  0.
Analysis
We take the nozzle as the system (Fig. 6–26A). This is a control
volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process. We
observe that there is only one inlet and one exit and thus m.
1  m.
2  m..
(a) The specific volume and enthalpy of steam at the nozzle inlet are
Then,
(b) Under stated assumptions and observations, the energy balance for this
steady-flow system can be expressed in the rate form as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
m# ah1  V 1
2
2 b  Q#
out  m# a h2  V 2
2
2 b˚˚1since W
#
 0, and ¢pe  02
E#
in  E#
out
E#
in  E#
out           dEsystem>dt         0
V1  134.4 ft/s
 10 lbm>s 
1
2.6883 ft3>lbm
 1V12 10.2 ft22
m#  1
v1
V1A1
P1  250 psia
T1  700°F
f
v1  2.6883 ft3/lbm
h1  1371.4 Btu/lbm  
1Table A–6E2
T2  303 K
 303.14 kJ/kg
h2  283.14 kJ/kg 
0  1200 m/s2 2
2
a
1 kJ/kg
1000 m2/s2 b
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
221
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
216
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Dividing by the mass flow rate m. and substituting, h2 is determined to be
Then,
Discussion
Note that the temperature of steam drops by 38.0°F as it flows
through the nozzle. This drop in temperature is mainly due to the conversion
of internal energy to kinetic energy. (The heat loss is too small to cause any
significant effect in this case.)
2
Turbines and Compressors
In steam, gas, or hydroelectric power plants, the device that drives the elec-
tric generator is the turbine. As the fluid passes through the turbine, work is
done against the blades, which are attached to the shaft. As a result, the
shaft rotates, and the turbine produces work.
Compressors, as well as pumps and fans, are devices used to increase the
pressure of a fluid. Work is supplied to these devices from an external
source through a rotating shaft. Therefore, compressors involve work inputs.
Even though these three devices function similarly, they do differ in the
tasks they perform. A fan increases the pressure of a gas slightly and is
mainly used to mobilize a gas. A compressor is capable of compressing the
gas to very high pressures. Pumps work very much like compressors except
that they handle liquids instead of gases.
Note that turbines produce power output whereas compressors, pumps,
and fans require power input. Heat transfer from turbines is usually negligi-
ble (Q. 
 0) since they are typically well insulated. Heat transfer is also neg-
ligible for compressors unless there is intentional cooling. Potential energy
changes are negligible for all of these devices (pe  0). The velocities
involved in these devices, with the exception of turbines and fans, are usu-
ally too low to cause any significant change in the kinetic energy (ke  0).
The fluid velocities encountered in most turbines are very high, and the
fluid experiences a significant change in its kinetic energy. However, this
change is usually very small relative to the change in enthalpy, and thus it is
often disregarded.
EXAMPLE 6–6
Compressing Air by a Compressor
Air at 100 kPa and 280 K is compressed steadily to 600 kPa and 400 K.
The mass flow rate of the air is 0.02 kg/s, and a heat loss of 16 kJ/kg occurs
during the process. Assuming the changes in kinetic and potential energies
are negligible, determine the necessary power input to the compressor.
P2  200 psia
h2  1354.4 Btu/lbmf
T2  662.0°F  
1Table A–6E2
 1354.4 Btu/lbm 
 11371.4  1.22 Btu/lbm 
1900 ft/s2 2  1134.4 ft/s2 2
2
a 1 Btu/lbm
25,037 ft2/s2 b
h2  h1  qout  V 2
2  V 1
2
2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
222
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
217
AIR
Win = ?
˙
T2 = 400 K
qout = 16 kJ/kg
P1 = 100 kPa
P2 = 600 kPa
T1 = 280 K
m = 0.02 kg/s
˙
FIGURE 6–27
Schematic for Example 6–6.
Solution
Air is compressed steadily by a compressor to a specified temper-
ature and pressure. The power input to the compressor is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0 and ECV  0. 2 Air is an ideal gas
since it is at a high temperature and low pressure relative to its critical-point
values. 3 The kinetic and potential energy changes are zero, ke  pe  0.
Analysis
We take the compressor as the system (Fig. 6–27). This is a con-
trol volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process. We
observe that there is only one inlet and one exit and thus m.
1  m.
2  m..
Also, heat is lost from the system and work is supplied to the system.
Under stated assumptions and observations, the energy balance for this
steady-flow system can be expressed in the rate form as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
The enthalpy of an ideal gas depends on temperature only, and the
enthalpies of the air at the specified temperatures are determined from the
air table (Table A–21) to be
Substituting, the power input to the compressor is determined to be
Discussion
Note that the mechanical energy input to the compressor mani-
fests itself as a rise in enthalpy of air and heat loss from the compressor.
EXAMPLE 6–7
Power Generation by a Steam Turbine
The power output of an adiabatic steam turbine is 5 MW, and the inlet and
the exit conditions of the steam are as indicated in Fig. 6–28.
(a)
Compare the magnitudes of h, ke, and pe.
(b)
Determine the work done per unit mass of the steam flowing through
the turbine.
(c)
Calculate the mass flow rate of the steam.
Solution
The inlet and exit conditions of a steam turbine and its power
output are given. The changes in kinetic energy, potential energy, and
enthalpy of steam, as well as the work done per unit mass and the mass flow
rate of steam are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0 and ECV  0. 2 The system is adia-
batic and thus there is no heat transfer.
 2.74 kW
W
#
in  10.02 kg/s2 116 kJ/kg2  10.02 kg/s2 1400.98  280.132 kJ/kg
h2  h@ 400 K  400.98 kJ/kg
h1  h @ 280 K  280.13 kJ/kg
W#
in  m# qout  m# 1h2  h12
W#
in  m# h1  Q#
out  m# h2  
1since ¢ke  ¢pe  02
E#
in  E#
out
E#
in  E#
out           dEsystem>dt         0
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
STEAM
TURBINE
Wout = 5 MW
P1 = 2 MPa
T1 = 400°C
V1 = 50 m/s
z1 = 10 m
P2 = 15 kPa
x2 = 90%
V2 = 180 m/s
z2 = 6 m
FIGURE 6–28
Schematic for Example 6–7.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
223
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
218
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
We take the turbine as the system. This is a control volume since
mass crosses the system boundary during the process. We observe that there
is only one inlet and one exit and thus m.
1  m.
2  m.. Also, work is done by
the system. The inlet and exit velocities and elevations are given, and thus
the kinetic and potential energies are to be considered.
(a) At the inlet, steam is in a superheated vapor state, and its enthalpy is
At the turbine exit, we obviously have a saturated liquid–vapor mixture at
15-kPa pressure. The enthalpy at this state is
Then
(b) The energy balance for this steady-flow system can be expressed in the
rate form as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Dividing by the mass flow rate m. and substituting, the work done by the tur-
bine per unit mass of the steam is determined to be
(c) The required mass flow rate for a 5-MW power output is
Discussion
Two observations can be made from these results. First, the
change in potential energy is insignificant in comparison to the changes in
enthalpy and kinetic energy. This is typical for most engineering devices.
Second, as a result of low pressure and thus high specific volume, the steam
velocity at the turbine exit can be very high. Yet the change in kinetic energy
is a small fraction of the change in enthalpy (less than 2 percent in our
case) and is therefore often neglected.
m#  W
#
out
wout

5000 kJ/s
872.48 kJ/kg  5.73 kg/s
 [887.39  14.95  0.04] kJ/kg  872.48 kJ/kg
wout   c 1h2  h12  V 2
2  V 1
2
2
 g1z2  z12 d   1¢h  ¢ke  ¢pe2
m# a h1  V 1
2
2  gz1b  W
#
out  m# ah2  V 2
2
2  gz2b
1since Q
#
 02
E#
in  E#
out
E
#
in  E
#
out           dEsystem>dt         0
¢pe  g 1z2  z12  19.81 m>s22 3 16  102 m4 a
1 kJ>kg
1000 m2>s2 b  0.04 kJ/kg
¢ke  V 2
2  V 2
1
2

1180 m>s2 2  150 m>s2 2
2
 a
1 kJ>kg
1000 m2>s2 b  14.95 kJ/kg
¢h  h2  h1  12361.01  3248.42 kJ>kg  887.39 kJ/kg
h2  hf  x2hfg  [225.94  (0.9)(2372.3)] kJ/kg  2361.01 kJ/kg
P1  2 MPa
T1  400C f h1  3248.4 kJ/kg  (Table A–6)
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
224
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
3
Throttling Valves
Throttling valves are any kind of flow-restricting devices that cause a signif-
icant pressure drop in the fluid. Some familiar examples are ordinary
adjustable valves, capillary tubes, and porous plugs (Fig. 6–29). Unlike tur-
bines, they produce a pressure drop without involving any work. The pres-
sure drop in the fluid is often accompanied by a large drop in temperature,
and for that reason throttling devices are commonly used in refrigeration
and air-conditioning applications. The magnitude of the temperature drop
(or, sometimes, the temperature rise) during a throttling process is governed
by a property called the Joule-Thomson coefficient.
Throttling valves are usually small devices, and the flow through them
may be assumed to be adiabatic (q  0) since there is neither sufficient time
nor large enough area for any effective heat transfer to take place. Also,
there is no work done (w  0), and the change in potential energy, if any, is
very small (pe  0). Even though the exit velocity is often considerably
higher than the inlet velocity, in many cases, the increase in kinetic energy
is insignificant (ke  0). Then the conservation of energy equation for this
single-stream steady-flow device reduces to
(6–41)
That is, enthalpy values at the inlet and exit of a throttling valve are the
same. For this reason, a throttling valve is sometimes called an isenthalpic
device. Note, however, that for throttling devices with large exposed surface
areas such as capillary tubes, heat transfer may be significant.
To gain some insight into how throttling affects fluid properties, let us
express Eq. 6–41 as follows:
or
Thus the final outcome of a throttling process depends on which of the two
quantities increases during the process. If the flow energy increases during
the process (P2v2  P1v1), it can do so at the expense of the internal energy.
As a result, internal energy decreases, which is usually accompanied by a
drop in temperature. If the product Pv decreases, the internal energy and the
temperature of a fluid will increase during a throttling process. In the case
of an ideal gas, h  h(T), and thus the temperature has to remain constant
during a throttling process (Fig. 6–30).
EXAMPLE 6–8
Expansion of Refrigerant-134a in a Refrigerator
Refrigerant-134a enters the capillary tube of a refrigerator as saturated liquid
at 0.8 MPa and is throttled to a pressure of 0.12 MPa. Determine the quality
of the refrigerant at the final state and the temperature drop during this
process.
Solution
Refrigerant-134a that enters a capillary tube as saturated liquid is
throttled to a specified pressure. The exit quality of the refrigerant and the
temperature drop are to be determined.
Internal energy  Flow energy  Constant
u1  P1v1  u2  P2v2
h2  h1  
1kJ>kg2
Chapter 6
|
219
(a) An adjustable valve
(b) A porous plug
(c) A capillary tube
FIGURE 6–29
Throttling valves are devices that
cause large pressure drops in the fluid.
Throttling
valve
IDEAL
GAS
T1
T2 = T1
h2 = h1
h1
FIGURE 6–30
The temperature of an ideal gas does
not change during a throttling (h 
constant) process since h  h(T).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
225
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Assumptions
1 Heat transfer from the tube is negligible. 2 Kinetic energy
change of the refrigerant is negligible.
Analysis
A capillary tube is a simple flow-restricting device that is commonly
used in refrigeration applications to cause a large pressure drop in the refrig-
erant. Flow through a capillary tube is a throttling process; thus, the enthalpy
of the refrigerant remains constant (Fig. 6–31).
At inlet:
At exit:
Obviously hf  h2  hg; thus, the refrigerant exists as a saturated mixture at
the exit state. The quality at this state is
Since the exit state is a saturated mixture at 0.12 MPa, the exit temperature
must be the saturation temperature at this pressure, which is 22.32°C.
Then the temperature change for this process becomes
Discussion
Note that the temperature of the refrigerant drops by 53.63°C
during this throttling process. Also note that 34.0 percent of the refrigerant
vaporizes during this throttling process, and the energy needed to vaporize
this refrigerant is absorbed from the refrigerant itself.
4a
Mixing Chambers
In engineering applications, mixing two streams of fluids is not a rare
occurrence. The section where the mixing process takes place is commonly
referred to as a mixing chamber. The mixing chamber does not have to be
a distinct “chamber.” An ordinary T-elbow or a Y-elbow in a shower, for
example, serves as the mixing chamber for the cold- and hot-water streams
(Fig. 6–32).
The conservation of mass principle for a mixing chamber requires that the
sum of the incoming mass flow rates equal the mass flow rate of the outgo-
ing mixture.
Mixing chambers are usually well insulated (q  0) and usually do not
involve any kind of work (w  0). Also, the kinetic and potential energies
of the fluid streams are usually negligible (ke  0, pe  0). Then all there
is left in the energy equation is the total energies of the incoming streams
and the outgoing mixture. The conservation of energy principle requires that
these two equal each other. Therefore, the conservation of energy equation
becomes analogous to the conservation of mass equation for this case.
¢T  T2  T1  122.32  31.312°C  53.63°C
x2 
h2  hf
hfg
 95.47  22.49
236.97  22.49  0.340
P2  0.12 MPa
(h2  h1)
 ¡ hf  22.49 kJ/kg
hg  236.97 kJ/kg Tsat  22.32C
P1  0.8 MPa
sat. liquid
f T1  Tsat @ 0.8 MPa  31.31C
h1  hf @ 0.8 MPa  95.47 kJ/kg  (Table A–12)
220
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Throttling
valve
u1 = 94.79 kJ/kg
P1v1 = 0.68 kJ/kg
(h1 = 95.47 kJ/kg)
u2 = 88.79 kJ/kg
P2v2 = 6.68 kJ/kg
(h2 = 95.47 kJ/kg)
FIGURE 6–31
During a throttling process, the
enthalpy (flow energy  internal
energy) of a fluid remains constant.
But internal and flow energies may be
converted to each other.
Hot
water
Cold
water
T-elbow
FIGURE 6–32
The T-elbow of an ordinary shower
serves as the mixing chamber for the
hot- and the cold-water streams.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
226
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
221
EXAMPLE 6–9
Mixing of Hot and Cold Waters in a Shower
Consider an ordinary shower where hot water at 140°F is mixed with cold
water at 50°F. If it is desired that a steady stream of warm water at 110°F
be supplied, determine the ratio of the mass flow rates of the hot to cold
water. Assume the heat losses from the mixing chamber to be negligible and
the mixing to take place at a pressure of 20 psia.
Solution
In a shower, cold water is mixed with hot water at a specified
temperature. For a specified mixture temperature, the ratio of the mass flow
rates of the hot to cold water is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0 and ECV  0. 2 The kinetic and poten-
tial energies are negligible, ke  pe  0. 3 Heat losses from the system are
negligible and thus Q.  0. 4 There is no work interaction involved.
Analysis
We take the mixing chamber as the system (Fig. 6–33). This is a
control volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process.
We observe that there are two inlets and one exit.
Under the stated assumptions and observations, the mass and energy bal-
ances for this steady-flow system can be expressed in the rate form as follows:
Mass balance:
Energy balance:
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Combining the mass and energy balances,
Dividing this equation by m.
2 yields
where y  m.
1/m.
2 is the desired mass flow rate ratio.
The saturation temperature of water at 20 psia is 227.92°F. Since the tem-
peratures of all three streams are below this value (T  Tsat), the water in all
three streams exists as a compressed liquid (Fig. 6–34). A compressed liquid
can be approximated as a saturated liquid at the given temperature. Thus,
Solving for y and substituting yields
Discussion
Note that the mass flow rate of the hot water must be twice the
mass flow rate of the cold water for the mixture to leave at 110°F.
y  h3  h2
h1  h3
 78.02  18.07
107.99  78.02  2.0
h3  hf @ 110°F  78.02 Btu/lbm
h2  hf @ 50°F  18.07 Btu/lbm
h1  hf @ 140°F  107.99 Btu/lbm
yh1  h2  (y  1)h3
m#
1h1  m#
2h2  (m#
1  m#
2)h3
m#
1h1  m#
2h2  m#
3h3 1since Q#  0, W
#
 0, ke  pe  02
E#
in  E#
out
E
#
in  E
#
out   
     dEsystem>dt          0
m#
in  m#
out S m#
1  m#
2  m#
3
m#
in  m#
out  dmsystem>dt         0
0 (steady)
¡
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
FIGURE 6–33
Schematic for Example 6–9.
Compressed
liquid states
P = const.
T
Tsat
v
FIGURE 6–34
A substance exists as a compressed
liquid at temperatures below the
saturation temperatures at the given
pressure.
T1 = 140°F
T2 = 50°F
T3 = 110°F
m3·
m2·
m1·
P = 20 psia
Mixing
chamber

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
227
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
4b
Heat Exchangers
As the name implies, heat exchangers are devices where two moving fluid
streams exchange heat without mixing. Heat exchangers are widely used in
various industries, and they come in various designs.
The simplest form of a heat exchanger is a double-tube (also called tube-
and-shell) heat exchanger, shown in Fig. 6–35. It is composed of two con-
centric pipes of different diameters. One fluid flows in the inner pipe, and
the other in the annular space between the two pipes. Heat is transferred
from the hot fluid to the cold one through the wall separating them. Some-
times the inner tube makes a couple of turns inside the shell to increase the
heat transfer area, and thus the rate of heat transfer. The mixing chambers
discussed earlier are sometimes classified as direct-contact heat exchangers.
The conservation of mass principle for a heat exchanger in steady opera-
tion requires that the sum of the inbound mass flow rates equal the sum of
the outbound mass flow rates. This principle can also be expressed as fol-
lows: Under steady operation, the mass flow rate of each fluid stream flow-
ing through a heat exchanger remains constant.
Heat exchangers typically involve no work interactions (w  0) and negli-
gible kinetic and potential energy changes (ke  0, pe  0) for each
fluid stream. The heat transfer rate associated with heat exchangers depends
on how the control volume is selected. Heat exchangers are intended for
heat transfer between two fluids within the device, and the outer shell is
usually well insulated to prevent any heat loss to the surrounding medium.
When the entire heat exchanger is selected as the control volume,
Q. becomes zero, since the boundary for this case lies just beneath the insu-
lation and little or no heat crosses the boundary (Fig. 6–36). If, however,
only one of the fluids is selected as the control volume, then heat will cross
this boundary as it flows from one fluid to the other and Q. will not be
zero. In fact, Q. in this case will be the rate of heat transfer between the two
fluids.
EXAMPLE 6–10
Cooling of Refrigerant-134a by Water
Refrigerant-134a is to be cooled by water in a condenser. The refrigerant
enters the condenser with a mass flow rate of 6 kg/min at 1 MPa and 70°C
and leaves at 35°C. The cooling water enters at 300 kPa and 15°C and leaves
222
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Heat
Fluid B
70°C
Heat
Fluid A
20°C
50°C
35°C
FIGURE 6–35
A heat exchanger can be as simple as
two concentric pipes.
Fluid B
Heat
Fluid A
(a) System: Entire heat
     exchanger (QCV = 0)
CV boundary
CV boundary
Fluid B
Heat
Fluid A
(b) System: Fluid A (QCV ≠ 0)
FIGURE 6–36
The heat transfer associated with 
a heat exchanger may be zero or
nonzero depending on how the control
volume is selected.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
228
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
at 25°C. Neglecting any pressure drops, determine (a) the mass flow rate of
the cooling water required and (b) the heat transfer rate from the refrigerant to
water.
Solution
Refrigerant-134a is cooled by water in a condenser. The mass flow
rate of the cooling water and the rate of heat transfer from the refrigerant to
the water are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0 and ECV  0. 2 The kinetic and
potential energies are negligible, ke  pe  0. 3 Heat losses from the sys-
tem are negligible and thus Q.  0. 4 There is no work interaction.
Analysis
We take the entire heat exchanger as the system (Fig. 6–37). This is
a control volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process.
In general, there are several possibilities for selecting the control volume for
multiple-stream steady-flow devices, and the proper choice depends on the
situation at hand. We observe that there are two fluid streams (and thus two
inlets and two exits) but no mixing.
(a) Under the stated assumptions and observations, the mass and energy
balances for this steady-flow system can be expressed in the rate form as
follows:
Mass balance:
for each fluid stream since there is no mixing. Thus,
Energy balance:
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Combining the mass and energy balances and rearranging give
Now we need to determine the enthalpies at all four states. Water exists as a
compressed liquid at both the inlet and the exit since the temperatures at
both locations are below the saturation temperature of water at 300 kPa
(133.52°C). Approximating the compressed liquid as a saturated liquid at
the given temperatures, we have
The refrigerant enters the condenser as a superheated vapor and leaves as a
compressed liquid at 35°C. From refrigerant-134a tables,
P4  1 MPa
T4  35C f h4  hf @ 35C  100.87 kJ/kg  (Table A–11)
P3  1 MPa
T3  70C f h3  303.85 kJ/kg  (Table A–13)
h2  hf @ 25° C  104.83 kJ/kg 
h1  hf @ 15° C  62.982 kJ/kg 
m#
w(h1  h2)  m#
R(h4  h3)
m#
1h1  m#
3h3  m#
2h2  m4# h4  
1since Q#  0, W#  0, ke  pe  02
E#
in  E#
out
E
#
in  E
#
out           dEsystem>dt        
 0
m#
3  m#
4  m#
R
m#
1  m#
2  m#
w
m#
in  m#
out
Chapter 6
|
223
2
25°C
3
70°C
1MPa
R-134a
1
Water
15°C
300 kPa
4
35°C
FIGURE 6–37
Schematic for Example 6–10.
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
(Table A–4)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
229
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Substituting, we find
(b) To determine the heat transfer from the refrigerant to the water, we have to
choose a control volume whose boundary lies on the path of heat transfer. We
can choose the volume occupied by either fluid as our control volume. For no
particular reason, we choose the volume occupied by the water. All the
assumptions stated earlier apply, except that the heat transfer is no longer
zero. Then assuming heat to be transferred to water, the energy balance for
this single-stream steady-flow system reduces to
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Rearranging and substituting,
Discussion
Had we chosen the volume occupied by the refrigerant as the
control volume (Fig. 6–38), we would have obtained the same result for Q
.
R,out
since the heat gained by the water is equal to the heat lost by the refrigerant.
5
Pipe and Duct Flow
The transport of liquids or gases in pipes and ducts is of great importance in
many engineering applications. Flow through a pipe or a duct usually satis-
fies the steady-flow conditions and thus can be analyzed as a steady-flow
process. This, of course, excludes the transient start-up and shut-down peri-
ods. The control volume can be selected to coincide with the interior surfaces
of the portion of the pipe or the duct that we are interested in analyzing.
Under normal operating conditions, the amount of heat gained or lost by
the fluid may be very significant, particularly if the pipe or duct is long
(Fig. 6–39). Sometimes heat transfer is desirable and is the sole purpose of
the flow. Water flow through the pipes in the furnace of a power plant, the
flow of refrigerant in a freezer, and the flow in heat exchangers are some
examples of this case. At other times, heat transfer is undesirable, and the
pipes or ducts are insulated to prevent any heat loss or gain, particularly
when the temperature difference between the flowing fluid and the sur-
roundings is large. Heat transfer in this case is negligible.
If the control volume involves a heating section (electric wires), a fan, or
a pump (shaft), the work interactions should be considered (Fig. 6–40). Of
these, fan work is usually small and often neglected in energy analysis.
 
 1218 kJ/min
Q#
w, in  m#
w 1h2  h12  129.1 kg/min2[ 1104.83  62.9822 kJ/kg]
Q#
w, in  m#
wh1  m#
wh2
E#
in  E#
out
E
#
in  E
#
out           dEsystem>dt        
 0
m#
w  29.1 kg/min
m#
w 162.982  104.832 kJ/kg  16 kg/min2[ 1100.87  303.852 kJ/kg]
224
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Q
.
.
w,in = QR,out
R-134a
Control volume
boundary
FIGURE 6–38
In a heat exchanger, the heat transfer
depends on the choice of the control
volume.
Surroundings 20°C
70°C
Hot fluid
Qout
.
FIGURE 6–39
Heat losses from a hot fluid flowing
through an uninsulated pipe or duct to
the cooler environment may be very
significant.
Control volume
W˙e
W˙ sh
FIGURE 6–40
Pipe or duct flow may involve more
than one form of work at the same
time.
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
230
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The velocities involved in pipe and duct flow are relatively low, and the
kinetic energy changes are usually insignificant. This is particularly true
when the pipe or duct diameter is constant and the heating effects are negligi-
ble. Kinetic energy changes may be significant, however, for gas flow in
ducts with variable cross-sectional areas especially when the compressibility
effects are significant. The potential energy term may also be significant
when the fluid undergoes a considerable elevation change as it flows in a pipe
or duct.
EXAMPLE 6–11
Electric Heating of Air in a House
The electric heating systems used in many houses consist of a simple duct
with resistance heaters. Air is heated as it flows over resistance wires. Con-
sider a 15-kW electric heating system. Air enters the heating section at 100
kPa and 17°C with a volume flow rate of 150 m3/min. If heat is lost from
the air in the duct to the surroundings at a rate of 200 W, determine the exit
temperature of air.
Solution
The electric heating system of a house is considered. For speci-
fied electric power consumption and air flow rate, the air exit temperature is
to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0 and ECV  0. 2 Air is an ideal gas
since it is at a high temperature and low pressure relative to its critical-point
values. 3 The kinetic and potential energy changes are negligible, ke 
pe  0. 4 Constant specific heats at room temperature can be used for air.
Analysis
We take the heating section portion of the duct as the system
(Fig. 6–41). This is a control volume since mass crosses the system bound-
ary during the process. We observe that there is only one inlet and one exit
and thus m.
1  m.
2  m.. Also, heat is lost from the system and electrical
work is supplied to the system.
At temperatures encountered in heating and air-conditioning applications,
h can be replaced by cp T where cp  1.005 kJ/kg · °C—the value
at room temperature—with negligible error (Fig. 6–42). Then the energy 
balance for this steady-flow system can be expressed in the rate form as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
From the ideal-gas relation, the specific volume of air at the inlet of the
duct is
The mass flow rate of the air through the duct is determined from
m#  V
#
1
v1
 150 m3/min
0.832 m3/kg
 a 1 min
60 s b  3.0 kg/s
v1  RT1
P1

10.287 kPa # m3/kg # K2 1290 K2
100 kPa
 0.832 m3/kg
W#
e,in  Q
#
out  m# cp1T2  T12
W#
e,in  m# h1  Q#
out  m# h2  
1since ¢ke  ¢pe  02
E#
in  E#
out
E
#
in  E
#
out           dEsystem>dt          0
Chapter 6
|
225
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
T2 = ?
Qout = 200 W
˙
We, in = 15 kW
˙
V1 = 150 m3/min
P1 = 100 kPa
T1 = 17°C
˙
FIGURE 6–41
Schematic for Example 6–11.
AIR
–20 to 70°C
Δh = 1.005 ΔT (kJ/kg)
FIGURE 6–42
The error involved in h  cp T,
where cp  1.005 kJ/kg · °C, is less
than 0.5 percent for air in the
temperature range 20 to 70°C.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
231
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Substituting the known quantities, the exit temperature of the air is deter-
mined to be
Discussion
Note that heat loss from the duct reduces the exit temperature
of the air.
6–5
■ENERGY ANALYSIS OF UNSTEADY-FLOW
PROCESSES
During a steady-flow process, no changes occur within the control volume
with time; thus, one does not need to be concerned about what is going on
within the boundaries. Not having to worry about any changes within the
control volume with time greatly simplifies the analysis.
Many processes of interest, however, involve changes within the control
volume with time. Such processes are called unsteady-flow, or transient-
flow, processes. The steady-flow relations developed earlier are obviously
not applicable to these processes. When an unsteady-flow process is ana-
lyzed, it is important to keep track of the mass and energy contents of the
control volume as well as the energy interactions across the boundary.
Some familiar unsteady-flow processes are the charging of rigid vessels
from supply lines (Fig. 6–43), discharging a fluid from a pressurized vessel,
driving a gas turbine with pressurized air stored in a large container, inflat-
ing tires or balloons, and even cooking with an ordinary pressure cooker.
Unlike steady-flow processes, unsteady-flow processes start and end over
some finite time period instead of continuing indefinitely. Therefore in this
section, we deal with changes that occur over some time interval t instead
of with the rate of changes (changes per unit time). An unsteady-flow sys-
tem, in some respects, is similar to a closed system, except that the mass
within the system boundaries does not remain constant during a process.
Another difference between steady- and unsteady-flow systems is that
steady-flow systems are fixed in space, size, and shape. Unsteady-flow 
systems, however, are not (Fig. 6–44). They are usually stationary; that is,
they are fixed in space, but they may involve moving boundaries and thus
boundary work.
The mass balance for any system undergoing any process can be
expressed as (see Sec. 6–1)
(6–42)
where msystem  mfinal  minitial is the change in the mass of the system.
For control volumes, it can also be expressed more explicitly as
(6–43)
where i  inlet, e  exit, 1  initial state, and 2  final state of the control
volume. Often one or more terms in the equation above are zero. For exam-
mi  me  1m2  m12 CV
min  mout  ¢msystem  
1kg2
T2  21.9°C
115 kJ/s2  10.2 kJ/s2  13 kg/s2 11.005 kJ/kg # °C2 1T2  172°C
226
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Supply line
Control
volume
CV boundary
FIGURE 6–43
Charging of a rigid tank from a supply
line is an unsteady-flow process since
it involves changes within the control
volume.
Control
volume
CV boundary
FIGURE 6–44
The shape and size of a control
volume may change during an
unsteady-flow process.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
232
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
ple, mi  0 if no mass enters the control volume during the process, me  0
if no mass leaves, and m1  0 if the control volume is initially evacuated.
The energy content of a control volume changes with time during an
unsteady-flow process. The magnitude of change depends on the amount of
energy transfer across the system boundaries as heat and work as well as on
the amount of energy transported into and out of the control volume by mass
during the process. When analyzing an unsteady-flow process, we must keep
track of the energy content of the control volume as well as the energies of
the incoming and outgoing flow streams.
The general energy balance was given earlier as
Energy balance:
(6–44)
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
The general unsteady-flow process, in general, is difficult to analyze
because the properties of the mass at the inlets and exits may change during
a process. Most unsteady-flow processes, however, can be represented rea-
sonably well by the uniform-flow process, which involves the following
idealization: The fluid flow at any inlet or exit is uniform and steady, and
thus the fluid properties do not change with time or position over the cross
section of an inlet or exit. If they do, they are averaged and treated as con-
stants for the entire process.
Note that unlike the steady-flow systems, the state of an unsteady-flow
system may change with time, and that the state of the mass leaving the
control volume at any instant is the same as the state of the mass in the con-
trol volume at that instant. The initial and final properties of the control vol-
ume can be determined from the knowledge of the initial and final states,
which are completely specified by two independent intensive properties for
simple compressible systems.
Then the energy balance for a uniform-flow system can be expressed
explicitly as
(6–45)
where u  h  ke  pe is the energy of a fluid stream at any inlet or exit
per unit mass, and e  u  ke  pe is the energy of the nonflowing fluid
within the control volume per unit mass. When the kinetic and potential
energy changes associated with the control volume and fluid streams are
negligible, as is usually the case, the energy balance above simplifies to
(6–46)
where Q  Qnet,in  Qin  Qout is the net heat input and W  Wnet,out  Wout
 Win is the net work output. Note that if no mass enters or leaves the con-
trol volume during a process (mi  me  0, and m1  m2  m), this equa-
tion reduces to the energy balance relation for closed systems (Fig. 6–45).
Also note that an unsteady-flow system may involve boundary work as well
as electrical and shaft work (Fig. 6–46).
Although both the steady-flow and uniform-flow processes are somewhat
idealized, many actual processes can be approximated reasonably well by
Q  W  a
out
mh  a
in
mh  1m2u2  m1u12 system
aQ in  Win  a
in
mu b  aQ out  Wout  a
out
mu b  1m2e2  m1e12 system
Ein  Eout           ¢Esystem       1kJ2
Chapter 6
|
227
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
Closed
system
Closed
Q
Q – W = ΔU
W
Closed
FIGURE 6–45
The energy equation of a uniform-flow
system reduces to that of a closed
system when all the inlets and exits
are closed.
Wb
Moving
boundary
We
Wsh
FIGURE 6–46
A uniform-flow system may involve
electrical, shaft, and boundary work
all at once.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
233
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
one of these with satisfactory results. The degree of satisfaction depends on
the desired accuracy and the degree of validity of the assumptions made.
EXAMPLE 6–12
Charging of a Rigid Tank by Steam
A rigid, insulated tank that is initially evacuated is connected through a
valve to a supply line that carries steam at 1 MPa and 300°C. Now the valve
is opened, and steam is allowed to flow slowly into the tank until the pres-
sure reaches 1 MPa, at which point the valve is closed. Determine the final
temperature of the steam in the tank.
Solution
A valve connecting an initially evacuated tank to a steam line is
opened, and steam flows in until the pressure inside rises to the line level.
The final temperature in the tank is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This process can be analyzed as a uniform-flow process since
the properties of the steam entering the control volume remain constant dur-
ing the entire process. 2 The kinetic and potential energies of the streams are
negligible, ke  pe  0. 3 The tank is stationary and thus its kinetic and
potential energy changes are zero; that is, KE  PE  0 and Esystem 
Usystem. 4 There are no boundary, electrical, or shaft work interactions
involved. 5 The tank is well insulated and thus there is no heat transfer.
Analysis
We take the tank as the system (Fig. 6–47(a)). This is a control
volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process. We
observe that this is an unsteady-flow process since changes occur within the
control volume. The control volume is initially evacuated and thus m1  0
and m1u1  0. Also, there is one inlet and no exits for mass flow.
Noting that microscopic energies of flowing and nonflowing fluids are rep-
resented by enthalpy h and internal energy u, respectively, the mass and
energy balances for this uniform-flow system can be expressed as
228
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Steam
m1 = 0
(a) Flow of steam into
      an evacuated tank
P2 = 1 MPa
T2 = ?
Pi = 1 MPa
Ti = 300°C
Imaginary
piston
P2 = 1 MPa
Pi = 1 MPa   (constant)
mi = m2
(b) The closed-system
      equivalence
FIGURE 6–47
Schematic for Example 6–12.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
234
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Mass balance:
Energy balance:
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Combining the mass and energy balances gives
That is, the final internal energy of the steam in the tank is equal to the
enthalpy of the steam entering the tank. The enthalpy of the steam at the
inlet state is
which is equal to u2. Since we now know two properties at the final state, it
is fixed and the temperature at this state is determined from the same table
to be
Discussion
Note that the temperature of the steam in the tank has increased
by 156.1°C. This result may be surprising at first, and you may be wonder-
ing where the energy to raise the temperature of the steam came from. The
answer lies in the enthalpy term h  u  Pv. Part of the energy represented
by enthalpy is the flow energy Pv, and this flow energy is converted to sensi-
ble internal energy once the flow ceases to exist in the control volume, and it
shows up as an increase in temperature (Fig. 6–48).
Alternative solution
This problem can also be solved by considering the
region within the tank and the mass that is destined to enter the tank as a
closed system, as shown in Fig. 6–47b. Since no mass crosses the bound-
aries, viewing this as a closed system is appropriate.
During the process, the steam upstream (the imaginary piston) will push
the enclosed steam in the supply line into the tank at a constant pressure of
1 MPa. Then the boundary work done during this process is
where Vi is the volume occupied by the steam before it enters the tank and
Pi is the pressure at the moving boundary (the imaginary piston face). The
energy balance for the closed system gives
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
u2  ui  Pivi  hi
miPivi  m2u2  miui
Wb,in  ¢U
Ein  Eout           ¢Esystem
Wb,in  
2
1
Pi dV  Pi1V2  V12  Pi3Vtank  1Vtank  Vi2 4  PiVi
P2  1 MPa
u2  3051.6 kJ/kgf
T2  456.1°C
Pi  1 MPa
Ti  300C f hi  3051.6 kJ/kg  (Table A–6)
u2  hi
 ke   pe  0, m1  02
mihi  m2u2  
1since W  Q  0,
Ein  Eout           ¢Esystem
min  mout  ¢msystem 
S
mi  m2  m1   m2
Chapter 6
|
229
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
0
Q
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
Steam
Ti = 300°C
T2 = 456.1°C
FIGURE 6–48
The temperature of steam rises from
300 to 456.1°C as it enters a tank as a
result of flow energy being converted
to internal energy.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
235
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
230
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
m1 = 1 kg
Qin = 500 W
System
boundary
Liquid
Vapor
H2O
V = 6 L
P = 75 kPa (gage)
˙
FIGURE 6–49
Schematic for Example 6–13.
P = 175 kPa
T = Tsat@P = 116°C
FIGURE 6–50
As long as there is liquid in a pressure
cooker, the saturation conditions exist
and the temperature remains constant
at the saturation temperature.
since the initial state of the system is simply the line conditions of the
steam. This result is identical to the one obtained with the uniform-flow
analysis. Once again, the temperature rise is caused by the so-called flow
energy or flow work, which is the energy required to move the fluid during
flow.
EXAMPLE 6–13
Cooking with a Pressure Cooker
A pressure cooker is a pot that cooks food much faster than ordinary pots by
maintaining a higher pressure and temperature during cooking. The pressure
inside the pot is controlled by a pressure regulator (the petcock) that keeps
the pressure at a constant level by periodically allowing some steam to
escape, thus preventing any excess pressure buildup.
Pressure cookers, in general, maintain a gage pressure of 2 atm (or 3 atm
absolute) inside. Therefore, pressure cookers cook at a temperature of about
133°C (or 271°F) instead of 100°C (or 212°F), cutting the cooking time by
as much as 70 percent while minimizing the loss of nutrients. The newer
pressure cookers use a spring valve with several pressure settings rather than
a weight on the cover.
A certain pressure cooker has a volume of 6 L and an operating pressure
of 75 kPa gage. Initially, it contains 1 kg of water. Heat is supplied to the
pressure cooker at a rate of 500 W for 30 min after the operating pressure is
reached. Assuming an atmospheric pressure of 100 kPa, determine (a) the
temperature at which cooking takes place and (b) the amount of water left in
the pressure cooker at the end of the process.
Solution
Heat is transferred to a pressure cooker at a specified rate for a
specified time period. The cooking temperature and the water remaining in
the cooker are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This process can be analyzed as a uniform-flow process since
the properties of the steam leaving the control volume remain constant during
the entire cooking process. 2 The kinetic and potential energies of the
streams are negligible, ke  pe  0. 3 The pressure cooker is stationary and
thus its kinetic and potential energy changes are zero; that is, KE  PE 
0 and Esystem  Usystem. 4 The pressure (and thus temperature) in the pres-
sure cooker remains constant. 5 Steam leaves as a saturated vapor at the
cooker pressure. 6 There are no boundary, electrical, or shaft work interactions
involved. 7 Heat is transferred to the cooker at a constant rate.
Analysis
We take the pressure cooker as the system (Fig. 6–49). This is a
control volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process.
We observe that this is an unsteady-flow process since changes occur within
the control volume. Also, there is one exit and no inlets for mass flow.
(a) The absolute pressure within the cooker is
Since saturation conditions exist in the cooker at all times (Fig. 6–50), the
cooking temperature must be the saturation temperature corresponding to
this pressure. From Table A–5, it is
which is about 16°C higher than the ordinary cooking temperature.
T  Tsat @ 175 kPa  116.04°C
Pabs  Pgage  Patm  75  100  175 kPa

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
236
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
231
(b) Noting that the microscopic energies of flowing and nonflowing fluids are
represented by enthalpy h and internal energy u, respectively, the mass and
energy balances for this uniform-flow system can be expressed as
Mass balance:
Energy balance:
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Combining the mass and energy balances gives
The amount of heat transfer during this process is found from
Steam leaves the pressure cooker as saturated vapor at 175 kPa at all times
(Fig. 6–51). Thus,
The initial internal energy is found after the quality is determined:
Thus,
and
The mass of the system at the final state is m2  V/v2. Substituting this
into the energy equation yields
There are two unknowns in this equation, u2 and v2. Thus we need to relate
them to a single unknown before we can determine these unknowns. Assum-
ing there is still some liquid water left in the cooker at the final state (i.e.,
saturation conditions exist), v2 and u2 can be expressed as
Recall that during a boiling process at constant pressure, the properties of
each phase remain constant (only the amounts change). When these expres-
sions are substituted into the above energy equation, x2 becomes the only
unknown, and it is determined to be
x2  0.009
u2  uf  x2ufg  486.82  x2 12037.72 kJ/kg 
v2  vf  x2vfg  0.001  x2 11.004  0.0012 m3/kg
Q in  a m1  V
v2
b he  a V
v2
 u2  m1u1b
U1  m1u1  (1 kg)(497 kJ/kg)  497 kJ
u1  uf  x1ufg  486.82  10.004992 12037.72 kJ/kg  497 kJ/kg
x1 
v1  vf
vfg
 0.006  0.001
1.004  0.001  0.00499
v1  V
m1
 0.006 m3
1 kg
 0.006 m3/kg
he  hg @ 175 kPa  2700.2 kJ/kg
Q in  Q
#
in ¢t  10.5 kJ/s2 130 
 60 s2  900 kJ
Qin  (m1  m2)he  (m2u2  m1u1)CV
 ke  pe  02
Qin  mehe  1m2u2  m1u12 CV  
1since W  0,
Ein  Eout           ¢Esystem
min  mout  ¢msystem S me  1m2  m12 CV or me  1m1  m22 CV
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
P
he = hg@175 kPa
Sat. vapor
Sat. liquid
Sat. vapor
FIGURE 6–51
In a pressure cooker, the enthalpy of
the exiting steam is hg @ 175 kPa
(enthalpy of the saturated vapor at the
given pressure).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
237
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
232
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Thus,
and
Therefore, after 30 min there is 0.6 kg water (liquid  vapor) left in the
pressure cooker.
Discussion
Note that almost half of the water in the pressure cooker has
evaporated during cooking.
m2  V
v2
 0.006 m3
0.01 m3/kg  0.6 kg
v2  0.001  10.0092 11.004  0.0012 m3/kg  0.010 m3/kg
The conservation of mass principle states that the net mass
transfer to or from a system during a process is equal to the
net change (increase or decrease) in the total mass of the sys-
tem during that process, and is expressed as
where msystem  mfinal  minitial is the change in the mass of
the system during the process, m.
in and m.
out are the total rates
of mass flow into and out of the system, and dmsystem/dt is the
rate of change of mass within the system boundaries. The
relations above are also referred to as the mass balance and
are applicable to any system undergoing any kind of process.
The amount of mass flowing through a cross section per
unit time is called the mass flow rate, and is expressed as
where r  density of fluid, V  average fluid velocity normal
to A, and A  cross-sectional area normal to flow direction.
The volume of the fluid flowing through a cross section per
unit time is called the volume flow rate and is expressed as
The work required to push a unit mass of fluid into or out
of a control volume is called flow work or flow energy, and is
expressed as wflow  Pv. In the analysis of control volumes,
it is convenient to combine the flow energy and internal
energy into enthalpy. Then the total energy of a flowing fluid
is expressed as
The total energy transported by a flowing fluid of mass m
with uniform properties is mu. The rate of energy transport
by a fluid with a mass flow rate of m. is m.u. When the kinetic
and potential energies of a fluid stream are negligible, the
amount and rate of energy transport become Emass  mh and
E.
mass  m.h, respectively.
u  h  ke  pe  h  V 2
2  gz
V
#
 VA  m# >r
m#  rVA
min  mout  ¢msystem and m#
in  m#
out  dmsystem>dt
SUMMARY
The first law of thermodynamics is essentially an expres-
sion of the conservation of energy principle, also called the
energy balance. The general mass and energy balances for
any system undergoing any process can be expressed as
Net energy transfer
Changes in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
It can also be expressed in the rate form as
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Thermodynamic processes involving control volumes can
be considered in two groups: steady-flow processes and
unsteady-flow processes. During a steady-flow process, the
fluid flows through the control volume steadily, experiencing
no change with time at a fixed position. The mass and energy
content of the control volume remain constant during a
steady-flow process. Taking heat transfer to the system and
work done by the system to be positive quantities, the conser-
vation of mass and energy equations for steady-flow
processes are expressed as
for each exit
for each inlet
These are the most general forms of the equations for steady-
flow processes. For single-stream (one-inlet–one-exit) sys-
tems such as nozzles, diffusers, turbines, compressors, and
pumps, they simplify to
Q#  W#  m# c h2  h1  V 2
2  V 1
2
2
 g1z2  z12 d
m#
1  m#
2 S  1
v1
V1A1  1
v2
V2A2
Q
#
 W
#
 a
out
m# a h  V 2
2  gz b  a
in
m# a h  V 2
2  gz b
a
in
m#  a
out
m#
E
#
in  E
#
out           dEsystem>dt
Ein  Eout           ¢Esystem
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
238
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
233
In these relations, subscripts 1 and 2 denote the inlet and exit
states, respectively.
Most unsteady-flow processes can be modeled as a uniform-
flow process, which requires that the fluid flow at any inlet or
exit is uniform and steady, and thus the fluid properties do not
change with time or position over the cross section of an inlet
or exit. If they do, they are averaged and treated as constants
for the entire process. When kinetic and potential energy
changes associated with the control volume and the fluid
streams are negligible, the mass and energy balance relations
for a uniform-flow system are expressed as
where Q  Qnet,in  Qin  Qout is the net heat input and 
W  Wnet,out  Wout  Win is the net work output.
When solving thermodynamic problems, it is recom-
mended that the general form of the energy balance 
Ein  Eout  Esystem be used for all problems, and simplify
it for the particular problem instead of using the specific rela-
tions given here for different processes.
Q  W  a
out
mh  a
in
mh  1m2u2  m1u12 system
min  mout  ¢msystem 
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
1. ASHRAE Handbook of Fundamentals. SI version.
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993.
2. ASHRAE Handbook of Refrigeration. SI version. Atlanta,
GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-
Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1994.
3. Y. A. Çengel and J. M. Cimbala, Fluid Mechanics:
Fundamentals and Applications. New York: McGraw-
Hill, 2006.
PROBLEMS*
Conservation of Mass
6–1C
Name four physical quantities that are conserved and
two quantities that are not conserved during a process.
6–2C
Define mass and volume flow rates. How are they
related to each other?
6–3C
Does the amount of mass entering a control volume
have to be equal to the amount of mass leaving during an
unsteady-flow process?
6–4C
When is the flow through a control volume steady?
6–5C
Consider a device with one inlet and one outlet. If the
volume flow rates at the inlet and at the outlet are the same,
is the flow through this device necessarily steady? Why?
6–6E
A garden hose attached with a nozzle is used to fill a
20-gal bucket. The inner diameter of the hose is 1 in and it
reduces to 0.5 in at the nozzle exit. If the average velocity in
the hose is 8 ft/s, determine (a) the volume and mass flow
rates of water through the hose, (b) how long it will take to
fill the bucket with water, and (c) the average velocity of
water at the nozzle exit.
6–7 Air enters a nozzle steadily at 2.21 kg/m3 and 40 m/s and
leaves at 0.762 kg/m3 and 180 m/s. If the inlet area of the
nozzle is 90 cm2, determine (a) the mass flow rate through
the nozzle, and (b) the exit area of the nozzle.
Answers:
(a) 0.796 kg/s, (b) 58 cm2
6–8E
A steam pipe is to transport 200 lbm/s of steam at
200 psia and 600F. Calculate the minimum diameter this pipe
can have so that the steam velocity does not exceed 59 ft/s.
Answer: 3.63 ft
6–9
A pump increases the water pressure from 70 kPa at
the inlet to 700 kPa at the outlet. Water enters this pump at
15C through a 1-cm-diameter opening and exits through a
1.5-cm-diameter opening. Determine the velocity of the water
at the inlet and outlet when the mass flow rate through the
pump is 0.5 kg/s. Will these velocities change significantly if
the inlet temperature is raised to 40C?
FIGURE P6–9
Water
70 kPa
15°C
700 kPa
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems with
the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete solutions together
with parametric studies are included on the enclosed DVD. Problems
with the 
icon are comprehensive in nature, and are intended to be
solved with a computer, preferably using the EES software that
accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
239
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
234
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
6–10
A hair dryer is basically a duct of constant diameter
in which a few layers of electric resistors are placed. A small
fan pulls the air in and forces it through the resistors where it
is heated. If the density of air is 1.20 kg/m3 at the inlet and
1.05 kg/m3 at the exit, determine the percent increase in the
velocity of air as it flows through the dryer.
FIGURE P6–10
6–11
A 1-m3 rigid tank initially contains air whose density
is 1.18 kg/m3. The tank is connected to a high-pressure supply
line through a valve. The valve is opened, and air is allowed
to enter the tank until the density in the tank rises to 
7.20 kg/m3. Determine the mass of air that has entered the
tank.
Answer: 6.02 kg
6–12
A smoking lounge is to accommodate 15 heavy
smokers. The minimum fresh air requirement for smoking
lounges is specified to be 30 L/s per person (ASHRAE, Stan-
dard 62, 1989). Determine the minimum required flow rate of
fresh air that needs to be supplied to the lounge, and the
diameter of the duct if the air velocity is not to exceed 8 m/s.
FIGURE P6–12
6–13
The minimum fresh air requirement of a residential
building is specified to be 0.35 air change per hour
(ASHRAE, Standard 62, 1989). That is, 35 percent of the
entire air contained in a residence should be replaced by
fresh outdoor air every hour. If the ventilation requirement of
a 2.7-m-high, 200-m2 residence is to be met entirely by a fan,
determine the flow capacity in L/min of the fan that needs to
be installed. Also determine the diameter of the duct if the air
velocity is not to exceed 6 m/s.
Smoking
lounge
15 smokers
Fan
1.05 kg/m3
1.20 kg/m3
6–14
A cyclone separator like that in Fig. P6–14 is used to
remove fine solid particles, such as fly ash, that are sus-
pended in a gas stream. In the flue-gas system of an electrical
power plant, the weight fraction of fly ash in the exhaust
gases is approximately 0.001. Determine the mass flow rates
at the two outlets (flue gas and fly ash) when 10 kg/s of flue
gas and ash mixture enters this unit. Also determine the
amount of fly ash collected per year.
FIGURE P6–14
6–15
Air enters the 1-m2 inlet of an aircraft engine at 
100 kPa and 20C with a velocity of 180 m/s. Determine the
volume flow rate, in m3/s, at the engine’s inlet and the mass
flow rate, in kg/s, at the engine’s exit.
6–16
A spherical hot-air balloon is initially filled with air at
120 kPa and 35C with an initial diameter of 3 m. Air enters
this balloon at 120 kPa and 35C with a velocity of 2 m/s
through a 1-m diameter opening. How many minutes will it
take to inflate this balloon to a 15-m diameter when the pres-
sure and temperature of the air in the balloon remain the
same as the air entering the balloon?
Answer: 18.6 min
FIGURE P6–16
© Vol. 27/PhotoDisc
Ash
Flue gas
Flue gas and ash

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
240
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
235
6–31
Air enters an adiabatic nozzle steadily at 300 kPa,
200°C, and 30 m/s and leaves at 100 kPa and 180 m/s. The
inlet area of the nozzle is 80 cm2. Determine (a) the mass
flow rate through the nozzle, (b) the exit temperature of the
air, and (c) the exit area of the nozzle.
Answers: (a) 0.5304
kg/s, (b) 184.6°C, (c) 38.7 cm2
FIGURE P6–31
6–32
Reconsider Prob. 6–31. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the inlet area
on the mass flow rate, exit temperature, and the exit area. Let
the inlet area vary from 50 cm2 to 150 cm2. Plot the final
results against the inlet area, and discuss the results.
6–33E
The stators in a gas turbine are designed to increase
the kinetic energy of the gas passing through them adiabati-
cally. Air enters a set of these nozzles at 300 psia and 700F
with a velocity of 80 ft/s and exits at 250 psia and 645F.
Calculate the velocity at the exit of the nozzles.
6–34
The diffuser in a jet engine is designed to decrease the
kinetic energy of the air entering the engine compressor with-
out any work or heat interactions. Calculate the velocity at the
exit of a diffuser when air at 100 kPa and 20C enters it with
a velocity of 500 m/s and the exit state is 200 kPa and 90C.
FIGURE P6–34
© Stockbyte/Punchstock
6–35
Steam at 5 MPa and 400°C enters a nozzle steadily
with a velocity of 80 m/s, and it leaves at 2 MPa and 300°C.
The inlet area of the nozzle is 50 cm2, and heat is being lost
at a rate of 120 kJ/s. Determine (a) the mass flow rate of the
steam, (b) the exit velocity of the steam, and (c) the exit area
of the nozzle.
AIR
V1 = 30 m/s
T1 = 200°C
P1 = 300 kPa
A1 = 80 cm 2
V2 = 180 m/s
P2 = 100 kPa
6–17
Water enters the constant 130-mm inside-diameter
tubes of a boiler at 7 MPa and 65C, and leaves the tubes at
6 MPa and 450C with a velocity of 80 m/s. Calculate the
velocity of the water at the tube inlet and the inlet volume
flow rate.
6–18
Refrigerant-134a enters a 28-cm diameter pipe
steadily at 200 kPa and 20°C with a velocity of 5 m/s. The
refrigerant gains heat as it flows and leaves the pipe at 
180 kPa and 40°C. Determine (a) the volume flow rate of the
refrigerant at the inlet, (b) the mass flow rate of the refriger-
ant, and (c) the velocity and volume flow rate at the exit.
Flow Work and Energy Transfer by Mass
6–19C
What are the different mechanisms for transferring
energy to or from a control volume?
6–20C
What is flow energy? Do fluids at rest possess any
flow energy?
6–21C
How do the energies of a flowing fluid and a fluid
at rest compare? Name the specific forms of energy associ-
ated with each case.
6–22E
Steam is leaving a pressure cooker whose operating
pressure is 30 psia. It is observed that the amount of liquid in
the cooker has decreased by 0.4 gal in 45 minutes after the
steady operating conditions are established, and the cross-
sectional area of the exit opening is 0.15 in2. Determine
(a) the mass flow rate of the steam and the exit velocity,
(b) the total and flow energies of the steam per unit mass, and
(c) the rate at which energy is leaving the cooker by steam.
6–23
Air flows steadily in a pipe at 300 kPa, 77°C, and 
25 m/s at a rate of 18 kg/min. Determine (a) the diameter of
the pipe, (b) the rate of flow energy, (c) the rate of energy
transport by mass, and (d) the error involved in part (c) if the
kinetic energy is neglected.
6–24E
A water pump increases the water pressure from
10 psia to 50 psia. Determine the flow work, in Btu/lbm,
required by the pump.
6–25
An air compressor compresses 10 L of air at 120 kPa
and 20C to 1000 kPa and 300C. Determine the flow work,
in kJ/kg, required by the compressor.
Answer: 80.4 kJ/kg
Steady-Flow Energy Balance: Nozzles and Diffusers
6–26C
How is a steady-flow system characterized?
6–27C
Can a steady-flow system involve boundary work?
6–28C
A diffuser is an adiabatic device that decreases the
kinetic energy of the fluid by slowing it down. What happens
to this lost kinetic energy?
6–29C
The kinetic energy of a fluid increases as it is accel-
erated in an adiabatic nozzle. Where does this energy come
from?
6–30C
Is heat transfer to or from the fluid desirable as it
flows through a nozzle? How will heat transfer affect the
fluid velocity at the nozzle exit?

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
241
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
6–36
Steam at 3 MPa and 400°C enters an adiabatic
nozzle steadily with a velocity of 40 m/s
and leaves at 2.5 MPa and 300 m/s. Determine (a) the exit
temperature and (b) the ratio of the inlet to exit area A1/A2.
6–37
Air at 80 kPa and 127°C enters an adiabatic diffuser
steadily at a rate of 6000 kg/h and leaves at 100 kPa. The
velocity of the air stream is decreased from 230 to 30 m/s as it
passes through the diffuser. Find (a) the exit temperature of
the air and (b) the exit area of the diffuser.
6–38E
Air at 13 psia and 20°F enters an adiabatic diffuser
steadily with a velocity of 600 ft/s and leaves with a low
velocity at a pressure of 14.5 psia. The exit area of the diffuser
is 5 times the inlet area. Determine (a) the exit temperature
and (b) the exit velocity of the air.
FIGURE P6–38E
6–39
Carbon dioxide enters an adiabatic nozzle steadily at
1 MPa and 500°C with a mass flow rate of 6000 kg/h and
leaves at 100 kPa and 450 m/s. The inlet area of the nozzle is
40 cm2. Determine (a) the inlet velocity and (b) the exit tem-
perature.
Answers: (a) 60.8 m/s, (b) 685.8 K
6–40
Refrigerant-134a at 700 kPa and 120°C enters an adi-
abatic nozzle steadily with a velocity of 20 m/s and leaves at
400 kPa and 30°C. Determine (a) the exit velocity and (b) the
ratio of the inlet to exit area A1/A2.
6–41
Nitrogen gas at 60 kPa and 7°C enters an adiabatic
diffuser steadily with a velocity of 200 m/s and leaves at 
85 kPa and 22°C. Determine (a) the exit velocity of the nitro-
gen and (b) the ratio of the inlet to exit area A1/A2.
6–42
Reconsider Prob. 6–41. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the inlet veloc-
ity on the exit velocity and the ratio of the inlet-to-exit area.
Let the inlet velocity vary from 180 to 260 m/s. Plot the final
results against the inlet velocity, and discuss the results.
6–43
Refrigerant-134a enters a diffuser steadily as saturated
vapor at 800 kPa with a velocity of 120 m/s, and it leaves at
900 kPa and 40°C. The refrigerant is gaining heat at a rate of
AIR
P1 = 13 psia
T1 = 20°F
V1 = 600 ft/s
P2 = 14.5 psia
V2 << V1
A2 = 5A1
236
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
2 kJ/s as it passes through the diffuser. If the exit area is 
80 percent greater than the inlet area, determine (a) the exit
velocity and (b) the mass flow rate of the refrigerant.
Answers: (a) 60.8 m/s, (b) 1.308 kg/s
6–44
Steam enters a nozzle at 400°C and 800 kPa with a
velocity of 10 m/s, and leaves at 300°C and 200 kPa while
losing heat at a rate of 25 kW. For an inlet area of 800 cm2,
determine the velocity and the volume flow rate of the steam
at the nozzle exit.
Answers: 606 m/s, 2.74 m3/s
FIGURE P6–44
Turbines and Compressors
6–45C
Consider an adiabatic turbine operating steadily.
Does the work output of the turbine have to be equal to the
decrease in the energy of the steam flowing through it?
6–46C
Consider an air compressor operating steadily. How
would you compare the volume flow rates of the air at the
compressor inlet and exit?
6–47C
Will the temperature of air rise as it is compressed
by an adiabatic compressor? Why?
6–48C
Somebody proposes the following system to cool a
house in the summer: Compress the regular outdoor air, let it
cool back to the outdoor temperature, pass it through a tur-
bine, and discharge the cold air leaving the turbine into the
house. From a thermodynamic point of view, is the proposed
system sound?
6–49
Air is expanded from 1000 kPa and 600C at the inlet
of a steady-flow turbine to 100 kPa and 200C at the outlet.
The inlet area and velocity are 0.1 m 2 and 30 m/s, respec-
tively, and the outlet velocity is 10 m/s. Determine the mass
flow rate and outlet area.
6–50E
Air enters a gas turbine at 150 psia and 700F and
leaves at 15 psia and 100F. Determine the inlet and outlet
volume flow rates when the mass flow rate through this tur-
bine is 5 lbm/s.
6–51
An adiabatic air compressor compresses 10 L/S of air
at 120 kPa and 20C to 1000 kPa and 300C. Determine (a)
the work required by the compressor, in kJ/kg, and (b) the
power required to drive the air compressor, in kW.
400°C
800 kPa
10 m/s
Steam
300°C
200 kPa
Q
•

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
242
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
237
FIGURE P6–51
6–52
Steam flows steadily through an adiabatic turbine. The
inlet conditions of the steam are 10 MPa, 450°C, and 80 m/s,
and the exit conditions are 10 kPa, 92 percent quality, and 
50 m/s. The mass flow rate of the steam is 12 kg/s. Determine
(a) the change in kinetic energy, (b) the power output, and
(c) the turbine inlet area.
Answers: (a) 1.95 kJ/kg, (b) 10.2
MW, (c) 0.00447 m2
FIGURE P6–52
6–53
Reconsider Prob. 6–52. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the turbine exit
pressure on the power output of the turbine. Let the exit pres-
sure vary from 10 to 200 kPa. Plot the power output against
the exit pressure, and discuss the results.
6–54
Steam enters an adiabatic turbine at 10 MPa and
500°C and leaves at 10 kPa with a quality of 90 percent.
Neglecting the changes in kinetic and potential energies,
determine the mass flow rate required for a power output of 
5 MW.
Answer: 4.852 kg/s
STEAM
Wout
·
V1 = 80 m/s
T1 = 450°C
P1 = 10 MPa
V2 = 50 m/s
x2 = 0.92
= 10 kPa
P2
m = 12 kg/s
˙
120 kPa
20°C
10 L/s
1 MPa
300°C
Compressor
6–55E
Steam flows steadily through a turbine at a rate of
45,000 lbm/h, entering at 1000 psia and 900°F and leaving at
5 psia as saturated vapor. If the power generated by the tur-
bine is 4 MW, determine the rate of heat loss from the steam.
6–56
Steam enters an adiabatic turbine at 8 MPa and 500°C
at a rate of 3 kg/s and leaves at 20 kPa. If the power output of
the turbine is 2.5 MW, determine the temperature of the
steam at the turbine exit. Neglect kinetic energy changes.
Answer: 60.1°C
6–57
Argon gas enters an adiabatic turbine steadily at 
900 kPa and 450°C with a velocity of 80 m/s and leaves at
150 kPa with a velocity of 150 m/s. The inlet area of the tur-
bine is 60 cm2. If the power output of the turbine is 250 kW,
determine the exit temperature of the argon.
6–58
Helium is to be compressed from 120 kPa and 310 K
to 700 kPa and 430 K. A heat loss of 20 kJ/kg occurs during
the compression process. Neglecting kinetic energy changes,
determine the power input required for a mass flow rate of
90 kg/min.
FIGURE P6–58
6–59
Carbon dioxide enters an adiabatic compressor at 
100 kPa and 300 K at a rate of 0.5 kg/s and leaves at 600 kPa
and 450 K. Neglecting kinetic energy changes, determine (a)
the volume flow rate of the carbon dioxide at the compressor
inlet and (b) the power input to the compressor.
Answers: (a) 0.28 m3/s, (b) 68.8 kW
6–60
An adiabatic gas turbine expands air at 1000 kPa and
500C to 100 kPa and 150C. Air enters the turbine through a
0.2-m2 opening with an average velocity of 40 m/s, and
exhausts through a 1-m2 opening. Determine (a) the mass
flow rate of air through the turbine and (b) the power pro-
duced by the turbine.
Answers: (a) 36.1 kg/s, (b) 13.3 MW
6–61
Air is compressed by an adiabatic compressor from
100 kPa and 20C to 1.8 MPa and 400C. Air enters the com-
pressor through a 0.15-m2 opening with a velocity of 30 m/s.
It exits through a 0.08-m 2 opening. Calculate the mass flow
rate of air and the required power input.
He
m· = 90 kg/min
·Win
20 kJ/kg
P2 = 700 kPa
T2 = 430 K
P1 = 120 kPa
T1 = 310 K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
243
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
238
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
6–69
Saturated liquid-vapor mixture of water, called wet
steam, in a steam line at 2000 kPa is throttled to 100 kPa and
120C. What is the quality in the steam line?
Answer: 0.957
FIGURE P6–69
6–70
Refrigerant-134a at 800 kPa and 25°C is throt-
tled to a temperature of 20°C. Determine the
pressure and the internal energy of the refrigerant at the final
state.
Answers: 133 kPa, 80.7 kJ/kg
6–71
A well-insulated valve is used to throttle steam from 
8 MPa and 500°C to 6 MPa. Determine the final temperature
of the steam.
Answer: 490.1°C
6–72
Reconsider Prob. 6–71. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the exit pres-
sure of steam on the exit temperature after throttling. Let the
exit pressure vary from 6 to 1 MPa. Plot the exit temperature
of steam against the exit pressure, and discuss the results.
6–73E
Air at 200 psia and 90°F is throttled to the atmo-
spheric pressure of 14.7 psia. Determine the final temperature
of the air.
6–74
Carbon dioxide gas enters a throttling valve at 5 MPa
and 100°C and leaves at 100 kPa. Determine the temperature
change during this process if CO2 is assumed to be (a) an
ideal gas and (b) a real gas. Real gas properties of CO2 may
be obtained from EES.
FIGURE P6–74
Mixing Chambers and Heat Exchangers
6–75C
When two fluid streams are mixed in a mixing
chamber, can the mixture temperature be lower than the tem-
perature of both streams? Explain.
6–76C
Consider a steady-flow mixing process. Under what
conditions will the energy transported into the control volume
by the incoming streams be equal to the energy transported
out of it by the outgoing stream?
6–77C
Consider a steady-flow heat exchanger involving
two different fluid streams. Under what conditions will the
amount of heat lost by one fluid be equal to the amount of
heat gained by the other?
CO2
5 MPa
100°C
100 kPa
Throttling valve
Steam
2 MPa
100 kPa
120C
6–62E
Air is expanded by an adiabatic gas turbine from
500 psia and 800F to 60 psia and 250F. If the volume flow
rate at the exit is 50 ft3/s; the inlet area is 0.6 ft2; and the
outlet area is 1.2 ft2; determine the power produced by this
turbine.
6–63
A portion of the steam passing through a steam tur-
bine is sometimes removed for the purposes of feedwater
heating as shown in Fig. P6–63. Consider an adiabatic steam
turbine with 12.5 MPa and 550C steam entering at a rate of
20 kg/s. Steam is bled from this turbine at 1000 kPa and
200C with a mass flow rate of 1 kg/s. The remaining steam
leaves the turbine at 100 kPa and 100C. Determine the
power produced by this turbine.
Answer: 15,860 kW
FIGURE P6–63
Throttling Valves
6–64C
During a throttling process, the temperature of a
fluid drops from 30 to 20°C. Can this process occur adia-
batically?
6–65C
Would you expect the temperature of air to drop as
it undergoes a steady-flow throttling process? Explain.
6–66C
Would you expect the temperature of a liquid to
change as it is throttled? Explain.
6–67C
Someone claims, based on temperature measure-
ments, that the temperature of a fluid rises during a throttling
process in a well-insulated valve with negligible friction.
How do you evaluate this claim? Does this process violate
any thermodynamic laws?
6–68
An adiabatic capillary tube is used in some refrigera-
tion systems to drop the pressure of the refrigerant from the
condenser level to the evaporator level. The R-134a enters the
capillary tube as a saturated liquid at 50C, and leaves at
12C. Determine the quality of the refrigerant at the inlet of
the evaporator.
12.5 MPa
550°C
20 kg/s
STEAM
TURBINE
(1st stage)
(2nd stage)
1 MPa
200°C
1 kg/s
100 kPa
100°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
244
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
239
6–78
A hot-water stream at 80°C enters a mixing chamber
with a mass flow rate of 0.5 kg/s where it is mixed with a
stream of cold water at 20°C. If it is desired that the mixture
leave the chamber at 42°C, determine the mass flow rate of the
cold-water stream. Assume all the streams are at a pressure of
250 kPa.
Answer: 0.865 kg/s
FIGURE P6–78
6–79E
Water at 50°F and 50 psia is heated in a chamber by
mixing it with saturated water vapor at 50 psia. If both
streams enter the mixing chamber at the same mass flow rate,
determine the temperature and the quality of the exiting
stream.
Answers: 281°F, 0.374
6–80
A stream of refrigerant-134a at 1 MPa and 12°C is
mixed with another stream at 1 MPa and 60°C. If the mass
flow rate of the cold stream is twice that of the hot one,
determine the temperature and the quality of the exit stream.
6–81
Reconsider Prob. 6–80. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the mass flow
rate of the cold stream of R-134a on the temperature and the
quality of the exit stream. Let the ratio of the mass flow rate
of the cold stream to that of the hot stream vary from 1 to 4.
Plot the mixture temperature and quality against the cold-to-
hot mass flow rate ratio, and discuss the results.
6–82
Refrigerant-134a at 700 kPa, 70°C, and 8 kg/min is
cooled by water in a condenser until it exists as a saturated
liquid at the same pressure. The cooling water enters the con-
denser at 300 kPa and 15°C and leaves at 25°C at the same
pressure. Determine the mass flow rate of the cooling water
required to cool the refrigerant.
Answer: 42.0 kg/min
6–83E
In a steam heating system, air is heated by
being passed over some tubes through which
steam flows steadily. Steam enters the heat exchanger at 
30 psia and 400°F at a rate of 15 lbm/min and leaves at 25
psia and 212°F. Air enters at 14.7 psia and 80°F and leaves at
130°F. Determine the volume flow rate of air at the inlet.
6–84
Steam enters the condenser of a steam power plant at
20 kPa and a quality of 95 percent with a mass flow rate of
20,000 kg/h. It is to be cooled by water from a nearby river
by circulating the water through the tubes within the con-
H2O
T1 =
=
80
0.5 kg/s
°C
(P = 250 kPa)
.m1
T3 = 42°C
T2 = 20°C
.m2
denser. To prevent thermal pollution, the river water is not
allowed to experience a temperature rise above 10°C. If the
steam is to leave the condenser as saturated liquid at 20 kPa,
determine the mass flow rate of the cooling water required.
Answer: 297.7 kg/s
FIGURE P6–84
6–85
A heat exchanger is to cool ethylene glycol (cp 
2.56 kJ/kg · °C) flowing at a rate of 2 kg/s from 80°C to
40°C by water (cp  4.18 kJ/kg · °C) that enters at 20°C and
leaves at 55°C. Determine (a) the rate of heat transfer and 
(b) the mass flow rate of water.
6–86
Reconsider Prob. 6–85. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the inlet tem-
perature of cooling water on the mass flow rate of water. Let
the inlet temperature vary from 10 to 40°C, and assume the
exit temperature to remain constant. Plot the mass flow rate
of water against the inlet temperature, and discuss the results.
6–87
A thin-walled double-pipe counter-flow heat exchanger
is used to cool oil (cp  2.20 kJ/kg · °C) from 150 to 40°C at
a rate of 2 kg/s by water (cp  4.18 kJ/kg · °C) that enters at
22°C at a rate of 1.5 kg/s. Determine the rate of heat transfer
in the heat exchanger and the exit temperature of water.
FIGURE P6–87
Hot oil
2 kg/s  150°C
40°C
Cold
water
1.5 kg/s
22°C
Steam
T1 + 10°C
P4 = 20 kPa
P3 = 20 kPa
Sat. liquid
m3 = 20,000 kg/h
T1
Water
x3 = 0.95

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
245
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
6–88
Cold water (cp  4.18 kJ/kg · °C) leading to a shower
enters a thin-walled double-pipe counter-flow heat exchanger
at 15°C at a rate of 0.60 kg/s and is heated to 45°C by hot
water (cp  4.19 kJ/kg · °C) that enters at 100°C at a rate of
3 kg/s. Determine the rate of heat transfer in the heat
exchanger and the exit temperature of the hot water.
6–89
Air (cp  1.005 kJ/kg · °C) is to be preheated by hot
exhaust gases in a cross-flow heat exchanger before it enters
the furnace. Air enters the heat exchanger at 95 kPa and 20°C
at a rate of 0.8 m3/s. The combustion gases (cp  1.10 kJ/
kg · °C) enter at 180°C at a rate of 1.1 kg/s and leave at
95°C. Determine the rate of heat transfer to the air and its
outlet temperature.
FIGURE P6–89
6–90
An adiabatic open feedwater heater in an electrical
power plant mixes 0.2 kg/s of steam at 100 kPa and 160C
with 10 kg/s of feedwater at 100 kPa and 50C to produce
feedwater at 100 kPa and 60C at the outlet. Determine the
outlet mass flow rate and the outlet velocity when the outlet
pipe diameter is 0.03 m.
FIGURE P6–90
Steam
Cool feedwater
Warm feedwater
Air
95 kPa
20°C
0.8 m3/s
Exhaust gases
1.1 kg/s
95°C
240
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
6–91E
An open feedwater heater such as that shown in
Fig. P6–90 heats the feedwater by mixing it with hot steam.
Consider an electrical power plant with an open feedwater
heater that mixes 0.1 lbm/s of steam at 10 psia and 200F
with 2.0 lbm/s of feedwater at 10 psia and 100F to produce
10 psia and 120F feedwater at the outlet. The diameter of
the outlet pipe is 0.5 ft. Determine the mass flow rate and
feedwater velocity at the outlet. Would the outlet flow rate
and velocity be significantly different if the temperature at
the outlet were 180F?
6–92
A well-insulated shell-and-tube heat exchanger is
used to heat water (cp  4.18 kJ/kg · °C) in the tubes from
20 to 70°C at a rate of 4.5 kg/s. Heat is supplied by hot oil
(cp  2.30 kJ/kg · °C) that enters the shell side at 170°C at a
rate of 10 kg/s. Determine the rate of heat transfer in the heat
exchanger and the exit temperature of oil.
6–93E
Steam is to be condensed on the shell side of a heat
exchanger at 85°F. Cooling water enters the tubes at 60°F at
a rate of 138 lbm/s and leaves at 73°F. Assuming the heat
exchanger to be well-insulated, determine the rate of heat
transfer in the heat exchanger and the rate of condensation of
the steam.
6–94
An air-conditioning system involves the mixing of cold
air and warm outdoor air before the mixture is routed to the
conditioned room in steady operation. Cold air enters the mix-
ing chamber at 5°C and 105 kPa at a rate of 1.25 m3/s while
warm air enters at 34°C and 105 kPa. The air leaves the room
at 24°C. The ratio of the mass flow rates of the hot to cold air
streams is 1.6. Using variable specific heats, determine (a) the
mixture temperature at the inlet of the room and (b) the rate of
heat gain of the room.
FIGURE P6–94
6–95
Hot exhaust gases of an internal combustion engine
are to be used to produce saturated water vapor at 2 MPa
pressure. The exhaust gases enter the heat exchanger at
400°C at a rate of 32 kg/min while water enters at 15°C. The
heat exchanger is not well insulated, and it is estimated that
10 percent of heat given up by the exhaust gases is lost to the
surroundings. If the mass flow rate of the exhaust gases is 
Cold air
5°C
Warm air
34°C
Room
24°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
246
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
241
15 times that of the water, determine (a) the temperature of
the exhaust gases at the heat exchanger exit and (b) the rate
of heat transfer to the water. Use the constant specific heat
properties of air for the exhaust gases.
FIGURE P6–95
6–96
Two streams of water are mixed in an insulated con-
tainer to form a third stream leaving the container. The first
stream has a flow rate of 30 kg/s and a temperature of 90C.
The flow rate of the second stream is 200 kg/s, and its tem-
perature is 50C. What is the temperature of the third stream?
6–97
A chilled-water heat-exchange unit is designed to cool
5 m3/s of air at 100 kPa and 30C to 100 kPa and 18C by
using water at 8C. Determine the maximum water outlet
temperature when the mass flow rate of the water is 2 kg/s.
Answer: 16.3C
FIGURE P6–97
Pipe and Duct Flow
6–98
Saturated liquid water is heated in a steady-flow steam
boiler at a constant pressure of 5 MPa at a rate of 10 kg/s to
an outlet temperature of 350C. Determine the rate of heat
transfer in the boiler.
6–99
A 110-volt electrical heater is used to warm 0.3 m 3/s
of air at 100 kPa and 15C to 100 kPa and 30C. How much
current in amperes must be supplied to this heater?
6–100E
The fan on a personal computer draws 0.5 ft 3/s
of air at 14.7 psia and 70F through the box containing the
CPU and other components. Air leaves at 14.7 psia and 80F.
Calculate the electrical power, in kW, dissipated by the PC
components.
Answer: 0.0948 kW
4
1
2
3
Water
Air
Water
Air
CHILLED WATER
HEAT EXCHANGER
Heat
exchanger
Water
15°C
2 MPa
sat. vap.
Exh. gas
400°C
Q.
FIGURE P6–100E
© Vol. 55/PhotoDisc
6–101
A desktop computer is to be cooled by a fan. The
electronic components of the computer consume 60 W of
power under full-load conditions. The computer is to operate
in environments at temperatures up to 45°C and at elevations
up to 3400 m where the average atmospheric pressure is
66.63 kPa. The exit temperature of air is not to exceed 60°C
to meet the reliability requirements. Also, the average veloc-
ity of air is not to exceed 110 m/min at the exit of the com-
puter case where the fan is installed to keep the noise level
down. Determine the flow rate of the fan that needs to be
installed and the diameter of the casing of the fan.
6–102
Repeat Prob. 6–101 for a computer that consumes
100 W of power.
6–103E
Water enters the tubes of a cold plate at 95°F with
an average velocity of 60 ft/min and leaves at 105°F. The
diameter of the tubes is 0.25 in. Assuming 15 percent of the
heat generated is dissipated from the components to the sur-
roundings by convection and radiation, and the remaining 
85 percent is removed by the cooling water, determine the
amount of heat generated by the electronic devices mounted
on the cold plate.
Answer: 263 W
6–104
The components of an electronic system dissi-
pating 180 W are located in a 1.4-m-long hori-
zontal duct whose cross section is 20 cm 
 20 cm. The
components in the duct are cooled by forced air that enters
the duct at 30°C and 1 atm at a rate of 0.6 m3/min and leaves
at 40°C. Determine the rate of heat transfer from the outer
surfaces of the duct to the ambient.
Answer: 63 W
FIGURE P6–104
40°C
Natural
convection
30°C
0.6 m3/min
1.4 m
180 W

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
247
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
242
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
6–110
Reconsider Prob. 6–109. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the inner pipe
diameter on the rate of heat loss. Let the pipe diameter vary
from 1.5 to 7.5 cm. Plot the rate of heat loss against the
diameter, and discuss the results.
6–111
A 5-m 
 6-m 
 8-m room is to be heated by an
electric resistance heater placed in a short duct in the room.
Initially, the room is at 15°C, and the local atmospheric pres-
sure is 98 kPa. The room is losing heat steadily to the outside
at a rate of 200 kJ/min. A 200-W fan circulates the air
steadily through the duct and the electric heater at an average
mass flow rate of 50 kg/min. The duct can be assumed to be
adiabatic, and there is no air leaking in or out of the room. If
it takes 15 min for the room air to reach an average tempera-
ture of 25°C, find (a) the power rating of the electric heater
and (b) the temperature rise that the air experiences each time
it passes through the heater.
6–112
A house has an electric heating system that consists
of a 300-W fan and an electric resistance heating element
placed in a duct. Air flows steadily through the duct at a rate
of 0.6 kg/s and experiences a temperature rise of 7°C. The
rate of heat loss from the air in the duct is estimated to be
300 W. Determine the power rating of the electric resistance
heating element.
Answer: 4.22 kW
6–113
A hair dryer is basically a duct in which a few layers
of electric resistors are placed. A small fan pulls the air in
and forces it through the resistors where it is heated. Air
enters a 1200-W hair dryer at 100 kPa and 22°C and leaves at
47°C. The cross-sectional area of the hair dryer at the exit is
60 cm2. Neglecting the power consumed by the fan and the
heat losses through the walls of the hair dryer, determine
(a) the volume flow rate of air at the inlet and (b) the velocity
of the air at the exit.
Answers: (a) 0.0404 m3/s, (b) 7.31 m/s
FIGURE P6–113
6–114
Reconsider Prob. 6–113. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the exit
cross-sectional area of the hair dryer on the exit velocity.
Let the exit area vary from 25 to 75 cm2. Plot the exit veloc-
ity against the exit cross-sectional area, and discuss the
results. Include the effect of the flow kinetic energy in the
analysis.
T1 = 22°C
P1 = 100 kPa
T2 = 47°C
A2 = 60 cm2
W·
e = 1200 W
6–105
Repeat Prob. 6–104 for a circular horizontal duct of
diameter 10 cm.
6–106E
The hot-water needs of a household are to be met
by heating water at 55°F to 180°F by a parabolic solar collec-
tor at a rate of 4 lbm/s. Water flows through a 1.25-in-diameter
thin aluminum tube whose outer surface is black-anodized in
order to maximize its solar absorption ability. The centerline
of the tube coincides with the focal line of the collector, and
a glass sleeve is placed outside the tube to minimize the heat
losses. If solar energy is transferred to water at a net rate of
400 Btu/h per ft length of the tube, determine the required
length of the parabolic collector to meet the hot-water
requirements of this house.
6–107
Consider a hollow-core printed circuit board 12 cm
high and 18 cm long, dissipating a total of 20 W. The width
of the air gap in the middle of the PCB is 0.25 cm. If the
cooling air enters the 12-cm-wide core at 32°C and 1 atm at a
rate of 0.8 L/s, determine the average temperature at which
the air leaves the hollow core.
Answer: 53.4°C
6–108
A computer cooled by a fan contains eight PCBs,
each dissipating 10 W power. The height of the PCBs is 
12 cm and the length is 18 cm. The cooling air is supplied by
a 25-W fan mounted at the inlet. If the temperature rise of air
as it flows through the case of the computer is not to exceed
10°C, determine (a) the flow rate of the air that the fan needs
to deliver and (b) the fraction of the temperature rise of air
that is due to the heat generated by the fan and its motor.
Answers: (a) 0.0104 kg/s, (b) 24 percent
FIGURE P6–108
6–109
Hot water at 90°C enters a 15-m section of a cast
iron pipe whose inner diameter is 4 cm at an average velocity
of 0.8 m/s. The outer surface of the pipe is exposed to the
cold air at 10°C in a basement. If water leaves the basement
at 88°C, determine the rate of heat loss from the water.
Air
outlet
PCB, 10 W
Air
inlet

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
248
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
243
6–115
The ducts of an air heating system pass through an
unheated area. As a result of heat losses, the temperature of
the air in the duct drops by 4°C. If the mass flow rate of air is
120 kg/min, determine the rate of heat loss from the air to the
cold environment.
6–116
Steam enters a long, horizontal pipe with an inlet
diameter of D1  12 cm at 1 MPa and 300°C with a velocity
of 2 m/s. Farther downstream, the conditions are 800 kPa and
250°C, and the diameter is D2  10 cm. Determine (a) the
mass flow rate of the steam and (b) the rate of heat transfer.
Answers: (a) 0.0877 kg/s, (b) 8.87 kJ/s
6–117
Steam enters an insulated pipe at 200 kPa and 200°C
and leaves at 150 kPa and 150°C. The inlet-to-outlet diameter
ratio for the pipe is D1/D21.80. Determine the inlet and exit
velocities of the steam.
FIGURE P6–117
6–118E
Water enters a boiler at 500 psia as a saturated liq-
uid and leaves at 600F at the same pressure. Calculate the
heat transfer per unit mass of water.
6–119
Refrigerant-134a enters the condenser of a refrigera-
tor at 1200 kPa and 80C, and leaves as a saturated liquid 
at the same pressure. Determine the heat transfer from the
refrigerant per unit mass.
FIGURE P6–119
6–120
Saturated liquid water is heated at constant pressure
in a steady-flow device until it is a saturated vapor. Calculate
the heat transfer, in kJ/kg, when the vaporization is done at a
pressure of 800 kPa.
Charging and Discharging Processes
6–121
A rigid, insulated tank that is initially evacuated is
connected through a valve to a supply line that carries helium
at 200 kPa and 120°C. Now the valve is opened, and helium
is allowed to flow into the tank until the pressure reaches 
200 kPa, at which point the valve is closed. Determine the
1200 kPa
80C
1200 kPa
sat. liq.
R-134a
qout
D1
200 kPa
200°C
Steam
D2
150 kPa
150°C
flow work of the helium in the supply line and the final tem-
perature of the helium in the tank.
Answers: 816 kJ/kg, 655 K
FIGURE P6–121
6–122
Consider an 8-L evacuated rigid bottle that is sur-
rounded by the atmosphere at 100 kPa and 17°C. A valve at
the neck of the bottle is now opened and the atmospheric air
is allowed to flow into the bottle. The air trapped in the bottle
eventually reaches thermal equilibrium with the atmosphere
as a result of heat transfer through the wall of the bottle. The
valve remains open during the process so that the trapped air
also reaches mechanical equilibrium with the atmosphere.
Determine the net heat transfer through the wall of the bottle
during this filling process.
Answer: Qout  0.8 kJ
FIGURE P6–122
6–123
An insulated rigid tank is initially evacuated. A valve
is opened, and atmospheric air at 95 kPa and 17°C enters
the tank until the pressure in the tank reaches 95 kPa, at
which point the valve is closed. Determine the final tempera-
ture of the air in the tank. Assume constant specific heats.
Answer: 406 K
6–124
A 2-m3 rigid tank initially contains air at 100 kPa and
22°C. The tank is connected to a supply line through a valve.
Air is flowing in the supply line at 600 kPa and 22°C. The
valve is opened, and air is allowed to enter the tank until the
pressure in the tank reaches the line pressure, at which point
the valve is closed. A thermometer placed in the tank indicates 
evacuated
8  L
AIR
100 kPa
17°C
Helium
200 kPa, 120°C
Initially
evacuated

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
249
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
244
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P6–124
that the air temperature at the final state is 77°C. Determine
(a) the mass of air that has entered the tank and (b) the amount
of heat transfer.
Answers: (a) 9.58 kg, (b) 339 kJ
6–125
A 0.2-m3 rigid tank initially contains refrigerant-134a
at 8°C. At this state, 70 percent of the mass is in the vapor
phase, and the rest is in the liquid phase. The tank is con-
nected by a valve to a supply line where refrigerant at 1 MPa
and 100°C flows steadily. Now the valve is opened slightly,
and the refrigerant is allowed to enter the tank. When the pres-
sure in the tank reaches 800 kPa, the entire refrigerant in the
tank exists in the vapor phase only. At this point the valve is
closed. Determine (a) the final temperature in the tank, (b) the
mass of refrigerant that has entered the tank, and (c) the heat
transfer between the system and the surroundings.
6–126
An insulated, vertical piston–cylinder device initially
contains 10 kg of water, 6 kg of which is in the vapor phase.
The mass of the piston is such that it maintains a constant pres-
sure of 200 kPa inside the cylinder. Now steam at 0.5 MPa and
350°C is allowed to enter the cylinder from a supply line until
all the liquid in the cylinder has vaporized. Determine (a) the
final temperature in the cylinder and (b) the mass of the steam
that has entered.
Answers: (a) 120.2°C, (b) 19.07 kg
FIGURE P6–126
Ti = 350°C
m1 = 10 kg
H2O
P = 200 kPa
Pi = 0.5 MPa
T1 = 22°C
V = 2 m3
P1 = 100 kPa
Pi = 600 kPa
Ti = 22°C
Qout
6–127E
A scuba diver’s 2-ft3 air tank is to be filled with air
from a compressed air line at 120 psia and 100F. Initially,
the air in this tank is at 20 psia and 70F. Presuming that the
tank is well insulated, determine the temperature and mass in
the tank when it is filled to 120 psia.
6–128
An air-conditioning system is to be filled from a
rigid container that initially contains 5 kg of liquid R-134a 
at 24C. The valve connecting this container to the air-
conditioning system is now opened until the mass in the con-
tainer is 0.25 kg, at which time the valve is closed. During
this time, only liquid R-134a flows from the container. Pre-
suming that the process is isothermal while the valve is open,
determine the final quality of the R-134a in the container and
the total heat transfer.
Answers: 0.506, 22.6 kJ
FIGURE P6–128
6–129E
Oxygen is supplied to a medical facility from ten
3-ft3 compressed oxygen tanks. Initially, these tanks are at
2000 psia and 80F. The oxygen is removed from these tanks
slowly enough that the temperature in the tanks remains at
80F. After two weeks, the pressure in the tanks is 100 psia.
Determine the mass of oxygen used and the total heat trans-
fer to the tanks.
6–130
The air in an insulated, rigid compressed-air tank
whose volume is 0.5 m 3 is initially at 4000 kPa and 20C.
Enough air is now released from the tank to reduce the pres-
sure to 2000 kPa. Following this release, what is the tempera-
ture of the remaining air in the tank?
FIGURE P6–130
© Vol. OS52/PhotoDisc
Liquid R-134a
5 kg
24C
A-C line

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
250
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
245
FIGURE P6–134
6–135
A 0.12-m3 rigid tank contains saturated refrigerant-
134a at 800 kPa. Initially, 25 percent of the volume is occu-
pied by liquid and the rest by vapor. A valve at the bottom of
the tank is now opened, and liquid is withdrawn from the
tank. Heat is transferred to the refrigerant such that the pres-
sure inside the tank remains constant. The valve is closed
when no liquid is left in the tank and vapor starts to come
out. Determine the total heat transfer for this process.
Answer: 201.2 kJ
6–136E
A 4-ft3 rigid tank contains saturated refrigerant-
134a at 100 psia. Initially, 20 percent of the volume is occu-
pied by liquid and the rest by vapor. A valve at the top of the
tank is now opened, and vapor is allowed to escape slowly
from the tank. Heat is transferred to the refrigerant such that
the pressure inside the tank remains constant. The valve is
closed when the last drop of liquid in the tank is vaporized.
Determine the total heat transfer for this process.
FIGURE P6–136E
6–137
A 0.2-m3 rigid tank equipped with a pressure regula-
tor contains steam at 2 MPa and 300°C. The steam in the
tank is now heated. The regulator keeps the steam pressure
Qin
R-134a
Sat. vapor
P = 100 psia
V = 4 ft3
Qin
H2O
V = 0.3 m3
 T = 200°C
Sat. liquid
me =
m1
1–2
6–131E
The weighted piston of the device shown in
Fig. P6–131E maintains the pressure of the piston-cylinder
contents at 200 psia. Initially, this system contains no mass.
The valve is now opened, and steam from the line flows into
the cylinder until the volume is 10 ft 3. This process is adia-
batic, and the steam in the line remains at 300 psia and 450F.
Determine the final temperature (and quality if appropriate)
of the steam in the cylinder and the total work produced as
the device is filled.
FIGURE P6–131E
6–132E
Repeat Prob. 6–131E when the supply line carries
oxygen at 300 psia and 450F.
Answers: 450F, 370 Btu
6–133
A 0.12-m3 rigid tank initially contains refrigerant-
134a at 1 MPa and 100 percent quality. The tank is connected
by a valve to a supply line that carries refrigerant-134a at 
1.2 MPa and 36°C. Now the valve is opened, and the refrig-
erant is allowed to enter the tank. The valve is closed when it
is observed that the tank contains saturated liquid at 1.2 MPa.
Determine (a) the mass of the refrigerant that has entered the
tank and (b) the amount of heat transfer.
Answers: (a) 128.4
kg, (b) 1057 kJ
6–134
A 0.3-m3 rigid tank is filled with saturated liquid
water at 200°C. A valve at the bottom of the tank is opened,
and liquid is withdrawn from the tank. Heat is transferred to
the water such that the temperature in the tank remains con-
stant. Determine the amount of heat that must be transferred
by the time one-half of the total mass has been withdrawn.
Valve
Weighted
piston
Supply line
Cylinder

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
251
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
constant by letting out some steam, but the temperature
inside rises. Determine the amount of heat transferred when
the steam temperature reaches 500°C.
6–138
An adiabatic piston-cylinder device equipped with a
spring maintains the pressure inside at 300 kPa when the vol-
ume is 0, and 3000 kPa when the volume is 5 m 3. The device
is connected to a steam line maintained at 1500 kPa and
200C, and initially the volume is 0. Determine the final tem-
perature (and quality if appropriate) when valve is opened
and steam in the line is allowed to enter the cylinder until the
pressure inside matches that in the line. Also determine the
total work produced during this adiabatic filling process.
FIGURE P6–138
6–139
Repeat Prob. 6–138 when the line is filled with air
that is maintained at 2000 kPa and 250C.
6–140
The air-release flap on a hot-air balloon is used to
release hot air from the balloon when appropriate. On one
hot-air balloon, the air release opening has an area of 0.5 m2,
and the filling opening has an area of 1 m2. During a two
minute adiabatic flight maneuver, hot air enters the balloon at
100 kPa and 35C with a velocity of 2 m/s; the air in the bal-
loon remains at 100 kPa and 35C; and air leaves the balloon
through the air-release flap at velocity 1 m/s. At the start of
this maneuver, the volume of the balloon is 75 m 3. Determine
the final volume of the balloon and work produced by the air
inside the balloon as it expands the balloon skin.
Valve
Piston
Supply line
Cylinder
246
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P6–140
© Vol. 1/PhotoDisc
6–141
An insulated 0.08-m3 tank contains helium at 2 MPa
and 80°C. A valve is now opened, allowing some helium to
escape. The valve is closed when one-half of the initial mass
has escaped. Determine the final temperature and pressure in
the tank.
Answers: 225 K, 637 kPa
6–142E
An insulated 60-ft3 rigid tank contains air at 
75 psia and 120°F. A valve connected to the tank is now
opened, and air is allowed to escape until the pressure inside
drops to 30 psia. The air temperature during this process is
maintained constant by an electric resistance heater placed in
the tank. Determine the electrical work done during this
process.
FIGURE P6–142E
6–143
A vertical piston–cylinder device initially contains
0.2 m3 of air at 20°C. The mass of the piston is such that it
maintains a constant pressure of 300 kPa inside. Now a valve
connected to the cylinder is opened, and air is allowed to
escape until the volume inside the cylinder is decreased by
one-half. Heat transfer takes place during the process so that
the temperature of the air in the cylinder remains constant.
We,in
AIR
V = 60 ft3
P = 75 psia
T = 120°F

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
252
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
247
Determine (a) the amount of air that has left the cylinder and
(b) the amount of heat transfer.
Answers: (a) 0.357 kg, (b) 0
6–144
A balloon initially contains 65 m3 of helium gas at
atmospheric conditions of 100 kPa and 22°C. The balloon is
connected by a valve to a large reservoir that supplies helium
gas at 150 kPa and 25°C. Now the valve is opened, and helium
is allowed to enter the balloon until pressure equilibrium with
the helium at the supply line is reached. The material of the
balloon is such that its volume increases linearly with pressure.
If no heat transfer takes place during this process, determine
the final temperature in the balloon.
Answer: 334 K
FIGURE P6–144
6–145
An insulated vertical piston–cylinder device initially
contains 0.8 m3 of refrigerant-134a at 1.2 MPa and 120°C. 
A linear spring at this point applies full force to the piston. 
A valve connected to the cylinder is now opened, and refriger-
ant is allowed to escape. The spring unwinds as the piston
moves down, and the pressure and volume drop to 0.6 MPa
and 0.5 m3 at the end of the process. Determine (a) the
amount of refrigerant that has escaped and (b) the final tem-
perature of the refrigerant.
FIGURE P6–145
6–146
A piston–cylinder device initially contains 0.6 kg of
steam with a volume of 0.1 m3. The mass of the piston is
such that it maintains a constant pressure of 800 kPa. The
R-134a
0.8 m3
1.2 MPa
120°C
T1 = 22°C
Pi = 150 kPa
Ti = 25°C
He
P1 = 100 kPa
cylinder is connected through a valve to a supply line that
carries steam at 5 MPa and 500°C. Now the valve is opened
and steam is allowed to flow slowly into the cylinder until the
volume of the cylinder doubles and the temperature in the
cylinder reaches 250°C, at which point the valve is closed.
Determine (a) the mass of steam that has entered and (b) the
amount of heat transfer.
FIGURE P6–146
Review Problems
6–147
A D0  10-m-diameter tank is initially filled with
water 2 m above the center of a D  10-cm-diameter valve
near the bottom. The tank surface is open to the atmosphere,
and the tank drains through a L  100-m-long pipe con-
nected to the valve. The friction factor of the pipe is given 
to be f  0.015, and the discharge velocity is expressed as
where z is the water height above the
center of the valve. Determine (a) the initial discharge veloc-
ity from the tank and (b) the time required to empty the tank.
The tank can be considered to be empty when the water level
drops to the center of the valve.
6–148
Underground water is being pumped into a pool
whose cross section is 3 m 
 4 m while water is discharged
through a 5-cm-diameter orifice at a constant average veloc-
ity of 5 m/s. If the water level in the pool rises at a rate of 
1.5 cm/min, determine the rate at which water is supplied to
the pool, in m3/s.
6–149
The velocity of a liquid flowing in a circular pipe of
radius R varies from zero at the wall to a maximum at the
pipe center. The velocity distribution in the pipe can be repre-
sented as V(r), where r is the radial distance from the pipe
center. Based on the definition of mass flow rate m., obtain a
relation for the average velocity in terms of V(r), R, and r.
6–150
Air at 4.18 kg/m3 enters a nozzle that has an inlet-to-
exit area ratio of 2:1 with a velocity of 120 m/s and leaves
with a velocity of 380 m/s. Determine the density of air at the
exit.
Answer: 2.64 kg/m3
6–151
An air compressor compresses 10 L/s of air at 
120 kPa and 20C to 1000 kPa and 300C while consuming
4.5 kW of power. How much of this power is being used to
increase the pressure of the air versus the power needed to
move the fluid through the compressor?
Answers: 3.35 kW,
1.15 kW
V  B
2gz
1.5  fL>D
Q
Steam
0.6 kg
0.1 m3
800 kPa
Steam
5 MPa
500°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
253
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
6–152
A steam turbine operates with 1.6 MPa and 350C
steam at its inlet and saturated vapor at 30C at its exit. The
mass flow rate of the steam is 16 kg/s, and the turbine pro-
duces 9000 kW of power. Determine the rate at which heat is
lost through the casing of this turbine.
FIGURE P6–152
6–153E
Nitrogen gas flows through a long, constant-
diameter adiabatic pipe. It enters at 100 psia and 120F and
leaves at 50 psia and 70F. Calculate the velocity of the nitro-
gen at the pipe’s inlet and outlet.
6–154
A 110-V electric hot-water heater warms 0.1 L/s of
water from 15 to 20C. Calculate the current in amperes that
must be supplied to this heater.
Answer: 19.0 A
6–155
Steam enters a long, insulated pipe at 1400 kPa,
350C, and 10 m/s, and exits at 1000 kPa. The diameter of the
pipe is 0.15 m at the inlet, and 0.1 m at the exit. Calculate the
mass flow rate of the steam and its speed at the pipe outlet.
6–156
The air flow in a compressed air line is divided into
two equal streams by a T-fitting in the line. The compressed
air enters this 2.5-cm diameter fitting at 1.6 MPa and 40C
with a velocity of 50 m/s. Each outlet has the same diame-
ter as the inlet, and the air at these outlets has a pressure of
1.4 MPa and a temperature of 36C. Determine the velocity
of the air at the outlets and the rate of change of flow energy
(flow power) across the T-fitting.
FIGURE P6–156
1.6 MPa
40°C
50 m/s
1.4 MPa
36°C
1.4 MPa
36°C
Heat
Turbine
1.6 MPa
350°C
16 kg/s
30°C
sat. vapor
248
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
6–157
Air enters a pipe at 50°C and 200 kPa and leaves at
40°C and 150 kPa. It is estimated that heat is lost from the
pipe in the amount of 3.3 kJ per kg of air flowing in the pipe.
The diameter ratio for the pipe is D1/D2  1.8. Using con-
stant specific heats for air, determine the inlet and exit veloc-
ities of the air.
Answers: 28.6 m/s, 120 m/s
6–158
Cold water enters a steam generator at 20°C and
leaves as saturated vapor at 150°C. Determine the fraction of
heat used in the steam generator to preheat the liquid water
from 20°C to the saturation temperature of 150°C.
6–159
Cold water enters a steam generator at 20°C and
leaves as saturated vapor at the boiler pressure. At what pres-
sure will the amount of heat needed to preheat the water to
saturation temperature be equal to the heat needed to vapor-
ize the liquid at the boiler pressure?
6–160E
A refrigeration system is being designed to cool
eggs (r  67.4 lbm/ft3 and cp  0.80 Btu/lbm · °F) with an
average mass of 0.14 lbm from an initial temperature of 90°F
to a final average temperature of 50°F by air at 34°F at a rate
of 10,000 eggs per hour. Determine (a) the rate of heat
removal from the eggs, in Btu/h and (b) the required volume
flow rate of air, in ft3/h, if the temperature rise of air is not to
exceed 10°F.
6–161
A glass bottle washing facility uses a well-agitated
hot-water bath at 55°C that is placed on the ground. The bot-
tles enter at a rate of 800 per minute at an ambient tempera-
ture of 20°C and leave at the water temperature. Each bottle
has a mass of 150 g and removes 0.2 g of water as it leaves
the bath wet. Make-up water is supplied at 15°C. Disregard-
ing any heat losses from the outer surfaces of the bath, deter-
mine the rate at which (a) water and (b) heat must be
supplied to maintain steady operation.
6–162
Repeat Prob. 6–161 for a water bath temperature of
50°C.
6–163
Long aluminum wires of diameter 3 mm (r 
2702 kg/m3 and cp  0.896 kJ/kg · °C) are extruded at a tem-
perature of 350°C and are cooled to 50°C in atmospheric air
at 30°C. If the wire is extruded at a velocity of 10 m/min,
determine the rate of heat transfer from the wire to the 
extrusion room.
FIGURE P6–163
6–164
Repeat Prob. 6–163 for a copper wire (r  8950
kg/m3 and cp  0.383 kJ/kg · °C).
10 m/min
350°C
Aluminum
wire
Tair = 30°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
254
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 6
|
249
FIGURE P6–170
6–171
In large gas-turbine power plants, air is preheated by
the exhaust gases in a heat exchanger called the regenerator
before it enters the combustion chamber. Air enters the regen-
erator at 1 MPa and 550 K at a mass flow rate of 800 kg/min.
Heat is transferred to the air at a rate of 3200 kJ/s. Exhaust
gases enter the regenerator at 140 kPa and 800 K and leave at
130 kPa and 600 K. Treating the exhaust gases as air, deter-
mine (a) the exit temperature of the air and (b) the mass flow
rate of exhaust gases.
Answers: (a) 775 K, (b) 14.9 kg/s
6–172
It is proposed to have a water heater that consists of
an insulated pipe of 5-cm diameter and an electric resistor
inside. Cold water at 20°C enters the heating section steadily at
a rate of 30 L/min. If water is to be heated to 55°C, determine
(a) the power rating of the resistance heater and (b) the average
velocity of the water in the pipe.
6–173
An insulated vertical piston–cylinder device
initially contains 0.2 m3 of air at 200 kPa and
22°C. At this state, a linear spring touches the piston but
exerts no force on it. The cylinder is connected by a valve to
a line that supplies air at 800 kPa and 22°C. The valve is
opened, and air from the high-pressure line is allowed to
enter the cylinder. The valve is turned off when the pressure
inside the cylinder reaches 600 kPa. If the enclosed volume
inside the cylinder doubles during this process, determine
(a) the mass of air that entered the cylinder, and (b) the final
temperature of the air inside the cylinder.
R-134a
45 hp
P1 = 15 psia
T1 = 20°F
V·
1 = 10 ft3/s
P2 = 100 psia
6–165
Steam at 40°C condenses on the outside of a 5-m-
long, 3-cm-diameter thin horizontal copper tube by cooling
water that enters the tube at 25°C at an average velocity of 
2 m/s and leaves at 35°C. Determine the rate of condensation
of steam.
Answer: 0.0245 kg/s
FIGURE P6–165
6–166
A fan is powered by a 0.5-hp motor and delivers air
at a rate of 85 m3/min. Determine the highest value for the
average velocity of air mobilized by the fan. Take the density
of air to be 1.18 kg/m3.
6–167
A liquid R-134a bottle has an internal volume of
0.001 m3. Initially it contains 0.4 kg of R-134a (saturated
mixture) at 26C. A valve is opened and R-134a vapor only
(no liquid) is allowed to escape slowly such that tempera-
ture remains constant until the mass of R-134a remaining is
0.1 kg. Find the heat transfer necessary with the surround-
ings to maintain the temperature and pressure of the R-134a
constant.
6–168
Steam enters a turbine steadily at 10 MPa and
550°C with a velocity of 60 m/s and leaves at
25 kPa with a quality of 95 percent. A heat loss of 30 kJ/kg
occurs during the process. The inlet area of the turbine is 
150 cm2, and the exit area is 1400 cm2. Determine (a) the
mass flow rate of the steam, (b) the exit velocity, and (c) the
power output.
6–169
Reconsider Prob. 6–168. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of turbine exit
area and turbine exit pressure on the exit velocity and power
output of the turbine. Let the exit pressure vary from 10 to 
50 kPa (with the same quality), and the exit area to vary from
1000 to 3000 cm2. Plot the exit velocity and the power outlet
against the exit pressure for the exit areas of 1000, 2000, and
3000 cm2, and discuss the results.
6–170E
Refrigerant-134a enters an adiabatic compressor at
15 psia and 20°F with a volume flow rate of 10 ft3/s and
leaves at a pressure of 100 psia. The power input to the com-
pressor is 45 hp. Find (a) the mass flow rate of the refrigerant
and (b) the exit temperature.
35°C
Steam
40°C
Cooling
water
25°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
6. Mass and Energy 
Analysis of Control 
Volumes
255
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
250
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P6–173
Design and Essay Problems
6–174E
Pneumatic nail drivers used in construction require
0.02 ft3 of air at 100 psia and 1 Btu of energy to drive a
single nail. You have been assigned the task of designing a
compressed-air storage tank with enough capacity to drive
500 nails. The pressure in this tank cannot exceed 500 psia,
and the temperature cannot exceed that normally found at a
construction site. What is the maximum pressure to be used
in the tank and what is the tank’s volume?
6–175
You have been given the responsibility of picking a
steam turbine for an electrical-generation station that is to
produce 300 MW of electrical power that will sell for $0.05
per kilowatt-hour. The boiler will produce steam at 700 psia
and 700F, and the condenser is planned to operate at 80F.
The cost of generating and condensing the steam is $0.01 per
kilowatt-hour of electricity produced. You have narrowed
your selection to the three turbines in the table below. Your
criterion for selection is to pay for the equipment as quickly
as possible. Which turbine should you choose?
Ti = 22°C
AIR
P1 = 200 kPa
Pi = 800 kPa
V1 = 0.2 m3
T1 = 22°C
Operating
Capacity
Cost
Cost
Turbine
(MW)
h
($Million)
($/kWh)
A
050
0.90
05.5
0.015
B
100
0.92
11.5
0.015
C
100
0.93
10.5
0.015
6–176E
You are to design a small, directional control rocket
to operate in space by providing as many as 100 bursts of 
5 seconds each with a mass flow rate of 0.5 lbm/s at a veloc-
ity of 400 ft/s. Storage tanks that will contain up to 3000 psia 
are available, and the tanks will be located in an environment
whose temperature is 40F. Your design criterion is to mini-
mize the volume of the storage tank. Should you use a com-
pressed-air or an R-134a system?
6–177
An air cannon uses compressed air to propel a pro-
jectile from rest to a final velocity. Consider an air cannon
that is to accelerate a 10-gram projectile to a speed of 300 m/s
using compressed air, whose temperature cannot exceed 20C.
The volume of the storage tank is not to exceed 0.1 m 3. Select
the storage volume size and maximum storage pressure that
requires the minimum amount of energy to fill the tank.
6–178
To maintain altitude, the temperature of the air inside
a hot-air balloon must remain within a 1C band, while the
volume cannot vary by more than 1 percent. At a 300-m alti-
tude, the air in a 1000 m 3 hot-air balloon needs to maintain a
35C average temperature. This balloon loses heat at a rate of
3 kW through the fabric. When the burner is activated, it adds
30 kg/s of air at 200C and 100 kPa to the balloon. When the
flap that allows air to escape is opened, air leaves the balloon
at a rate of 20 kg/s. Design the burner and exhaust-flap con-
trol cycles (on time and off time) necessary to maintain the
balloon at a 300-m altitude.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
256
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 7
THE SECOND LAW OF THERMODYNAMICS
|
251
T
o this point, we have focused our attention on the first
law of thermodynamics, which requires that energy be
conserved during a process. In this chapter, we intro-
duce the second law of thermodynamics, which asserts that
processes occur in a certain direction and that energy has
quality as well as quantity. A process cannot take place
unless it satisfies both the first and second laws of thermody-
namics. In this chapter, the thermal energy reservoirs,
reversible and irreversible processes, heat engines, refrigera-
tors, and heat pumps are introduced first. Various statements
of the second law are followed by a discussion of perpetual-
motion machines and the thermodynamic temperature scale.
The Carnot cycle is introduced next, and the Carnot princi-
ples are discussed. Finally, the idealized Carnot heat engines,
refrigerators, and heat pumps are examined.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Introduce the second law of thermodynamics.
• Identify valid processes as those that satisfy both the first
and second laws of thermodynamics.
• Discuss thermal energy reservoirs, reversible and
irreversible processes, heat engines, refrigerators, and 
heat pumps.
• Describe the Kelvin–Planck and Clausius statements of the
second law of thermodynamics.
• Discuss the concepts of perpetual-motion machines.
• Apply the second law of thermodynamics to cycles and
cyclic devices.
• Apply the second law to develop the absolute
thermodynamic temperature scale.
• Describe the Carnot cycle.
• Examine the Carnot principles, idealized Carnot heat
engines, refrigerators, and heat pumps.
• Determine the expressions for the thermal efficiencies and
coefficients of performance for reversible heat engines, heat
pumps, and refrigerators.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
257
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
7–1
■INTRODUCTION TO THE SECOND LAW
In Chaps. 5 and 6, we applied the first law of thermodynamics, or the conser-
vation of energy principle, to processes involving closed and open systems.
As pointed out repeatedly in those chapters, energy is a conserved property,
and no process is known to have taken place in violation of the first law of
thermodynamics. Therefore, it is reasonable to conclude that a process must
satisfy the first law to occur. However, as explained here, satisfying the first
law alone does not ensure that the process will actually take place.
It is common experience that a cup of hot coffee left in a cooler room
eventually cools off (Fig. 7–1). This process satisfies the first law of thermo-
dynamics since the amount of energy lost by the coffee is equal to the
amount gained by the surrounding air. Now let us consider the reverse
process—the hot coffee getting even hotter in a cooler room as a result of
heat transfer from the room air. We all know that this process never takes
place. Yet, doing so would not violate the first law as long as the amount of
energy lost by the air is equal to the amount gained by the coffee.
As another familiar example, consider the heating of a room by the passage
of electric current through a resistor (Fig. 7–2). Again, the first law dictates
that the amount of electric energy supplied to the resistance wires be equal to
the amount of energy transferred to the room air as heat. Now let us attempt
to reverse this process. It will come as no surprise that transferring some heat
to the wires does not cause an equivalent amount of electric energy to be
generated in the wires.
Finally, consider a paddle-wheel mechanism that is operated by the fall of
a mass (Fig. 7–3). The paddle wheel rotates as the mass falls and stirs a
fluid within an insulated container. As a result, the potential energy of the
mass decreases, and the internal energy of the fluid increases in accordance
with the conservation of energy principle. However, the reverse process,
raising the mass by transferring heat from the fluid to the paddle wheel,
does not occur in nature, although doing so would not violate the first law
of thermodynamics.
It is clear from these arguments that processes proceed in a certain direc-
tion and not in the reverse direction (Fig. 7–4). The first law places no
restriction on the direction of a process, but satisfying the first law does not
ensure that the process can actually occur. This inadequacy of the first law to
identify whether a process can take place is remedied by introducing another
general principle, the second law of thermodynamics. We show later in this
chapter that the reverse processes discussed above violate the second law of
thermodynamics. This violation is easily detected with the help of a property,
called entropy, defined in Chap. 8. A process cannot occur unless it satisfies
both the first and the second laws of thermodynamics (Fig. 7–5).
There are numerous valid statements of the second law of thermodynam-
ics. Two such statements are presented and discussed later in this chapter in
relation to some engineering devices that operate on cycles.
The use of the second law of thermodynamics is not limited to identifying
the direction of processes, however. The second law also asserts that energy
has quality as well as quantity. The first law is concerned with the quantity
of energy and the transformations of energy from one form to another with
no regard to its quality. Preserving the quality of energy is a major concern
252
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Heat
HOT
COFFEE
FIGURE 7–1
A cup of hot coffee does not get hotter
in a cooler room.
Heat
I = 0
FIGURE 7–2
Transferring heat to a wire will not
generate electricity.
Heat
FIGURE 7–3
Transferring heat to a paddle wheel
will not cause it to rotate.
ONE WAY
FIGURE 7–4
Processes occur in a certain direction,
and not in the reverse direction.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
258
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
to engineers, and the second law provides the necessary means to determine
the quality as well as the degree of degradation of energy during a process.
As discussed later in this chapter, more of high-temperature energy can be
converted to work, and thus it has a higher quality than the same amount of
energy at a lower temperature.
The second law of thermodynamics is also used in determining the
theoretical limits for the performance of commonly used engineering sys-
tems, such as heat engines and refrigerators, as well as predicting the degree
of completion of chemical reactions.
7–2
■THERMAL ENERGY RESERVOIRS
In the development of the second law of thermodynamics, it is very conve-
nient to have a hypothetical body with a relatively large thermal energy
capacity (mass 
 specific heat) that can supply or absorb finite amounts of
heat without undergoing any change in temperature. Such a body is called a
thermal energy reservoir, or just a reservoir. In practice, large bodies of
water such as oceans, lakes, and rivers as well as the atmospheric air can be
modeled accurately as thermal energy reservoirs because of their large ther-
mal energy storage capabilities or thermal masses (Fig. 7–6). The atmo-
sphere, for example, does not warm up as a result of heat losses from
residential buildings in winter. Likewise, megajoules of waste energy
dumped in large rivers by power plants do not cause any significant change
in water temperature.
A two-phase system can be modeled as a reservoir also since it can absorb
and release large quantities of heat while remaining at constant temperature.
Another familiar example of a thermal energy reservoir is the industrial fur-
nace. The temperatures of most furnaces are carefully controlled, and they
are capable of supplying large quantities of thermal energy as heat in an
essentially isothermal manner. Therefore, they can be modeled as reservoirs.
A body does not actually have to be very large to be considered a reser-
voir. Any physical body whose thermal energy capacity is large relative to
the amount of energy it supplies or absorbs can be modeled as one. The air
in a room, for example, can be treated as a reservoir in the analysis of the
heat dissipation from a TV set in the room, since the amount of heat transfer
from the TV set to the room air is not large enough to have a noticeable
effect on the room air temperature.
A reservoir that supplies energy in the form of heat is called a source, and
one that absorbs energy in the form of heat is called a sink (Fig. 7–7). Ther-
mal energy reservoirs are often referred to as heat reservoirs since they
supply or absorb energy in the form of heat.
Heat transfer from industrial sources to the environment is of major con-
cern to environmentalists as well as to engineers. Irresponsible manage-
ment of waste energy can significantly increase the temperature of portions
of the environment, causing what is called thermal pollution. If it is not
carefully controlled, thermal pollution can seriously disrupt marine life in
lakes and rivers. However, by careful design and management, the waste
energy dumped into large bodies of water can be used to improve the qual-
ity of marine life by keeping the local temperature increases within safe
and desirable levels.
Chapter 7
|
253
PROCESS
2nd law
1st law
FIGURE 7–5
A process must satisfy both the first
and second laws of thermodynamics to
proceed.
ATMOSPHERE
LAKE
RIVER
OCEAN
FIGURE 7–6
Bodies with relatively large thermal
masses can be modeled as thermal
energy reservoirs.
Thermal energy
SINK
Thermal energy
SOURCE
HEAT
HEAT
FIGURE 7–7
A source supplies energy in the form
of heat, and a sink absorbs it.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
259
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
7–3
■HEAT ENGINES
As pointed out earlier, work can easily be converted to other forms of energy,
but converting other forms of energy to work is not that easy. The mechani-
cal work done by the shaft shown in Fig. 7–8, for example, is first converted
to the internal energy of the water. This energy may then leave the water as
heat. We know from experience that any attempt to reverse this process will
fail. That is, transferring heat to the water does not cause the shaft to rotate.
From this and other observations, we conclude that work can be converted to
heat directly and completely, but converting heat to work requires the use of
some special devices. These devices are called heat engines.
Heat engines differ considerably from one another, but all can be charac-
terized by the following (Fig. 7–9):
1. They receive heat from a high-temperature source (solar energy, oil fur-
nace, nuclear reactor, etc.).
2. They convert part of this heat to work (usually in the form of a rotating
shaft).
3. They reject the remaining waste heat to a low-temperature sink (the
atmosphere, rivers, etc.).
4. They operate on a cycle.
Heat engines and other cyclic devices usually involve a fluid to and from
which heat is transferred while undergoing a cycle. This fluid is called the
working fluid.
The term heat engine is often used in a broader sense to include work-
producing devices that do not operate in a thermodynamic cycle. Engines
that involve internal combustion such as gas turbines and car engines fall into
this category. These devices operate in a mechanical cycle but not in a
thermodynamic cycle since the working fluid (the combustion gases) does
not undergo a complete cycle. Instead of being cooled to the initial tempera-
ture, the exhaust gases are purged and replaced by fresh air-and-fuel mixture
at the end of the cycle.
The work-producing device that best fits into the definition of a heat
engine is the steam power plant, which is an external-combustion engine.
That is, combustion takes place outside the engine, and the thermal energy
released during this process is transferred to the steam as heat. The
schematic of a basic steam power plant is shown in Fig. 7–10. This is a
rather simplified diagram, and the discussion of actual steam power plants
is given in later chapters. The various quantities shown on this figure are
as follows:
Qin  amount of heat supplied to steam in boiler from a high-temperature
source (furnace)
Qout  amount of heat rejected from steam in condenser to a low-
temperature sink (the atmosphere, a river, etc.)
Wout  amount of work delivered by steam as it expands in turbine
Win  amount of work required to compress water to boiler pressure
Notice that the directions of the heat and work interactions are indicated
by the subscripts in and out. Therefore, all four of the described quantities
are always positive.
254
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
WATER
Heat
Work
WATER
Heat
No work
FIGURE 7–8
Work can always be converted to heat
directly and completely, but the
reverse is not true.
Wnet,out
Low-temperature
SINK
Qout
Qin
HEAT
ENGINE
High-temperature
SOURCE
FIGURE 7–9
Part of the heat received by a heat
engine is converted to work, while the
rest is rejected to a sink.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
260
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The net work output of this power plant is simply the difference between
the total work output of the plant and the total work input (Fig. 7–11):
(7–1)
The net work can also be determined from the heat transfer data alone. The
four components of the steam power plant involve mass flow in and out, and
therefore they should be treated as open systems. These components, together
with the connecting pipes, however, always contain the same fluid (not count-
ing the steam that may leak out, of course). No mass enters or leaves this com-
bination system, which is indicated by the shaded area on Fig. 7–10; thus, it
can be analyzed as a closed system. Recall that for a closed system undergoing
a cycle, the change in internal energy U is zero, and therefore the net work
output of the system is also equal to the net heat transfer to the system:
(7–2)
Thermal Efficiency
In Eq. 7–2, Qout represents the magnitude of the energy wasted in order to
complete the cycle. But Qout is never zero; thus, the net work output of a heat
engine is always less than the amount of heat input. That is, only part of the
heat transferred to the heat engine is converted to work. The fraction of the
heat input that is converted to net work output is a measure of the perfor-
mance of a heat engine and is called the thermal efficiency hth (Fig. 7–12).
For heat engines, the desired output is the net work output, and the
required input is the amount of heat supplied to the working fluid. Then the
thermal efficiency of a heat engine can be expressed as
(7–3)
Thermal efficiency  Net work output
Total heat input
Wnet,out  Qin  Qout  
1kJ2
Wnet,out  Wout  Win  
1kJ2
Chapter 7
|
255
System boundary
Boiler
Pump
Turbine
Qout
Win
Wout
Qin
Energy source
(such as a furnace)
Energy sink
(such as the atmosphere)
Condenser
FIGURE 7–10
Schematic of a steam power plant.
HEAT
ENGINE
Wout
Wnet,out
Win
FIGURE 7–11
A portion of the work output of a heat
engine is consumed internally to
maintain continuous operation.
Heat input
100 kJ
100 kJ
1
Net
work
output
20kJ
2
Net
work
output
30kJ
SINK
Waste heat
80kJ
Waste heat
70 kJ
ηth,1 = 20%
ηth,2 = 30%
SOURCE
FIGURE 7–12
Some heat engines perform better than
others (convert more of the heat they
receive to work).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
261
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
or
(7–4)
It can also be expressed as
(7–5)
since Wnet,out  Qin  Qout.
Cyclic devices of practical interest such as heat engines, refrigerators, and
heat pumps operate between a high-temperature medium (or reservoir) at
temperature TH and a low-temperature medium (or reservoir) at temperature
TL. To bring uniformity to the treatment of heat engines, refrigerators, and
heat pumps, we define these two quantities:
QH  magnitude of heat transfer between the cyclic device and the high-
temperature medium at temperature TH
QL  magnitude of heat transfer between the cyclic device and the low-
temperature medium at temperature TL
Notice that both QL and QH are defined as magnitudes and therefore are
positive quantities. The direction of QH and QL is easily determined by
inspection. Then the net work output and thermal efficiency relations for
any heat engine (shown in Fig. 7–13) can also be expressed as
and
or
(7–6)
The thermal efficiency of a heat engine is always less than unity since both
QL and QH are defined as positive quantities.
Thermal efficiency is a measure of how efficiently a heat engine converts
the heat that it receives to work. Heat engines are built for the purpose of
converting heat to work, and engineers are constantly trying to improve the
efficiencies of these devices since increased efficiency means less fuel con-
sumption and thus lower fuel bills and less pollution.
The thermal efficiencies of work-producing devices are relatively low.
Ordinary spark-ignition automobile engines have a thermal efficiency of
about 25 percent. That is, an automobile engine converts about 25 percent
of the chemical energy of the gasoline to mechanical work. This number is
as high as 40 percent for diesel engines and large gas-turbine plants and as
high as 60 percent for large combined gas-steam power plants. Thus, even
with the most efficient heat engines available today, almost one-half of the
energy supplied ends up in the rivers, lakes, or the atmosphere as waste or
useless energy (Fig. 7–14).
hth  1  Q L
Q H
hth 
Wnet,out
QH
Wnet,out  QH  QL
hth  1  Q out
Q in
hth 
Wnet,out
Qin
256
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Low-temperature reservoir 
at TL
HE
Wnet,out
QH
QL
High-temperature reservoir
at TH
FIGURE 7–13
Schematic of a heat engine.
Furnace
The atmosphere
HE
Wnet,out = 55 MJ
QH= 100 MJ
QL = 45 MJ
FIGURE 7–14
Even the most efficient heat engines
reject almost one-half of the energy
they receive as waste heat.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
262
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Can We Save Qout?
In a steam power plant, the condenser is the device where large quantities of
waste heat is rejected to rivers, lakes, or the atmosphere. Then one may ask,
can we not just take the condenser out of the plant and save all that waste
energy? The answer to this question is, unfortunately, a firm no for the sim-
ple reason that without a heat rejection process in a condenser, the cycle
cannot be completed. (Cyclic devices such as steam power plants cannot run
continuously unless the cycle is completed.) This is demonstrated next with
the help of a simple heat engine.
Consider the simple heat engine shown in Fig. 7–15 that is used to lift
weights. It consists of a piston–cylinder device with two sets of stops. The
working fluid is the gas contained within the cylinder. Initially, the gas tem-
perature is 30°C. The piston, which is loaded with the weights, is resting on
top of the lower stops. Now 100 kJ of heat is transferred to the gas in the
cylinder from a source at 100°C, causing it to expand and to raise the loaded
piston until the piston reaches the upper stops, as shown in the figure. At this
point, the load is removed, and the gas temperature is observed to be 90°C.
The work done on the load during this expansion process is equal to the
increase in its potential energy, say 15 kJ. Even under ideal conditions
(weightless piston, no friction, no heat losses, and quasi-equilibrium expan-
sion), the amount of heat supplied to the gas is greater than the work done
since part of the heat supplied is used to raise the temperature of the gas.
Now let us try to answer this question: Is it possible to transfer the 85 kJ
of excess heat at 90°C back to the reservoir at 100°C for later use? If it 
is, then we will have a heat engine that can have a thermal efficiency of
100 percent under ideal conditions. The answer to this question is again
no, for the very simple reason that heat is always transferred from a high-
temperature medium to a low-temperature one, and never the other way
around. Therefore, we cannot cool this gas from 90 to 30°C by transferring
heat to a reservoir at 100°C. Instead, we have to bring the system into con-
tact with a low-temperature reservoir, say at 20°C, so that the gas can return
to its initial state by rejecting its 85 kJ of excess energy as heat to this reser-
voir. This energy cannot be recycled, and it is properly called waste energy.
We conclude from this discussion that every heat engine must waste some
energy by transferring it to a low-temperature reservoir in order to complete
Chapter 7
|
257
GAS
30°C
Heat in
(100kJ)
Reservoir at
100°C
LOAD
GAS
90°C
LOAD
GAS
30°C
Heat out
(85kJ)
Reservoir at
20°C
(15kJ)
FIGURE 7–15
A heat-engine cycle cannot be
completed without rejecting some heat
to a low-temperature sink.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
263
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the cycle, even under idealized conditions. The requirement that a heat
engine exchange heat with at least two reservoirs for continuous operation
forms the basis for the Kelvin–Planck expression of the second law of ther-
modynamics discussed later in this section.
258
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 7–1
Net Power Production of a Heat Engine
Heat is transferred to a heat engine from a furnace at a rate of 80 MW. If
the rate of waste heat rejection to a nearby river is 50 MW, determine the
net power output and the thermal efficiency for this heat engine.
Solution
The rates of heat transfer to and from a heat engine are given.
The net power output and the thermal efficiency are to be determined.
Assumptions
Heat losses through the pipes and other components are
negligible.
Analysis
A schematic of the heat engine is given in Fig. 7–16. The furnace
serves as the high-temperature reservoir for this heat engine and the river as
the low-temperature reservoir. The given quantities can be expressed as
The net power output of this heat engine is
Then the thermal efficiency is easily determined to be
Discussion
Note that the heat engine converts 37.5 percent of the heat it
receives to work.
hth 
W
#
net,out
Q
#
H
 30 MW
80 MW  0.375 1or 37.5%2
W
#
net,out  Q
#
H  Q
#
L  180  502 MW  30 MW
Q
#
H  80 MW and Q
#
L  50 MW
EXAMPLE 7–2
Fuel Consumption Rate of a Car
A car engine with a power output of 65 hp has a thermal efficiency of 
24 percent. Determine the fuel consumption rate of this car if the fuel has a
heating value of 19,000 Btu/lbm (that is, 19,000 Btu of energy is released
for each lbm of fuel burned).
Solution
The power output and the efficiency of a car engine are given.
The rate of fuel consumption of the car is to be determined.
Assumptions
The power output of the car is constant.
Analysis
A schematic of the car engine is given in Fig. 7–17. The car
engine is powered by converting 24 percent of the chemical energy released
during the combustion process to work. The amount of energy input required
to produce a power output of 65 hp is determined from the definition of
thermal efficiency to be
Q#
H 
Wnet,out
hth
 65 hp
0.24 a
2545 Btu>h
1 hp
b  689,270 Btu>h
FURNACE
RIVER
HE
Wnet,out
QH= 80MW
QL = 50 MW
·
·
·
FIGURE 7–16
Schematic for Example 7–1.
Combustion chamber
Atmosphere
CAR
ENGINE
(idealized)
Wnet,out = 65 hp
QL
QH
mfuel
·
·
·
·
FIGURE 7–17
Schematic for Example 7–2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
264
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The Second Law of Thermodynamics:
Kelvin–Planck Statement
We have demonstrated earlier with reference to the heat engine shown in
Fig. 7–15 that, even under ideal conditions, a heat engine must reject some
heat to a low-temperature reservoir in order to complete the cycle. That is,
no heat engine can convert all the heat it receives to useful work. This limi-
tation on the thermal efficiency of heat engines forms the basis for the
Kelvin–Planck statement of the second law of thermodynamics, which is
expressed as follows:
It is impossible for any device that operates on a cycle to receive heat from a
single reservoir and produce a net amount of work.
That is, a heat engine must exchange heat with a low-temperature sink as well
as a high-temperature source to keep operating. The Kelvin–Planck statement
can also be expressed as no heat engine can have a thermal efficiency of
100 percent (Fig. 7–18), or as for a power plant to operate, the working fluid
must exchange heat with the environment as well as the furnace.
Note that the impossibility of having a 100 percent efficient heat engine is
not due to friction or other dissipative effects. It is a limitation that applies
to both the idealized and the actual heat engines. Later in this chapter, we
develop a relation for the maximum thermal efficiency of a heat engine. We
also demonstrate that this maximum value depends on the reservoir temper-
atures only.
7–4
■REFRIGERATORS AND HEAT PUMPS
We all know from experience that heat is transferred in the direction of
decreasing temperature, that is, from high-temperature mediums to low-
temperature ones. This heat transfer process occurs in nature without requir-
ing any devices. The reverse process, however, cannot occur by itself. The
transfer of heat from a low-temperature medium to a high-temperature one
requires special devices called refrigerators.
Refrigerators, like heat engines, are cyclic devices. The working fluid
used in the refrigeration cycle is called a refrigerant. The most frequently
used refrigeration cycle is the vapor-compression refrigeration cycle, which
involves four main components: a compressor, a condenser, an expansion
valve, and an evaporator, as shown in Fig. 7–19.
Chapter 7
|
259
To supply energy at this rate, the engine must burn fuel at a rate of
since 19,000 Btu of thermal energy is released for each lbm of fuel burned.
Discussion
Note that if the thermal efficiency of the car could be doubled,
the rate of fuel consumption would be reduced by half.
m# 
689,270 Btu>h
19,000 Btu>lbm  36.3 lbm/h
HEAT
ENGINE
Wnet,out = 100 kW
QH = 100 kW
QL = 0
Thermal energy reservoir
·
·
·
FIGURE 7–18
A heat engine that violates the
Kelvin–Planck statement of the
second law.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
265
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The refrigerant enters the compressor as a vapor and is compressed to the
condenser pressure. It leaves the compressor at a relatively high temperature
and cools down and condenses as it flows through the coils of the condenser
by rejecting heat to the surrounding medium. It then enters a capillary tube
where its pressure and temperature drop drastically due to the throttling effect.
The low-temperature refrigerant then enters the evaporator, where it evapo-
rates by absorbing heat from the refrigerated space. The cycle is completed as
the refrigerant leaves the evaporator and reenters the compressor.
In a household refrigerator, the freezer compartment where heat is absorbed
by the refrigerant serves as the evaporator, and the coils usually behind the
refrigerator where heat is dissipated to the kitchen air serve as the condenser.
A refrigerator is shown schematically in Fig. 7–20. Here QL is the magni-
tude of the heat removed from the refrigerated space at temperature TL, QH
is the magnitude of the heat rejected to the warm environment at tempera-
ture TH, and Wnet,in is the net work input to the refrigerator. As discussed
before, QL and QH represent magnitudes and thus are positive quantities.
Coefficient of Performance
The efficiency of a refrigerator is expressed in terms of the coefficient of
performance (COP), denoted by COPR. The objective of a refrigerator is to
remove heat (QL) from the refrigerated space. To accomplish this objective,
it requires a work input of Wnet,in. Then the COP of a refrigerator can be
expressed as
(7–7)
This relation can also be expressed in rate form by replacing QL by Q.
L and
Wnet,in by W.
net,in.
The conservation of energy principle for a cyclic device requires that
(7–8)
Wnet,in  QH  QL  
1kJ2
COPR  Desired output
Required input 
QL
Wnet,in
260
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
CONDENSER
EXPANSION
VALVE
120 kPa
–25°C
120 kPa
–20°C
800 kPa
30°C
800 kPa
60°C
COMPRESSOR
QL
QH
Wnet,in
Surrounding medium
such as the kitchen air
Refrigerated space
EVAPORATOR
FIGURE 7–19
Basic components of a refrigeration
system and typical operating
conditions.
Warm environment
at TH > TL
Cold refrigerated 
space at TL
R
Wnet,in
QH
QL
Required
input
Desired
output
FIGURE 7–20
The objective of a refrigerator is to
remove QL from the cooled space.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
266
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Then the COP relation becomes
(7–9)
Notice that the value of COPR can be greater than unity. That is, the
amount of heat removed from the refrigerated space can be greater than the
amount of work input. This is in contrast to the thermal efficiency, which
can never be greater than 1. In fact, one reason for expressing the efficiency
of a refrigerator by another term—the coefficient of performance—is the
desire to avoid the oddity of having efficiencies greater than unity.
Heat Pumps
Another device that transfers heat from a low-temperature medium to a
high-temperature one is the heat pump, shown schematically in Fig. 7–21.
Refrigerators and heat pumps operate on the same cycle but differ in their
objectives. The objective of a refrigerator is to maintain the refrigerated
space at a low temperature by removing heat from it. Discharging this heat
to a higher-temperature medium is merely a necessary part of the operation,
not the purpose. The objective of a heat pump, however, is to maintain a
heated space at a high temperature. This is accomplished by absorbing heat
from a low-temperature source, such as well water or cold outside air in
winter, and supplying this heat to the high-temperature medium such as a
house (Fig. 7–22).
An ordinary refrigerator that is placed in the window of a house with its
door open to the cold outside air in winter will function as a heat pump
since it will try to cool the outside by absorbing heat from it and rejecting
this heat into the house through the coils behind it (Fig. 7–23).
The measure of performance of a heat pump is also expressed in terms of
the coefficient of performance COPHP, defined as
(7–10)
which can also be expressed as
(7–11)
A comparison of Eqs. 7–7 and 7–10 reveals that
(7–12)
for fixed values of QL and QH. This relation implies that the coefficient of
performance of a heat pump is always greater than unity since COPR is a
positive quantity. That is, a heat pump will function, at worst, as a resistance
heater, supplying as much energy to the house as it consumes. In reality,
however, part of QH is lost to the outside air through piping and other
devices, and COPHP may drop below unity when the outside air temperature
is too low. When this happens, the system usually switches to a resistance
heating mode. Most heat pumps in operation today have a seasonally aver-
aged COP of 2 to 3.
COPHP  COPR  1
COPHP 
Q H
Q H  Q L

1
1  Q L>Q H
COPHP  Desired output
Required input 
QH
Wnet,in
COPR 
Q L
Q H  Q L

1
Q H>Q L  1
Chapter 7
|
261
Warm heated space
at TH > TL
Cold environment
at TL
HP
Wnet,in
QH
QL
Required
input
Desired
output
FIGURE 7–21
The objective of a heat pump is to
supply heat QH into the warmer space.
Warm
indoors
at 20°C
Cold outdoors
at 4°C
HP
Wnet,in = 2 kJ
QH = 7 kJ
QL = 5 kJ
COP = 3.5
FIGURE 7–22
The work supplied to a heat pump is
used to extract energy from the cold
outdoors and carry it into the warm
indoors.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
267
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Most existing heat pumps use the cold outside air as the heat source in
winter, and they are referred to as air-source heat pumps. The COP of
such heat pumps is about 3.0 at design conditions. Air-source heat pumps
are not appropriate for cold climates since their efficiency drops consider-
ably when temperatures are below the freezing point. In such cases, geo-
thermal (also called ground-source) heat pumps that use the ground as the
heat source can be used. Geothermal heat pumps require the burial of
pipes in the ground 1 to 2 m deep. Such heat pumps are more expensive to
install, but they are also more efficient (up to 45 percent more efficient
than air-source heat pumps). The COP of ground-source heat pumps is
about 4.0.
Air conditioners are basically refrigerators whose refrigerated space is
a room or a building instead of the food compartment. A window air-
conditioning unit cools a room by absorbing heat from the room air and
discharging it to the outside. The same air-conditioning unit can be used
as a heat pump in winter by installing it backwards as shown in Fig. 7–23.
In this mode, the unit absorbs heat from the cold outside and delivers it to
the room. Air-conditioning systems that are equipped with proper controls
and a reversing valve operate as air conditioners in summer and as heat
pumps in winter.
The performance of refrigerators and air conditioners in the United States
is often expressed in terms of the energy efficiency rating (EER), which is
the amount of heat removed from the cooled space in Btu’s for 1 Wh (watt-
hour) of electricity consumed. Considering that 1 kWh  3412 Btu and thus
1 Wh  3.412 Btu, a unit that removes 1 kWh of heat from the cooled
space for each kWh of electricity it consumes (COP  1) will have an EER
of 3.412. Therefore, the relation between EER and COP is
Most air conditioners have an EER between 8 and 12 (a COP of 2.3 to
3.5). A high-efficiency heat pump manufactured by the Trane Company
using a reciprocating variable-speed compressor is reported to have a COP
of 3.3 in the heating mode and an EER of 16.9 (COP of 5.0) in the air-
conditioning mode. Variable-speed compressors and fans allow the unit to
operate at maximum efficiency for varying heating/cooling needs and weather
conditions as determined by a microprocessor. In the air-conditioning mode,
for example, they operate at higher speeds on hot days and at lower speeds
on cooler days, enhancing both efficiency and comfort.
The EER or COP of a refrigerator decreases with decreasing refrigera-
tion temperature. Therefore, it is not economical to refrigerate to a lower
temperature than needed. The COPs of refrigerators are in the range of
2.7–3.0 for cutting and preparation rooms; 2.3–2.6 for meat, deli, dairy,
and produce; 1.2–1.5 for frozen foods; and 1.0–1.2 for ice cream units.
Note that the COP of freezers is about half of the COP of meat refrigera-
tors, and thus it costs twice as much to cool the meat products with refrig-
erated air that is cold enough to cool frozen foods. It is good energy
conservation practice to use separate refrigeration systems to meet different
refrigeration needs.
EER  3.412 COPR
262
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 7–23
When installed backward, an air
conditioner functions as a heat pump.
© Reprinted with special permission of King
Features Syndicate.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
268
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 7
|
263
EXAMPLE 7–3
Heat Rejection by a Refrigerator
The food compartment of a refrigerator, shown in Fig. 7–24, is maintained at
4°C by removing heat from it at a rate of 360 kJ/min. If the required power
input to the refrigerator is 2 kW, determine (a) the coefficient of perfor-
mance of the refrigerator and (b) the rate of heat rejection to the room that
houses the refrigerator.
Solution
The power consumption of a refrigerator is given. The COP and
the rate of heat rejection are to be determined.
Assumptions
Steady operating conditions exist.
Analysis
(a) The coefficient of performance of the refrigerator is
That is, 3 kJ of heat is removed from the refrigerated space for each kJ of
work supplied.
(b) The rate at which heat is rejected to the room that houses the refrigerator
is determined from the conservation of energy relation for cyclic devices,
Discussion
Notice that both the energy removed from the refrigerated space
as heat and the energy supplied to the refrigerator as electrical work eventu-
ally show up in the room air and become part of the internal energy of the
air. This demonstrates that energy can change from one form to another, can
move from one place to another, but is never destroyed during a process.
Q
#
H  Q
#
L  W
#
net,in  360 kJ>min  12 kW2 a
60 kJ>min
1 kW
b  480 kJ/min
COPR 
Q#
L
W
#
net,in

360 kJ>min
2 kW
 a
1 kW
60 kJ>min b  3
·
·
·
Kitchen
Food
compartment
4°C
R
Wnet,in = 2 kW
QH
QL = 360 kJ/min
FIGURE 7–24
Schematic for Example 7–3.
EXAMPLE 7–4
Heating a House by a Heat Pump
A heat pump is used to meet the heating requirements of a house and main-
tain it at 20°C. On a day when the outdoor air temperature drops to 2°C,
the house is estimated to lose heat at a rate of 80,000 kJ/h. If the heat
pump under these conditions has a COP of 2.5, determine (a) the power
consumed by the heat pump and (b) the rate at which heat is absorbed from
the cold outdoor air.
Solution
The COP of a heat pump is given. The power consumption and
the rate of heat absorption are to be determined.
Assumptions
Steady operating conditions exist.
Analysis
(a) The power consumed by this heat pump, shown in Fig. 7–25,
is determined from the definition of the coefficient of performance to be
(b) The house is losing heat at a rate of 80,000 kJ/h. If the house is to be
maintained at a constant temperature of 20°C, the heat pump must deliver
W#
net,in 
Q
#
H
COPHP

80,000 kJ>h
2.5
 32,000 kJ/h 1or 8.9 kW2
·
·
·
House
20°C
Outdoor air at –2°C
HP
Wnet,in = ?
QH
QL = ?
COP = 2.5
Heat loss
80,000 kJ/h
FIGURE 7–25
Schematic for Example 7–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
269
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The Second Law of Thermodynamics:
Clausius Statement
There are two classical statements of the second law—the Kelvin–Planck
statement, which is related to heat engines and discussed in the preceding
section, and the Clausius statement, which is related to refrigerators or heat
pumps. The Clausius statement is expressed as follows:
It is impossible to construct a device that operates in a cycle and produces
no effect other than the transfer of heat from a lower-temperature body to a
higher-temperature body.
It is common knowledge that heat does not, of its own volition, transfer
from a cold medium to a warmer one. The Clausius statement does not
imply that a cyclic device that transfers heat from a cold medium to a
warmer one is impossible to construct. In fact, this is precisely what a com-
mon household refrigerator does. It simply states that a refrigerator cannot
operate unless its compressor is driven by an external power source, such as
an electric motor (Fig. 7–26). This way, the net effect on the surroundings
involves the consumption of some energy in the form of work, in addition to
the transfer of heat from a colder body to a warmer one. That is, it leaves a
trace in the surroundings. Therefore, a household refrigerator is in complete
compliance with the Clausius statement of the second law.
Both the Kelvin–Planck and the Clausius statements of the second law are
negative statements, and a negative statement cannot be proved. Like any
other physical law, the second law of thermodynamics is based on experimen-
tal observations. To date, no experiment has been conducted that contradicts
the second law, and this should be taken as sufficient proof of its validity.
Equivalence of the Two Statements
The Kelvin–Planck and the Clausius statements are equivalent in their conse-
quences, and either statement can be used as the expression of the second law
of thermodynamics. Any device that violates the Kelvin–Planck statement
also violates the Clausius statement, and vice versa. This can be demonstrated
as follows.
264
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
heat to the house at the same rate, that is, at a rate of 80,000 kJ/h. Then
the rate of heat transfer from the outdoor becomes
Discussion
Note that 48,000 of the 80,000 kJ/h heat delivered to the
house is actually extracted from the cold outdoor air. Therefore, we are pay-
ing only for the 32,000-kJ/h energy that is supplied as electrical work to the
heat pump. If we were to use an electric resistance heater instead, we would
have to supply the entire 80,000 kJ/h to the resistance heater as electric
energy. This would mean a heating bill that is 2.5 times higher. This
explains the popularity of heat pumps as heating systems and why they are
preferred to simple electric resistance heaters despite their considerably
higher initial cost.
Q#
L  Q#
H  W#
net,in  180,000  32,0002 kJ>h  48,000 kJ/h
Warm environment
Cold refrigerated space
R
Wnet,in = 0
QH = 5 kJ
QL = 5 kJ
FIGURE 7–26
A refrigerator that violates the
Clausius statement of the second law.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
270
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Consider the heat-engine-refrigerator combination shown in Fig. 7–27a,
operating between the same two reservoirs. The heat engine is assumed to
have, in violation of the Kelvin–Planck statement, a thermal efficiency of
100 percent, and therefore it converts all the heat QH it receives to work W.
This work is now supplied to a refrigerator that removes heat in the amount
of QL from the low-temperature reservoir and rejects heat in the amount of
QL  QH to the high-temperature reservoir. During this process, the high-
temperature reservoir receives a net amount of heat QL (the difference
between QL  QH and QH). Thus, the combination of these two devices can
be viewed as a refrigerator, as shown in Fig. 7–27b, that transfers heat in an
amount of QL from a cooler body to a warmer one without requiring any
input from outside. This is clearly a violation of the Clausius statement.
Therefore, a violation of the Kelvin–Planck statement results in the viola-
tion of the Clausius statement.
It can also be shown in a similar manner that a violation of the Clausius
statement leads to the violation of the Kelvin–Planck statement. Therefore,
the Clausius and the Kelvin–Planck statements are two equivalent expres-
sions of the second law of thermodynamics.
7–5
■PERPETUAL-MOTION MACHINES
We have repeatedly stated that a process cannot take place unless it satisfies
both the first and second laws of thermodynamics. Any device that violates
either law is called a perpetual-motion machine, and despite numerous
attempts, no perpetual-motion machine is known to have worked. But this
has not stopped inventors from trying to create new ones.
A device that violates the first law of thermodynamics (by creating
energy) is called a perpetual-motion machine of the first kind (PMM1),
and a device that violates the second law of thermodynamics is called a
perpetual-motion machine of the second kind (PMM2).
Chapter 7
|
265
High-temperature reservoir
at TH
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL
REFRIG-
ERATOR
High-temperature reservoir
at TH
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL
HEAT
ENGINE
ηth = 100%
REFRIG-
ERATOR
QL
QH
QH + QL
Wnet
= QH
QL
QL
(a) A refrigerator that is powered by 
a 100 percent efficient heat engine
(b) The equivalent refrigerator
FIGURE 7–27
Proof that the violation of the
Kelvin–Planck statement leads to the
violation of the Clausius statement.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
271
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Consider the steam power plant shown in Fig. 7–28. It is proposed to heat
the steam by resistance heaters placed inside the boiler, instead of by the
energy supplied from fossil or nuclear fuels. Part of the electricity generated
by the plant is to be used to power the resistors as well as the pump. The
rest of the electric energy is to be supplied to the electric network as the net
work output. The inventor claims that once the system is started, this power
plant will produce electricity indefinitely without requiring any energy input
from the outside.
Well, here is an invention that could solve the world’s energy problem—if
it works, of course. A careful examination of this invention reveals that the
system enclosed by the shaded area is continuously supplying energy to the
outside at a rate of Q.
out  W.
net,out without receiving any energy. That is, this
system is creating energy at a rate of Q.
out  W.
net,out, which is clearly a vio-
lation of the first law. Therefore, this wonderful device is nothing more than
a PMM1 and does not warrant any further consideration.
Now let us consider another novel idea by the same inventor. Convinced
that energy cannot be created, the inventor suggests the following modifica-
tion that will greatly improve the thermal efficiency of that power plant
without violating the first law. Aware that more than one-half of the heat
transferred to the steam in the furnace is discarded in the condenser to the
environment, the inventor suggests getting rid of this wasteful component
and sending the steam to the pump as soon as it leaves the turbine, as shown
in Fig. 7–29. This way, all the heat transferred to the steam in the boiler will
be converted to work, and thus the power plant will have a theoretical effi-
ciency of 100 percent. The inventor realizes that some heat losses and fric-
tion between the moving components are unavoidable and that these effects
will hurt the efficiency somewhat, but still expects the efficiency to be no
less than 80 percent (as opposed to 40 percent in most actual power plants)
for a carefully designed system.
Well, the possibility of doubling the efficiency would certainly be very
tempting to plant managers and, if not properly trained, they would proba-
bly give this idea a chance, since intuitively they see nothing wrong with
it. A student of thermodynamics, however, will immediately label this
266
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
System boundary
BOILER
PUMP
CONDENSER
GENERATOR
TURBINE
Resistance heater
Qout
Wnet,out
·
·
FIGURE 7–28
A perpetual-motion machine that
violates the first law of
thermodynamics (PMM1).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
272
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
device as a PMM2, since it works on a cycle and does a net amount of
work while exchanging heat with a single reservoir (the furnace) only.
It satisfies the first law but violates the second law, and therefore it will
not work.
Countless perpetual-motion machines have been proposed throughout his-
tory, and many more are being proposed. Some proposers have even gone so
far as to patent their inventions, only to find out that what they actually have
in their hands is a worthless piece of paper.
Some perpetual-motion machine inventors were very successful in fund-
raising. For example, a Philadelphia carpenter named J. W. Kelly col-
lected millions of dollars between 1874 and 1898 from investors in his
hydropneumatic-pulsating-vacu-engine, which supposedly could push a rail-
road train 3000 miles on 1 L of water. Of course, it never did. After his
death in 1898, the investigators discovered that the demonstration machine
was powered by a hidden motor. Recently a group of investors was set to
invest $2.5 million into a mysterious energy augmentor, which multiplied
whatever power it took in, but their lawyer wanted an expert opinion first.
Confronted by the scientists, the “inventor” fled the scene without even
attempting to run his demo machine.
Tired of applications for perpetual-motion machines, the U.S. Patent
Office decreed in 1918 that it would no longer consider any perpetual-
motion machine applications. However, several such patent applications
were still filed, and some made it through the patent office undetected. Some
applicants whose patent applications were denied sought legal action. For
example, in 1982 the U.S. Patent Office dismissed as just another perpetual-
motion machine a huge device that involves several hundred kilograms of
rotating magnets and kilometers of copper wire that is supposed to be gen-
erating more electricity than it is consuming from a battery pack. However,
the inventor challenged the decision, and in 1985 the National Bureau of
Standards finally tested the machine just to certify that it is battery-operated.
However, it did not convince the inventor that his machine will not work.
The proposers of perpetual-motion machines generally have innovative
minds, but they usually lack formal engineering training, which is very unfor-
tunate. No one is immune from being deceived by an innovative perpetual-
motion machine. As the saying goes, however, if something sounds too good
to be true, it probably is.
Chapter 7
|
267
System
boundary
BOILER
PUMP
TURBINE
Wnet,out
Qin
·
·
FIGURE 7–29
A perpetual-motion machine that
violates the second law of
thermodynamics (PMM2).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
273
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
7–6
■REVERSIBLE AND IRREVERSIBLE PROCESSES
The second law of thermodynamics states that no heat engine can have an
efficiency of 100 percent. Then one may ask, What is the highest efficiency
that a heat engine can possibly have? Before we can answer this question,
we need to define an idealized process first, which is called the reversible
process.
The processes that were discussed at the beginning of this chapter occurred
in a certain direction. Once having taken place, these processes cannot
reverse themselves spontaneously and restore the system to its initial state.
For this reason, they are classified as irreversible processes. Once a cup of
hot coffee cools, it will not heat up by retrieving the heat it lost from the sur-
roundings. If it could, the surroundings, as well as the system (coffee), would
be restored to their original condition, and this would be a reversible process.
A reversible process is defined as a process that can be reversed without
leaving any trace on the surroundings (Fig. 7–30). That is, both the system
and the surroundings are returned to their initial states at the end of the
reverse process. This is possible only if the net heat and net work exchange
between the system and the surroundings is zero for the combined (original
and reverse) process. Processes that are not reversible are called irreversible
processes.
It should be pointed out that a system can be restored to its initial state
following a process, regardless of whether the process is reversible or irre-
versible. But for reversible processes, this restoration is made without leav-
ing any net change on the surroundings, whereas for irreversible processes,
the surroundings usually do some work on the system and therefore does
not return to their original state.
Reversible processes actually do not occur in nature. They are merely ide-
alizations of actual processes. Reversible processes can be approximated by
actual devices, but they can never be achieved. That is, all the processes
occurring in nature are irreversible. You may be wondering, then, why we are
bothering with such fictitious processes. There are two reasons. First, they
are easy to analyze, since a system passes through a series of equilibrium
states during a reversible process; second, they serve as idealized models to
which actual processes can be compared.
In daily life, the concepts of Mr. Right and Ms. Right are also idealiza-
tions, just like the concept of a reversible (perfect) process. People who
insist on finding Mr. or Ms. Right to settle down are bound to remain Mr. or
Ms. Single for the rest of their lives. The possibility of finding the perfect
prospective mate is no higher than the possibility of finding a perfect
(reversible) process. Likewise, a person who insists on perfection in friends
is bound to have no friends.
Engineers are interested in reversible processes because work-producing
devices such as car engines and gas or steam turbines deliver the most work,
and work-consuming devices such as compressors, fans, and pumps consume
the least work when reversible processes are used instead of irreversible ones
(Fig. 7–31).
Reversible processes can be viewed as theoretical limits for the corre-
sponding irreversible ones. Some processes are more irreversible than others.
We may never be able to have a reversible process, but we can certainly
268
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(a) Frictionless pendulum
(b) Quasi-equilibrium expansion
      and compression of a gas
FIGURE 7–30
Two familiar reversible processes.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
274
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
approach it. The more closely we approximate a reversible process, the more
work delivered by a work-producing device or the less work required by a
work-consuming device.
The concept of reversible processes leads to the definition of the second-
law efficiency for actual processes, which is the degree of approximation to
the corresponding reversible processes. This enables us to compare the per-
formance of different devices that are designed to do the same task on the
basis of their efficiencies. The better the design, the lower the irreversibili-
ties and the higher the second-law efficiency.
Irreversibilities
The factors that cause a process to be irreversible are called irreversibilities.
They include friction, unrestrained expansion, mixing of two fluids, heat
transfer across a finite temperature difference, electric resistance, inelastic
deformation of solids, and chemical reactions. The presence of any of these
effects renders a process irreversible. A reversible process involves none of
these. Some of the frequently encountered irreversibilities are discussed
briefly below.
Friction is a familiar form of irreversibility associated with bodies in
motion. When two bodies in contact are forced to move relative to each
other (a piston in a cylinder, for example, as shown in Fig. 7–32), a friction
force that opposes the motion develops at the interface of these two bodies,
and some work is needed to overcome this friction force. The energy sup-
plied as work is eventually converted to heat during the process and is trans-
ferred to the bodies in contact, as evidenced by a temperature rise at the
interface. When the direction of the motion is reversed, the bodies are
restored to their original position, but the interface does not cool, and heat is
not converted back to work. Instead, more of the work is converted to heat
while overcoming the friction forces that also oppose the reverse motion.
Since the system (the moving bodies) and the surroundings cannot be
returned to their original states, this process is irreversible. Therefore, any
process that involves friction is irreversible. The larger the friction forces
involved, the more irreversible the process is.
Friction does not always involve two solid bodies in contact. It is also
encountered between a fluid and solid and even between the layers of a
fluid moving at different velocities. A considerable fraction of the power
produced by a car engine is used to overcome the friction (the drag force)
between the air and the external surfaces of the car, and it eventually
becomes part of the internal energy of the air. It is not possible to reverse
Chapter 7
|
269
Water
Pressure
distribution
Water
Water
Water
(a) Slow (reversible) process
(b) Fast (irreversible) process
Expansion
Compression
Expansion
Compression
FIGURE 7–31
Reversible processes deliver the most
and consume the least work.
Friction
GAS
FIGURE 7–32
Friction renders a process irreversible.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
275
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
this process and recover that lost power, even though doing so would not
violate the conservation of energy principle.
Another example of irreversibility is the unrestrained expansion of a
gas separated from a vacuum by a membrane, as shown in Fig. 7–33. When
the membrane is ruptured, the gas fills the entire tank. The only way to
restore the system to its original state is to compress it to its initial volume,
while transferring heat from the gas until it reaches its initial temperature.
From the conservation of energy considerations, it can easily be shown that
the amount of heat transferred from the gas equals the amount of work done
on the gas by the surroundings. The restoration of the surroundings involves
conversion of this heat completely to work, which would violate the second
law. Therefore, unrestrained expansion of a gas is an irreversible process.
A third form of irreversibility familiar to us all is heat transfer through a
finite temperature difference. Consider a can of cold soda left in a warm room
(Fig. 7–34). Heat is transferred from the warmer room air to the cooler soda.
The only way this process can be reversed and the soda restored to its original
temperature is to provide refrigeration, which requires some work input.
At the end of the reverse process, the soda will be restored to its initial
state, but the surroundings will not be. The internal energy of the surround-
ings will increase by an amount equal in magnitude to the work supplied to
the refrigerator. The restoration of the surroundings to the initial state can be
done only by converting this excess internal energy completely to work,
which is impossible to do without violating the second law. Since only the
system, not both the system and the surroundings, can be restored to its initial
condition, heat transfer through a finite temperature difference is an irre-
versible process.
Heat transfer can occur only when there is a temperature difference
between a system and its surroundings. Therefore, it is physically impossi-
ble to have a reversible heat transfer process. But a heat transfer process
becomes less and less irreversible as the temperature difference between the
two bodies approaches zero. Then heat transfer through a differential tem-
perature difference dT can be considered to be reversible. As dT approaches
zero, the process can be reversed in direction (at least theoretically) without
requiring any refrigeration. Notice that reversible heat transfer is a concep-
tual process and cannot be duplicated in the real world.
The smaller the temperature difference between two bodies, the smaller
the heat transfer rate will be. Any significant heat transfer through a small
temperature difference requires a very large surface area and a very long
time. Therefore, even though approaching reversible heat transfer is desir-
able from a thermodynamic point of view, it is impractical and not econom-
ically feasible.
Internally and Externally Reversible Processes
A typical process involves interactions between a system and its surround-
ings, and a reversible process involves no irreversibilities associated with
either of them.
A process is called internally reversible if no irreversibilities occur
within the boundaries of the system during the process. During an internally
reversible process, a system proceeds through a series of equilibrium states,
270
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(a) An irreversible heat transfer process
20°C
20°C
5°C
5°C
2°C
(b) An impossible heat transfer process
20°C
Heat
Heat
FIGURE 7–34
(a) Heat transfer through a
temperature difference is irreversible,
and (b) the reverse process is
impossible.
(a) Fast compression
(b) Fast expansion
(c) Unrestrained expansion
700 kPa
50 kPa
FIGURE 7–33
Irreversible compression and
expansion processes.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
276
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
and when the process is reversed, the system passes through exactly the
same equilibrium states while returning to its initial state. That is, the paths
of the forward and reverse processes coincide for an internally reversible
process. The quasi-equilibrium process is an example of an internally
reversible process.
A process is called externally reversible if no irreversibilities occur out-
side the system boundaries during the process. Heat transfer between a
reservoir and a system is an externally reversible process if the outer surface
of the system is at the temperature of the reservoir.
A process is called totally reversible, or simply reversible, if it involves
no irreversibilities within the system or its surroundings (Fig. 7–35). A
totally reversible process involves no heat transfer through a finite tempera-
ture difference, no nonquasi-equilibrium changes, and no friction or other
dissipative effects.
As an example, consider the transfer of heat to two identical systems that
are undergoing a constant-pressure (thus constant-temperature) phase-
change process, as shown in Fig. 7–36. Both processes are internally
reversible, since both take place isothermally and both pass through exactly
the same equilibrium states. The first process shown is externally reversible
also, since heat transfer for this process takes place through an infinites-
imal temperature difference dT. The second process, however, is externally 
irreversible, since it involves heat transfer through a finite temperature 
difference T.
7–7
■THE CARNOT CYCLE
We mentioned earlier that heat engines are cyclic devices and that the work-
ing fluid of a heat engine returns to its initial state at the end of each cycle.
Work is done by the working fluid during one part of the cycle and on the
working fluid during another part. The difference between these two is the
net work delivered by the heat engine. The efficiency of a heat-engine cycle
greatly depends on how the individual processes that make up the cycle are
executed. The net work, thus the cycle efficiency, can be maximized by
using processes that require the least amount of work and deliver the most,
Chapter 7
|
271
No
irreversibilities
inside
the system
No
irreversibilities
outside
the system
FIGURE 7–35
A reversible process involves no
internal and external irreversibilities.
20°C
Heat
Thermal energy
reservoir at 20.000...1°C
20°C
Heat
Thermal energy
reservoir at 30°C
Boundary
at 20°C
(a) Totally reversible
(b) Internally reversible
FIGURE 7–36
Totally and interally reversible heat
transfer processes.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
277
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
that is, by using reversible processes. Therefore, it is no surprise that the
most efficient cycles are reversible cycles, that is, cycles that consist entirely
of reversible processes.
Reversible cycles cannot be achieved in practice because the irreversibili-
ties associated with each process cannot be eliminated. However, reversible
cycles provide upper limits on the performance of real cycles. Heat engines
and refrigerators that work on reversible cycles serve as models to which
actual heat engines and refrigerators can be compared. Reversible cycles
also serve as starting points in the development of actual cycles and are
modified as needed to meet certain requirements.
Probably the best known reversible cycle is the Carnot cycle, first pro-
posed in 1824 by French engineer Sadi Carnot. The theoretical heat engine
that operates on the Carnot cycle is called the Carnot heat engine. The
Carnot cycle is composed of four reversible processes—two isothermal and
two adiabatic—and it can be executed either in a closed or a steady-flow
system.
Consider a closed system that consists of a gas contained in an adiabatic
piston–cylinder device, as shown in Fig. 7–37. The insulation of the cylin-
der head is such that it may be removed to bring the cylinder into contact
with reservoirs to provide heat transfer. The four reversible processes that
make up the Carnot cycle are as follows:
Reversible Isothermal Expansion (process 1-2, TH  constant). Initially
(state 1), the temperature of the gas is TH and the cylinder head is in close
contact with a source at temperature TH. The gas is allowed to expand
slowly, doing work on the surroundings. As the gas expands, the
temperature of the gas tends to decrease. But as soon as the temperature
drops by an infinitesimal amount dT, some heat is transferred from the
reservoir into the gas, raising the gas temperature to TH. Thus, the gas
temperature is kept constant at TH. Since the temperature difference
between the gas and the reservoir never exceeds a differential amount dT,
this is a reversible heat transfer process. It continues until the piston
reaches position 2. The amount of total heat transferred to the gas during
this process is QH.
Reversible Adiabatic Expansion (process 2-3, temperature drops from 
TH to TL). At state 2, the reservoir that was in contact with the cylinder
head is removed and replaced by insulation so that the system becomes
adiabatic. The gas continues to expand slowly, doing work on the
surroundings until its temperature drops from TH to TL (state 3). The
piston is assumed to be frictionless and the process to be quasi-
equilibrium, so the process is reversible as well as adiabatic.
Reversible Isothermal Compression (process 3-4, TL  constant). At state
3, the insulation at the cylinder head is removed, and the cylinder is
brought into contact with a sink at temperature TL. Now the piston is
pushed inward by an external force, doing work on the gas. As the gas 
is compressed, its temperature tends to rise. But as soon as it rises by 
an infinitesimal amount dT, heat is transferred from the gas to the sink,
causing the gas temperature to drop to TL. Thus, the gas temperature
remains constant at TL. Since the temperature difference between the gas
and the sink never exceeds a differential amount dT, this is a reversible
272
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(1)
(2)
TH = const.
(a) Process 1-2
Energy
source
at TH
QH
(2)
(3)
TH
(b) Process 2-3
(3)
(4)
TL = const.
(c) Process 3-4
Energy
sink
at TL
QL
(d) Process 4-1
Insulation
TL
Insulation
TH
TL
(4)
(1)
FIGURE 7–37
Execution of the Carnot cycle in a
closed system.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
278
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
heat transfer process. It continues until the piston reaches state 4. The
amount of heat rejected from the gas during this process is QL.
Reversible Adiabatic Compression (process 4-1, temperature rises from 
TL to TH). State 4 is such that when the low-temperature reservoir is
removed, the insulation is put back on the cylinder head, and the gas is
compressed in a reversible manner, the gas returns to its initial state (state
1). The temperature rises from TL to TH during this reversible adiabatic
compression process, which completes the cycle.
The P-V diagram of this cycle is shown in Fig. 7–38. Remembering that
on a P-V diagram the area under the process curve represents the boundary
work for quasi-equilibrium (internally reversible) processes, we see that the
area under curve 1-2-3 is the work done by the gas during the expansion
part of the cycle, and the area under curve 3-4-1 is the work done on the gas
during the compression part of the cycle. The area enclosed by the path of
the cycle (area 1-2-3-4-1) is the difference between these two and represents
the net work done during the cycle.
Notice that if we acted stingily and compressed the gas at state 3 adiabat-
ically instead of isothermally in an effort to save QL, we would end up back
at state 2, retracing the process path 3-2. By doing so we would save QL, but
we would not be able to obtain any net work output from this engine. This
illustrates once more the necessity of a heat engine exchanging heat with at
least two reservoirs at different temperatures to operate in a cycle and pro-
duce a net amount of work.
The Carnot cycle can also be executed in a steady-flow system. It is dis-
cussed in later chapters in conjunction with other power cycles.
Being a reversible cycle, the Carnot cycle is the most efficient cycle oper-
ating between two specified temperature limits. Even though the Carnot
cycle cannot be achieved in reality, the efficiency of actual cycles can be
improved by attempting to approximate the Carnot cycle more closely.
The Reversed Carnot Cycle
The Carnot heat-engine cycle just described is a totally reversible cycle.
Therefore, all the processes that comprise it can be reversed, in which case it
becomes the Carnot refrigeration cycle. This time, the cycle remains
exactly the same, except that the directions of any heat and work interactions
are reversed: Heat in the amount of QL is absorbed from the low-temperature
reservoir, heat in the amount of QH is rejected to a high-temperature reser-
voir, and a work input of Wnet,in is required to accomplish all this.
The P-V diagram of the reversed Carnot cycle is the same as the one
given for the Carnot cycle, except that the directions of the processes are
reversed, as shown in Fig. 7–39.
7–8
■THE CARNOT PRINCIPLES
The second law of thermodynamics puts limits on the operation of cyclic
devices as expressed by the Kelvin–Planck and Clausius statements. A heat
engine cannot operate by exchanging heat with a single reservoir, and a
refrigerator cannot operate without a net energy input from an external source.
Chapter 7
|
273
1
QH
TH = const.
TL = const.
QL
2
4
3
Wnet,out
P
V
FIGURE 7–38
P-V diagram of the Carnot cycle.
1
QH
TH = const.
TL = const.
QL
4
2
3
Wnet,in
P
V
FIGURE 7–39
P-V diagram of the reversed Carnot
cycle.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
279
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
We can draw valuable conclusions from these statements. Two conclusions
pertain to the thermal efficiency of reversible and irreversible (i.e., actual)
heat engines, and they are known as the Carnot principles (Fig. 7–40),
expressed as follows:
1. The efficiency of an irreversible heat engine is always less than the effi-
ciency of a reversible one operating between the same two reservoirs.
2. The efficiencies of all reversible heat engines operating between the
same two reservoirs are the same.
These two statements can be proved by demonstrating that the violation of
either statement results in the violation of the second law of thermodynamics.
To prove the first statement, consider two heat engines operating between
the same reservoirs, as shown in Fig. 7–41. One engine is reversible and the
other is irreversible. Now each engine is supplied with the same amount of
heat QH. The amount of work produced by the reversible heat engine is
Wrev, and the amount produced by the irreversible one is Wirrev.
In violation of the first Carnot principle, we assume that the irreversible
heat engine is more efficient than the reversible one (that is, hth,irrev  hth,rev)
and thus delivers more work than the reversible one. Now let the reversible
heat engine be reversed and operate as a refrigerator. This refrigerator will
receive a work input of Wrev and reject heat to the high-temperature reservoir.
Since the refrigerator is rejecting heat in the amount of QH to the high-
temperature reservoir and the irreversible heat engine is receiving the same
amount of heat from this reservoir, the net heat exchange for this reservoir is
zero. Thus, it could be eliminated by having the refrigerator discharge QH
directly into the irreversible heat engine.
Now considering the refrigerator and the irreversible engine together, we
have an engine that produces a net work in the amount of Wirrev  Wrev
274
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
High-temperature reservoir
at TH
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL
2
Rev.
HE
3
Rev.
HE
1
Irrev.
HE
 η  th,1 < ηth,2
 η th,2 = ηth,3
FIGURE 7–40
The Carnot principles.
Irreversible
HE
Reversible
HE
(or R)
Combined
HE + R
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL
High-temperature reservoir
at TH
QH
QH
Wirrev
Wrev
QL,irrev <   QL,rev
(assumed)
QL,rev
(a) A reversible and an irreversible heat
     engine operating between the same two
     reservoirs (the reversible heat engine is
     then reversed to run as a refrigerator)
Wirrev – Wrev
QL,rev
– QL,irrev
(b) The equivalent combined system
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL
FIGURE 7–41
Proof of the first Carnot principle.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
280
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
while exchanging heat with a single reservoir—a violation of the Kelvin–
Planck statement of the second law. Therefore, our initial assumption that
hth,irrev  hth,rev is incorrect. Then we conclude that no heat engine can be
more efficient than a reversible heat engine operating between the same
reservoirs.
The second Carnot principle can also be proved in a similar manner. This
time, let us replace the irreversible engine by another reversible engine that
is more efficient and thus delivers more work than the first reversible
engine. By following through the same reasoning, we end up having an
engine that produces a net amount of work while exchanging heat with a
single reservoir, which is a violation of the second law. Therefore, we con-
clude that no reversible heat engine can be more efficient than a reversible
one operating between the same two reservoirs, regardless of how the cycle
is completed or the kind of working fluid used.
7–9
■THE THERMODYNAMIC
TEMPERATURE SCALE
A temperature scale that is independent of the properties of the substances
that are used to measure temperature is called a thermodynamic tempera-
ture scale. Such a temperature scale offers great conveniences in thermody-
namic calculations, and its derivation is given below using some reversible
heat engines.
The second Carnot principle discussed in Section 7–8 states that all
reversible heat engines have the same thermal efficiency when operating
between the same two reservoirs (Fig. 7–42). That is, the efficiency of a
reversible engine is independent of the working fluid employed and its
properties, the way the cycle is executed, or the type of reversible engine
used. Since energy reservoirs are characterized by their temperatures, the
thermal efficiency of reversible heat engines is a function of the reservoir
temperatures only. That is,
or
(7–13)
since hth  1  QL/QH. In these relations TH and TL are the temperatures of
the high- and low-temperature reservoirs, respectively.
The functional form of f(TH, TL) can be developed with the help of the
three reversible heat engines shown in Fig. 7–43. Engines A and C are sup-
plied with the same amount of heat Q1 from the high-temperature reservoir
at T1. Engine C rejects Q3 to the low-temperature reservoir at T3. Engine B
receives the heat Q2 rejected by engine A at temperature T2 and rejects heat
in the amount of Q3 to a reservoir at T3.
The amounts of heat rejected by engines B and C must be the same since
engines A and B can be combined into one reversible engine operating
between the same reservoirs as engine C and thus the combined engine will
QH
QL
 f1TH, TL2
hth,rev  g1TH, TL2
Chapter 7
|
275
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL = 300 K 
High-temperature reservoir
at TH = 1000 K
A reversible
HE
ηth,A
 η th, A = ηth,B = 70%
Another
reversible
HE
ηth,B
FIGURE 7–42
All reversible heat engines operating
between the same two reservoirs have
the same efficiency (the second Carnot
principle).
WA
Thermal energy reservoir
at T1
Rev. HE
A
Thermal energy reservoir
at T3
Rev. HE
B
Q1
Q2
Q2
Q3
T2
WB
WC
Rev. HE
C
Q1
Q3
FIGURE 7–43
The arrangement of heat engines used
to develop the thermodynamic
temperature scale.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
281
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
have the same efficiency as engine C. Since the heat input to engine C is the
same as the heat input to the combined engines A and B, both systems must
reject the same amount of heat.
Applying Eq. 7–13 to all three engines separately, we obtain
Now consider the identity
which corresponds to
A careful examination of this equation reveals that the left-hand side is a
function of T1 and T3, and therefore the right-hand side must also be a func-
tion of T1 and T3 only, and not T2. That is, the value of the product on the
right-hand side of this equation is independent of the value of T2. This con-
dition will be satisfied only if the function f has the following form:
so that f(T2) will cancel from the product of f(T1, T2) and f(T2, T3), yielding
(7–14)
This relation is much more specific than Eq. 7–13 for the functional form of
Q1/Q3 in terms of T1 and T3.
For a reversible heat engine operating between two reservoirs at tempera-
tures TH and TL, Eq. 7–14 can be written as
(7–15)
This is the only requirement that the second law places on the ratio of heat
transfers to and from the reversible heat engines. Several functions f(T) sat-
isfy this equation, and the choice is completely arbitrary. Lord Kelvin first
proposed taking f(T)  T to define a thermodynamic temperature scale as
(Fig. 7–44)
(7–16)
This temperature scale is called the Kelvin scale, and the temperatures on
this scale are called absolute temperatures. On the Kelvin scale, the tem-
perature ratios depend on the ratios of heat transfer between a reversible heat
engine and the reservoirs and are independent of the physical properties of
any substance. On this scale, temperatures vary between zero and infinity.
The thermodynamic temperature scale is not completely defined by
Eq. 7–16 since it gives us only a ratio of absolute temperatures. We also
need to know the magnitude of a kelvin. At the International Conference on
a QH
QL
b
rev
 TH
TL
QH
QL

f1TH2
f1TL2
Q1
Q3
 f 1T1, T32 
f1T12
f1T32
f 1T1, T22 
f1T12
f1T22
and f 1T2, T32 
f1T22
f1T32
f 1T1, T32  f 1T1, T22 # f 1T2, T32
Q1
Q3
 Q1
Q2
 Q2
Q3
Q1
Q2
 f 1T1, T22, Q2
Q3
 f 1T2, T32, and Q1
Q3
 f 1T1, T32
276
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL
High-temperature reservoir
at TH
Reversible
heat engine
or
refrigerator
QH
QL
Wnet
QH
QL
TH
TL
=
FIGURE 7–44
For reversible cycles, the heat transfer
ratio QH/QL can be replaced by the
absolute temperature ratio TH/TL.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
282
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Weights and Measures held in 1954, the triple point of water (the state at
which all three phases of water exist in equilibrium) was assigned the value
273.16 K (Fig. 7–45). The magnitude of a kelvin is defined as 1/273.16 of
the temperature interval between absolute zero and the triple-point tempera-
ture of water. The magnitudes of temperature units on the Kelvin and
Celsius scales are identical (1 K 	 1°C). The temperatures on these two
scales differ by a constant 273.15:
(7–17)
Even though the thermodynamic temperature scale is defined with the help
of the reversible heat engines, it is not possible, nor is it practical, to actually
operate such an engine to determine numerical values on the absolute tempera-
ture scale. Absolute temperatures can be measured accurately by other means,
such as the constant-volume ideal-gas thermometer together with extrapola-
tion techniques as discussed in Chap. 2. The validity of Eq. 7–16 can be
demonstrated from physical considerations for a reversible cycle using an
ideal gas as the working fluid.
7–10
■THE CARNOT HEAT ENGINE
The hypothetical heat engine that operates on the reversible Carnot cycle is
called the Carnot heat engine. The thermal efficiency of any heat engine,
reversible or irreversible, is given by Eq. 7–6 as
where QH is heat transferred to the heat engine from a high-temperature
reservoir at TH, and QL is heat rejected to a low-temperature reservoir at TL.
For reversible heat engines, the heat transfer ratio in the above relation can
be replaced by the ratio of the absolute temperatures of the two reservoirs,
as given by Eq. 7–16. Then the efficiency of a Carnot engine, or any
reversible heat engine, becomes
(7–18)
This relation is often referred to as the Carnot efficiency, since the
Carnot heat engine is the best known reversible engine. This is the highest
efficiency a heat engine operating between the two thermal energy reser-
voirs at temperatures TL and TH can have (Fig. 7–46). All irreversible (i.e.,
actual) heat engines operating between these temperature limits (TL and TH)
have lower efficiencies. An actual heat engine cannot reach this maximum
theoretical efficiency value because it is impossible to completely eliminate
all the irreversibilities associated with the actual cycle.
Note that TL and TH in Eq. 7–18 are absolute temperatures. Using °C or
°F for temperatures in this relation gives results grossly in error.
The thermal efficiencies of actual and reversible heat engines operating
between the same temperature limits compare as follows (Fig. 7–47):
(7–19)
hth•
6  hth, rev 
irreversible heat engine
  hth, rev 
reversible heat engine
7  hth, rev 
impossible heat engine
hth,rev  1  TL
TH
hth  1  QL
QH
T 1°C2  T 1K2  273.15
Chapter 7
|
277
273.16 K (assigned)
Water at triple point
T = 273.16 QH
–––
QL
Carnot
HE
QH
W
QL
Heat reservoir
T
FIGURE 7–45
A conceptual experimental setup to
determine thermodynamic
temperatures on the Kelvin scale by
measuring heat transfers QH and QL.
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL = 300 K
Carnot
HE
ηth = 70%
QH
Wnet,out
QL
High-temperature reservoir
at TH = 1000 K
FIGURE 7–46
The Carnot heat engine is the most
efficient of all heat engines operating
between the same high- and low-
temperature reservoirs.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
283
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Most work-producing devices (heat engines) in operation today have effi-
ciencies under 40 percent, which appear low relative to 100 percent. However,
when the performance of actual heat engines is assessed, the efficiencies
should not be compared to 100 percent; instead, they should be compared to
the efficiency of a reversible heat engine operating between the same temper-
ature limits—because this is the true theoretical upper limit for the efficiency,
not 100 percent.
The maximum efficiency of a steam power plant operating between
TH  1000 K and TL  300 K is 70 percent, as determined from Eq. 7–18.
Compared with this value, an actual efficiency of 40 percent does not seem
so bad, even though there is still plenty of room for improvement.
It is obvious from Eq. 7–18 that the efficiency of a Carnot heat engine
increases as TH is increased, or as TL is decreased. This is to be expected
since as TL decreases, so does the amount of heat rejected, and as TL
approaches zero, the Carnot efficiency approaches unity. This is also true
for actual heat engines. The thermal efficiency of actual heat engines can be
maximized by supplying heat to the engine at the highest possible tempera-
ture (limited by material strength) and rejecting heat from the engine at the
lowest possible temperature (limited by the temperature of the cooling
medium such as rivers, lakes, or the atmosphere).
278
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL = 300 K
High-temperature reservoir
at TH = 1000 K
Rev. HE
ηth = 70%
Irrev. HE
ηth = 45%
Impossible
HE
ηth = 80%
FIGURE 7–47
No heat engine can have a higher
efficiency than a reversible heat engine
operating between the same high- and
low-temperature reservoirs.
EXAMPLE 7–5
Analysis of a Carnot Heat Engine
A Carnot heat engine, shown in Fig. 7–48, receives 500 kJ of heat per cycle
from a high-temperature source at 652°C and rejects heat to a low-temperature
sink at 30°C. Determine (a) the thermal efficiency of this Carnot engine and
(b) the amount of heat rejected to the sink per cycle.
Solution
The heat supplied to a Carnot heat engine is given. The thermal
efficiency and the heat rejected are to be determined.
Analysis
(a) The Carnot heat engine is a reversible heat engine, and so its
efficiency can be determined from Eq. 7–18 to be
hth,C  hth,rev  1  TL
TH
 1 
130  2732 K
1652  2732 K  0.672
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL = 30°C
Carnot
HE
QH = 500 kJ
Wnet,out
QL
High-temperature reservoir
at TH = 652°C
FIGURE 7–48
Schematic for Example 7–5.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
284
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The Quality of Energy
The Carnot heat engine in Example 7–5 receives heat from a source at 925 K
and converts 67.2 percent of it to work while rejecting the rest (32.8 percent)
to a sink at 303 K. Now let us examine how the thermal efficiency varies
with the source temperature when the sink temperature is held constant.
The thermal efficiency of a Carnot heat engine that rejects heat to a sink at
303 K is evaluated at various source temperatures using Eq. 7–18 and is
listed in Fig. 7–49. Clearly the thermal efficiency decreases as the source
temperature is lowered. When heat is supplied to the heat engine at 500
instead of 925 K, for example, the thermal efficiency drops from 67.2 to 
39.4 percent. That is, the fraction of heat that can be converted to work drops
to 39.4 percent when the temperature of the source drops to 500 K. When the
source temperature is 350 K, this fraction becomes a mere 13.4 percent.
These efficiency values show that energy has quality as well as quantity.
It is clear from the thermal efficiency values in Fig. 7–49 that more of the
high-temperature thermal energy can be converted to work. Therefore, the
higher the temperature, the higher the quality of the energy (Fig. 7–50).
Large quantities of solar energy, for example, can be stored in large
bodies of water called solar ponds at about 350 K. This stored energy can
then be supplied to a heat engine to produce work (electricity). However,
the efficiency of solar pond power plants is very low (under 5 percent)
because of the low quality of the energy stored in the source, and the con-
struction and maintenance costs are relatively high. Therefore, they are not
competitive even though the energy supply of such plants is free. The tem-
perature (and thus the quality) of the solar energy stored could be raised
by utilizing concentrating collectors, but the equipment cost in that case
becomes very high.
Work is a more valuable form of energy than heat since 100 percent of
work can be converted to heat, but only a fraction of heat can be converted
to work. When heat is transferred from a high-temperature body to a lower-
temperature one, it is degraded since less of it now can be converted to
work. For example, if 100 kJ of heat is transferred from a body at 1000 K to
a body at 300 K, at the end we will have 100 kJ of thermal energy stored at
300 K, which has no practical value. But if this conversion is made through
a heat engine, up to 1  300/1000  70 percent of it could be converted to
work, which is a more valuable form of energy. Thus 70 kJ of work poten-
tial is wasted as a result of this heat transfer, and energy is degraded.
Chapter 7
|
279
That is, this Carnot heat engine converts 67.2 percent of the heat it receives
to work.
(b) The amount of heat rejected QL by this reversible heat engine is easily
determined from Eq. 7–16 to be
Discussion
Note that this Carnot heat engine rejects to a low-temperature
sink 164 kJ of the 500 kJ of heat it receives during each cycle.
QL,rev  TL
TH
QH,rev 
130  2732 K
1652  2732 K 1500 kJ2  164 kJ
Low-temperature reservoir
at TL = 303 K
High-temperature reservoir
at TH
Rev. HE
ηth
TH, K
925
800
700
500
350
ηth, %
67.2
62.1
56.7
39.4
13.4
FIGURE 7–49
The fraction of heat that can be
converted to work as a function of
source temperature (for TL  303 K).
2000
1500
1000
500
T, K
Thermal
energy
Quality
FIGURE 7–50
The higher the temperature of the
thermal energy, the higher its quality.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
285
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Quantity versus Quality in Daily Life
At times of energy crisis, we are bombarded with speeches and articles on
how to “conserve” energy. Yet we all know that the quantity of energy is
already conserved. What is not conserved is the quality of energy, or the
work potential of energy. Wasting energy is synonymous to converting it to
a less useful form. One unit of high-quality energy can be more valuable
than three units of lower-quality energy. For example, a finite amount of
thermal energy at high temperature is more attractive to power plant engi-
neers than a vast amount of thermal energy at low temperature, such as the
energy stored in the upper layers of the oceans at tropical climates.
As part of our culture, we seem to be fascinated by quantity, and little
attention is given to quality. However, quantity alone cannot give the
whole picture, and we need to consider quality as well. That is, we need
to look at something from both the first- and second-law points of view
when evaluating something, even in nontechnical areas. Below we
present some ordinary events and show their relevance to the second law
of thermodynamics.
Consider two students Andy and Wendy. Andy has 10 friends who never
miss his parties and are always around during fun times. However, they
seem to be busy when Andy needs their help. Wendy, on the other hand, has
five friends. They are never too busy for her, and she can count on them at
times of need. Let us now try to answer the question, Who has more
friends? From the first-law point of view, which considers quantity only, it
is obvious that Andy has more friends. However, from the second-law point
of view, which considers quality as well, there is no doubt that Wendy is the
one with more friends.
Another example with which most people will identify is the multibillion-
dollar diet industry, which is primarily based on the first law of thermody-
namics. However, considering that 90 percent of the people who lose weight
gain it back quickly, with interest, suggests that the first law alone does not
give the whole picture. This is also confirmed by studies that show that
calories that come from fat are more likely to be stored as fat than the calo-
ries that come from carbohydrates and protein. A Stanford study found that
body weight was related to fat calories consumed and not calories per se. A
Harvard study found no correlation between calories eaten and degree of
obesity. A major Cornell University survey involving 6500 people in nearly
all provinces of China found that the Chinese eat more—gram for gram,
calorie for calorie—than Americans do, but they weigh less, with less body
fat. Studies indicate that the metabolism rates and hormone levels change
noticeably in the mid-30s. Some researchers concluded that prolonged diet-
ing teaches a body to survive on fewer calories, making it more fuel effi-
cient. This probably explains why the dieters gain more weight than they
lost once they go back to their normal eating levels.
People who seem to be eating whatever they want, whenever they want,
without gaining weight are living proof that the calorie-counting technique
(the first law) leaves many questions on dieting unanswered. Obviously,
more research focused on the second-law effects of dieting is needed before
we can fully understand the weight-gain and weight-loss process.
280
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
286
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
It is tempting to judge things on the basis of their quantity instead of their
quality since assessing quality is much more difficult than assessing quan-
tity. However, assessments made on the basis of quantity only (the first law)
may be grossly inadequate and misleading.
7–11
■THE CARNOT REFRIGERATOR 
AND HEAT PUMP
A refrigerator or a heat pump that operates on the reversed Carnot cycle is
called a Carnot refrigerator, or a Carnot heat pump. The coefficient of
performance of any refrigerator or heat pump, reversible or irreversible, is
given by Eqs. 7–9 and 7–11 as
where QL is the amount of heat absorbed from the low-temperature medium
and QH is the amount of heat rejected to the high-temperature medium. The
COPs of all reversible refrigerators or heat pumps can be determined by
replacing the heat transfer ratios in the above relations by the ratios of the
absolute temperatures of the high- and low-temperature reservoirs, as
expressed by Eq. 7–16. Then the COP relations for reversible refrigerators
and heat pumps become
(7–20)
and
(7–21)
These are the highest coefficients of performance that a refrigerator or a
heat pump operating between the temperature limits of TL and TH can have.
All actual refrigerators or heat pumps operating between these temperature
limits (TL and TH) have lower coefficients of performance (Fig. 7–51).
COPHP,rev 
1
1  TL>TH
COPR,rev 
1
TH>TL  1
COPR 
1
QH>QL  1 and COPHP 
1
1  QL>QH
Chapter 7
|
281
Warm environment
at TH = 300 K
Cool refrigerated space
at TL = 275 K
Reversible
refrigerator
COPR = 11
Irreversible
refrigerator
COPR = 7
Impossible
refrigerator
COPR = 13
FIGURE 7–51
No refrigerator can have a higher COP
than a reversible refrigerator operating
between the same temperature limits.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
287
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The coefficients of performance of actual and reversible refrigerators
operating between the same temperature limits can be compared as follows:
(7–22)
A similar relation can be obtained for heat pumps by replacing all COPR’s
in Eq. 7–22 by COPHP.
The COP of a reversible refrigerator or heat pump is the maximum theo-
retical value for the specified temperature limits. Actual refrigerators or heat
pumps may approach these values as their designs are improved, but they
can never reach them.
As a final note, the COPs of both the refrigerators and the heat pumps
decrease as TL decreases. That is, it requires more work to absorb heat from
lower-temperature media. As the temperature of the refrigerated space
approaches zero, the amount of work required to produce a finite amount of
refrigeration approaches infinity and COPR approaches zero.
COPR•
6  COPR, rev  
irreversible refrigerator
  COPR, rev  
reversible refrigerator
7  COPR, rev  
impossible refrigerator
282
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 7–6
A Questionable Claim for a Refrigerator
An inventor claims to have developed a refrigerator that maintains the refrig-
erated space at 35°F while operating in a room where the temperature is
75°F and that has a COP of 13.5. Is this claim reasonable?
Solution
An extraordinary claim made for the performance of a refrigerator
is to be evaluated.
Assumptions
Steady operating conditions exist.
Analysis
The performance of this refrigerator (shown in Fig. 7–52) can be
evaluated by comparing it with a reversible refrigerator operating between
the same temperature limits:
Discussion
This is the highest COP a refrigerator can have when absorb-
ing heat from a cool medium at 35°F and rejecting it to a warmer medium at
75°F. Since the COP claimed by the inventor is above this maximum value,
the claim is false.

1
175  460 R2> 135  460 R2  1  12.4
 COPR,max  COPR,rev 
1
TH>TL  1
EXAMPLE 7–7
Heating a House by a Carnot Heat Pump
A heat pump is to be used to heat a house during the winter, as shown in
Fig. 7–53. The house is to be maintained at 21°C at all times. The house is
estimated to be losing heat at a rate of 135,000 kJ/h when the outside tem-
perature drops to 5°C. Determine the minimum power required to drive
this heat pump.
Cool refrigerated space
at TL = 35°F
Refrigerator
Warm environment
at TH = 75°F
COP = 13.5
FIGURE 7–52
Schematic for Example 7–6.
135,000 kJ/h
Heat loss
House
TH = 21°C
Cold outside air
TL = –5°C
HP
Wnet,in = ?
QH
QL
·
·
·
FIGURE 7–53
Schematic for Example 7–7.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
288
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 7
|
283
The second law of thermodynamics states that processes
occur in a certain direction, not in any direction. A process
does not occur unless it satisfies both the first and the second
laws of thermodynamics. Bodies that can absorb or reject
finite amounts of heat isothermally are called thermal energy
reservoirs or heat reservoirs.
Work can be converted to heat directly, but heat can be
converted to work only by some devices called heat engines.
The thermal efficiency of a heat engine is defined as
where Wnet,out is the net work output of the heat engine, QH is
the amount of heat supplied to the engine, and QL is the
amount of heat rejected by the engine.
Refrigerators and heat pumps are devices that absorb heat
from low-temperature media and reject it to higher-temperature
ones. The performance of a refrigerator or a heat pump is
expressed in terms of the coefficient of performance, which is
defined as
hth 
Wnet,out
QH
 1  QL
QH
The Kelvin–Planck statement of the second law of thermo-
dynamics states that no heat engine can produce a net amount
of work while exchanging heat with a single reservoir only.
The Clausius statement of the second law states that no
device can transfer heat from a cooler body to a warmer one
without leaving an effect on the surroundings.
Any device that violates the first or the second law of ther-
modynamics is called a perpetual-motion machine.
A process is said to be reversible if both the system and
the surroundings can be restored to their original conditions.
Any other process is irreversible. The effects such as friction,
non-quasi-equilibrium expansion or compression, and heat
transfer through a finite temperature difference render a
process irreversible and are called irreversibilities.
 COPHP 
QH
Wnet,in

1
1  QL>QH
 COPR 
QL
Wnet,in

1
QH>QL  1
Solution
A heat pump maintains a house at a constant temperature. The
required minimum power input to the heat pump is to be determined.
Assumptions
Steady operating conditions exist.
Analysis
The heat pump must supply heat to the house at a rate of QH 
135,000 kJ/h  37.5 kW. The power requirements are minimum when a
reversible heat pump is used to do the job. The COP of a reversible heat
pump operating between the house and the outside air is
Then the required power input to this reversible heat pump becomes
Discussion
This reversible heat pump can meet the heating requirements of
this house by consuming electric power at a rate of 3.32 kW only. If this
house were to be heated by electric resistance heaters instead, the power
consumption would jump up 11.3 times to 37.5 kW. This is because in
resistance heaters the electric energy is converted to heat at a one-to-one
ratio. With a heat pump, however, energy is absorbed from the outside and
carried to the inside using a refrigeration cycle that consumes only 3.32 kW.
Notice that the heat pump does not create energy. It merely transports it
from one medium (the cold outdoors) to another (the warm indoors).
W#
net,in 
Q#
H
COPHP
 37.5 kW
11.3
 3.32 kW
COPHP,rev 
1
1  TL>TH

1
1  15  273 K2> 121  273 K2  11.3
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
289
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
284
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
7–5C
An experimentalist claims to have raised the tempera-
ture of a small amount of water to 150°C by transferring heat
from high-pressure steam at 120°C. Is this a reasonable
claim? Why? Assume no refrigerator or heat pump is used in
the process.
7–6C
What is a thermal energy reservoir? Give some
examples.
7–7C
Consider the process of baking potatoes in a conven-
tional oven. Can the hot air in the oven be treated as a ther-
mal energy reservoir? Explain.
7–8C
Consider the energy generated by a TV set. What is a
suitable choice for a thermal energy reservoir?
Heat Engines and Thermal Efficiency
7–9C
Is it possible for a heat engine to operate without
rejecting any waste heat to a low-temperature reservoir?
Explain.
7–10C
What are the characteristics of all heat engines?
7–11C
Consider a pan of water being heated (a) by placing
it on an electric range and (b) by placing a heating element in
1. ASHRAE Handbook of Refrigeration, SI version. Atlanta,
GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-
Conditioning Engineers, Inc. 1994.
2. D. Stewart. “Wheels Go Round and Round, but Always
Run Down.” November 1986, Smithsonian, pp. 193–208.
The Carnot cycle is a reversible cycle that is composed of
four reversible processes, two isothermal and two adiabatic.
The Carnot principles state that the thermal efficiencies of 
all reversible heat engines operating between the same two
reservoirs are the same, and that no heat engine is more effi-
cient than a reversible one operating between the same two
reservoirs. These statements form the basis for establishing 
a thermodynamic temperature scale related to the heat 
transfers between a reversible device and the high- and low-
temperature reservoirs by
Therefore, the QH/QL ratio can be replaced by TH/TL for
reversible devices, where TH and TL are the absolute tempera-
tures of the high- and low-temperature reservoirs, respectively.
A heat engine that operates on the reversible Carnot cycle is
called a Carnot heat engine. The thermal efficiency of a
a QH
QL
b
rev
 TH
TL
Carnot heat engine, as well as all other reversible heat engines,
is given by
This is the maximum efficiency a heat engine operating
between two reservoirs at temperatures TH and TL can have.
The COPs of reversible refrigerators and heat pumps are
given in a similar manner as
and
Again, these are the highest COPs a refrigerator or a heat pump
operating between the temperature limits of TH and TL can have.
COPHP,rev 
1
1  TL>TH
COPR,rev 
1
TH>TL  1
hth,rev  1  TL
TH
PROBLEMS*
Second Law of Thermodynamics and Thermal Energy
Reservoirs
7–1C
A mechanic claims to have developed a car engine
that runs on water instead of gasoline. What is your response
to this claim?
7–2C
Describe an imaginary process that satisfies the first
law but violates the second law of thermodynamics.
7–3C
Describe an imaginary process that satisfies the sec-
ond law but violates the first law of thermodynamics.
7–4C
Describe an imaginary process that violates both the
first and the second laws of thermodynamics.
* Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems
with the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete solutions
together with parametric studies are included on the enclosed DVD.
Problems with the 
icon are comprehensive in nature, and are
intended to be solved with a computer, preferably using the EES
software that accompanies this text.
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
290
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 7
|
285
the water. Which method is a more efficient way of heating
water? Explain.
7–12C
Baseboard heaters are basically electric resistance
heaters and are frequently used in space heating. A home
owner claims that her 5-year-old baseboard heaters have a
conversion efficiency of 100 percent. Is this claim in violation
of any thermodynamic laws? Explain.
7–13C
What is the Kelvin–Planck expression of the second
law of thermodynamics?
7–14C
Does a heat engine that has a thermal efficiency of
100 percent necessarily violate (a) the first law and (b) the
second law of thermodynamics? Explain.
7–15C
In the absence of any friction and other irreversibili-
ties, can a heat engine have an efficiency of 100 percent?
Explain.
7–16C
Are the efficiencies of all the work-producing
devices, including the hydroelectric power plants, limited by
the Kelvin–Planck statement of the second law? Explain.
7–17
A 600-MW steam power plant, which is cooled by a
nearby river, has a thermal efficiency of 40 percent. Deter-
mine the rate of heat transfer to the river water. Will the actual
heat transfer rate be higher or lower than this value? Why?
7–18
A heat engine has a total heat input of 1.3 kJ and 
a thermal efficiency of 35 percent. How much work will it
produce?
FIGURE P7–18
7–19E
A heat engine that propels a ship produces 500 Btu/
lbm of work while rejecting 300 Btu/lbm of heat. What is its
thermal efficiency?
7–20
A heat engine that pumps water out of an underground
mine accepts 500 kJ of heat and produces 200 kJ of work.
How much heat does it reject, in kJ?
7–21
A heat engine with a thermal efficiency of 40 percent
rejects 1000 kJ/kg of heat. How much heat does it receive?
Answer: 1667 kJ/kg
7–22
A steam power plant with a power output of 150 MW
consumes coal at a rate of 60 tons/h. If the heating value of
Furnace
Wout
sink
1.3 kJ
HE
the coal is 30,000 kJ/kg, determine the overall efficiency of
this plant.
Answer: 30.0 percent
7–23
An automobile engine consumes fuel at a rate of
28 L/h and delivers 60 kW of power to the wheels. If the fuel
has a heating value of 44,000 kJ/kg and a density of 0.8 g/cm3,
determine the efficiency of this engine.
Answer: 21.9 percent
7–24E
Solar energy stored in large bodies of water, called
solar ponds, is being used to generate electricity. If such a
solar power plant has an efficiency of 4 percent and a net
power output of 350 kW, determine the average value of the
required solar energy collection rate, in Btu/h.
7–25
In 2001, the United States produced 51 percent of its
electricity in the amount of 1.878 
 1012 kWh from coal-
fired power plants. Taking the average thermal efficiency to
be 34 percent, determine the amount of thermal energy
rejected by the coal-fired power plants in the United States
that year.
7–26
The Department of Energy projects that between the
years 1995 and 2010, the United States will need to build
new power plants to generate an additional 150,000 MW of
electricity to meet the increasing demand for electric power.
One possibility is to build coal-fired power plants, which cost
$1300 per kW to construct and have an efficiency of 34 per-
cent. Another possibility is to use the clean-burning Inte-
grated Gasification Combined Cycle (IGCC) plants where the
coal is subjected to heat and pressure to gasify it while
removing sulfur and particulate matter from it. The gaseous
coal is then burned in a gas turbine, and part of the waste
heat from the exhaust gases is recovered to generate steam
for the steam turbine. Currently the construction of IGCC
plants costs about $1500 per kW, but their efficiency is about
45 percent. The average heating value of the coal is about
28,000,000 kJ per ton (that is, 28,000,000 kJ of heat is
released when 1 ton of coal is burned). If the IGCC plant is
to recover its cost difference from fuel savings in five years,
determine what the price of coal should be in $ per ton.
7–27
Reconsider Prob. 7–26. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the price of coal for vary-
ing simple payback periods, plant construction costs, and
operating efficiency.
7–28
Repeat Prob. 7–26 for a simple payback period of
three years instead of five years.
7–29
A coal-burning steam power plant produces a net power
of 300 MW with an overall thermal efficiency of 32 percent. The
actual gravimetric air–fuel ratio in the furnace is calculated to be
12 kg air/kg fuel. The heating value of the coal is 28,000 kJ/kg.
Determine (a) the amount of coal consumed during a 24-hour
period and (b) the rate of air flowing through the furnace.
Answers: (a) 2.89 
 106 kg, (b) 402 kg/s
Refrigerators and Heat Pumps
7–30C
What is the difference between a refrigerator and a
heat pump?

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
291
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
286
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
7–31C
What is the difference between a refrigerator and an
air conditioner?
7–32C
In a refrigerator, heat is transferred from a lower-
temperature medium (the refrigerated space) to a higher-
temperature one (the kitchen air). Is this a violation of the
second law of thermodynamics? Explain.
7–33C
A heat pump is a device that absorbs energy from the
cold outdoor air and transfers it to the warmer indoors. Is this
a violation of the second law of thermodynamics? Explain.
7–34C
Define the coefficient of performance of a refrigera-
tor in words. Can it be greater than unity?
7–35C
Define the coefficient of performance of a heat
pump in words. Can it be greater than unity?
7–36C
A heat pump that is used to heat a house has a COP
of 2.5. That is, the heat pump delivers 2.5 kWh of energy to
the house for each 1 kWh of electricity it consumes. Is this a
violation of the first law of thermodynamics? Explain.
7–37C
A refrigerator has a COP of 1.5. That is, the refrig-
erator removes 1.5 kWh of energy from the refrigerated space
for each 1 kWh of electricity it consumes. Is this a violation
of the first law of thermodynamics? Explain.
7–38C
What is the Clausius expression of the second law
of thermodynamics?
7–39C
Show that the Kelvin–Planck and the Clausius
expressions of the second law are equivalent.
7–40
A household refrigerator with a COP of 1.2 removes
heat from the refrigerated space at a rate of 60 kJ/min. Deter-
mine (a) the electric power consumed by the refrigerator and
(b) the rate of heat transfer to the kitchen air.
Answers:
(a) 0.83 kW, (b) 110 kJ/min
7–41E
A commercial heat pump removes 10,000 Btu/h from
the source, rejects 15,090 Btu/h to the sink, and requires 2 hp of
power. What is this heat pump’s coefficient of performance?
7–42
The coefficient of performance of a residential heat
pump is 1.6. Calculate the heating effect, in kJ/s, this heat pump
will produce when it consumes 2 kW of electrical power.
FIGURE P7–42
Reservoir
2 kW
Reservoir
QH·
QL·
HP
7–43
A refrigerator used for cooling food in a grocery store
is to produce a 10,000 kJ/h cooling effect, and it has a coeffi-
cient of performance of 1.35. How many kilowatts of power
will this refrigerator require to operate?
Answer: 2.06 kW
7–44
A food freezer is to produce a 5 kW cooling effect,
and its COP is 1.3. How many kW of power will this refrig-
erator require for operation?
7–45
A heat pump has a COP of 1.7. Determine the heat
transferred to and from this heat pump when 50 kJ of work is
supplied.
7–46E
Water enters an ice machine at 55°F and leaves as
ice at 25°F. If the COP of the ice machine is 2.4 during this
operation, determine the required power input for an ice pro-
duction rate of 28 lbm/h. (169 Btu of energy needs to be
removed from each lbm of water at 55°F to turn it into ice
at 25°F.)
7–47
A household refrigerator that has a power input of
450 W and a COP of 2.5 is to cool five large watermelons, 10
kg each, to 8°C. If the watermelons are initially at 20°C,
determine how long it will take for the refrigerator to cool
them. The watermelons can be treated as water whose spe-
cific heat is 4.2 kJ/kg · °C. Is your answer realistic or opti-
mistic? Explain.
Answer: 2240 s
7–48
When a man returns to his well-sealed house on a
summer day, he finds that the house is at 32°C.
He turns on the air conditioner, which cools the entire house to
20°C in 15 min. If the COP of the air-conditioning system is
2.5, determine the power drawn by the air conditioner. Assume
the entire mass within the house is equivalent to 800 kg of air
for which cv  0.72 kJ/kg · °C and cp  1.0 kJ/kg · °C.
FIGURE P7–48
7–49
Reconsider Prob. 7–48. Using EES (or other)
software, determine the power input required by
the air conditioner to cool the house as a function for air-
conditioner EER ratings in the range 9 to 16. Discuss your
results and include representative costs of air-conditioning
units in the EER rating range.
7–50
A house that was heated by electric resistance heaters
consumed 1200 kWh of electric energy in a winter month. If
this house were heated instead by a heat pump that has an
average COP of 2.4, determine how much money the home
owner would have saved that month. Assume a price of
8.5¢/kWh for electricity.
32°C
A/C
20°C
Win
·

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
292
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 7
|
287
7–51E
A heat pump with a COP of 1.4 is to produce a
100,000 Btu/h heating effect. How much power does this de-
vice require, in hp?
7–52
A food refrigerator is to provide a 15,000 kJ/h cooling
effect while rejecting 22,000 kJ/h of heat. Calculate the COP
of this refrigerator.
Answer: 2.14
FIGURE P7–52
7–53
An automotive air conditioner produces a 1-kW cool-
ing effect while consuming 0.75 kW of power. What is the
rate at which heat is rejected from this air conditioner?
7–54
A heat pump is used to maintain a house at a constant
temperature of 23°C. The house is losing heat to the outside
air through the walls and the windows at a rate of 60,000 kJ/h
while the energy generated within the house from people,
lights, and appliances amounts to 4000 kJ/h. For a COP of
2.5, determine the required power input to the heat pump.
Answer: 6.22 kW
FIGURE P7–54
7–55E
Consider an office room that is being cooled ade-
quately by a 12,000 Btu/h window air conditioner. Now it is
decided to convert this room into a computer room by
installing several computers, terminals, and printers with a
total rated power of 3.5 kW. The facility has several
4000 Btu/h air conditioners in storage that can be installed to
meet the additional cooling requirements. Assuming a usage
factor of 0.4 (i.e., only 40 percent of the rated power will be
consumed at any given time) and additional occupancy of
four people, each generating heat at a rate of 100 W,
60,000 kJ/h
32°C
4000 kJ/h
HP
Win
·
Reservoir
Win
15,000 kJ/h
22,000 kJ/h
R
·
Reservoir
determine how many of these air conditioners need to be
installed to the room.
7–56
Consider a building whose annual air-conditioning
load is estimated to be 120,000 kWh in an area where the
unit cost of electricity is $0.10/kWh. Two air conditioners are
considered for the building. Air conditioner A has a seasonal
average COP of 3.2 and costs $5500 to purchase and install.
Air conditioner B has a seasonal average COP of 5.0 and
costs $7000 to purchase and install. All else being equal,
determine which air conditioner is a better buy.
FIGURE P7–56
7–57
Refrigerant-134a enters the condenser of a residential
heat pump at 800 kPa and 35°C at a rate of 0.018 kg/s and
leaves at 800 kPa as a saturated liquid. If the compressor con-
sumes 1.2 kW of power, determine (a) the COP of the heat
pump and (b) the rate of heat absorption from the outside air.
FIGURE P7–57
7–58
Refrigerant-134a enters the evaporator coils placed at
the back of the freezer section of a household refrigerator at
120 kPa with a quality of 20 percent and leaves at 120 kPa
and 20°C. If the compressor consumes 450 W of power and
the COP the refrigerator is 1.2, determine (a) the mass flow
rate of the refrigerant and (b) the rate of heat rejected to the
kitchen air.
Answers: (a) 0.00311 kg/s, (b) 990 W
Expansion
valve
Compressor
800 kPa
35°C
800 kPa
x = 0
Evaporator
Condenser
QL
QH
Win
·
·
·
House
120,000 kWh
120,000 kWh
A
Air cond.
COP = 3.2
B
Air cond.
COP = 5.0

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
293
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
288
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P7–58
Perpetual-Motion Machines
7–59C
An inventor claims to have developed a resistance
heater that supplies 1.2 kWh of energy to a room for each
kWh of electricity it consumes. Is this a reasonable claim, or
has the inventor developed a perpetual-motion machine?
Explain.
7–60C
It is common knowledge that the temperature of air
rises as it is compressed. An inventor thought about using this
high-temperature air to heat buildings. He used a compressor
driven by an electric motor. The inventor claims that the com-
pressed hot-air system is 25 percent more efficient than a
resistance heating system that provides an equivalent amount
of heating. Is this claim valid, or is this just another perpetual-
motion machine? Explain.
Reversible and Irreversible Processes
7–61C
A block slides down an inclined plane with friction
and no restraining force. Is this process reversible or irrevers-
ible? Justify your answer.
7–62C
Show that processes that use work for mixing are ir-
reversible by considering an adiabatic system whose contents
are stirred by turning a paddle wheel inside the system (e.g.,
stirring a cake mix with an electric mixer).
7–63C
Show that processes involving rapid chemical reac-
tions are irreversible by considering the combustion of a nat-
ural gas (e.g., methane) and air mixture in a rigid container.
7–64C
A cold canned drink is left in a warmer room where
its temperature rises as a result of heat transfer. Is this a
reversible process? Explain.
7–65C
Why are engineers interested in reversible processes
even though they can never be achieved?
7–66C
Why does a nonquasi-equilibrium compression
process require a larger work input than the corresponding
quasi-equilibrium one?
7–67C
Why does a nonquasi-equilibrium expansion process
deliver less work than the corresponding quasi-equilibrium
one?
Expansion
valve
Compressor
120 kPa
x = 0.2
120 kPa
–20°C
Evaporator
Condenser
QL
QH
Win
·
·
·
7–68C
How do you distinguish between internal and exter-
nal irreversibilities?
7–69C
Is a reversible expansion or compression process
necessarily quasi-equilibrium? Is a quasi-equilibrium expan-
sion or compression process necessarily reversible? Explain.
The Carnot Cycle and Carnot Principles
7–70C
What are the four processes that make up the Carnot
cycle?
7–71C
What are the two statements known as the Carnot
principles?
7–72C
Somebody claims to have developed a new reversible
heat-engine cycle that has a higher theoretical efficiency than
the Carnot cycle operating between the same temperature lim-
its. How do you evaluate this claim?
7–73C
Somebody claims to have developed a new reversible
heat-engine cycle that has the same theoretical efficiency as
the Carnot cycle operating between the same temperature lim-
its. Is this a reasonable claim?
7–74C
Is it possible to develop (a) an actual and (b) a
reversible heat-engine cycle that is more efficient than a
Carnot cycle operating between the same temperature limits?
Explain.
Carnot Heat Engines
7–75C
Is there any way to increase the efficiency of a Carnot
heat engine other than by increasing TH or decreasing TL?
7–76C
Consider two actual power plants operating with
solar energy. Energy is supplied to one plant from a solar
pond at 80°C and to the other from concentrating collectors
that raise the water temperature to 600°C. Which of these
power plants will have a higher efficiency? Explain.
7–77
From a work-production perspective, which is more
valuable: (a) thermal energy reservoirs at 675 K and 325 K
or (b) thermal energy reservoirs at 625 K and 275 K?
7–78
You are an engineer in an electric-generation station.
You know that the flames in the boiler reach a temperature of
1200 K and that cooling water at 300 K is available from a
nearby river. What is the maximum efficiency your plant will
ever achieve?
7–79
As the engineer of the previous problem, you also
know that the metallurgical temperature limit for the blades
in the turbine is 1000 K before they will incur excessive
creep. Now what is the maximum efficiency for this plant?
7–80
A heat engine operates between a source at
550°C and a sink at 25°C. If heat is supplied to
the heat engine at a steady rate of 1200 kJ/min, determine the
maximum power output of this heat engine.
7–81
Reconsider Prob. 7–80. Using EES (or other)
software, study the effects of the temperatures of

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
294
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 7
|
289
the heat source and the heat sink on the power produced and
the cycle thermal efficiency. Let the source temperature vary
from 300 to 1000°C, and the sink temperature to vary from 0
to 50°C. Plot the power produced and the cycle efficiency
against the source temperature for sink temperatures of 0°C,
25°C, and 50°C, and discuss the results.
7–82E
A heat engine is operating on a Carnot cycle and has a
thermal efficiency of 75 percent. The waste heat from this
engine is rejected to a nearby lake at 60°F at a rate of 800 Btu/
min. Determine (a) the power output of the engine and (b) the
temperature of the source.
Answers: (a) 56.6 hp, (b) 2080 R
FIGURE P7–82E
7–83E
A completely reversible heat engine operates with a
source at 1500 R and a sink at 500 R. At what rate must heat
be supplied to this engine, in Btu/h, for it to produce 5 hp of
power?
Answer: 19,100 Btu/h
7–84E
An inventor claims to have devised a cyclical engine
for use in space vehicles that operates with a nuclear-fuel-
generated energy source whose temperature is 1000 R and a
sink at 550 R that radiates waste heat to deep space. He also
claims that this engine produces 5 hp while rejecting heat at a
rate of 15,000 Btu/h. Is this claim valid?
FIGURE P7–84E
1000 R
5 hp
550 R
QH·
15,000 Btu/h
HE
SOURCE
TH
Carnot
HE
Wnet, out
SINK
60°F
800 Btu/min
·
7–85
It is claimed that the efficiency of a completely re-
versible heat engine can be doubled by doubling the tempera-
ture of the energy source. Justify the validity of this claim.
7–86
An inventor claims to have developed a heat engine
that receives 700 kJ of heat from a source at 500 K and pro-
duces 300 kJ of net work while rejecting the waste heat to a
sink at 290 K. Is this a reasonable claim? Why?
7–87E
An experimentalist claims that, based on his mea-
surements, a heat engine receives 300 Btu of heat from a
source of 900 R, converts 160 Btu of it to work, and rejects
the rest as waste heat to a sink at 540 R. Are these measure-
ments reasonable? Why?
7–88
A geothermal power plant uses geothermal water
extracted at 160°C at a rate of 440 kg/s as the heat source
and produces 22 MW of net power. If the environment tem-
perature is 25°C, determine (a) the actual thermal efficiency,
(b) the maximum possible thermal efficiency, and (c) the
actual rate of heat rejection from this power plant.
Carnot Refrigerators and Heat Pumps
7–89C
How can we increase the COP of a Carnot
refrigerator?
7–90C
What is the highest COP that a refrigerator operat-
ing between temperature levels TL and TH can have?
7–91C
In an effort to conserve energy in a heat-engine cycle,
somebody suggests incorporating a refrigerator that will absorb
some of the waste energy QL and transfer it to the energy
source of the heat engine. Is this a smart idea? Explain.
7–92C
It is well established that the thermal efficiency of a
heat engine increases as the temperature TL at which heat is
rejected from the heat engine decreases. In an effort to
increase the efficiency of a power plant, somebody suggests
refrigerating the cooling water before it enters the condenser,
where heat rejection takes place. Would you be in favor of
this idea? Why?
7–93C
It is well known that the thermal efficiency of heat
engines increases as the temperature of the energy source
increases. In an attempt to improve the efficiency of a power
plant, somebody suggests transferring heat from the available
energy source to a higher-temperature medium by a heat
pump before energy is supplied to the power plant. What do
you think of this suggestion? Explain.
7–94
Determine the minimum work per unit of heat trans-
fer from the source reservoir that is required to drive a heat
pump with thermal energy reservoirs at 460 K and 535 K.
7–95E
A thermodynamicist claims to have developed a
heat engine with 50 percent thermal efficiency when operat-
ing with thermal energy reservoirs at 1260 R and 510 R. Is
this claim valid?

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
295
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
290
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
7–96
Derive an expression for the COP of a completely
reversible refrigerator in terms of the thermal energy reser-
voir temperatures, TL and TH.
7–97
A completely reversible refrigerator is driven by a 
10-kW compressor and operates with thermal energy reser-
voirs at 250 K and 300 K. Calculate the rate of cooling pro-
vided by this refrigerator.
Answer: 50 kW
7–98
A refrigerator is to remove heat from the cooled space
at a rate of 300 kJ/min to maintain its temperature at 8°C.
If the air surrounding the refrigerator is at 25°C, determine
the minimum power input required for this refrigerator.
Answer: 0.623 kW
FIGURE P7–98
7–99
A Carnot refrigerator operates in a room in which the
temperature is 25°C. The refrigerator consumes 500 W of
power when operating and has a COP of 4.5. Determine (a) the
rate of heat removal from the refrigerated space and (b) the
temperature of the refrigerated space.
Answers: (a) 135 kJ/min,
(b) 29.2°C
7–100
An inventor claims to have developed a refrigeration
system that removes heat from the closed region at 12°C
and transfers it to the surrounding air at 25°C while maintain-
ing a COP of 6.5. Is this claim reasonable? Why?
7–101E
An air-conditioning system is used to maintain a
house at 75°F when the temperature outside is 95°F. The
house is gaining heat through the walls and the windows at a
rate of 800 Btu/min, and the heat generation rate within 
the house from people, lights, and appliances amounts to 
100 Btu/min. Determine the minimum power input required
for this air-conditioning system.
Answer: 0.79 hp
7–102
A heat pump is used to heat a house and maintain it
at 24°C. On a winter day when the outdoor air temperature 
is 5°C, the house is estimated to lose heat at a rate of
80,000 kJ/h. Determine the minimum power required to oper-
ate this heat pump.
7–103
A heat pump is used to maintain a house at 22°C by
extracting heat from the outside air on a day when the outside
air temperature is 2°C. The house is estimated to lose heat at
a rate of 110,000 kJ/h, and the heat pump consumes 5 kW of
Win,min
REFRIG.
–8°C
25°C
300
kJ/min
·
electric power when running. Is this heat pump powerful
enough to do the job?
FIGURE P7–103
7–104E
A completely reversible refrigerator operates be-
tween thermal energy reservoirs at 450 R and 540 R. How
many kilowatts of power are required for this device to pro-
duce a 15,000-Btu/h cooling effect?
7–105
Calculate and plot the COP of a completely revers-
ible refrigerator as a function of the temperature of the sink
up to 500 K with the temperature of the source fixed at 
250 K.
7–106
A completely reversible heat pump has a COP of 1.6
and a sink temperature of 300 K. Calculate (a) the tempera-
ture of the source and (b) the rate of heat transfer to the sink
when 1.5 kW of power is supplied to this heat pump.
FIGURE P7–106
7–107
The structure of a house is such that it loses heat at a
rate of 5400 kJ/h per °C difference between the indoors and
outdoors. A heat pump that requires a power input of 6 kW is
used to maintain this house at 21°C. Determine the lowest
300 K
1.5 kW
QH·
QL·
HP
TL
22°C
HP
110,000 kJ/h
5 kW
Outdoors
2°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
296
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 7
|
291
outdoor temperature for which the heat pump can meet the
heating requirements of this house.
Answer: 13.3°C
7–108
The performance of a heat pump degrades (i.e., its
COP decreases) as the temperature of the heat source
decreases. This makes using heat pumps at locations with
severe weather conditions unattractive. Consider a house that
is heated and maintained at 20°C by a heat pump during the
winter. What is the maximum COP for this heat pump if heat
is extracted from the outdoor air at (a) 10°C, (b) 5°C, and
(c) 30°C?
7–109E
A heat pump is to be used for heating a house in
winter. The house is to be maintained at 78°F at all times.
When the temperature outdoors drops to 25°F, the heat losses
from the house are estimated to be 55,000 Btu/h. Determine
the minimum power required to run this heat pump if heat is
extracted from (a) the outdoor air at 25°F and (b) the well
water at 50°F.
7–110
A Carnot heat pump is to be used to heat a house and
maintain it at 20°C in winter. On a day when the average out-
door temperature remains at about 2°C, the house is estimated
to lose heat at a rate of 82,000 kJ/h. If the heat pump con-
sumes 8 kW of power while operating, determine (a) how
long the heat pump ran on that day; (b) the total heating costs,
assuming an average price of 8.5¢/kWh for electricity; and
(c) the heating cost for the same day if resistance heating is
used instead of a heat pump.
Answers: (a) 4.19 h, (b) $2.85,
(c) $46.47
FIGURE P7–110
7–111
A Carnot heat engine receives heat from a reservoir
at 900°C at a rate of 800 kJ/min and rejects the waste heat to
the ambient air at 27°C. The entire work output of the heat
engine is used to drive a refrigerator that removes heat from
the refrigerated space at 5°C and transfers it to the same
ambient air at 27°C. Determine (a) the maximum rate of heat
20°C
HP
82,000 kJ/h
8 kW
2°C
removal from the refrigerated space and (b) the total rate of
heat rejection to the ambient air.
Answers: (a) 4982 kJ/min,
(b) 5782 kJ/min
7–112E
A Carnot heat engine receives heat from a reservoir
at 1700°F at a rate of 700 Btu/min and rejects the waste heat
to the ambient air at 80°F. The entire work output of the heat
engine is used to drive a refrigerator that removes heat from
the refrigerated space at 20°F and transfers it to the same
ambient air at 80°F. Determine (a) the maximum rate of heat
removal from the refrigerated space and (b) the total rate of
heat rejection to the ambient air.
Answers: (a) 4200 Btu/min,
(b) 4900 Btu/min
7–113
An air-conditioner with refrigerant-134a as the
working fluid is used to keep a room at 26°C by rejecting the
waste heat to the outdoor air at 34°C. The room gains heat
through the walls and the windows at a rate of 250 kJ/min
while the heat generated by the computer, TV, and lights
amounts to 900 W. The refrigerant enters the compressor at
500 kPa as a saturated vapor at a rate of 100 L/min and
leaves at 1200 kPa and 50°C. Determine (a) the actual COP,
(b) the maximum COP, and (c) the minimum volume flow
rate of the refrigerant at the compressor inlet for the same
compressor inlet and exit conditions.
Answers: (a) 6.59,
(b) 37.4, (c) 17.6 L/min
Review Problems
7–114
Consider a Carnot heat-engine cycle executed in a
steady-flow system using steam as the working fluid. The
cycle has a thermal efficiency of 30 percent, and steam
changes from saturated liquid to saturated vapor at 275°C
during the heat addition process. If the mass flow rate of the
steam is 3 kg/s, determine the net power output of this
engine, in kW.
7–115
A heat pump with a COP of 2.4 is used to heat a
house. When running, the heat pump consumes 8 kW of elec-
tric power. If the house is losing heat to the outside at an
average rate of 40,000 kJ/h and the temperature of the house
is 3°C when the heat pump is turned on, determine how long
it will take for the temperature in the house to rise to 22°C.
Assume the house is well sealed (i.e., no air leaks) and take
the entire mass within the house (air, furniture, etc.) to be
equivalent to 2000 kg of air.
7–116
A manufacturer of ice cream freezers claims that its
product has a coefficient of performance of 1.3 while freez-
ing ice cream at 250 K when the surrounding environment is
at 300 K. Is this claim valid?
7–117
A heat pump designer claims to have an air-source
heat pump whose coefficient of performance is 1.8 when heat-
ing a building whose interior temperature is 300 K and when
the atmospheric air surrounding the building is at 260 K. Is
this claim valid?
7–118E
A heat pump creates a heating effect of 100,000
Btu/h for a space maintained at 530 R while using 3 kW of

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
297
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
292
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
electrical power. What is the minimum temperature of the
source that satisfies the second law of thermodynamics?
Answer: 476 R
7–119
A thermodynamicist claims to have developed a heat
pump with a COP of 1.7 when operating with thermal energy
reservoirs at 273 K and 293 K. Is this claim valid?
7–120
Consider a Carnot heat-engine cycle executed in a
closed system using 0.01 kg of refrigerant-134a as the work-
ing fluid. The cycle has a thermal efficiency of 15 percent,
and the refrigerant-134a changes from saturated liquid to sat-
urated vapor at 50°C during the heat addition process. Deter-
mine the net work output of this engine per cycle.
7–121
A heat pump with a COP of 2.8 is used to heat an
air-tight house. When running, the heat pump consumes
5 kW of power. If the temperature in the house is 7°C when
the heat pump is turned on, how long will it take for the heat
pump to raise the temperature of the house to 22°C? Is this
answer realistic or optimistic? Explain. Assume the entire
mass within the house (air, furniture, etc.) is equivalent to
1500 kg of air.
Answer: 19.2 min
7–122
A promising method of power generation involves
collecting and storing solar energy in large artificial lakes a
few meters deep, called solar ponds. Solar energy is absorbed
by all parts of the pond, and the water temperature rises
everywhere. The top part of the pond, however, loses to the
atmosphere much of the heat it absorbs, and as a result, its
temperature drops. This cool water serves as insulation for the
bottom part of the pond and helps trap the energy there. Usu-
ally, salt is planted at the bottom of the pond to prevent the
rise of this hot water to the top. A power plant that uses an
organic fluid, such as alcohol, as the working fluid can be
operated between the top and the bottom portions of the pond.
If the water temperature is 35°C near the surface and 80°C
near the bottom of the pond, determine the maximum thermal
efficiency that this power plant can have. Is it realistic to use
35 and 80°C for temperatures in the calculations? Explain.
Answer: 12.7 percent
FIGURE P7–122
Pump
Turbine
SOLAR POND
35°C
80°C
Condenser
Boiler
7–123
Consider a Carnot heat-engine cycle executed in a
closed system using 0.0103 kg of steam as the working fluid. It
is known that the maximum absolute temperature in the cycle
is twice the minimum absolute temperature, and the net work
output of the cycle is 25 kJ. If the steam changes from satu-
rated vapor to saturated liquid during heat rejection, determine
the temperature of the steam during the heat rejection process.
7–124
Reconsider Prob. 7–123. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the net work
output on the required temperature of the steam during the
heat rejection process. Let the work output vary from 15 to
25 kJ.
7–125
Consider a Carnot refrigeration cycle executed in a
closed system in the saturated liquid–vapor mixture region
using 0.96 kg of refrigerant-134a as the working fluid. It is
known that the maximum absolute temperature in the cycle is
1.2 times the minimum absolute temperature, and the net
work input to the cycle is 22 kJ. If the refrigerant changes
from saturated vapor to saturated liquid during the heat rejec-
tion process, determine the minimum pressure in the cycle.
7–126
Reconsider Prob. 7–125. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the net work
input on the minimum pressure. Let the work input vary from
10 to 30 kJ. Plot the minimum pressure in the refrigeration
cycle as a function of net work input, and discuss the results.
7–127
Consider two Carnot heat engines operating in series.
The first engine receives heat from the reservoir at 1800 K
and rejects the waste heat to another reservoir at temperature
T. The second engine receives this energy rejected by the first
one, converts some of it to work, and rejects the rest to a
reservoir at 300 K. If the thermal efficiencies of both engines
are the same, determine the temperature T.
Answer: 735 K
7–128
Prove that a refrigerator’s COP cannot exceed that of
a completely reversible refrigerator that shares the same ther-
mal energy reservoirs.
7–129E
Calculate and plot the thermal efficiency of a com-
pletely reversible heat engine as a function of the source 
temperature up to 2000 R with the sink temperature fixed at
500 R.
7–130
Prove that the COP of all completely reversible re-
frigerators must be the same when the reservoir temperatures
are the same.
7–131
Derive an expression for the COP of a completely
reversible heat pump in terms of the thermal energy reservoir
temperatures, TL and TH.
7–132
A Carnot heat engine receives heat at 750 K and
rejects the waste heat to the environment at 300 K. The entire
work output of the heat engine is used to drive a Carnot
refrigerator that removes heat from the cooled space at
15°C at a rate of 400 kJ/min and rejects it to the same envi-
ronment at 300 K. Determine (a) the rate of heat supplied to

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
298
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 7
|
293
the heat engine and (b) the total rate of heat rejection to the
environment.
7–133
Reconsider Prob. 7–132. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the heat
engine source temperature, the environment temperature, and
the cooled space temperature on the required heat supply to
the heat engine and the total rate of heat rejection to the envi-
ronment. Let the source temperature vary from 500 to 1000 K,
the environment temperature vary from 275 to 325 K, and the
cooled space temperature vary from 20 to 0°C. Plot the
required heat supply against the source temperature for the
cooled space temperature of 15°C and environment temper-
atures of 275, 300, and 325 K, and discuss the results.
7–134
A heat engine operates between two reservoirs at 800
and 20°C. One-half of the work output of the heat engine is
used to drive a Carnot heat pump that removes heat from the
cold surroundings at 2°C and transfers it to a house maintained
at 22°C. If the house is losing heat at a rate of 62,000 kJ/h,
determine the minimum rate of heat supply to the heat engine
required to keep the house at 22°C.
7–135
Consider a Carnot refrigeration cycle executed in a
closed system in the saturated liquid–vapor mixture region
using 0.8 kg of refrigerant-134a as the working fluid. The
maximum and the minimum temperatures in the cycle are
20°C and 8°C, respectively. It is known that the refrigerant
is saturated liquid at the end of the heat rejection process, and
the net work input to the cycle is 15 kJ. Determine the frac-
tion of the mass of the refrigerant that vaporizes during the
heat addition process, and the pressure at the end of the heat
rejection process.
7–136
Consider a Carnot heat-pump cycle executed in a
steady-flow system in the saturated liquid–vapor mixture
region using refrigerant-134a flowing at a rate of 0.264 kg/s
as the working fluid. It is known that the maximum absolute
temperature in the cycle is 1.25 times the minimum absolute
temperature, and the net power input to the cycle is 7 kW. If
the refrigerant changes from saturated vapor to saturated liq-
uid during the heat rejection process, determine the ratio of
the maximum to minimum pressures in the cycle.
7–137
A Carnot heat engine is operating between a source
at TH and a sink at TL. If it is desired to double the thermal
efficiency of this engine, what should the new source temper-
ature be? Assume the sink temperature is held constant.
7–138E
The “Energy Guide” label on a washing machine
indicates that the washer will use $33 worth of hot water if the
water is heated by a gas water heater at a natural gas rate of
$1.21/therm. If the water is heated from 60 to 130°F, deter-
mine how many gallons of hot water an average family uses
per week. Disregard the electricity consumed by the washer,
and take the efficiency of the gas water heater to be 58 percent.
7–139
A typical electric water heater has an efficiency
of 90 percent and costs $390 a year to operate
at a unit cost of electricity of $0.08/kWh. A typical heat
pump–powered water heater has a COP of 2.2 but costs about
$800 more to install. Determine how many years it will take
for the heat pump water heater to pay for its cost differential
from the energy it saves.
FIGURE P7–139
7–140
Reconsider Prob. 7–139. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the heat pump
COP on the yearly operation costs and the number of years
required to break even. Let the COP vary from 2 to 5. Plot
the payback period against the COP and discuss the results.
7–141
A homeowner is trying to decide between a high-
efficiency natural gas furnace with an efficiency of 97 percent
and a ground-source heat pump with a COP of 3.5. The unit
costs of electricity and natural gas are $0.092/kWh and
$1.42/therm (1 therm  105,500 kJ). Determine which sys-
tem will have a lower energy cost.
Design and Essay Problems
7–142
Show that the work produced by a reversible process
exceeds that produced by an equivalent irreversible process
by considering a weight moving down a plane both with and
without friction.
7–143
The sun supplies electromagnetic energy to the earth.
It appears to have an effective temperature of approximately
5800 K. On a clear summer day in North America, the energy
incident on a surface facing the sun is approximately 
0.95 kW/m2. The electromagnetic solar energy can be con-
verted into thermal energy by being absorbed on a darkened
Water
heater
© The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. 
Jill Braaten, photographer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
7. The Second Law of 
Thermodynamics
299
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
294
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
surface. How might you characterize the work potential of
the sun’s energy when it is to be used to produce work?
7–144
In the search to reduce thermal pollution and take
advantage of renewable energy sources, some people have
proposed that we take advantage of such sources as dis-
charges from electrical power plants, geothermal energy, and
ocean thermal energy. Although many of these sources con-
tain an enormous amount of energy, the amount of work they
are capable of producing is limited. How might you use the
work potential to assign an “energy quality” to these pro-
posed sources? Test your proposed “energy quality” measure
by applying it to the ocean thermal source, where the temper-
ature 30 m below the surface is perhaps 5ºC lower than at the
surface. Apply it also to the geothermal water source, where
the temperature 2 to 3 km below the surface is perhaps 150ºC
hotter than at the surface.
7–145
The maximum work that can be produced by a heat
engine may be increased by lowering the temperature of its
sink. Hence, it seems logical to use refrigerators to cool the
sink and reduce its temperature. What is the fallacy in this
logic?
7–146
Using a timer (or watch) and a thermometer, conduct
the following experiment to determine the rate of heat gain of
your refrigerator. First make sure that the door of the refriger-
ator is not opened for at least a few hours so that steady 
operating conditions are established. Start the timer when the
refrigerator stops running and measure the time t1 it stays
off before it kicks in. Then measure the time t2 it stays on.
Noting that the heat removed during t2 is equal to the heat
gain of the refrigerator during t1  t2 and using the power
consumed by the refrigerator when it is running, determine
the average rate of heat gain for your refrigerator, in W. Take
the COP (coefficient of performance) of your refrigerator to
be 1.3 if it is not available.
7–147
Design a hydrocooling unit that can cool fruits and
vegetables from 30 to 5°C at a rate of 20,000 kg/h under the
following conditions:
The unit will be of flood type, which will cool the products
as they are conveyed into the channel filled with water. The
products will be dropped into the channel filled with water at
one end and be picked up at the other end. The channel can
be as wide as 3 m and as high as 90 cm. The water is to be
circulated and cooled by the evaporator section of a refrigera-
tion system. The refrigerant temperature inside the coils is to
be 2°C, and the water temperature is not to drop below 1°C
and not to exceed 6°C.
Assuming reasonable values for the average product den-
sity, specific heat, and porosity (the fraction of air volume in
a box), recommend reasonable values for (a) the water veloc-
ity through the channel and (b) the refrigeration capacity of
the refrigeration system.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
300
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
ENTROPY
|
295
I
n Chap. 7, we introduced the second law of thermody-
namics and applied it to cycles and cyclic devices. In this
chapter, we apply the second law to processes. The first
law of thermodynamics deals with the property energy and
the conservation of it. The second law leads to the definition
of a new property called entropy. Entropy is a somewhat
abstract property, and it is difficult to give a physical descrip-
tion of it without considering the microscopic state of the sys-
tem. Entropy is best understood and appreciated by studying
its uses in commonly encountered engineering processes,
and this is what we intend to do.
This chapter starts with a discussion of the Clausius
inequality, which forms the basis for the definition of entropy,
and continues with the increase of entropy principle. Unlike
energy, entropy is a nonconserved property, and there is no
such thing as conservation of entropy. Next, the entropy
changes that take place during processes for pure substances,
incompressible substances, and ideal gases are discussed,
and a special class of idealized processes, called isentropic
processes, is examined. Then, the reversible steady-flow work
and the isentropic efficiencies of various engineering devices
such as turbines and compressors are considered. Finally,
entropy balance is introduced and applied to various systems.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Apply the second law of thermodynamics to processes.
• Define a new property called entropy to quantify the
second-law effects.
• Establish the increase of entropy principle.
• Calculate the entropy changes that take place during
processes for pure substances, incompressible substances,
and ideal gases.
• Examine a special class of idealized processes, called
isentropic processes, and develop the property relations for
these processes.
• Derive the reversible steady-flow work relations.
• Develop the isentropic efficiencies for various steady-flow
devices.
• Introduce and apply the entropy balance to various
systems.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
301
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–1
■ENTROPY
The second law of thermodynamics often leads to expressions that involve
inequalities. An irreversible (i.e., actual) heat engine, for example, is less
efficient than a reversible one operating between the same two thermal
energy reservoirs. Likewise, an irreversible refrigerator or a heat pump has a
lower coefficient of performance (COP) than a reversible one operating
between the same temperature limits. Another important inequality that has
major consequences in thermodynamics is the Clausius inequality. It was
first stated by the German physicist R. J. E. Clausius (1822–1888), one of
the founders of thermodynamics, and is expressed as
That is, the cyclic integral of dQ/T is always less than or equal to zero. This
inequality is valid for all cycles, reversible or irreversible. The symbol 
(integral symbol with a circle in the middle) is used to indicate that the inte-
gration is to be performed over the entire cycle. Any heat transfer to or from a
system can be considered to consist of differential amounts of heat transfer.
Then the cyclic integral of dQ/T can be viewed as the sum of all these differ-
ential amounts of heat transfer divided by the temperature at the boundary.
To demonstrate the validity of the Clausius inequality, consider a system
connected to a thermal energy reservoir at a constant thermodynamic (i.e.,
absolute) temperature of TR through a reversible cyclic device (Fig. 8–1).
The cyclic device receives heat dQR from the reservoir and supplies heat dQ
to the system whose temperature at that part of the boundary is T (a vari-
able) while producing work dWrev. The system produces work dWsys as a
result of this heat transfer. Applying the energy balance to the combined
system identified by dashed lines yields
where dWC is the total work of the combined system (dWrev  dWsys) and
dEC is the change in the total energy of the combined system. Considering
that the cyclic device is a reversible one, we have
where the sign of dQ is determined with respect to the system (positive if to
the system and negative if from the system) and the sign of dQR is deter-
mined with respect to the reversible cyclic device. Eliminating dQR from the
two relations above yields
We now let the system undergo a cycle while the cyclic device undergoes an
integral number of cycles. Then the preceding relation becomes
since the cyclic integral of energy (the net change in the energy, which is a
property, during a cycle) is zero. Here WC is the cyclic integral of dWC, and
it represents the net work for the combined cycle.
WC  TR 
dQ
T
dWC  TR dQ
T  dEC
dQR
TR
 dQ
T
dWC  dQR  dEC

dQ
T  0
296
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Combined system
(system and cyclic device)
Reversible
cyclic
device
δ QR
Thermal reservoir
TR
δWrev
δWsys
T
δ Q
System
FIGURE 8–1
The system considered in the
development of the Clausius
inequality.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
302
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
It appears that the combined system is exchanging heat with a single ther-
mal energy reservoir while involving (producing or consuming) work WC
during a cycle. On the basis of the Kelvin–Planck statement of the second
law, which states that no system can produce a net amount of work while
operating in a cycle and exchanging heat with a single thermal energy
reservoir, we reason that WC cannot be a work output, and thus it cannot be
a positive quantity. Considering that TR is the thermodynamic temperature
and thus a positive quantity, we must have
(8–1)
which is the Clausius inequality. This inequality is valid for all thermody-
namic cycles, reversible or irreversible, including the refrigeration cycles.
If no irreversibilities occur within the system as well as the reversible
cyclic device, then the cycle undergone by the combined system is inter-
nally reversible. As such, it can be reversed. In the reversed cycle case, all
the quantities have the same magnitude but the opposite sign. Therefore, the
work WC, which could not be a positive quantity in the regular case, cannot
be a negative quantity in the reversed case. Then it follows that WC,int rev  0
since it cannot be a positive or negative quantity, and therefore
(8–2)
for internally reversible cycles. Thus, we conclude that the equality in the
Clausius inequality holds for totally or just internally reversible cycles and
the inequality for the irreversible ones.
To develop a relation for the definition of entropy, let us examine Eq. 8–2
more closely. Here we have a quantity whose cyclic integral is zero. Let
us think for a moment what kind of quantities can have this characteristic.
We know that the cyclic integral of work is not zero. (It is a good thing
that it is not. Otherwise, heat engines that work on a cycle such as steam
power plants would produce zero net work.) Neither is the cyclic integral of
heat.
Now consider the volume occupied by a gas in a piston–cylinder device
undergoing a cycle, as shown in Fig. 8–2. When the piston returns to its ini-
tial position at the end of a cycle, the volume of the gas also returns to its
initial value. Thus the net change in volume during a cycle is zero. This is
also expressed as
(8–3)
That is, the cyclic integral of volume (or any other property) is zero. Con-
versely, a quantity whose cyclic integral is zero depends on the state only
and not the process path, and thus it is a property. Therefore, the quantity
(dQ/T )int rev must represent a property in the differential form.
Clausius realized in 1865 that he had discovered a new thermodynamic
property, and he chose to name this property entropy. It is designated S and
is defined as
(8–4)
dS  a dQ
T b
int rev  
1kJ>K2
 dV  0
 a dQ
T b
int rev
 0

dQ
T  0
Chapter 8
|
297
1 m3
3 m3
1 m3
∫dV = ΔVcycle = 0
FIGURE 8–2
The net change in volume (a property)
during a cycle is always zero.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
303
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Entropy is an extensive property of a system and sometimes is referred to as
total entropy. Entropy per unit mass, designated s, is an intensive property
and has the unit kJ/kg · K. The term entropy is generally used to refer to
both total entropy and entropy per unit mass since the context usually clari-
fies which one is meant.
The entropy change of a system during a process can be determined by
integrating Eq. 8–4 between the initial and the final states:
(8–5)
Notice that we have actually defined the change in entropy instead of
entropy itself, just as we defined the change in energy instead of the energy
itself when we developed the first-law relation. Absolute values of entropy
are determined on the basis of the third law of thermodynamics, which is
discussed later in this chapter. Engineers are usually concerned with the
changes in entropy. Therefore, the entropy of a substance can be assigned a
zero value at some arbitrarily selected reference state, and the entropy val-
ues at other states can be determined from Eq. 8–5 by choosing state 1 to be
the reference state (S  0) and state 2 to be the state at which entropy is to
be determined.
To perform the integration in Eq. 8–5, one needs to know the relation
between Q and T during a process. This relation is often not available, and
the integral in Eq. 8–5 can be performed for a few cases only. For the
majority of cases we have to rely on tabulated data for entropy.
Note that entropy is a property, and like all other properties, it has fixed
values at fixed states. Therefore, the entropy change S between two speci-
fied states is the same no matter what path, reversible or irreversible, is fol-
lowed during a process (Fig. 8–3).
Also note that the integral of dQ/T gives us the value of entropy change
only if the integration is carried out along an internally reversible path
between the two states. The integral of dQ/T along an irreversible path is
not a property, and in general, different values will be obtained when the
integration is carried out along different irreversible paths. Therefore, even
for irreversible processes, the entropy change should be determined by
carrying out this integration along some convenient imaginary internally
reversible path between the specified states.
A Special Case: Internally Reversible 
Isothermal Heat Transfer Processes
Recall that isothermal heat transfer processes are internally reversible.
Therefore, the entropy change of a system during an internally reversible
isothermal heat transfer process can be determined by performing the inte-
gration in Eq. 8–5:
which reduces to
(8–6)
¢S  Q
T0  
1kJ>K2
¢S  
2
1
a dQ
T b
int rev
 
2
1
a dQ
T0
b
int rev
 1
T0 
2
1
1dQ2 int rev
¢S  S2  S1  
2
1
a dQ
T b
int rev  
1kJ>K2
298
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Irreversible
process
Reversible
process
1
2
0.3
0.7
S, kJ/K
ΔS = S2 – S1 = 0.4 kJ/K
T
FIGURE 8–3
The entropy change between two
specified states is the same whether
the process is reversible or
irreversible.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
304
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where T0 is the constant temperature of the system and Q is the heat transfer
for the internally reversible process. Equation 8–6 is particularly useful for
determining the entropy changes of thermal energy reservoirs that can
absorb or supply heat indefinitely at a constant temperature.
Notice that the entropy change of a system during an internally reversible
isothermal process can be positive or negative, depending on the direction
of heat transfer. Heat transfer to a system increases the entropy of a system,
whereas heat transfer from a system decreases it. In fact, losing heat is the
only way the entropy of a system can be decreased.
Chapter 8
|
299
EXAMPLE 8–1
Entropy Change during an Isothermal Process
A piston–cylinder device contains a liquid–vapor mixture of water at 300 K.
During a constant-pressure process, 750 kJ of heat is transferred to the
water. As a result, part of the liquid in the cylinder vaporizes. Determine the
entropy change of the water during this process.
Solution
Heat is transferred to a liquid–vapor mixture of water in a piston–
cylinder device at constant pressure. The entropy change of water is to be
determined.
Assumptions
No irreversibilities occur within the system boundaries during
the process.
Analysis
We take the entire water (liquid  vapor) in the cylinder as the
system (Fig. 8–4). This is a closed system since no mass crosses the system
boundary during the process. We note that the temperature of the system
remains constant at 300 K during this process since the temperature of a
pure substance remains constant at the saturation value during a phase-
change process at constant pressure.
The system undergoes an internally reversible, isothermal process, and
thus its entropy change can be determined directly from Eq. 8–6 to be
Discussion
Note that the entropy change of the system is positive, as
expected, since heat transfer is to the system.
¢Ssys,isothermal  Q
Tsys
 750 kJ
300 K  2.5 kJ/K
8–2
■THE INCREASE OF ENTROPY PRINCIPLE
Consider a cycle that is made up of two processes: process 1-2, which is
arbitrary (reversible or irreversible), and process 2-1, which is internally
reversible, as shown in Figure 8–5. From the Clausius inequality,
or

2
1
 dQ
T  
1
2
a dQ
T b
int rev
 0

dQ
T  0
T
T = 300 K = const.
ΔSsys = Q = 2.5 kJ
K
Q = 750 kJ
FIGURE 8–4
Schematic for Example 8–1.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
305
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The second integral in the previous relation is recognized as the entropy
change S1  S2. Therefore,
which can be rearranged as
(8–7)
It can also be expressed in differential form as
(8–8)
where the equality holds for an internally reversible process and the
inequality for an irreversible process. We may conclude from these equa-
tions that the entropy change of a closed system during an irreversible
process is greater than the integral of dQ/T evaluated for that process. In the
limiting case of a reversible process, these two quantities become equal. We
again emphasize that T in these relations is the thermodynamic temperature
at the boundary where the differential heat dQ is transferred between the
system and the surroundings.
The quantity S  S2  S1 represents the entropy change of the system.
For a reversible process, it becomes equal to 
2
1 dQ/T, which represents the
entropy transfer with heat.
The inequality sign in the preceding relations is a constant reminder that
the entropy change of a closed system during an irreversible process is
always greater than the entropy transfer. That is, some entropy is generated
or created during an irreversible process, and this generation is due entirely
to the presence of irreversibilities. The entropy generated during a process is
called entropy generation and is denoted by Sgen. Noting that the difference
between the entropy change of a closed system and the entropy transfer is
equal to entropy generation, Eq. 8–7 can be rewritten as an equality as
(8–9)
Note that the entropy generation Sgen is always a positive quantity or zero.
Its value depends on the process, and thus it is not a property of the system.
Also, in the absence of any entropy transfer, the entropy change of a system
is equal to the entropy generation.
Equation 8–7 has far-reaching implications in thermodynamics. For an
isolated system (or simply an adiabatic closed system), the heat transfer is
zero, and Eq. 8–7 reduces to
(8–10)
This equation can be expressed as the entropy of an isolated system during
a process always increases or, in the limiting case of a reversible process,
remains constant. In other words, it never decreases. This is known as the
increase of entropy principle. Note that in the absence of any heat transfer,
entropy change is due to irreversibilities only, and their effect is always to
increase entropy.
¢Sisolated  0
¢Ssys  S2  S1  
2
1
 dQ
T  Sgen
dS  dQ
T
S2  S1  
2
1
 dQ
T

2
1
 dQ
T  S1  S2  0
300
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Process 1-2
(reversible or
irreversible)
1
2
Process 2-1
(internally
reversible)
FIGURE 8–5
A cycle composed of a reversible and
an irreversible process.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
306
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Entropy is an extensive property, and thus the total entropy of a system is
equal to the sum of the entropies of the parts of the system. An isolated sys-
tem may consist of any number of subsystems (Fig. 8–6). A system and its
surroundings, for example, constitute an isolated system since both can be
enclosed by a sufficiently large arbitrary boundary across which there is no
heat, work, or mass transfer (Fig. 8–7). Therefore, a system and its sur-
roundings can be viewed as the two subsystems of an isolated system, and
the entropy change of this isolated system during a process is the sum of the
entropy changes of the system and its surroundings, which is equal to the
entropy generation since an isolated system involves no entropy transfer.
That is,
(8–11)
where the equality holds for reversible processes and the inequality for irre-
versible ones. Note that Ssurr refers to the change in the entropy of the sur-
roundings as a result of the occurrence of the process under consideration.
Since no actual process is truly reversible, we can conclude that some
entropy is generated during a process, and therefore the entropy of the uni-
verse, which can be considered to be an isolated system, is continuously
increasing. The more irreversible a process, the larger the entropy generated
during that process. No entropy is generated during reversible processes
(Sgen  0).
Entropy increase of the universe is a major concern not only to engineers
but also to philosophers, theologians, economists, and environmentalists
since entropy is viewed as a measure of the disorder (or “mixed-up-ness”)
in the universe.
The increase of entropy principle does not imply that the entropy of a sys-
tem cannot decrease. The entropy change of a system can be negative dur-
ing a process (Fig. 8–8), but entropy generation cannot. The increase of
entropy principle can be summarized as follows:
This relation serves as a criterion in determining whether a process is
reversible, irreversible, or impossible.
Things in nature have a tendency to change until they attain a state of equi-
librium. The increase of entropy principle dictates that the entropy of an iso-
lated system increases until the entropy of the system reaches a maximum
value. At that point, the system is said to have reached an equilibrium state
since the increase of entropy principle prohibits the system from undergoing
any change of state that results in a decrease in entropy.
Some Remarks about Entropy
In light of the preceding discussions, we draw the following conclusions:
1. Processes can occur in a certain direction only, not in any direction.
A process must proceed in the direction that complies with the increase
of entropy principle, that is, Sgen  0. A process that violates this princi-
ple is impossible. This principle often forces chemical reactions to
come to a halt before reaching completion.
Sgen •
7  0 Irreversible process
   0 Reversible process
6  0 Impossible process
Sgen  ¢Stotal  ¢Ssys  ¢Ssurr  0
Chapter 8
|
301
Subsystem
1
Subsystem
3
Subsystem
2
Subsystem
N
(Isolated)
ΔStotal = 
ΔSi > 0 
i=1
N
Σ
FIGURE 8–6
The entropy change of an isolated
system is the sum of the entropy
changes of its components, and is
never less than zero.
Surroundings
System
Q, W
Isolated system
boundary
m = 0
Q = 0
W = 0
m
FIGURE 8–7
A system and its surroundings form an
isolated system.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
307
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
2. Entropy is a nonconserved property, and there is no such thing as the
conservation of entropy principle. Entropy is conserved during the 
idealized reversible processes only and increases during all actual
processes.
3. The performance of engineering systems is degraded by the presence 
of irreversibilities, and entropy generation is a measure of the magni-
tudes of the irreversibilities present during that process. The greater the
extent of irreversibilities, the greater the entropy generation. Therefore,
entropy generation can be used as a quantitative measure of irreversibil-
ities associated with a process. It is also used to establish criteria for the
performance of engineering devices. This point is illustrated further in
Example 8–2.
302
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Surroundings
SYSTEM
ΔSsys = –2 kJ/K
ΔSsurr = 3 kJ/K
Sgen = ΔStotal = ΔSsys + ΔSsurr = 1 kJ/K
Q
FIGURE 8–8
The entropy change of a system can be
negative, but the entropy generation
cannot.
EXAMPLE 8–2
Entropy Generation during Heat Transfer
Processes
A heat source at 800 K loses 2000 kJ of heat to a sink at (a) 500 K and 
(b) 750 K. Determine which heat transfer process is more irreversible.
Solution
Heat is transferred from a heat source to two heat sinks at differ-
ent temperatures. The heat transfer process that is more irreversible is to be
determined.
Analysis
A sketch of the reservoirs is shown in Fig. 8–9. Both cases involve
heat transfer through a finite temperature difference, and therefore both are
irreversible. The magnitude of the irreversibility associated with each process
can be determined by calculating the total entropy change for each case.
The total entropy change for a heat transfer process involving two reservoirs
(a source and a sink) is the sum of the entropy changes of each reservoir
since the two reservoirs form an adiabatic system.
Or do they? The problem statement gives the impression that the two reser-
voirs are in direct contact during the heat transfer process. But this cannot be
the case since the temperature at a point can have only one value, and thus it
cannot be 800 K on one side of the point of contact and 500 K on the other
side. In other words, the temperature function cannot have a jump discontinu-
ity. Therefore, it is reasonable to assume that the two reservoirs are separated
by a partition through which the temperature drops from 800 K on one side to
500 K (or 750 K) on the other. Therefore, the entropy change of the partition
should also be considered when evaluating the total entropy change for this
process. However, considering that entropy is a property and the values of
properties depend on the state of a system, we can argue that the entropy
change of the partition is zero since the partition appears to have undergone a
steady process and thus experienced no change in its properties at any point.
We base this argument on the fact that the temperature on both sides of the
partition and thus throughout remains constant during this process. There-
fore, we are justified to assume that Spartition  0 since the entropy (as
well as the energy) content of the partition remains constant during this
process.
Source
800 K
Sink B
750 K
Source
800 K
Sink A
500 K
2000 kJ
(a)
(b)
FIGURE 8–9
Schematic for Example 8–2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
308
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–3
■ENTROPY CHANGE OF PURE SUBSTANCES
Entropy is a property, and thus the value of entropy of a system is fixed
once the state of the system is fixed. Specifying two intensive independent
properties fixes the state of a simple compressible system, and thus the
value of entropy, as well as the values of other properties at that state. Start-
ing with its defining relation, the entropy change of a substance can be
expressed in terms of other properties (see Sec. 8–7). But in general, these
relations are too complicated and are not practical to use for hand calcula-
tions. Therefore, using a suitable reference state, the entropies of substances
are evaluated from measurable property data following rather involved com-
putations, and the results are tabulated in the same manner as the other
properties such as v, u, and h (Fig. 8–10).
The entropy values in the property tables are given relative to an arbitrary
reference state. In steam tables the entropy of saturated liquid sf at 0.01°C is
assigned the value of zero. For refrigerant-134a, the zero value is assigned
to saturated liquid at 40°C. The entropy values become negative at tem-
peratures below the reference value.
Chapter 8
|
303
The entropy change for each reservoir can be determined from Eq. 8–6
since each reservoir undergoes an internally reversible, isothermal process.
(a) For the heat transfer process to a sink at 500 K:
and
Therefore, 1.5 kJ/K of entropy is generated during this process. Noting that
both reservoirs have undergone internally reversible processes, the entire
entropy generation took place in the partition.
(b) Repeating the calculations in part (a) for a sink temperature of 750 K,
we obtain
and
The total entropy change for the process in part (b) is smaller, and therefore
it is less irreversible. This is expected since the process in (b) involves a
smaller temperature difference and thus a smaller irreversibility.
Discussion
The irreversibilities associated with both processes could be
eliminated by operating a Carnot heat engine between the source and the
sink. For this case it can be shown that Stotal  0.
Sgen  ¢Stotal  12.5  2.72 kJ>K  0.2 kJ/K
¢Ssink  2.7 kJ>K
¢Ssource  2.5 kJ>k
Sgen  ¢Stotal  ¢Ssource  ¢Ssink  12.5  4.02 kJ>K  1.5 kJ/K
¢Ssink  Q sink
Tsink
 2000 kJ
500 K  4.0 kJ>K
¢Ssource  Q source
Tsource
 2000 kJ
800 K
 2.5 kJ>K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
309
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The value of entropy at a specified state is determined just like any other
property. In the compressed liquid and superheated vapor regions, it can be
obtained directly from the tables at the specified state. In the saturated mix-
ture region, it is determined from
where x is the quality and sf and sfg values are listed in the saturation tables.
In the absence of compressed liquid data, the entropy of the compressed liq-
uid can be approximated by the entropy of the saturated liquid at the given
temperature:
The entropy change of a specified mass m (a closed system) during a
process is simply
(8–12)
which is the difference between the entropy values at the final and initial
states.
When studying the second-law aspects of processes, entropy is commonly
used as a coordinate on diagrams such as the T-s and h-s diagrams. The
general characteristics of the T-s diagram of pure substances are shown in
Fig. 8–11 using data for water. Notice from this diagram that the constant-
volume lines are steeper than the constant-pressure lines and the constant-
pressure lines are parallel to the constant-temperature lines in the saturated
liquid–vapor mixture region. Also, the constant-pressure lines almost coin-
cide with the saturated liquid line in the compressed liquid region.
¢S  m¢s  m1s2  s12
1kJ>K2
s@ T,P  sf @ T  
1kJ>kg # K2
s  sf  xsfg  
1kJ>kg # K2
304
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
T, °C
0
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
100
200
300
400
500
Saturated
liquid line
Critical
state
Saturated
vapor line
v = 0.5 m3/kg
v = 0.1 m3/kg
P = 10 MPa
P = 1 MPa
s, kJ/kg   K
FIGURE 8–11
Schematic of the T-s diagram for
water.
Superheated
vapor
T
s
1
3
2
Saturated
liquid–vapor mixture
s3
T3
P3}
s1 ≅ sƒ@T1
P1
T1}
Compressed
liquid
s2 = sƒ + x2sƒg
T2
x2}
FIGURE 8–10
The entropy of a pure substance is
determined from the tables (like other
properties).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
310
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
305
EXAMPLE 8–3
Entropy Change of a Substance in a Tank
A rigid tank contains 5 kg of refrigerant-134a initially at 20°C and 140 kPa.
The refrigerant is now cooled while being stirred until its pressure drops to
100 kPa. Determine the entropy change of the refrigerant during this process.
Solution
The refrigerant in a rigid tank is cooled while being stirred. The
entropy change of the refrigerant is to be determined.
Assumptions
The volume of the tank is constant and thus v2  v1.
Analysis
We take the refrigerant in the tank as the system (Fig. 8–12). This
is a closed system since no mass crosses the system boundary during the
process. We note that the change in entropy of a substance during a process
is simply the difference between the entropy values at the final and initial
states. The initial state of the refrigerant is completely specified.
Recognizing that the specific volume remains constant during this
process, the properties of the refrigerant at both states are
State 1:
State 2:
The refrigerant is a saturated liquid–vapor mixture at the final state since 
vf  v2  vg at 100 kPa pressure. Therefore, we need to determine the 
quality first:
Thus,
Then the entropy change of the refrigerant during this process is
Discussion
The negative sign indicates that the entropy of the system is
decreasing during this process. This is not a violation of the second law,
however, since it is the entropy generation Sgen that cannot be negative.
 1.173 kJ/K
¢S  m 1s2  s12  15 kg2 10.8278  1.06242 kJ>kg # K
s2  sf  x2sfg  0.07188  10.8592 10.879952  0.8278 kJ>kg # K
x2 
v2  vf
vfg
 0.16544  0.0007259
0.19254  0.0007259  0.859
P2  100 kPa
1v2  v12
f
vf  0.0007259 m3>kg
vg  0.19254 m3>kg
P1  140 kPa
T1  20°C
f
s1  1.0624 kJ>kg # K
v1  0.16544 m3>kg
Heat
m = 5 kg
Refrigerant-134a
T1 = 20°C
P1 = 140 kPa
ΔS = ?
T
s
s2
1
2
s1
υ = const.
FIGURE 8–12
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–3.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
311
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
306
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 8–4
Entropy Change during a Constant-Pressure
Process
A piston–cylinder device initially contains 3 lbm of liquid water at 20 psia
and 70°F. The water is now heated at constant pressure by the addition of
3450 Btu of heat. Determine the entropy change of the water during this
process.
Solution
Liquid water in a piston–cylinder device is heated at constant
pressure. The entropy change of water is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The tank is stationary and thus the kinetic and potential
energy changes are zero, KE  PE  0. 2 The process is quasi-equilib-
rium. 3 The pressure remains constant during the process and thus P2  P1.
Analysis
We take the water in the cylinder as the system (Fig. 8–13). This is
a closed system since no mass crosses the system boundary during the
process. We note that a piston–cylinder device typically involves a moving
boundary and thus boundary work Wb. Also, heat is transferred to the system.
Water exists as a compressed liquid at the initial state since its pressure is
greater than the saturation pressure of 0.3632 psia at 70°F. By approximat-
ing the compressed liquid as a saturated liquid at the given temperature, the
properties at the initial state are
State 1:
At the final state, the pressure is still 20 psia, but we need one more prop-
erty to fix the state. This property is determined from the energy balance,
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
since U  Wb  H for a constant-pressure quasi-equilibrium process.
Then,
State 2:
P2  20 psia
h2  1188.1 Btu>lbm f 
s2  1.7761 Btu>lbm # R
1Table A-6E, interpolation2
h2  1188.1 Btu>lbm
 3450 Btu  13 lbm2 1h2  38.08 Btu>lbm2
Qin  ¢H  m1h2  h12
Qin  Wb  ¢U
Ein  Eout 
 
   
¢Esystem
P1  20 psia
T1  70°F
f 
s1  sf @ 70°F  0.07459 Btu>lbm # R
h1  hf @ 70°F  38.08 Btu>lbm
T
s
s1
1
2
s2
P = const.
P1 = 20 psia
H2O
T1 = 70°F
FIGURE 8–13
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–4.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
312
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–4
■ISENTROPIC PROCESSES
We mentioned earlier that the entropy of a fixed mass can be changed by
(1) heat transfer and (2) irreversibilities. Then it follows that the entropy of
a fixed mass does not change during a process that is internally reversible
and adiabatic (Fig. 8–14). A process during which the entropy remains
constant is called an isentropic process. It is characterized by
Isentropic process:
(8–13)
That is, a substance will have the same entropy value at the end of the
process as it does at the beginning if the process is carried out in an isen-
tropic manner.
Many engineering systems or devices such as pumps, turbines, nozzles,
and diffusers are essentially adiabatic in their operation, and they perform
best when the irreversibilities, such as the friction associated with the
process, are minimized. Therefore, an isentropic process can serve as an
appropriate model for actual processes. Also, isentropic processes enable us
to define efficiencies for processes to compare the actual performance of
these devices to the performance under idealized conditions.
It should be recognized that a reversible adiabatic process is necessarily
isentropic (s2  s1), but an isentropic process is not necessarily a reversible
adiabatic process. (The entropy increase of a substance during a process as
a result of irreversibilities may be offset by a decrease in entropy as a result
of heat losses, for example.) However, the term isentropic process is cus-
tomarily used in thermodynamics to imply an internally reversible, adia-
batic process.
¢s  0 or s2  s1  
1kJ>kg # K2
Chapter 8
|
307
Therefore, the entropy change of water during this process is
 5.105 Btu/R
¢S  m 1s2  s12  13 lbm2 11.7761  0.074592 Btu>lbm # R
s2 = s1
No irreversibilities
(internally reversible)
No heat transfer
(adiabatic)
s
Steam
1
FIGURE 8–14
During an internally reversible,
adiabatic (isentropic) process, the
entropy remains constant.
EXAMPLE 8–5
Isentropic Expansion of Steam in a Turbine
Steam enters an adiabatic turbine at 5 MPa and 450°C and leaves at a pres-
sure of 1.4 MPa. Determine the work output of the turbine per unit mass of
steam if the process is reversible.
Solution
Steam is expanded in an adiabatic turbine to a specified pressure
in a reversible manner. The work output of the turbine is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0, ECV  0, and SCV  0. 2 The
process is reversible. 3 Kinetic and potential energies are negligible. 4 The
turbine is adiabatic and thus there is no heat transfer.
Analysis
We take the turbine as the system (Fig. 8–15). This is a control
volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process. We note
that there is only one inlet and one exit, and thus m.
1  m.
2  m. .
T
s
1
2
s2 = s1
Isentropic
expansion
1.4 MPa
5 MPa
FIGURE 8–15
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–5.
STEAM
TURBINE
P1  5 MPa
T1  450C
P2  1.4 MPa
s2  s1
wout  ?

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
313
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–5
■PROPERTY DIAGRAMS INVOLVING ENTROPY
Property diagrams serve as great visual aids in the thermodynamic analysis
of processes. We have used P-v and T-v diagrams extensively in previous
chapters in conjunction with the first law of thermodynamics. In the second-
law analysis, it is very helpful to plot the processes on diagrams for which
one of the coordinates is entropy. The two diagrams commonly used in the
second-law analysis are the temperature-entropy and the enthalpy-entropy
diagrams.
Consider the defining equation of entropy (Eq. 8–4). It can be
rearranged as
(8–14)
As shown in Fig. 8–16, dQrev int corresponds to a differential area on a T-S
diagram. The total heat transfer during an internally reversible process is
determined by integration to be
(8–15)
which corresponds to the area under the process curve on a T-S diagram.
Therefore, we conclude that the area under the process curve on a T-S dia-
gram represents heat transfer during an internally reversible process. This
is somewhat analogous to reversible boundary work being represented by
Q int rev  
2
1
T dS  
1kJ2
dQint rev  T dS   
1kJ2
308
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
The power output of the turbine is determined from the rate form of the
energy balance,
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
The inlet state is completely specified since two properties are given. But
only one property (pressure) is given at the final state, and we need one
more property to fix it. The second property comes from the observation that
the process is reversible and adiabatic, and thus isentropic. Therefore, s2 
s1, and
State 1:
State 2:
Then the work output of the turbine per unit mass of the steam becomes
wout  h1  h2  3317.2  2967.4  349.8 kJ/kg
P2  1.4 MPa
s2  s1
f
h2  2967.4 kJ>kg
P1  5 MPa
T1  450°C f
h1  3317.2 kJ>kg
s1  6.8210 kJ>kg # K
W#
out  m# 1h1  h22
m# h1  W#
out  m# h2  
1since Q#  0, ke   pe  02
E#
in  E#
out
E#
in  E#
out          dEsystem/dt      
 0
∫
Internally
reversible
process
T
S
dA = T dS
dA = δQ
Area = T dS = Q
1
2
FIGURE 8–16
On a T-S diagram, the area under the
process curve represents the heat
transfer for internally reversible
processes.
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
1444444442444444443

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
314
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the area under the process curve on a P-V diagram. Note that the area under
the process curve represents heat transfer for processes that are internally
(or totally) reversible. The area has no meaning for irreversible processes.
Equations 8–14 and 8–15 can also be expressed on a unit-mass basis as
(8–16)
and
(8–17)
To perform the integrations in Eqs. 8–15 and 8–17, one needs to know the
relationship between T and s during a process. One special case for which
these integrations can be performed easily is the internally reversible
isothermal process. It yields
(8–18)
or
(8–19)
where T0 is the constant temperature and S is the entropy change of the
system during the process.
An isentropic process on a T-s diagram is easily recognized as a vertical-
line segment. This is expected since an isentropic process involves no
heat transfer, and therefore the area under the process path must be zero
(Fig. 8–17). The T-s diagrams serve as valuable tools for visualizing the
second-law aspects of processes and cycles, and thus they are frequently
used in thermodynamics. The T-s diagram of water is given in the appendix
in Fig. A–9.
Another diagram commonly used in engineering is the enthalpy-entropy
diagram, which is quite valuable in the analysis of steady-flow devices such
as turbines, compressors, and nozzles. The coordinates of an h-s diagram
represent two properties of major interest: enthalpy, which is a primary
property in the first-law analysis of the steady-flow devices, and entropy,
which is the property that accounts for irreversibilities during adiabatic
processes. In analyzing the steady flow of steam through an adiabatic tur-
bine, for example, the vertical distance between the inlet and the exit states
h is a measure of the work output of the turbine, and the horizontal dis-
tance s is a measure of the irreversibilities associated with the process
(Fig. 8–18).
The h-s diagram is also called a Mollier diagram after the German scien-
tist R. Mollier (1863–1935). An h-s diagram is given in the appendix for
steam in Fig. A–10.
qint rev  T0 ¢s  
1kJ>kg2
Q int rev  T0 ¢S  
1kJ2
qint rev  
2
1
T ds  
1kJ>kg2
dqint rev  T ds  
1kJ>kg2
Chapter 8
|
309
T
s
s2 = s1
2
Isentropic
process
1
FIGURE 8–17
The isentropic process appears as a
vertical line segment on a T-s diagram.
h
s
1
2
Δs
Δh
FIGURE 8–18
For adiabatic steady-flow devices, the
vertical distance h on an h-s diagram
is a measure of work, and the
horizontal distance s is a measure of
irreversibilities.
EXAMPLE 8–6
The T-S Diagram of the Carnot Cycle
Show the Carnot cycle on a T-S diagram and indicate the areas that repre-
sent the heat supplied QH, heat rejected QL, and the net work output Wnet,out
on this diagram.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
315
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–6
■WHAT IS ENTROPY?
It is clear from the previous discussion that entropy is a useful property and
serves as a valuable tool in the second-law analysis of engineering devices.
But this does not mean that we know and understand entropy well. Because
we do not. In fact, we cannot even give an adequate answer to the question,
What is entropy? Not being able to describe entropy fully, however, does
not take anything away from its usefulness. We could not define energy
either, but it did not interfere with our understanding of energy transforma-
tions and the conservation of energy principle. Granted, entropy is not a
household word like energy. But with continued use, our understanding of
entropy will deepen, and our appreciation of it will grow. The next discus-
sion should shed some light on the physical meaning of entropy by consid-
ering the microscopic nature of matter.
Entropy can be viewed as a measure of molecular disorder, or molecular
randomness. As a system becomes more disordered, the positions of the mol-
ecules become less predictable and the entropy increases. Thus, it is not sur-
prising that the entropy of a substance is lowest in the solid phase and highest
in the gas phase (Fig. 8–20). In the solid phase, the molecules of a substance
continually oscillate about their equilibrium positions, but they cannot move
relative to each other, and their position at any instant can be predicted with
good certainty. In the gas phase, however, the molecules move about at ran-
dom, collide with each other, and change direction, making it extremely diffi-
cult to predict accurately the microscopic state of a system at any instant.
Associated with this molecular chaos is a high value of entropy.
When viewed microscopically (from a statistical thermodynamics point of
view), an isolated system that appears to be at a state of equilibrium may
exhibit a high level of activity because of the continual motion of the mole-
cules. To each state of macroscopic equilibrium there corresponds a large
number of possible microscopic states or molecular configurations. The
entropy of a system is related to the total number of possible microscopic
310
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Solution
The Carnot cycle is to be shown on a T-S diagram, and the areas
that represent QH, QL, and Wnet,out are to be indicated.
Analysis
Recall that the Carnot cycle is made up of two reversible isother-
mal (T  constant) processes and two isentropic (s  constant) processes.
These four processes form a rectangle on a T-S diagram, as shown in Fig.
8–19.
On a T-S diagram, the area under the process curve represents the heat
transfer for that process. Thus the area A12B represents QH, the area A43B
represents QL, and the difference between these two (the area in color) rep-
resents the net work since
Therefore, the area enclosed by the path of a cycle (area 1234) on a T-S dia-
gram represents the net work. Recall that the area enclosed by the path of a
cycle also represents the net work on a P-V diagram.
Wnet,out  Q H  Q L
T
S
S1 = S4
S2 = S3
Wnet
A
B
4
3
1
2
TH
TL
FIGURE 8–19
The T-S diagram of a Carnot cycle
(Example 8–6).
LIQUID
SOLID
GAS
Entropy,
kJ/kg   K
FIGURE 8–20
The level of molecular disorder
(entropy) of a substance increases as it
melts or evaporates.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
316
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
states of that system, called thermodynamic probability p, by the Boltz-
mann relation, expressed as
(8–20)
where k  1.3806 
 1023 J/K is the Boltzmann constant. Therefore, from
a microscopic point of view, the entropy of a system increases whenever the
molecular randomness or uncertainty (i.e., molecular probability) of a sys-
tem increases. Thus, entropy is a measure of molecular disorder, and the
molecular disorder of an isolated system increases anytime it undergoes a
process.
As mentioned earlier, the molecules of a substance in solid phase continu-
ally oscillate, creating an uncertainty about their position. These oscilla-
tions, however, fade as the temperature is decreased, and the molecules
supposedly become motionless at absolute zero. This represents a state of
ultimate molecular order (and minimum energy). Therefore, the entropy of a
pure crystalline substance at absolute zero temperature is zero since there is
no uncertainty about the state of the molecules at that instant (Fig. 8–21).
This statement is known as the third law of thermodynamics. The third
law of thermodynamics provides an absolute reference point for the deter-
mination of entropy. The entropy determined relative to this point is called
absolute entropy, and it is extremely useful in the thermodynamic analysis
of chemical reactions. Notice that the entropy of a substance that is not pure
crystalline (such as a solid solution) is not zero at absolute zero tempera-
ture. This is because more than one molecular configuration exists for such
substances, which introduces some uncertainty about the microscopic state
of the substance.
Molecules in the gas phase possess a considerable amount of kinetic
energy. However, we know that no matter how large their kinetic energies
are, the gas molecules do not rotate a paddle wheel inserted into the con-
tainer and produce work. This is because the gas molecules, and the energy
they possess, are disorganized. Probably the number of molecules trying to
rotate the wheel in one direction at any instant is equal to the number of
molecules that are trying to rotate it in the opposite direction, causing the
wheel to remain motionless. Therefore, we cannot extract any useful work
directly from disorganized energy (Fig. 8–22).
Now consider a rotating shaft shown in Fig. 8–23. This time the energy of
the molecules is completely organized since the molecules of the shaft are
rotating in the same direction together. This organized energy can readily be
used to perform useful tasks such as raising a weight or generating electric-
ity. Being an organized form of energy, work is free of disorder or random-
ness and thus free of entropy. There is no entropy transfer associated with
energy transfer as work. Therefore, in the absence of any friction, the
process of raising a weight by a rotating shaft (or a flywheel) does not pro-
duce any entropy. Any process that does not produce a net entropy is
reversible, and thus the process just described can be reversed by lowering
the weight. Therefore, energy is not degraded during this process, and no
potential to do work is lost.
Instead of raising a weight, let us operate the paddle wheel in a container
filled with a gas, as shown in Fig. 8–24. The paddle-wheel work in this case
S  k ln p
Chapter 8
|
311
LOAD
FIGURE 8–22
Disorganized energy does not create
much useful effect, no matter how
large it is.
Wsh
WEIGHT
FIGURE 8–23
In the absence of friction, raising a
weight by a rotating shaft does not
create any disorder (entropy), and thus
energy is not degraded during this
process.
Pure crystal
T = 0 K
Entropy = 0
FIGURE 8–21
A pure crystalline substance at
absolute zero temperature is in 
perfect order, and its entropy is zero
(the third law of thermodynamics).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
317
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
is converted to the internal energy of the gas, as evidenced by a rise in gas
temperature, creating a higher level of molecular disorder in the container.
This process is quite different from raising a weight since the organized
paddle-wheel energy is now converted to a highly disorganized form of
energy, which cannot be converted back to the paddle wheel as the rota-
tional kinetic energy. Only a portion of this energy can be converted to work
by partially reorganizing it through the use of a heat engine. Therefore,
energy is degraded during this process, the ability to do work is reduced,
molecular disorder is produced, and associated with all this is an increase in
entropy.
The quantity of energy is always preserved during an actual process (the
first law), but the quality is bound to decrease (the second law). This
decrease in quality is always accompanied by an increase in entropy. As an
example, consider the transfer of 10 kJ of energy as heat from a hot medium
to a cold one. At the end of the process, we still have the 10 kJ of energy,
but at a lower temperature and thus at a lower quality.
Heat is, in essence, a form of disorganized energy, and some disorganiza-
tion (entropy) flows with heat (Fig. 8–25). As a result, the entropy and the
level of molecular disorder or randomness of the hot body decreases with
the entropy and the level of molecular disorder of the cold body increases.
The second law requires that the increase in entropy of the cold body be
greater than the decrease in entropy of the hot body, and thus the net
entropy of the combined system (the cold body and the hot body) increases.
That is, the combined system is at a state of greater disorder at the final
state. Thus we can conclude that processes can occur only in the direction
of increased overall entropy or molecular disorder. That is, the entire uni-
verse is getting more and more chaotic every day.
Entropy and Entropy Generation in Daily Life
The concept of entropy can also be applied to other areas. Entropy can be
viewed as a measure of disorder or disorganization in a system. Likewise,
entropy generation can be viewed as a measure of disorder or disorganiza-
tion generated during a process. The concept of entropy is not used in daily
life nearly as extensively as the concept of energy, even though entropy is
readily applicable to various aspects of daily life. The extension of the
entropy concept to nontechnical fields is not a novel idea. It has been the
topic of several articles, and even some books. Next we present several ordi-
nary events and show their relevance to the concept of entropy and entropy
generation.
Efficient people lead low-entropy (highly organized) lives. They have a
place for everything (minimum uncertainty), and it takes minimum energy
for them to locate something. Inefficient people, on the other hand, are dis-
organized and lead high-entropy lives. It takes them minutes (if not hours)
to find something they need, and they are likely to create a bigger disorder
as they are searching since they will probably conduct the search in a disor-
ganized manner (Fig. 8–26). People leading high-entropy lifestyles are
always on the run, and never seem to catch up.
You probably noticed (with frustration) that some people seem to learn
fast and remember well what they learn. We can call this type of learning
312
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
HOT BODY
80°C
(Entropy
decreases)
COLD BODY
20°C
(Entropy
increases)
Heat
FIGURE 8–25
During a heat transfer process, the net
entropy increases. (The increase in the
entropy of the cold body more than
offsets the decrease in the entropy of
the hot body.)
FIGURE 8–26
The use of entropy (disorganization,
uncertainty) is not limited to
thermodynamics.
© Reprinted with permission of King Features
Syndicate.
Wsh
GAS
T
FIGURE 8–24
The paddle-wheel work done on a gas
increases the level of disorder
(entropy) of the gas, and thus energy is
degraded during this process.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
318
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
organized or low-entropy learning. These people make a conscientious
effort to file the new information properly by relating it to their existing
knowledge base and creating a solid information network in their minds. On
the other hand, people who throw the information into their minds as they
study, with no effort to secure it, may think they are learning. They are
bound to discover otherwise when they need to locate the information, for
example, during a test. It is not easy to retrieve information from a database
that is, in a sense, in the gas phase. Students who have blackouts during
tests should reexamine their study habits.
A library with a good shelving and indexing system can be viewed as a
low-entropy library because of the high level of organization. Likewise, a
library with a poor shelving and indexing system can be viewed as a high-
entropy library because of the high level of disorganization. A library with no
indexing system is like no library, since a book is of no value if it cannot be
found.
Consider two identical buildings, each containing one million books. In
the first building, the books are piled on top of each other, whereas in the
second building they are highly organized, shelved, and indexed for easy
reference. There is no doubt about which building a student will prefer to go
to for checking out a certain book. Yet, some may argue from the first-law
point of view that these two buildings are equivalent since the mass and
knowledge content of the two buildings are identical, despite the high level
of disorganization (entropy) in the first building. This example illustrates
that any realistic comparisons should involve the second-law point of view.
Two textbooks that seem to be identical because both cover basically the
same topics and present the same information may actually be very different
depending on how they cover the topics. After all, two seemingly identical
cars are not so identical if one goes only half as many miles as the other one
on the same amount of fuel. Likewise, two seemingly identical books are
not so identical if it takes twice as long to learn a topic from one of them as
it does from the other. Thus, comparisons made on the basis of the first law
only may be highly misleading.
Having a disorganized (high-entropy) army is like having no army at all. It
is no coincidence that the command centers of any armed forces are among
the primary targets during a war. One army that consists of 10 divisions is 10
times more powerful than 10 armies each consisting of a single division.
Likewise, one country that consists of 10 states is more powerful than 10
countries, each consisting of a single state. The United States would not be
such a powerful country if there were 50 independent countries in its place
instead of a single country with 50 states. The European Union has the poten-
tial to be a new economic and political superpower. The old cliché “divide
and conquer” can be rephrased as “increase the entropy and conquer.”
We know that mechanical friction is always accompanied by entropy gen-
eration, and thus reduced performance. We can generalize this to daily life:
friction in the workplace with fellow workers is bound to generate entropy,
and thus adversely affect performance (Fig. 8–27). It results in reduced 
productivity.
We also know that unrestrained expansion (or explosion) and uncon-
trolled electron exchange (chemical reactions) generate entropy and are
highly irreversible. Likewise, unrestrained opening of the mouth to scatter
Chapter 8
|
313
FIGURE 8–27
As in mechanical systems, friction in
the workplace is bound to generate
entropy and reduce performance.
© Vol. 26/PhotoDisc

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
319
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
angry words is highly irreversible since this generates entropy, and it can
cause considerable damage. A person who gets up in anger is bound to sit
down at a loss. Hopefully, someday we will be able to come up with some
procedures to quantify entropy generated during nontechnical activities, and
maybe even pinpoint its primary sources and magnitude.
8–7
■THE T ds RELATIONS
Recall that the quantity (dQ/T)int rev corresponds to a differential change in
the property entropy. The entropy change for a process, then, can be evalu-
ated by integrating dQ/T along some imaginary internally reversible path
between the actual end states. For isothermal internally reversible processes,
this integration is straightforward. But when the temperature varies during
the process, we have to have a relation between dQ and T to perform this
integration. Finding such relations is what we intend to do in this section.
The differential form of the conservation of energy equation for a closed
stationary system (a fixed mass) containing a simple compressible substance
can be expressed for an internally reversible process as
(8–21)
But
Thus,
(8–22)
or
(8–23)
This equation is known as the first T ds, or Gibbs, equation. Notice that the
only type of work interaction a simple compressible system may involve as
it undergoes an internally reversible process is the boundary work.
The second T ds equation is obtained by eliminating du from Eq. 8–23 by
using the definition of enthalpy (h  u  Pv):
(8–24)
Equations 8–23 and 8–24 are extremely valuable since they relate entropy
changes of a system to the changes in other properties. Unlike Eq. 8–4, they
are property relations and therefore are independent of the type of the
processes.
These T ds relations are developed with an internally reversible process in
mind since the entropy change between two states must be evaluated along
a reversible path. However, the results obtained are valid for both reversible
and irreversible processes since entropy is a property and the change in a
property between two states is independent of the type of process the sys-
tem undergoes. Equations 8–23 and 8–24 are relations between the proper-
ties of a unit mass of a simple compressible system as it undergoes a change
of state, and they are applicable whether the change occurs in a closed or an
open system (Fig. 8–28).
h  u  Pv
1Eq. 8–232
¡
¡
dh  du  P dv  v dP
T ds  du  P dv
f T ds  dh  v dP
T ds  du  P dv  
1kJ>kg2
T dS  dU  P dV  
1kJ2
dWint rev,out  P dV
dQ int rev  T dS
dQ int rev  dWint rev,out  dU
314
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
CV
Closed
system
T ds = du + P d  v
T ds = dh – v  dP
FIGURE 8–28
The T ds relations are valid for both
reversible and irreversible processes
and for both closed and open systems.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
320
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Explicit relations for differential changes in entropy are obtained by solv-
ing for ds in Eqs. 8–23 and 8–24:
(8–25)
and
(8–26)
The entropy change during a process can be determined by integrating
either of these equations between the initial and the final states. To perform
these integrations, however, we must know the relationship between du or
dh and the temperature (such as du  cv dT and dh  cp dT for ideal gases)
as well as the equation of state for the substance (such as the ideal-gas
equation of state Pv  RT). For substances for which such relations exist,
the integration of Eq. 8–25 or 8–26 is straightforward. For other substances,
we have to rely on tabulated data.
The T ds relations for nonsimple systems, that is, systems that involve
more than one mode of quasi-equilibrium work, can be obtained in a similar
manner by including all the relevant quasi-equilibrium work modes.
8–8
■ENTROPY CHANGE OF LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS
Recall that liquids and solids can be approximated as incompressible sub-
stances since their specific volumes remain nearly constant during a process.
Thus, dv  0 for liquids and solids, and Eq. 8–25 for this case reduces to
(8–27)
since cp  cv  c and du  c dT for incompressible substances. Then the
entropy change during a process is determined by integration to be
Liquids, solids:
(8–28)
where cavg is the average specific heat of the substance over the given tem-
perature interval. Note that the entropy change of a truly incompressible
substance depends on temperature only and is independent of pressure.
Equation 8–28 can be used to determine the entropy changes of solids and
liquids with reasonable accuracy. However, for liquids that expand consider-
ably with temperature, it may be necessary to consider the effects of volume
change in calculations. This is especially the case when the temperature
change is large.
A relation for isentropic processes of liquids and solids is obtained by set-
ting the entropy change relation above equal to zero. It gives
Isentropic:
(8–29)
That is, the temperature of a truly incompressible substance remains con-
stant during an isentropic process. Therefore, the isentropic process of an
incompressible substance is also isothermal. This behavior is closely
approximated by liquids and solids.
s2  s1  cavg ln T2
T1
 0 
S  
T2  T1
s2  s1  
2
1
c 1T2 dT
T  cavg ln T2
T1  
1kJ>kg # K2
ds  du
T  c dT
T
ds  dh
T  v dP
T
ds  du
T  P dv
T
Chapter 8
|
315

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
321
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
316
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 8–7
Effect of Density of a Liquid on Entropy
Liquid methane is commonly used in various cryogenic applications. The crit-
ical temperature of methane is 191 K (or 82°C), and thus methane must be
maintained below 191 K to keep it in liquid phase. The properties of liquid
methane at various temperatures and pressures are given in Table 8–1. Deter-
mine the entropy change of liquid methane as it undergoes a process from
110 K and 1 MPa to 120 K and 5 MPa (a) using tabulated properties and (b)
approximating liquid methane as an incompressible substance. What is the
error involved in the latter case?
Solution
Liquid methane undergoes a process between two specified
states. The entropy change of methane is to be determined by using actual
data and by assuming methane to be incompressible.
Analysis
(a) We consider a unit mass of liquid methane (Fig. 8–29). The
properties of the methane at the initial and final states are
State 1:
State 2:
Therefore,
(b) Approximating liquid methane as an incompressible substance, its entropy
change is determined to be
since
cavg 
cp1  cp2
2
 3.471  3.486
2
 3.4785 kJ>kg # K
¢s  cavg ln T2
T1
 13.4785 kJ>kg # K2 ln 120 K
110 K  0.303 kJ/kg # K
¢s  s2  s1  5.145  4.875  0.270 kJ/kg # K
P2  5 MPa
T2  120 K f
s2  5.145 kJ>kg # K
cp2  3.486 kJ>kg # K
P1  1 MPa
T1  110 K f
s1  4.875 kJ>kg # K
cp1  3.471 kJ>kg # K
TABLE 8–1
Properties of liquid methane
Specific
Temp.,
Pressure,
Density,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
heat,
T, K
P, MPa
r, kg/m3
h, kJ/kg
s, kJ/kg · K
cp, kJ/kg · K
110
0.5
425.3
208.3
4.878
3.476
1.0
425.8
209.0
4.875
3.471
2.0
426.6
210.5
4.867
3.460
5.0
429.1
215.0
4.844
3.432
120
0.5
410.4
243.4
5.185
3.551
1.0
411.0
244.1
5.180
3.543
2.0
412.0
245.4
5.171
3.528
5.0
415.2
249.6
5.145
3.486
P1 = 1 MPa
T1 = 110 K
P2 = 5 MPa
T2 = 120 K
Methane
pump
Heat
FIGURE 8–29
Schematic for Example 8–7.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
322
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
317
Therefore, the error involved in approximating liquid methane as an incom-
pressible substance is
Discussion
This result is not surprising since the density of liquid methane
changes during this process from 425.8 to 415.2 kg/m3 (about 3 percent),
which makes us question the validity of the incompressible substance
assumption. Still, this assumption enables us to obtain reasonably accurate
results with less effort, which proves to be very convenient in the absence of
compressed liquid data.
Error  0¢sactual  ¢sideal0
¢sactual
 |0.270  0.303|
0.270
 0.122 (or 12.2%)
EXAMPLE 8–8
Economics of Replacing a Valve by a Turbine
A cryogenic manufacturing facility handles liquid methane at 115 K and
5 MPa at a rate of 0.280 m3/s . A process requires dropping the pressure of
liquid methane to 1 MPa, which is done by throttling the liquid methane by
passing it through a flow resistance such as a valve. A recently hired engineer
proposes to replace the throttling valve by a turbine in order to produce power
while dropping the pressure to 1 MPa. Using data from Table 8–1, determine
the maximum amount of power that can be produced by such a turbine. Also,
determine how much this turbine will save the facility from electricity usage
costs per year if the turbine operates continuously (8760 h/yr) and the facility
pays $0.075/kWh for electricity.
Solution
Liquid methane is expanded in a turbine to a specified pressure
at a specified rate. The maximum power that this turbine can produce and
the amount of money it can save per year are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0, ECV  0, and SCV  0. 2 The tur-
bine is adiabatic and thus there is no heat transfer. 3 The process is
reversible. 4 Kinetic and potential energies are negligible.
Analysis
We take the turbine as the system (Fig. 8–30). This is a control
volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process. We note
that there is only one inlet and one exit and thus m.
1  m.
2  m. .
The assumptions above are reasonable since a turbine is normally well
insulated and it must involve no irreversibilities for best performance and
thus maximum power production. Therefore, the process through the turbine
must be reversible adiabatic or isentropic. Then, s2  s1 and
State 1:
State 2:
Also, the mass flow rate of liquid methane is
m#  r1V
#
1  1422.15 kg>m32 10.280 m3>s2  118.2 kg>s
P2  1 MPa
s2  s1
f
h2  222.8 kJ>kg
P1  5 MPa
T1  115 K f
h1  232.3 kJ>kg
s1  4.9945 kJ>kg # K
r1  422.15 kg>s
FIGURE 8–30
A 1.0-MW liquified natural gas (LNG)
turbine with 95-cm turbine runner
diameter being installed in a cryogenic
test facility.
Courtesy of Ebara International Corporation,
Cryodynamics Division, Sparks, Nevada.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
323
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–9
■THE ENTROPY CHANGE OF IDEAL GASES
An expression for the entropy change of an ideal gas can be obtained from
Eq. 8–25 or 8–26 by employing the property relations for ideal gases (Fig.
8–31). By substituting du  cv dT and P  RT/v into Eq. 8–25, the differ-
ential entropy change of an ideal gas becomes
(8–30)
ds  cv dT
T  R dv
v
318
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Then the power output of the turbine is determined from the rate form of the
energy balance to be
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal,
by heat, work, and mass
kinetic, potential, etc., energies
For continuous operation (365 
 24  8760 h), the amount of power pro-
duced per year is
At $0.075/kWh, the amount of money this turbine can save the facility is
That is, this turbine can save the facility $737,800 a year by simply taking
advantage of the potential that is currently being wasted by a throttling
valve, and the engineer who made this observation should be rewarded.
Discussion
This example shows the importance of the property entropy since
it enabled us to quantify the work potential that is being wasted. In practice,
the turbine will not be isentropic, and thus the power produced will be less.
The analysis above gave us the upper limit. An actual turbine-generator
assembly can utilize about 80 percent of the potential and produce more than
900 kW of power while saving the facility more than $600,000 a year.
It can also be shown that the temperature of methane drops to 113.9 K
(a drop of 1.1 K) during the isentropic expansion process in the turbine
instead of remaining constant at 115 K as would be the case if methane were
assumed to be an incompressible substance. The temperature of methane
would rise to 116.6 K (a rise of 1.6 K) during the throttling process.
 $737,800/yr
 10.9837 
 107 kWh>yr2 1$0.075>kWh2
 Annual power savings  1Annual power production2 1Unit cost of power2
 0.9837 
 107 kWh>yr
 Annual power production  W
#
out 
 ¢t  11123 kW2 18760 h>yr2
 1123 kW
 1118.2 kg>s2 1232.3  222.82 kJ>kg
W#
out  m# 1h1  h22
m# h1  W#
out  m# h2    1since Q#  0, ke   pe  02
E#
in  E#
out
E#
in  E#
out         dEsystem/dt          0
0 (steady)
¡
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
1444444442444444443

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
324
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The entropy change for a process is obtained by integrating this relation
between the end states:
(8–31)
A second relation for the entropy change of an ideal gas is obtained in a
similar manner by substituting dh  cp dT and v  RT/P into Eq. 8–26 and
integrating. The result is
(8–32)
The specific heats of ideal gases, with the exception of monatomic gases,
depend on temperature, and the integrals in Eqs. 8–31 and 8–32 cannot be
performed unless the dependence of cv and cp on temperature is known.
Even when the cv(T) and cp(T) functions are available, performing long
integrations every time entropy change is calculated is not practical. Then
two reasonable choices are left: either perform these integrations by simply
assuming constant specific heats or evaluate those integrals once and tabu-
late the results. Both approaches are presented next.
Constant Specific Heats (Approximate Analysis)
Assuming constant specific heats for ideal gases is a common approxima-
tion, and we used this assumption before on several occasions. It usually
simplifies the analysis greatly, and the price we pay for this convenience is
some loss in accuracy. The magnitude of the error introduced by this
assumption depends on the situation at hand. For example, for monatomic
ideal gases such as helium, the specific heats are independent of tempera-
ture, and therefore the constant-specific-heat assumption introduces no
error. For ideal gases whose specific heats vary almost linearly in the tem-
perature range of interest, the possible error is minimized by using specific
heat values evaluated at the average temperature (Fig. 8–32). The results
obtained in this way usually are sufficiently accurate if the temperature
range is not greater than a few hundred degrees.
The entropy-change relations for ideal gases under the constant-specific-
heat assumption are easily obtained by replacing cv(T) and cp(T) in Eqs. 8–31
and 8–32 by cv,avg and cp,avg, respectively, and performing the integrations. We
obtain
(8–33)
and
(8–34)
Entropy changes can also be expressed on a unit-mole basis by multiplying
these relations by molar mass:
(8–35)
s2  s1  cv,avg ln T2
T1
 Ru ln v2
v1  
1kJ>kmol # K2
s2  s1  cp,avg ln T2
T1
 R ln P2
P1  
1kJ>kg # K2
s2  s1  cv,avg ln T2
T1
 R ln v2
v1  
1kJ>kg # K2
s2  s1  
2
1
cp1T2 dT
T  R ln P2
P1
s2  s1  
2
1
 cv1T2 dT
T  R ln v2
v1
Chapter 8
|
319
Pv = RT
du = cv dT
dh = cp dT
FIGURE 8–31
A broadcast from channel IG.
© Vol. 1/PhotoDisc
T1
c p
T
T2
cp,avg
Tavg
Average cp
Actual cp
FIGURE 8–32
Under the constant-specific-heat
assumption, the specific heat is
assumed to be constant at some
average value.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
325
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
and
(8–36)
Variable Specific Heats (Exact Analysis)
When the temperature change during a process is large and the specific
heats of the ideal gas vary nonlinearly within the temperature range, the
assumption of constant specific heats may lead to considerable errors in
entropy-change calculations. For those cases, the variation of specific heats
with temperature should be properly accounted for by utilizing accurate
relations for the specific heats as a function of temperature. The entropy
change during a process is then determined by substituting these cv(T) or
cp(T) relations into Eq. 8–31 or 8–32 and performing the integrations.
Instead of performing these laborious integrals each time we have a new
process, it is convenient to perform these integrals once and tabulate the
results. For this purpose, we choose absolute zero as the reference tempera-
ture and define a function s° as
(8–37)
Obviously, s° is a function of temperature alone, and its value is zero at
absolute zero temperature. The values of s° are calculated at various temper-
atures, and the results are tabulated in the appendix as a function of temper-
ature for air. Given this definition, the integral in Eq. 8–32 becomes
(8–38)
where s°2 is the value of s° at T2 and s°1 is the value at T1. Thus,
(8–39)
It can also be expressed on a unit-mole basis as
(8–40)
Note that unlike internal energy and enthalpy, the entropy of an ideal gas
varies with specific volume or pressure as well as the temperature. There-
fore, entropy cannot be tabulated as a function of temperature alone. The 
s° values in the tables account for the temperature dependence of entropy
(Fig. 8–33). The variation of entropy with pressure is accounted for by the
last term in Eq. 8–39. Another relation for entropy change can be developed
based on Eq. 8–31, but this would require the definition of another function
and tabulation of its values, which is not practical.
s2  s1  s°2  s°1  Ru ln P2
P1  
1kJ>kmol # K2
s2  s1  s°2  s°1  R ln P2
P1  
1kJ>kg # K2

2
1
cp1T2 dT
T  s°2  s°1
s°  
T
0
cp1T2 dT
T
s2  s1  cp,avg ln T2
T1
 Ru ln P2
P1  
1kJ>kmol # K2
320
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(Table A-21)
T, K
...
300
310
320
...
s°, kJ/kg • K
...
1.70203
1.73498
1.76690
...
FIGURE 8–33
The entropy of an ideal gas depends
on both T and P. The function s
represents only the temperature-
dependent part of entropy.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
326
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
321
EXAMPLE 8–9
Entropy Change of an Ideal Gas
Air is compressed from an initial state of 100 kPa and 17°C to a final state
of 600 kPa and 57°C. Determine the entropy change of air during this com-
pression process by using (a) property values from the air table and (b) aver-
age specific heats.
Solution
Air is compressed between two specified states. The entropy
change of air is to be determined by using tabulated property values and
also by using average specific heats.
Assumptions
Air is an ideal gas since it is at a high temperature and low
pressure relative to its critical-point values. Therefore, entropy change rela-
tions developed under the ideal-gas assumption are applicable.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the T-s diagram for the process are
given in Fig. 8–34. We note that both the initial and the final states of air
are completely specified.
(a) The properties of air are given in the air table (Table A–21). Reading s°
values at given temperatures and substituting, we find
(b) The entropy change of air during this process can also be determined
approximately from Eq. 8–34 by using a cp value at the average temperature
of 37°C (Table A–2b) and treating it as a constant:
Discussion
The two results above are almost identical since the change in
temperature during this process is relatively small (Fig. 8–35). When the
temperature change is large, however, they may differ significantly. For those
cases, Eq. 8–39 should be used instead of Eq. 8–34 since it accounts for
the variation of specific heats with temperature.
 0.3842 kJ/kg # K
 11.006 kJ>kg # K2 ln 330 K
290 K  10.287 kJ>kg # K2 ln 600 kPa
100 kPa
s2  s1  cp,avg ln T2
T1
 R ln P2
P1
 0.3844 kJ/kg # K
 3 11.79783  1.668022 kJ>kg # K4  10.287 kJ>kg # K2 ln 600 kPa
100 kPa
s2  s1  s2°  s1°  R ln P2
P1
T
s
P2 = 600 kPa
P1 = 100 kPa
1
2
P2 = 600 kPa
T2 = 330 K
AIR
COMPRESSOR
P1 = 100 kPa
T1 = 290 K
FIGURE 8–34
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–9.
AIR
AIR
T1 = 290 K
= 290 K
T2 = 330 K
= 330 K
––
––
s2 – – s1 = 
= s2° – – s1° – – R lnln
= – 0.3844 kJ/kg 
= – 0.3844 kJ/kg . K
= – 0.3842 kJ/kg
= – 0.3842 kJ/kg . K
P2
P1
––
––
P2
P1
––
––
T2
T1
s2 – – s1 = 
= cp,avg
,avg ln       – 
ln
– R lnln
FIGURE 8–35
For small temperature differences, the
exact and approximate relations for
entropy changes of ideal gases give
almost identical results.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
327
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Isentropic Processes of Ideal Gases
Several relations for the isentropic processes of ideal gases can be obtained
by setting the entropy-change relations developed previously equal to zero.
Again, this is done first for the case of constant specific heats and then for
the case of variable specific heats.
Constant Specific Heats (Approximate Analysis)
When the constant-specific-heat assumption is valid, the isentropic relations
for ideal gases are obtained by setting Eqs. 8–33 and 8–34 equal to zero.
From Eq. 8–33,
which can be rearranged as
(8–41)
or
(8–42)
since R  cp  cv, k  cp/cv, and thus R/cv  k  1.
Equation 8–42 is the first isentropic relation for ideal gases under the
constant-specific-heat assumption. The second isentropic relation is obtained
in a similar manner from Eq. 8–34 with the following result:
(8–43)
The third isentropic relation is obtained by substituting Eq. 8–43 into 
Eq. 8–42 and simplifying:
(8–44)
Equations 8–42 through 8–44 can also be expressed in a compact form as
(8–45)
(8–46)
(8–47)
The specific heat ratio k, in general, varies with temperature, and thus an
average k value for the given temperature range should be used.
Note that the ideal-gas isentropic relations above, as the name implies, are
strictly valid for isentropic processes only when the constant-specific-heat
assumption is appropriate (Fig. 8–36).
Pv k constant
TP11k2>k  constant  
1ideal gas2
Tv k1  constant
a P2
P1
b
sconst.
 a v1
v2
b
k  
1ideal gas2
a T2
T1
b
sconst.
 a P2
P1
b
1k12>k  
1ideal gas2
a T2
T1
b
sconst.
 a v1
v2
b
k1  
1ideal gas2
ln T2
T1
 ln a v1
v2
b
R>cv
ln T2
T1
  R
cv    ln v2
v1
322
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
VALID FOR
*ideal gas
*isentropic process
*constant specific heats
T2
T1(
(
s = const.
P2
P1(
(
(k –1)/k
=
1
2(
(
k –1
= v
v
FIGURE 8–36
The isentropic relations of ideal gases
are valid for the isentropic processes
of ideal gases only.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
328
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Variable Specific Heats (Exact Analysis)
When the constant-specific-heat assumption is not appropriate, the isen-
tropic relations developed previously yields results that are not quite accu-
rate. For such cases, we should use an isentropic relation obtained from 
Eq. 8–39 that accounts for the variation of specific heats with temperature.
Setting this equation equal to zero gives
or
(8–48)
where s°2 is the s° value at the end of the isentropic process.
Relative Pressure and Relative Specific Volume
Equation 8–48 provides an accurate way of evaluating property changes of
ideal gases during isentropic processes since it accounts for the variation of
specific heats with temperature. However, it involves tedious iterations
when the volume ratio is given instead of the pressure ratio. This is quite an
inconvenience in optimization studies, which usually require numerous
repetitive calculations. To remedy this deficiency, we define two new
dimensionless quantities associated with isentropic processes.
The definition of the first is based on Eq. 8–48, which can be rearranged as
or
The quantity exp(s°/R) is defined as the relative pressure Pr. With this def-
inition, the last relation becomes
(8–49)
Note that the relative pressure Pr is a dimensionless quantity that is a func-
tion of temperature only since s° depends on temperature alone. Therefore,
values of Pr can be tabulated against temperature. This is done for air in
Table A–21. The use of Pr data is illustrated in Fig. 8–37.
Sometimes specific volume ratios are given instead of pressure ratios.
This is particularly the case when automotive engines are analyzed. In such
cases, one needs to work with volume ratios. Therefore, we define another
quantity related to specific volume ratios for isentropic processes. This is
done by utilizing the ideal-gas relation and Eq. 8–49:
P1v1
T1
 P2v2
T2
 S  v2
v1
 T2
T1
 P1
P2
 T2
T1
 Pr1
Pr2

T2>Pr2
T1>Pr1
a P2
P1
b
sconst.
 Pr2
Pr1
P2
P1

exp 1s°2 >R2
exp 1s°1 >R2
P2
P1
 exp s°2  s°1
R
s°2  s°1  R ln P2
P1
0  s°2  s°1  R ln P2
P1
Chapter 8
|
323
Process: isentropic
Given:
1, T
P
P
P
P
P
P P
1, and 2
Find: T2
T
..
.
...
...
Pr
..
.
...
...
T2
T1
r2 =
r1
r1
2
1
read
read
FIGURE 8–37
The use of Pr data for calculating the
final temperature during an isentropic
process.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
329
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The quantity T/Pr is a function of temperature only and is defined as rela-
tive specific volume vr. Thus,
(8–50)
Equations 8–49 and 8–50 are strictly valid for isentropic processes of
ideal gases only. They account for the variation of specific heats with tem-
perature and therefore give more accurate results than Eqs. 8–42 through
8–47. The values of Pr and vr are listed for air in Table A–21.
a v2
v1
b
sconst.
 vr2
vr1
324
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 8–10
Isentropic Compression of Air in a Car Engine
Air is compressed in a car engine from 22°C and 95 kPa in a reversible and
adiabatic manner. If the compression ratio V1/V2 of this engine is 8, deter-
mine the final temperature of the air.
Solution
Air is compressed in a car engine isentropically. For a given com-
pression ratio, the final air temperature is to be determined.
Assumptions
At specified conditions, air can be treated as an ideal gas.
Therefore, the isentropic relations for ideal gases are applicable.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the T-s diagram for the process are
given in Fig. 8–38.
This process is easily recognized as being isentropic since it is both
reversible and adiabatic. The final temperature for this isentropic process
can be determined from Eq. 8–50 with the help of relative specific volume
data (Table A–21), as illustrated in Fig. 8–39.
For closed systems:
At T1  295 K:
From Eq. 8–50:
Therefore, the temperature of air will increase by 367.7°C during this
process.
vr2  vr1a v2
v1
b  1647.92 a 1
8 b  80.99 S  T2  662.7 K
vr1  647.9
V2
V1
 v2
v1
T, K
s
1
2
AIR
P1 = 95 kPa
T1 = 295 K
V1
V2
= 8
v1 = const.
v2 = const.
295
Isentropic
compression
FIGURE 8–38
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–10.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
330
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
325
Alternative Solution
The final temperature could also be determined from
Eq. 8–42 by assuming constant specific heats for air:
The specific heat ratio k also varies with temperature, and we need to use the
value of k corresponding to the average temperature. However, the final tem-
perature is not given, and so we cannot determine the average temperature in
advance. For such cases, calculations can be started with a k value at the ini-
tial or the anticipated average temperature. This value could be refined later,
if necessary, and the calculations can be repeated. We know that the temper-
ature of the air will rise considerably during this adiabatic compression
process, so we guess the average temperature to be about 450 K. The k value
at this anticipated average temperature is determined from Table A–2b to be
1.391. Then the final temperature of air becomes
This gives an average temperature value of 480.1 K, which is sufficiently
close to the assumed value of 450 K. Therefore, it is not necessary to repeat
the calculations by using the k value at this average temperature.
The result obtained by assuming constant specific heats for this case is in
error by about 0.4 percent, which is rather small. This is not surprising since
the temperature change of air is relatively small (only a few hundred
degrees) and the specific heats of air vary almost linearly with temperature
in this temperature range.
T2  1295 K2 182 1.3911  665.2 K
a T2
T1
b
sconst.
 a v1
v2
b
k1
EXAMPLE 8–11
Isentropic Compression of an Ideal Gas
Helium gas is compressed by an adiabatic compressor from an initial state
of 14 psia and 50°F to a final temperature of 320°F in a reversible manner.
Determine the exit pressure of helium.
Solution
Helium is compressed from a given state to a specified pressure
isentropically. The exit pressure of helium is to be determined.
Assumptions
At specified conditions, helium can be treated as an ideal gas.
Therefore, the isentropic relations developed earlier for ideal gases are
applicable.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the T-s diagram for the process are
given in Fig. 8–40.
The specific heat ratio k of helium is 1.667 and is independent of tem-
perature in the region where it behaves as an ideal gas. Thus the final pres-
sure of helium can be determined from Eq. 8–43:
P2  P1a T2
T1
b
k>1k12
 114 psia2 a 780 R
510 R b
1.667>0.667
 40.5 psia
Process: isentropic
Given:
1, T1, and 2
Find: T2
T
..
.
...
...
r
..
.
...
...
T2
T1
=
read
read
v
v
v
v2
vr2
v1
vr1
vr1
FIGURE 8–39
The use of vr data for calculating the
final temperature during an isentropic
process (Example 8–10).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
331
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–10
■REVERSIBLE STEADY-FLOW WORK
The work done during a process depends on the path followed as well as on
the properties at the end states. Recall that reversible (quasi-equilibrium)
moving boundary work associated with closed systems is expressed in terms
of the fluid properties as
We mentioned that the quasi-equilibrium work interactions lead to the max-
imum work output for work-producing devices and the minimum work
input for work-consuming devices.
It would also be very insightful to express the work associated with
steady-flow devices in terms of fluid properties.
Taking the positive direction of work to be from the system (work out-
put), the energy balance for a steady-flow device undergoing an internally
reversible process can be expressed in differential form as
But
Substituting this into the relation above and canceling dh yield
Integrating, we find
(8–51)
When the changes in kinetic and potential energies are negligible, this equa-
tion reduces to
(8–52)
Equations 8–51 and 8–52 are relations for the reversible work output associ-
ated with an internally reversible process in a steady-flow device. They will
wrev  
2
1
v dP  
1kJ>kg2
wrev  
2
1
v dP  ¢ke  ¢pe  
1kJ>kg2
dwrev  v dP  dke  dpe
dqrev  T ds
T ds  dh  v dP
1Eq. 8–162
1Eq. 8–242 f 
dqrev  dh  v dP
dqrev  dwrev  dh  dke  dpe
Wb  
2
1
P dV
326
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
T, R
s
1
2
780
510
P1 = 14 psia
P2
Isentropic
compression
T2 = 780 R
P2 = ?
He
COMPRESSOR
P1 = 14 psia
T1 = 510 R
FIGURE 8–40
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–11.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
332
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
give a negative result when work is done on the system. To avoid the nega-
tive sign, Eq. 8–51 can be written for work input to steady-flow devices
such as compressors and pumps as
(8–53)
The resemblance between the v dP in these relations and P dv is striking.
They should not be confused with each other, however, since P dv is associ-
ated with reversible boundary work in closed systems (Fig. 8–41).
Obviously, one needs to know v as a function of P for the given process
to perform the integration. When the working fluid is incompressible, the
specific volume v remains constant during the process and can be taken out
of the integration. Then Eq. 8–51 simplifies to
(8–54)
For the steady flow of a liquid through a device that involves no work inter-
actions (such as a nozzle or a pipe section), the work term is zero, and the
equation above can be expressed as
(8–55)
which is known as the Bernoulli equation in fluid mechanics. It is devel-
oped for an internally reversible process and thus is applicable to incom-
pressible fluids that involve no irreversibilities such as friction or shock
waves. This equation can be modified, however, to incorporate these effects.
Equation 8–52 has far-reaching implications in engineering regarding
devices that produce or consume work steadily such as turbines, compres-
sors, and pumps. It is obvious from this equation that the reversible steady-
flow work is closely associated with the specific volume of the fluid flowing
through the device. The larger the specific volume, the larger the reversible
work produced or consumed by the steady-flow device (Fig. 8–42). This
conclusion is equally valid for actual steady-flow devices. Therefore, every
effort should be made to keep the specific volume of a fluid as small as pos-
sible during a compression process to minimize the work input and as large
as possible during an expansion process to maximize the work output.
In steam or gas power plants, the pressure rise in the pump or compressor
is equal to the pressure drop in the turbine if we disregard the pressure
losses in various other components. In steam power plants, the pump han-
dles liquid, which has a very small specific volume, and the turbine handles
vapor, whose specific volume is many times larger. Therefore, the work out-
put of the turbine is much larger than the work input to the pump. This is
one of the reasons for the wide-spread use of steam power plants in electric
power generation.
If we were to compress the steam exiting the turbine back to the turbine
inlet pressure before cooling it first in the condenser in order to “save” the
heat rejected, we would have to supply all the work produced by the turbine
back to the compressor. In reality, the required work input would be even
greater than the work output of the turbine because of the irreversibilities
present in both processes.
v 1P2  P12  V˛˛˛2
2  V˛˛˛1
2
2
 g1z2  z12  0
wrev  v 1P2  P12  ¢ke  ¢pe  
1kJ>kg2
wrev,in  
2
1
v dP  ¢ke  ¢pe
Chapter 8
|
327
wrev
1
2
P dv
wrev
wrev
= –∫1
2
v dP
wrev
(a) Steady-flow system
(b) Closed system
=∫
FIGURE 8–41
Reversible work relations for steady-
flow and closed systems.
= –∫1
2
v dP
w
= –∫1
2
v dP
w
= –∫1
2v dP
w
FIGURE 8–42
The larger the specific volume, the
greater the work produced (or
consumed) by a steady-flow device.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
333
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
In gas power plants, the working fluid (typically air) is compressed in the
gas phase, and a considerable portion of the work output of the turbine is
consumed by the compressor. As a result, a gas power plant delivers less net
work per unit mass of the working fluid.
328
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 8–12
Compressing a Substance in the Liquid versus
Gas Phases
Determine the compressor work input required to compress steam isentropi-
cally from 100 kPa to 1 MPa, assuming that the steam exists as (a) satu-
rated liquid and (b) saturated vapor at the inlet state.
Solution
Steam is to be compressed from a given pressure to a specified
pressure isentropically. The work input is to be determined for the cases of
steam being a saturated liquid and saturated vapor at the inlet.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Kinetic and potential
energy changes are negligible. 3 The process is given to be isentropic.
Analysis
We take first the turbine and then the pump as the system. Both
are control volumes since mass crosses the boundary. Sketches of the pump
and the turbine together with the T-s diagram are given in Fig. 8–43.
(a) In this case, steam is a saturated liquid initially, and its specific volume is
which remains essentially constant during the process. Thus,
(b) This time, steam is a saturated vapor initially and remains a vapor during
the entire compression process. Since the specific volume of a gas changes
considerably during a compression process, we need to know how v varies
with P to perform the integration in Eq. 8–53. This relation, in general, is not
readily available. But for an isentropic process, it is easily obtained from the
 0.94 kJ>kg
 10.001043 m3>kg2 3 11000  1002 kPa4˚a
1 kJ
1 kPa # m3 b
wrev,in  
2
1
v dP  v11P2  P12
v1  vf @ 100 kPa  0.001043 m3>kg  
1Table A–52
T
s
1
2
P2 = 1 MPa
P1 = 100 kPa
P1 = 100 kPa
P2 = 1 MPa
(a) Compressing
     a liquid
(b) Compressing
      a vapor
PUMP
1
2
1 MPa
100 kPa
(a)
(b)
COMPRESSOR
FIGURE 8–43
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–12.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
334
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Proof that Steady-Flow Devices Deliver the
Most and Consume the Least Work when
the Process Is Reversible
We have shown in Chapter 7 that cyclic devices (heat engines, refrigerators,
and heat pumps) deliver the most work and consume the least when
reversible processes are used. Now we demonstrate that this is also the case
for individual devices such as turbines and compressors in steady operation.
Consider two steady-flow devices, one reversible and the other irre-
versible, operating between the same inlet and exit states. Again taking heat
transfer to the system and work done by the system to be positive quantities,
the energy balance for each of these devices can be expressed in the differ-
ential form as
Actual:
Reversible:
The right-hand sides of these two equations are identical since both devices
are operating between the same end states. Thus,
or
However,
dqrev  T ds
dwrev  dwact  dqrev  dqact
dqact  dwact  dqrev  dwrev
dqrev  dwrev  dh  dke  dpe
dqact  dwact  dh  dke  dpe
Chapter 8
|
329
second T ds relation by setting ds  0:
Thus,
This result could also be obtained from the energy balance relation for an
isentropic steady-flow process. Next we determine the enthalpies:
State 1:
State 2:
Thus,
Discussion
Note that compressing steam in the vapor form would require
over 500 times more work than compressing it in the liquid form between the
same pressure limits.
wrev,in  13194.5  2675.02 kJ>kg  519.5 kJ/kg
P2  1 MPa
s2  s1
f
h2  3194.5 kJ>kg  
1Table A–62
P1  100 kPa
1sat. vapor2
f
h1  2675.0 kJ>kg
s1  7.3589 kJ>kg # K  
1Table A–52
wrev,in  
2
1
v dP  
2
1
dh  h2  h1
T ds  dh  v dP 
1Eq. 8-242
ds  0 
1isentropic process2 f 
v dP  dh

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
335
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Substituting this relation into the preceding equation and dividing each term
by T, we obtain
since
Also, T is the absolute temperature, which is always positive. Thus,
or
Therefore, work-producing devices such as turbines (w is positive) deliver
more work, and work-consuming devices such as pumps and compressors
(w is negative) require less work when they operate reversibly (Fig. 8–44).
8–11
■MINIMIZING THE COMPRESSOR WORK
We have just shown that the work input to a compressor is minimized when
the compression process is executed in an internally reversible manner.
When the changes in kinetic and potential energies are negligible, the com-
pressor work is given by (Eq. 8–53)
(8–56)
Obviously one way of minimizing the compressor work is to approximate
an internally reversible process as much as possible by minimizing the irre-
versibilities such as friction, turbulence, and nonquasi-equilibrium compres-
sion. The extent to which this can be accomplished is limited by economic
considerations. A second (and more practical) way of reducing the compres-
sor work is to keep the specific volume of the gas as small as possible dur-
ing the compression process. This is done by maintaining the temperature of
the gas as low as possible during compression since the specific volume of a
gas is proportional to temperature. Therefore, reducing the work input to a
compressor requires that the gas be cooled as it is compressed.
To have a better understanding of the effect of cooling during the com-
pression process, we compare the work input requirements for three kinds
of processes: an isentropic process (involves no cooling), a polytropic
process (involves some cooling), and an isothermal process (involves maxi-
mum cooling). Assuming all three processes are executed between the same
pressure levels (P1 and P2) in an internally reversible manner and the gas
behaves as an ideal gas (Pv  RT) with constant specific heats, we see that
the compression work is determined by performing the integration in 
Eq. 8–56 for each case, with the following results:
wrev,in  
2
1
v dP
wrev  wact
0wrev  0wact
ds  dqact
T
dwrev  dwact
T
 ds  dqact
T
 0
330
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
P1, T1
TURBINE
P2, T2
wrev > wact
FIGURE 8–44
A reversible turbine delivers more
work than an irreversible one if both
operate between the same end states.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
336
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Isentropic (Pvk  constant):
(8–57a)
Polytropic (Pvn  constant):
(8–57b)
Isothermal (Pv  constant):
(8–57c)
The three processes are plotted on a P-v diagram in Fig. 8–45 for the
same inlet state and exit pressure. On a P-v diagram, the area to the left of
the process curve is the integral of v dP. Thus it is a measure of the steady-
flow compression work. It is interesting to observe from this diagram that of
the three internally reversible cases considered, the adiabatic compression
(Pvk  constant) requires the maximum work and the isothermal compres-
sion (T  constant or Pv  constant) requires the minimum. The work
input requirement for the polytropic case (Pvn  constant) is between these
two and decreases as the polytropic exponent n is decreased, by increasing
the heat rejection during the compression process. If sufficient heat is
removed, the value of n approaches unity and the process becomes isother-
mal. One common way of cooling the gas during compression is to use
cooling jackets around the casing of the compressors.
Multistage Compression with Intercooling
It is clear from these arguments that cooling a gas as it is compressed is desir-
able since this reduces the required work input to the compressor. However,
often it is not possible to have adequate cooling through the casing of the
compressor, and it becomes necessary to use other techniques to achieve
effective cooling. One such technique is multistage compression with inter-
cooling, where the gas is compressed in stages and cooled between each
stage by passing it through a heat exchanger called an intercooler. Ideally, the
cooling process takes place at constant pressure, and the gas is cooled to the
initial temperature T1 at each intercooler. Multistage compression with inter-
cooling is especially attractive when a gas is to be compressed to very high
pressures.
The effect of intercooling on compressor work is graphically illustrated on
P-v and T-s diagrams in Fig. 8–46 for a two-stage compressor. The gas is
compressed in the first stage from P1 to an intermediate pressure Px, cooled at
constant pressure to the initial temperature T1, and compressed in the second
stage to the final pressure P2. The compression processes, in general, can be
modeled as polytropic (Pv n  constant) where the value of n varies between
k and 1. The colored area on the P-v diagram represents the work saved as a
result of two-stage compression with intercooling. The process paths for sin-
gle-stage isothermal and polytropic processes are also shown for comparison.
wcomp,in  RT ln P2
P1
wcomp,in 
nR 1T2  T12
n  1
 nRT1
n  1 c a P2
P1
b
1n12>n
 1d
wcomp,in 
kR 1T2  T12
k  1
 kRT1
k  1 c a P2
P1
b
1k12>k
 1d
Chapter 8
|
331
P
v
1
P2
P1
Isentropic (n = k)
Polytropic (1 < n < k)
Isothermal (n = 1)
FIGURE 8–45
P-v diagrams of isentropic, polytropic,
and isothermal compression processes
between the same pressure limits.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
337
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The size of the colored area (the saved work input) varies with the value
of the intermediate pressure Px, and it is of practical interest to determine
the conditions under which this area is maximized. The total work input for
a two-stage compressor is the sum of the work inputs for each stage of com-
pression, as determined from Eq. 8–57b:
(8–58)
The only variable in this equation is Px. The Px value that minimizes the
total work is determined by differentiating this expression with respect to Px
and setting the resulting expression equal to zero. It yields
(8–59)
That is, to minimize compression work during two-stage compression, the
pressure ratio across each stage of the compressor must be the same. When
this condition is satisfied, the compression work at each stage becomes
identical, that is, wcomp I,in  wcomp II,in.
Px  1P1P22 1>2 or Px
P1
 P2
Px
 nRT1
n  1 c a Px
P1
b
1n12>n
 1d  nRT1
n  1 c a P2
Px
b
1n12>n
 1d
wcomp,in  wcomp I,in  wcomp II,in
332
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
P
v
1
P2
P1
Isothermal
Px
Polytropic
Work saved
Intercooling
2
T
s
1
T1
Intercooling
2
P2
P1
Px
FIGURE 8–46
P-v and T-s diagrams for a two-stage
steady-flow compression process.
EXAMPLE 8–13
Work Input for Various Compression Processes
Air is compressed steadily by a reversible compressor from an inlet state of
100 kPa and 300 K to an exit pressure of 900 kPa. Determine the compressor
work per unit mass for (a) isentropic compression with k  1.4, (b) polytropic
compression with n  1.3, (c) isothermal compression, and (d) ideal two-
stage compression with intercooling with a polytropic exponent of 1.3.
Solution
Air is compressed reversibly from a specified state to a specified
pressure. The compressor work is to be determined for the cases of
isentropic, polytropic, isothermal, and two-stage compression.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
338
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
333
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 At specified conditions,
air can be treated as an ideal gas. 3 Kinetic and potential energy changes are
negligible.
Analysis
We take the compressor to be the system. This is a control volume
since mass crosses the boundary. A sketch of the system and the T-s diagram
for the process are given in Fig. 8–47.
The steady-flow compression work for all these four cases is determined by
using the relations developed earlier in this section:
(a) Isentropic compression with k  1.4:
(b) Polytropic compression with n  1.3:
(c) Isothermal compression:
(d) Ideal two-stage compression with intercooling (n  1.3): In this case, the
pressure ratio across each stage is the same, and its value is
Px  1P1P22 1>2  3 1100 kPa2 1900 kPa2 4 1>2  300 kPa
 189.2 kJ/kg
wcomp,in  RT ln P2
P1
 10.287 kJ>kg # K2 1300 K2 ln 900 kPa
100 kPa
 246.4 kJ/kg

11.32 10.287 kJ>kg # K2 1300 K2
1.3  1
 c a 900 kPa
100 kPa b
11.312>1.3
 1d
wcomp,in  nRT1
n  1 c a P2
P1
b
1n12>n
 1 d
 263.2 kJ/kg

11.42 10.287 kJ>kg # K2 1300 K2
1.4  1
 c a 900 kPa
100 kPa b
11.412>1.4
 1d
wcomp,in  kRT1
k  1 c a P2
P1
b
1k12>k
 1 d
P, kPa
900
100
Isentropic (k = 1.4)
Polytropic (n = 1.3)
Two-stage
Isothermal
P2 = 900 kPa
P1 = 100 kPa
T1 = 300 K
wcomp
1
AIR
COMPRESSOR
v
FIGURE 8–47
Schematic and P-v diagram for
Example 8–13.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
339
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–12
■ISENTROPIC EFFICIENCIES 
OF STEADY-FLOW DEVICES
We mentioned repeatedly that irreversibilities inherently accompany all
actual processes and that their effect is always to downgrade the perfor-
mance of devices. In engineering analysis, it would be very desirable to
have some parameters that would enable us to quantify the degree of degra-
dation of energy in these devices. In the last chapter we did this for cyclic
devices, such as heat engines and refrigerators, by comparing the actual
cycles to the idealized ones, such as the Carnot cycle. A cycle that was com-
posed entirely of reversible processes served as the model cycle to which the
actual cycles could be compared. This idealized model cycle enabled us to
determine the theoretical limits of performance for cyclic devices under
specified conditions and to examine how the performance of actual devices
suffered as a result of irreversibilities.
Now we extend the analysis to discrete engineering devices working
under steady-flow conditions, such as turbines, compressors, and nozzles,
and we examine the degree of degradation of energy in these devices as a
result of irreversibilities. However, first we need to define an ideal process
that serves as a model for the actual processes.
Although some heat transfer between these devices and the surrounding
medium is unavoidable, many steady-flow devices are intended to operate
under adiabatic conditions. Therefore, the model process for these devices
should be an adiabatic one. Furthermore, an ideal process should involve no
irreversibilities since the effect of irreversibilities is always to downgrade
the performance of engineering devices. Thus, the ideal process that can
serve as a suitable model for adiabatic steady-flow devices is the isentropic
process (Fig. 8–48).
The more closely the actual process approximates the idealized isentropic
process, the better the device performs. Thus, it would be desirable to have
a parameter that expresses quantitatively how efficiently an actual device
approximates an idealized one. This parameter is the isentropic or adia-
batic efficiency, which is a measure of the deviation of actual processes
from the corresponding idealized ones.
334
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
The compressor work across each stage is also the same. Thus the total
compressor work is twice the compression work for a single stage:
Discussion
Of all four cases considered, the isothermal compression requires
the minimum work and the isentropic compression the maximum. The
compressor work is decreased when two stages of polytropic compression are
utilized instead of just one. As the number of compressor stages is increased,
the compressor work approaches the value obtained for the isothermal case.
 215.3 kJ/kg

211.32 10.287 kJ>kg # K2 1300 K2
1.3  1
 c a 300 kPa
100 kPa b
11.312>1.3
 1d
wcomp,in  2wcomp I,in  2 nRT1
n  1
 c a Px
P1
b
1n12>n
 1d
P1, T1
P2
P2
P1, T1
ACTUAL
(irreversible)
IDEAL
(reversible)
FIGURE 8–48
The isentropic process involves no
irreversibilities and serves as the ideal
process for adiabatic devices.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
340
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Isentropic efficiencies are defined differently for different devices since
each device is set up to perform different tasks. Next we define the isen-
tropic efficiencies of turbines, compressors, and nozzles by comparing the
actual performance of these devices to their performance under isentropic
conditions for the same inlet state and exit pressure.
Isentropic Efficiency of Turbines
For a turbine under steady operation, the inlet state of the working fluid and
the exhaust pressure are fixed. Therefore, the ideal process for an adiabatic
turbine is an isentropic process between the inlet state and the exhaust pres-
sure. The desired output of a turbine is the work produced, and the isen-
tropic efficiency of a turbine is defined as the ratio of the actual work
output of the turbine to the work output that would be achieved if the
process between the inlet state and the exit pressure were isentropic:
(8–60)
Usually the changes in kinetic and potential energies associated with a fluid
stream flowing through a turbine are small relative to the change in enthalpy
and can be neglected. Then the work output of an adiabatic turbine simply
becomes the change in enthalpy, and Eq. 8–60 becomes
(8–61)
where h2a and h2s are the enthalpy values at the exit state for actual and
isentropic processes, respectively (Fig. 8–49).
The value of hT greatly depends on the design of the individual compo-
nents that make up the turbine. Well-designed, large turbines have isentropic
efficiencies above 90 percent. For small turbines, however, it may drop even
below 70 percent. The value of the isentropic efficiency of a turbine is
determined by measuring the actual work output of the turbine and by cal-
culating the isentropic work output for the measured inlet conditions and the
exit pressure. This value can then be used conveniently in the design of
power plants.
hT  h1  h2a
h1  h2s
hT 
Actual turbine work
Isentropic turbine work  wa
ws
Chapter 8
|
335
h
s
1
h2s
h2a
h1
2s
2a
P2
P1
Inlet state
Actual process
Isentropic process
Exit
pressure
s2s = s1
wa
ws
FIGURE 8–49
The h-s diagram for the actual and
isentropic processes of an adiabatic
turbine.
EXAMPLE 8–14
Isentropic Efficiency of a Steam Turbine
Steam enters an adiabatic turbine steadily at 3 MPa and 400°C and leaves 
at 50 kPa and 100°C. If the power output of the turbine is 2 MW, determine
(a) the isentropic efficiency of the turbine and (b) the mass flow rate of the
steam flowing through the turbine.
Solution
Steam flows steadily in a turbine between inlet and exit states. For
a specified power output, the isentropic efficiency and the mass flow rate are
to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The changes in kinetic
and potential energies are negligible.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
341
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
336
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the T-s diagram of the process are given
in Fig. 8–50.
(a) The enthalpies at various states are
State 1:
State 2a:
The exit enthalpy of the steam for the isentropic process h2s is determined
from the requirement that the entropy of the steam remain constant (s2s  s1):
State 2s:
Obviously, at the end of the isentropic process steam exists as a saturated
mixture since sf  s2s  sg. Thus we need to find the quality at state 2s first:
and
By substituting these enthalpy values into Eq. 8–61, the isentropic efficiency
of this turbine is determined to be
(b) The mass flow rate of steam through this turbine is determined from the
energy balance for steady-flow systems:
m#  3.64 kg/s
 2 MW a
1000 kJ>s
1 MW
b  m# 13231.7  2682.42 kJ>kg
W#
a,out  m# 1h1  h2a2
m# h1  W#
a,out  m# h2a
E
#
in  E
#
out
hT  h1  h2a
h1  h2s
 3231.7  2682.4
3231.7  2407.9  0.667, or 66.7%
h2s  hf  x2shfg  340.54  0.89712304.72  2407.9 kJ>kg
x2s 
s2s  sf
sfg
 6.9235  1.0912
6.5019
 0.897
P2s  50 kPa
1s2s  s12
 
S  
sf  1.0912 kJ>kg # K
sg  7.5931 kJ>kg # K  
1Table A–52
P2a  50 kPa
T2a  100°C f
h2a  2682.4 kJ>kg  
1Table A–62
P1  3 MPA
T1  400°C f
h1  3231.7 kJ>kg
s1  6.9235 kJ>kg # K  
1Table A–62
T,°C
s
1
2s
s2s = s1
50 kPa
3 MPa
400
100
2
P1 = 3 MPa
T1 = 400°C
P2 = 50 kPa
STEAM
TURBINE
2 MW
T2 = 100°C
Actual process
Isentropic process
FIGURE 8–50
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–14.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
342
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Isentropic Efficiencies of Compressors and Pumps
The isentropic efficiency of a compressor is defined as the ratio of the
work input required to raise the pressure of a gas to a specified value in an
isentropic manner to the actual work input:
(8–62)
Notice that the isentropic compressor efficiency is defined with the isen-
tropic work input in the numerator instead of in the denominator. This is
because ws is a smaller quantity than wa, and this definition prevents hC
from becoming greater than 100 percent, which would falsely imply that the
actual compressors performed better than the isentropic ones. Also notice
that the inlet conditions and the exit pressure of the gas are the same for
both the actual and the isentropic compressor.
When the changes in kinetic and potential energies of the gas being com-
pressed are negligible, the work input to an adiabatic compressor becomes
equal to the change in enthalpy, and Eq. 8–62 for this case becomes
(8–63)
where h2a and h2s are the enthalpy values at the exit state for actual and
isentropic compression processes, respectively, as illustrated in Fig. 8–51.
Again, the value of hC greatly depends on the design of the compressor.
Well-designed compressors have isentropic efficiencies that range from 80
to 90 percent.
When the changes in potential and kinetic energies of a liquid are negligi-
ble, the isentropic efficiency of a pump is defined similarly as
(8–64)
When no attempt is made to cool the gas as it is compressed, the actual
compression process is nearly adiabatic and the reversible adiabatic (i.e.,
isentropic) process serves well as the ideal process. However, sometimes
compressors are cooled intentionally by utilizing fins or a water jacket
placed around the casing to reduce the work input requirements (Fig. 8–52).
In this case, the isentropic process is not suitable as the model process since
the device is no longer adiabatic and the isentropic compressor efficiency
defined above is meaningless. A realistic model process for compressors
that are intentionally cooled during the compression process is the rever-
sible isothermal process. Then we can conveniently define an isothermal
efficiency for such cases by comparing the actual process to a reversible
isothermal one:
(8–65)
where wt and wa are the required work inputs to the compressor for the
reversible isothermal and actual cases, respectively.
h C  wt
wa
hP  ws
wa

v 1P2  P12
h2a  h1
h C  h2s  h1
h2a  h1
h C  Isentropic compressor work
Actual compressor work
 ws
wa
Chapter 8
|
337
h2s
h
s
1
h1
h2a
2s
2a
P2
P1
Inlet
state
s2s = s1
wa
Exit
pressure
ws
Actual
process
Isentropic
process
FIGURE 8–51
The h-s diagram of the actual and
isentropic processes of an adiabatic
compressor.
Air
COMPRESSOR
Cooling
water
FIGURE 8–52
Compressors are sometimes
intentionally cooled to minimize the
work input.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
343
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
338
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 8–15
Effect of Efficiency on Compressor Power Input
Air is compressed by an adiabatic compressor from 100 kPa and 12°C to a
pressure of 800 kPa at a steady rate of 0.2 kg/s. If the isentropic efficiency
of the compressor is 80 percent, determine (a) the exit temperature of air and
(b) the required power input to the compressor.
Solution
Air is compressed to a specified pressure at a specified rate. For a
given isentropic efficiency, the exit temperature and the power input are to be
determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Air is an ideal gas. 3 The
changes in kinetic and potential energies are negligible.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the T-s diagram of the process are given
in Fig. 8–53.
(a) We know only one property (pressure) at the exit state, and we need to
know one more to fix the state and thus determine the exit temperature. The
property that can be determined with minimal effort in this case is h2a since
the isentropic efficiency of the compressor is given. At the compressor inlet,
The enthalpy of the air at the end of the isentropic compression process is
determined by using one of the isentropic relations of ideal gases,
and
Substituting the known quantities into the isentropic efficiency relation, we have
Thus,
h2a  575.03 kJ>kg 
S
T2a  569.5 K
hC  h2s  h1
h2a  h1 
S
0.80 
1517.05  285.142 kJ>kg
1h2a  285.142 kJ>kg
Pr2  9.2672 
S
h2s  517.05 kJ>kg
Pr2  Pr1a P2
P1
b  1.1584a 800 kPa
100 kPa b  9.2672
1Pr1  1.15842
T1  285 K 
S  
h1  285.14 kJ>kg  
1Table A–212
AIR
COMPRESSOR
m = 0.2 kg/s
T, K
s
1
2s
s2s = s1
Isentropic process
285
Actual process
P2 = 800 kPa
P1 = 100 kPa
T1 = 285 K
T2a
T2s
2a
800 kPa
100 kPa
·
FIGURE 8–53
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–15.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
344
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Isentropic Efficiency of Nozzles
Nozzles are essentially adiabatic devices and are used to accelerate a fluid.
Therefore, the isentropic process serves as a suitable model for nozzles. The
isentropic efficiency of a nozzle is defined as the ratio of the actual kinetic
energy of the fluid at the nozzle exit to the kinetic energy value at the exit of
an isentropic nozzle for the same inlet state and exit pressure. That is,
(8–66)
Note that the exit pressure is the same for both the actual and isentropic
processes, but the exit state is different.
Nozzles involve no work interactions, and the fluid experiences little or
no change in its potential energy as it flows through the device. If, in addi-
tion, the inlet velocity of the fluid is small relative to the exit velocity, the
energy balance for this steady-flow device reduces to
Then the isentropic efficiency of the nozzle can be expressed in terms of
enthalpies as
(8–67)
where h2a and h2s are the enthalpy values at the nozzle exit for the actual and
isentropic processes, respectively (Fig. 8–54). Isentropic efficiencies of noz-
zles are typically above 90 percent, and nozzle efficiencies above 95 percent
are not uncommon.
hN  h1  h2a
h1  h2s
h1  h2a  V 2a  
2
2
hN 
Actual KE at nozzle exit
Isentropic KE at nozzle exit  V 2a
2
V 2s
2
Chapter 8
|
339
(b) The required power input to the compressor is determined from the energy
balance for steady-flow devices,
Discussion
Notice that in determining the power input to the compressor, we
used h2a instead of h2s since h2a is the actual enthalpy of the air as it exits
the compressor. The quantity h2s is a hypothetical enthalpy value that the air
would have if the process were isentropic.
 58.0 kW
 10.2 kg>s2 3 1575.03  285.142 kJ>kg4
W#
a,in  m# 1h2a  h12
m# h1  W#
a,in  m# h2a
E#
in  E#
out
EXAMPLE 8–16
Effect of Efficiency on Nozzle Exit Velocity
Air at 200 kPa and 950 K enters an adiabatic nozzle at low velocity and is
discharged at a pressure of 80 kPa. If the isentropic efficiency of the nozzle
is 92 percent, determine (a) the maximum possible exit velocity, (b) the exit
temperature, and (c) the actual exit velocity of the air. Assume constant
specific heats for air.
h2s
h
s
1
h1
h2a
2s
2a
P2
P1
Inlet state 
Actual process
Isentropic process
s2s = s1
Exit
pressure
V22a
2
V 22s
2
FIGURE 8–54
The h-s diagram of the actual and
isentropic processes of an adiabatic
nozzle.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
345
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
340
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Solution
The acceleration of air in a nozzle is considered. For specified exit
pressure and isentropic efficiency, the maximum and actual exit velocities
and the exit temperature are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Air is an ideal gas. 3 The
inlet kinetic energy is negligible.
Analysis
A sketch of the system and the T-s diagram of the process are given
in Fig. 8–55.
The temperature of air will drop during this acceleration process because
some of its internal energy is converted to kinetic energy. This problem can
be solved accurately by using property data from the air table. But we will
assume constant specific heats (thus sacrifice some accuracy) to demon-
strate their use. Let us guess the average temperature of the air to be about
800 K. Then the average values of cp and k at this anticipated average
temperature are determined from Table A–2b to be cp  1.099 kJ/kg · K and
k  1.354.
(a) The exit velocity of the air will be a maximum when the process in the
nozzle involves no irreversibilities. The exit velocity in this case is determined
from the steady-flow energy equation. However, first we need to determine
the exit temperature. For the isentropic process of an ideal gas we have:
or
This gives an average temperature of 849 K, which is somewhat higher than
the assumed average temperature (800 K). This result could be refined by
reevaluating the k value at 749 K and repeating the calculations, but it is not
warranted since the two average temperatures are sufficiently close (doing so
would change the temperature by only 1.5 K, which is not significant).
Now we can determine the isentropic exit velocity of the air from the
energy balance for this isentropic steady-flow process:
h1  V 1
2
2  h2s  V 2s
2
2
ein  eout
T2s  T1a P2s
P1
b
1k12>k
 1950 K2 a 80 kPa
200 kPa b
0.354>1.354
 748 K
T2s
T1
 a P2s
P1
b
1k12>k
T2s
T, K
s
1
950
T2a
2s
2a
Actual process
Isentropic process
s2s = s1
P1 = 200 kPa
T1 = 950 K
V1 << V2
AIR
NOZZLE
ηN = 0.92
P2 = 80 kPa
200 kPa
80 kPa
FIGURE 8–55
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–16.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
346
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–13
■ENTROPY BALANCE
The property entropy is a measure of molecular disorder or randomness of
a system, and the second law of thermodynamics states that entropy can
be created but it cannot be destroyed. Therefore, the entropy change of 
a system during a process is greater than the entropy transfer by an
amount equal to the entropy generated during the process within the system,
and the increase of entropy principle for any system is expressed as
(Fig. 8–57)
or
(8–68)
which is a verbal statement of Eq. 8–9. This relation is often referred to as
the entropy balance and is applicable to any system undergoing any
process. The entropy balance relation above can be stated as: the entropy
change of a system during a process is equal to the net entropy transfer
through the system boundary and the entropy generated within the system.
Next we discuss the various terms in that relation.
Sin  Sout  Sgen  ¢Ssystem
°
Total
entropy
entering
¢  °
Total
entropy
leaving
¢  °
Total
entropy
generated
¢  °
Change in the
total entropy
of the system
¢
Chapter 8
|
341
or
(b) The actual exit temperature of the air is higher than the isentropic exit
temperature evaluated above and is determined from
or
That is, the temperature is 16 K higher at the exit of the actual nozzle as a
result of irreversibilities such as friction. It represents a loss since this rise in
temperature comes at the expense of kinetic energy (Fig. 8–56).
(c) The actual exit velocity of air can be determined from the definition of
isentropic efficiency of a nozzle,
hN  V 2a
2
V 2s
2  
S
V2a  2hNV 2s
2  20.921666 m>s2 2  639 m/s
0.92  950  T2a
950  748 
S
T2a  764 K
hN  h1  h2a
h1  h2s

cp,avg1T1  T2a2
cp,avg1T1  T2s2
 666 m/s
 B2 11.099 kJ>kg # K2 3 1950  7482 K4 a
1000 m2>s2
1 kJ>kg
b
V2s  22 1h1  h2s2  22cp,avg 1T1  T2s2
950  K
AIR
Actual nozzle
Isentropic nozzle
748 K, 666 m/s
764 K, 639 m/s
FIGURE 8–56
A substance leaves actual nozzles at a
higher temperature (thus a lower
velocity) as a result of friction.
System
ΔEsystem
ΔEsystem = Ein – Eout
ΔSsystem = Sin – Sout + Sgen
Eout
Ein
Sout
Sin
ΔSsystem
Sgen ≥ 0
FIGURE 8–57
Energy and entropy balances for a
system.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
347
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Entropy Change of a System, Ssystem
Despite the reputation of entropy as being vague and abstract and the intim-
idation associated with it, entropy balance is actually easier to deal with
than energy balance since, unlike energy, entropy does not exist in various
forms. Therefore, the determination of entropy change of a system during a
process involves evaluating entropy of the system at the beginning and at
the end of the process and taking their difference. That is,
or
(8–69)
Note that entropy is a property, and the value of a property does not change
unless the state of the system changes. Therefore, the entropy change of a
system is zero if the state of the system does not change during the process.
For example, the entropy change of steady-flow devices such as nozzles,
compressors, turbines, pumps, and heat exchangers is zero during steady
operation.
When the properties of the system are not uniform, the entropy of the sys-
tem can be determined by integration from
(8–70)
where V is the volume of the system and r is density.
Mechanisms of Entropy Transfer, Sin and Sout
Entropy can be transferred to or from a system by two mechanisms: heat
transfer and mass flow (in contrast, energy is transferred by work also).
Entropy transfer is recognized at the system boundary as it crosses the
boundary, and it represents the entropy gained or lost by a system during a
process. The only form of entropy interaction associated with a fixed mass
or closed system is heat transfer, and thus the entropy transfer for an adia-
batic closed system is zero.
1
Heat Transfer
Heat is, in essence, a form of disorganized energy, and some disorganization
(entropy) will flow with heat. Heat transfer to a system increases the
entropy of that system and thus the level of molecular disorder or random-
ness, and heat transfer from a system decreases it. In fact, heat rejection is
the only way the entropy of a fixed mass can be decreased. The ratio of the
heat transfer Q at a location to the absolute temperature T at that location is
called the entropy flow or entropy transfer and is expressed as (Fig. 8–58)
Entropy transfer by heat transfer:
(8–71)
The quantity Q/T represents the entropy transfer accompanied by heat trans-
fer, and the direction of entropy transfer is the same as the direction of heat
transfer since thermodynamic temperature T is always a positive quantity.
Sheat  Q
T  
1T  constant2
Ssystem   s dm  
V
sr dV
¢Ssystem  Sfinal  Sinitial  S2  S1
Entropy change  Entropy at final state  Entropy at initial state
342
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Surroundings
SYSTEM
Sheat =
Q = 500 kJ
Q
Tb
Tb = 400 K
= 1.25 kJ/K
FIGURE 8–58
Heat transfer is always accompanied
by entropy transfer in the amount of
Q/T, where T is the boundary
temperature.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
348
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
When the temperature T is not constant, the entropy transfer during a
process 1-2 can be determined by integration (or by summation if appropri-
ate) as
(8–72)
where Qk is the heat transfer through the boundary at temperature Tk at
location k.
When two systems are in contact, the entropy transfer from the warmer
system is equal to the entropy transfer into the cooler one at the point of
contact. That is, no entropy can be created or destroyed at the boundary
since the boundary has no thickness and occupies no volume.
Note that work is entropy-free, and no entropy is transferred by work.
Energy is transferred by both heat and work, whereas entropy is transferred
only by heat. That is,
Entropy transfer by work:
(8–73)
The first law of thermodynamics makes no distinction between heat transfer
and work; it considers them as equals. The distinction between heat transfer
and work is brought out by the second law: an energy interaction that is
accompanied by entropy transfer is heat transfer, and an energy interaction
that is not accompanied by entropy transfer is work. That is, no entropy is
exchanged during a work interaction between a system and its surroundings.
Thus, only energy is exchanged during work interaction whereas both
energy and entropy are exchanged during heat transfer (Fig. 8–59).
2
Mass Flow
Mass contains entropy as well as energy, and the entropy and energy con-
tents of a system are proportional to the mass. (When the mass of a system
is doubled, so are the entropy and energy contents of the system.) Both
entropy and energy are carried into or out of a system by streams of matter,
and the rates of entropy and energy transport into or out of a system are
proportional to the mass flow rate. Closed systems do not involve any mass
flow and thus any entropy transfer by mass. When a mass in the amount of
m enters or leaves a system, entropy in the amount of ms, where s is the
specific entropy (entropy per unit mass entering or leaving), accompanies it
(Fig. 8–60). That is,
Entropy transfer by mass flow:
(8–74)
Therefore, the entropy of a system increases by ms when mass in the
amount of m enters and decreases by the same amount when the same
amount of mass at the same state leaves the system. When the properties of
the mass change during the process, the entropy transfer by mass flow can
be determined by integration from
(8–75)
where Ac is the cross-sectional area of the flow and Vn is the local velocity
normal to dAc.
S
#
mass  
Ac
srVn dAc and Smass   s dm  
¢t
S
#
mass dt
Smass  ms
Swork  0
Sheat  
2
1
 dQ
T  a
Qk
Tk
Chapter 8
|
343
Entropy is not
transferred
with work
Entropy
generation
via friction
FIGURE 8–59
No entropy accompanies work as it
crosses the system boundary. But
entropy may be generated within the
system as work is dissipated into a less
useful form of energy.
Control volume
mh
ms
h
s m
FIGURE 8–60
Mass contains entropy as well as
energy, and thus mass flow into or out
of system is always accompanied by
energy and entropy transfer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
349
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Entropy Generation, Sgen
Irreversibilities such as friction, mixing, chemical reactions, heat transfer
through a finite temperature difference, unrestrained expansion, nonquasi-
equilibrium compression, or expansion always cause the entropy of a sys-
tem to increase, and entropy generation is a measure of the entropy created
by such effects during a process.
For a reversible process (a process that involves no irreversibilities), the
entropy generation is zero and thus the entropy change of a system is equal
to the entropy transfer. Therefore, the entropy balance relation in the
reversible case becomes analogous to the energy balance relation, which
states that energy change of a system during a process is equal to the energy
transfer during that process. However, note that the energy change of a sys-
tem equals the energy transfer for any process, but the entropy change of a
system equals the entropy transfer only for a reversible process.
The entropy transfer by heat Q/T is zero for adiabatic systems, and the
entropy transfer by mass ms is zero for systems that involve no mass flow
across their boundary (i.e., closed systems).
Entropy balance for any system undergoing any process can be expressed
more explicitly as
(8–76)
or, in the rate form, as
(8–77)
where the rates of entropy transfer by heat transferred at a rate of Q. and
mass flowing at a rate of m. are S.
heat  Q./T and S.
mass  m.s. The entropy bal-
ance can also be expressed on a unit-mass basis as
(8–78)
where all the quantities are expressed per unit mass of the system. Note that
for a reversible process, the entropy generation term Sgen drops out from all
of the relations above.
The term Sgen represents the entropy generation within the system bound-
ary only (Fig. 8–61), and not the entropy generation that may occur outside
the system boundary during the process as a result of external irreversibili-
ties. Therefore, a process for which Sgen  0 is internally reversible, but not
necessarily totally reversible. The total entropy generated during a process
can be determined by applying the entropy balance to an extended system
that includes the system itself and its immediate surroundings where exter-
nal irreversibilities might be occurring (Fig. 8–62). Also, the entropy change
in this case is equal to the sum of the entropy change of the system and the
entropy change of the immediate surroundings. Note that under steady con-
ditions, the state and thus the entropy of the immediate surroundings (let us
call it the “buffer zone”) at any point does not change during the process,
and the entropy change of the buffer zone is zero. The entropy change of the
buffer zone, if any, is usually small relative to the entropy change of the sys-
tem, and thus it is usually disregarded.
1sin  sout2  sgen  ¢ssystem  
1kJ>kg # K2
S
#
in S
#
out 
S
#
gen 
dSsystem>dt  
1kW>K2
Sin  Sout  
 Sgen 
¢Ssystem  
1kJ>K2
344
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
System
Mass
Heat
Mass
Heat
ΔSsystem
Sgen ≥ 0
Sin
Sout
FIGURE 8–61
Mechanisms of entropy transfer for a
general system.
Immediate
surroundings
SYSTEM
Q
Tsurr
FIGURE 8–62
Entropy generation outside system
boundaries can be accounted for by
writing an entropy balance on an
extended system that includes the
system and its immediate
surroundings.
123
Net entropy transfer 
by heat and mass
123
Entropy
generation
123
Change
in entropy
123
Rate of net entropy
transfer by heat 
and mass
123
Rate of entropy
generation
123
Rate of change
in entropy

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
350
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
When evaluating the entropy transfer between an extended system and the
surroundings, the boundary temperature of the extended system is simply
taken to be the environment temperature.
Closed Systems
A closed system involves no mass flow across its boundaries, and its entropy
change is simply the difference between the initial and final entropies of the
system. The entropy change of a closed system is due to the entropy transfer
accompanying heat transfer and the entropy generation within the system
boundaries. Taking the positive direction of heat transfer to be to the system,
the general entropy balance relation (Eq. 8–76) can be expressed for a closed
system as
Closed system:
(8–79)
The entropy balance relation above can be stated as:
The entropy change of a closed system during a process is equal to the sum
of the net entropy transferred through the system boundary by heat transfer
and the entropy generated within the system boundaries.
For an adiabatic process (Q  0), the entropy transfer term in the above
relation drops out and the entropy change of the closed system becomes
equal to the entropy generation within the system boundaries. That is,
Adiabatic closed system:
(8–80)
Noting that any closed system and its surroundings can be treated as an adi-
abatic system and the total entropy change of a system is equal to the sum
of the entropy changes of its parts, the entropy balance for a closed system
and its surroundings can be written as
System  Surroundings:
(8–81)
where Ssystem  m(s2  s1) and the entropy change of the surroundings can
be determined from Ssurr  Qsurr/Tsurr if its temperature is constant. At ini-
tial stages of studying entropy and entropy transfer, it is more instructive to
start with the general form of the entropy balance (Eq. 8–76) and to sim-
plify it for the problem under consideration. The specific relations above are
convenient to use after a certain degree of intuitive understanding of the
material is achieved.
Control Volumes
The entropy balance relations for control volumes differ from those for
closed systems in that they involve one more mechanism of entropy
exchange: mass flow across the boundaries. As mentioned earlier, mass pos-
sesses entropy as well as energy, and the amounts of these two extensive
properties are proportional to the amount of mass (Fig. 8–63).
Taking the positive direction of heat transfer to be to the system, the gen-
eral entropy balance relations (Eqs. 8–76 and 8–77) can be expressed for
control volumes as
(8–82)
a
Q k
Tk
 a misi  a mese  Sgen  1S2  S12 CV  
1kJ>K2
Sgen  a ¢S  ¢Ssystem  ¢Ssurroundings
Sgen  ¢Sadiabatic system
a
Q k
Tk
 Sgen  ¢Ssystem  S2  S1  
1kJ>K2
Chapter 8
|
345
Surroundings
Control
volume
mi
si
me
se
Entropy
transfer
by heat
Entropy
transfer
by mass
ΔSCV = Q
T + misi – mese + Sgen
{
{
T
Q
FIGURE 8–63
The entropy of a control volume
changes as a result of mass flow as
well as heat transfer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
351
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
or, in the rate form, as
(8–83)
This entropy balance relation can be stated as:
The rate of entropy change within the control volume during a process is
equal to the sum of the rate of entropy transfer through the control volume
boundary by heat transfer, the net rate of entropy transfer into the control
volume by mass flow, and the rate of entropy generation within the
boundaries of the control volume as a result of irreversibilities.
Most control volumes encountered in practice such as turbines, compres-
sors, nozzles, diffusers, heat exchangers, pipes, and ducts operate steadily,
and thus they experience no change in their entropy. Therefore, the entropy
balance relation for a general steady-flow process can be obtained from 
Eq. 8–83 by setting dSCV/dt  0 and rearranging to give
Steady-flow:
(8–84)
For single-stream (one inlet and one exit) steady-flow devices, the entropy
balance relation simplifies to
Steady-flow, single-stream:
(8–85)
For the case of an adiabatic single-stream device, the entropy balance rela-
tion further simplifies to
Steady-flow, single-stream, adiabatic:
(8–86)
which indicates that the specific entropy of the fluid must increase as it
flows through an adiabatic device since S.
gen  0 (Fig. 8–64). If the flow
through the device is reversible and adiabatic, then the entropy remains
constant, se  si, regardless of the changes in other properties.
S
#
gen  m# 1se  si2
S
#
gen  m# 1se  si2  a
Q
#
k
Tk
S
#
gen  a m#
ese  a m#
isi  a
Q
#
k
Tk
a
Q#
k
Tk
 a m#
isi  a m#
ese  S#
gen  dSCV>dt  
1kW>K2
346
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
se > si
si
FIGURE 8–64
The entropy of a substance always
increases (or remains constant in the
case of a reversible process) as it flows
through a single-stream, adiabatic,
steady-flow device.
EXAMPLE 8–17
Entropy Generation in a Wall
Consider steady heat transfer through a 5-m 
 7-m brick wall of a house of
thickness 30 cm. On a day when the temperature of the outdoors is 0C, the
house is maintained at 27C. The temperatures of the inner and outer
surfaces of the brick wall are measured to be 20C and 5C, respectively, and
the rate of heat transfer through the wall is 1035 W. Determine the rate of
entropy generation in the wall, and the rate of total entropy generation
associated with this heat transfer process.
Solution
Steady heat transfer through a wall is considered. For specified
heat transfer rate, wall temperatures, and environment temperatures, the
entropy generation rate within the wall and the total entropy generation rate
are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The process is steady, and thus the rate of heat transfer
through the wall is constant. 2 Heat transfer through the wall is one-
dimensional.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
352
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
347
Analysis
We first take the wall as the system (Fig. 8–65). This is a closed
system since no mass crosses the system boundary during the process. We
note that the entropy change of the wall is zero during this process since the
state and thus the entropy of the wall do not change anywhere in the wall.
Heat and entropy are entering from one side of the wall and leaving from the
other side.
The rate form of the entropy balance for the wall simplifies to
Therefore, the rate of entropy generation in the wall is
Note that entropy transfer by heat at any location is Q/T at that location, and
the direction of entropy transfer is the same as the direction of heat transfer.
To determine the rate of total entropy generation during this heat transfer
process, we extend the system to include the regions on both sides of the
wall that experience a temperature change. Then one side of the system
boundary becomes room temperature while the other side becomes the
temperature of the outdoors. The entropy balance for this extended system
(system  immediate surroundings) is the same as that given above, except
the two boundary temperatures are now 300 and 273 K instead of 293 and
278 K, respectively. Then the rate of total entropy generation becomes
Discussion
Note that the entropy change of this extended system is also zero
since the state of air does not change at any point during the process. The
differences between the two entropy generations is 0.150 W/K, and it
represents the entropy generated in the air layers on both sides of the wall.
The entropy generation in this case is entirely due to irreversible heat transfer
through a finite temperature difference.
1035 W
300 K  1035 W
273 K  S
#
gen,total  0 
S
S
#
gen,total  0.341 W/K
S
#
gen,wall  0.191 W/K
1035 W
293 K  1035 W
278 K  S
#
gen  0
a Q#
T b
in
 a Q#
T b
out
 S#
gen  0
S#
in S#
out 
S#
gen 
dSsystem>dt
20ºC
27ºC
0ºC
5ºC
Brick
wall
Q·
30 cm
FIGURE 8–65
Schematic for Example 8–17.
EXAMPLE 8–18
Entropy Generation during a Throttling Process
Steam at 7 MPa and 450C is throttled in a valve to a pressure of 3 MPa
during a steady-flow process. Determine the entropy generated during this
process and check if the increase of entropy principle is satisfied.
Solution
Steam is throttled to a specified pressure. The entropy generated
during this process is to be determined, and the validity of the increase of
entropy principle is to be verified.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0, ECV  0, and SCV  0. 2 Heat
transfer to or from the valve is negligible. 3 The kinetic and potential energy
changes are negligible, ke  pe  0.
123
Rate of net entropy
transfer by heat 
and mass
123
Rate of entropy
generation
123
Rate of change
in entropy
0 (steady)
¡

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
353
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
348
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
We take the throttling valve as the system (Fig. 8–66). This is a
control volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process.
We note that there is only one inlet and one exit and thus m.
1  m.
2  m..
Also, the enthalpy of a fluid remains nearly constant during a throttling
process and thus h2  h1.
The entropy of the steam at the inlet and the exit states is determined from
the steam tables to be
State 1:
State 2:
Then the entropy generation per unit mass of the steam is determined from
the entropy balance applied to the throttling valve,
Dividing by mass flow rate and substituting gives
This is the amount of entropy generated per unit mass of steam as it is
throttled from the inlet state to the final pressure, and it is caused by un-
restrained expansion. The increase of entropy principle is obviously satisfied
during this process since the entropy generation is positive.
sgen  s2  s1  7.0046  6.6353  0.3693 kJ/kg # K
S
#
gen  m# 1s2  s12
m# s1  m# s2  S
#
gen  0
S#
in S
#
out 
  
S
#
gen 
  dSsystem>dt
P2  3 MPa
h2  h1
f 
s2  7.0046 kJ>kg # K
P1  7 MPa
T1  450°C f 
h1  3288.3 kJ>kg
s1  6.6353 kJ>kg # K
T,°C
s
1
2
s1
h = const.
450
s2
Throttling
process
P1 = 7 MPa
T1 = 450°C
P2 = 3 MPa
FIGURE 8–66
Schematic and T-s diagram for
Example 8–18.
123
Rate of net entropy
transfer by heat 
and mass
123
Rate of entropy
generation
123
Rate of change
in entropy
0 (steady)
¡

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
354
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
349
EXAMPLE 8–19
Entropy Generated when a Hot Block Is Dropped
in a Lake
A 50-kg block of iron casting at 500 K is thrown into a large lake that is at a
temperature of 285 K. The iron block eventually reaches thermal equilibrium
with the lake water. Assuming an average specific heat of 0.45 kJ/kg · K for
the iron, determine (a) the entropy change of the iron block, (b) the entropy
change of the lake water, and (c) the entropy generated during this process.
Solution
A hot iron block is thrown into a lake, and cools to the lake
temperature. The entropy changes of the iron and of the lake as well as the
entropy generated during this process are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Both the water and the iron block are incompressible
substances. 2 Constant specific heats can be used for the water and the iron.
3 The kinetic and potential energy changes of the iron are negligible, KE 
PE  0 and thus E  U.
Properties
The specific heat of the iron is 0.45 kJ/kg  K (Table A–3).
Analysis
We take the iron casting as the system (Fig. 8–67). This is a closed
system since no mass crosses the system boundary during the process.
To determine the entropy change for the iron block and for the lake, first
we need to know the final equilibrium temperature. Given that the thermal
energy capacity of the lake is very large relative to that of the iron block, the
lake will absorb all the heat rejected by the iron block without experiencing
any change in its temperature. Therefore, the iron block will cool to 285 K
during this process while the lake temperature remains constant at 285 K.
(a) The entropy change of the iron block can be determined from
(b) The temperature of the lake water remains constant during this process at
285 K. Also, the amount of heat transfer from the iron block to the lake is
determined from an energy balance on the iron block to be
Net energy transfer
Change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
or
Then the entropy change of the lake becomes
¢Slake  Q lake
Tlake
 4838 kJ
285 K
 16.97 kJ/K
Q out  mcavg1T1  T22  150 kg2 10.45 kJ>kg # K2 1500  2852 K  4838 kJ
Qout  ¢U  mcavg 1T2  T12
Ein  Eout 
    
¢Esystem
 12.65 kJ/K
 150 kg2 10.45 kJ>kg # K2 ln 285 K
500 K
¢Siron  m 1s2  s12  mcavg ln T2
T1
IRON
CASTING
LAKE
285 K
m = 50 kg
T1= 500 K
FIGURE 8–67
Schematic for Example 8–19.
⎫⎪⎬⎪⎭
⎫
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎭

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
355
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
350
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(c) The entropy generated during this process can be determined by applying
an entropy balance on an extended system that includes the iron block and
its immediate surroundings so that the boundary temperature of the extended
system is at 285 K at all times:
or
Discussion
The entropy generated can also be determined by taking the iron
block and the entire lake as the system, which is an isolated system, and
applying an entropy balance. An isolated system involves no heat or entropy
transfer, and thus the entropy generation in this case becomes equal to the
total entropy change,
which is the same result obtained above.
Sgen  ¢Stotal  ¢Ssystem  ¢Slake  12.65  16.97  4.32 kJ>K
Sgen  Q out
Tb
 ¢Ssystem  4838 kJ
285 K  112.65 kJ>K2  4.32 kJ/K
Qout
Tb
 Sgen  ¢Ssystem
Sin  Sout 
  Sgen 
  
¢Ssystem
EXAMPLE 8–20
Entropy Generation in a Mixing Chamber
Water at 20 psia and 50F enters a mixing chamber at a rate of 300 lbm/min
where it is mixed steadily with steam entering at 20 psia and 240F. The
mixture leaves the chamber at 20 psia and 130F, and heat is lost to the
surrounding air at 70F at a rate of 180 Btu/min. Neglecting the changes in
kinetic and potential energies, determine the rate of entropy generation
during this process.
Solution
Water and steam are mixed in a chamber that is losing heat at a
specified rate. The rate of entropy generation during this process is to be
determined.
Assumptions
1 This is a steady-flow process since there is no change with
time at any point and thus mCV  0, ECV  0, and SCV  0. 2 There are
no work interactions involved. 3 The kinetic and potential energies are
negligible, ke  pe  0.
Analysis
We take the mixing chamber as the system (Fig. 8–68). This is a
control volume since mass crosses the system boundary during the process.
We note that there are two inlets and one exit.
T3 = 130°F
T2 = 240°F
T1 = 50°F
300 lbm/min
Mixing
chamber
P = 20 psia
180Btu/min
FIGURE 8–68
Schematic for Example 8–20.
123
Net entropy transfer 
by heat and mass
123
Entropy
generation
123
Change
in entropy

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
356
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
351
Under the stated assumptions and observations, the mass and energy
balances for this steady-flow system can be expressed in the rate form as
follows:
Mass balance:
Energy balance:
Rate of net energy transfer
Rate of change in internal, kinetic,
by heat, work, and mass
potential, etc., energies
Combining the mass and energy balances gives
The desired properties at the specified states are determined from the steam
tables to be
State 1:
State 2:
State 3:
Substituting,
which gives
The rate of entropy generation during this process can be determined by
applying the rate form of the entropy balance on an extended system that
includes the mixing chamber and its immediate surroundings so that the
boundary temperature of the extended system is 70F  530 R:
m#
1s1  m#
2s2  m#
3s3  Q#
out
Tb
 S
#
gen  0
S
#
in S
#
out 
  
S
#
gen 
  dSsystem>dt
m#
2  22.7 lbm>min
180 Btu>min  3300 
 18.07  m#
2 
 1162.3  1300  m#
22 
 97.994 Btu>min
P3  20 psia
T3  130°F f 
h3  hf @ 130°F  97.99 Btu>lbm
s3  sf @ 130°F  0.18174 Btu>lbm # R
P2  20 psia
T2  240°F f 
h2  1162.3 Btu>lbm
s2  1.7406 Btu>lbm # R
P1  20 psia
T1  50°F
f 
h1  hf @ 50°F  18.07 Btu>lbm
s1  sf @ 50°F  0.03609 Btu>lbm # R
Q
#
out  m#
1h1  m#
2h2  1m#
1  m#
22h3
m#
1h1  m#
2h2  m#
3h3  Q#
out    1since W#  0, ke  pe  02
E#
in  E#
out
E#
in  E#
out     dEsystem/dt  0
m#
in  m#
out 
dmsystem>dt  0 S  m#
1  m#
2  m#
3
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
⎫
⎪
⎪
⎬
⎪
⎪
⎭
0 (steady)
¡
0 (steady)
¡
123
Rate of net entropy
transfer by heat 
and mass
123
Rate of entropy
generation
123
Rate of change
in entropy

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
357
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
352
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Substituting, the rate of entropy generation is determined to be
Discussion
Note that entropy is generated during this process at a rate of
8.65 Btu/min · R. This entropy generation is caused by the mixing of two
fluid streams (an irreversible process) and the heat transfer between the
mixing chamber and the surroundings through a finite temperature difference
(another irreversible process).
 8.65 Btu/min # R
 

180 Btu>min
530 R
 1322.7 
 0.18174  300 
 0.03609  22.7 
 1.74062 Btu>min # R
S#
gen  m#
3s3  m#
1s1  m#
2s2  Q#
out
Tb
Any process:
Isentropic process:
3. Ideal gases:
a. Constant specific heats (approximate treatment):
Any process:
Isentropic process:
b. Variable specific heats (exact treatment):
Any process:
Isentropic process:
s°2  s°1  R ln  P2
P1
s2  s1  s°2  s°1  R ln  P2
P1
a P2
P1
b
sconst.
 a v1
v2
b
k
a T2
T1
b
sconst.
 a P2
P1
b
1k12>k
a T2
T1
b
sconst.
 a v1
v2
b
k1
s2  s1  cp,avg ln T2
T1
 R ln P2
P1
s2  s1  cv,avg ln  T2
T1
 R ln  v2
v1
T2  T1
s2  s1  cavg ln  T2
T1
SUMMARY
The second law of thermodynamics leads to the definition of
a new property called entropy, which is a quantitative mea-
sure of microscopic disorder for a system. Any quantity
whose cyclic integral is zero is a property, and entropy is
defined as
For the special case of an internally reversible, isothermal
process, it gives
The inequality part of the Clausius inequality combined with
the definition of entropy yields an inequality known as the
increase of entropy principle, expressed as
where Sgen is the entropy generated during the process.
Entropy change is caused by heat transfer, mass flow, and irre-
versibilities. Heat transfer to a system increases the entropy,
and heat transfer from a system decreases it. The effect of irre-
versibilities is always to increase the entropy.
The entropy-change and isentropic relations for a process
can be summarized as follows:
1. Pure substances:
Any process:
Isentropic process:
2. Incompressible substances:
s2  s1
¢s  s2  s1
Sgen  0
¢S  Q
T0
dS  a dQ
T b
int rev

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
358
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
353
where Pr is the relative pressure and vr is the relative 
specific volume. The function s° depends on temperature
only.
The steady-flow work for a reversible process can be
expressed in terms of the fluid properties as
For incompressible substances (v  constant) it simplifies to
The work done during a steady-flow process is proportional
to the specific volume. Therefore, v should be kept as small
as possible during a compression process to minimize the
work input and as large as possible during an expansion
process to maximize the work output.
The reversible work inputs to a compressor compressing an
ideal gas from T1, P1 to P2 in an isentropic (Pv k  constant),
polytropic (Pv n  constant), or isothermal (Pv  constant)
manner, are determined by integration for each case with the
following results:
Isentropic:
Polytropic:
Isothermal:  wcomp,in  RTln  P2
P1
wcomp,in 
nR 1T2  T12
n  1
 nRT1
n  1 c a P2
P1
b
1n12>n
 1d
wcomp,in 
kR 1T2  T12
k  1
 kRT1
k  1
 c a P2
P1
b
1k12>k
 1d
wrev  v 1P2  P12  ¢ke  ¢pe
wrev  
2
1
v dP  ¢ke  ¢pe
a v2
v1
b
sconst.
 vr2
vr1
a P2
P1
b
sconst.
 Pr2
Pr1
The work input to a compressor can be reduced by using
multistage compression with intercooling. For maximum sav-
ings from the work input, the pressure ratio across each stage
of the compressor must be the same.
Most steady-flow devices operate under adiabatic condi-
tions, and the ideal process for these devices is the isentropic
process. The parameter that describes how efficiently a
device approximates a corresponding isentropic device is
called isentropic or adiabatic efficiency. It is expressed for
turbines, compressors, and nozzles as follows:
In the relations above, h2a and h2s are the enthalpy values at the
exit state for actual and isentropic processes, respectively.
The entropy balance for any system undergoing any
process can be expressed in the general form as
or, in the rate form, as
For a general steady-flow process it simplifies to
S
#
gen  a m#
ese  a m#
isi  a
Q
#
k
Tk
S
#
in S
#
out 
S
#
gen 
dSsystem>dt
Sin  Sout  
 Sgen 
¢Ssystem
hN 
Actual KE at nozzle exit
Isentropic KE at nozzle exit  V 2a
2
V 2s
2  h1  h2a
h1  h2s
hC  Isentropic compressor work
Actual compressor work
 ws
wa
 h2s  h1
h2a  h1
hT 
Actual turbine work
Isentropic turbine work  wa
ws
 h1  h2a
h1  h2s
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
1. A. Bejan. Advanced Engineering Thermodynamics.
3rd ed. New York: Wiley Interscience, 2006.
2. A. Bejan. Entropy Generation through Heat and Fluid
Flow. New York: Wiley Interscience, 1982.
3. Y. A. Çengel and H. Kimmel. “Optimization of Expansion
in Natural Gas Liquefaction Processes.” LNG Journal,
U.K., May–June, 1998.
4. Y. Çerci, Y. A. Çengel, and R. H. Turner, “Reducing the
Cost of Compressed Air in Industrial Facilities.”
International Mechanical Engineering Congress and
Exposition, San Francisco, California, November 12–17,
1995.
5. W. F. E. Feller. Air Compressors: Their Installation,
Operation, and Maintenance. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1944.
6. D. W. Nutter, A. J. Britton, and W. M. Heffington.
“Conserve Energy to Cut Operating Costs.” Chemical
Engineering, September 1993, pp. 128–137.
7. J. Rifkin. Entropy. New York: The Viking Press, 1980.
123
Net entropy transfer 
by heat and mass
123
Entropy
generation
123
Change
in entropy
123
Rate of net entropy
transfer by 
heat and mass
123
Rate of entropy
generation
123
Rate of change
in entropy

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
359
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
354
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
PROBLEMS*
Entropy and the Increase of Entropy Principle
8–1C
Does a cycle for which  dQ  0 violate the Clausius
inequality? Why?
8–2C
Does the cyclic integral of work have to be zero (i.e.,
does a system have to produce as much work as it consumes
to complete a cycle)? Explain.
8–3C
A system undergoes a process between two fixed
states first in a reversible manner and then in an irreversible
manner. For which case is the entropy change greater? Why?
8–4C
Is the value of the integral 1
2 dQ/T the same for all
processes between states 1 and 2? Explain.
8–5C
Is the value of the integral 1
2 dQ/T the same for all
reversible processes between states 1 and 2? Why?
8–6C
To determine the entropy change for an irreversible
process between states 1 and 2, should the integral 1
2 dQ/T
be performed along the actual process path or an imaginary
reversible path? Explain.
8–7C
Is
an
isothermal
process
necessarily
internally 
reversible? Explain your answer with an example.
8–8C
How do the values of the integral 1
2 dQ/T compare for
a reversible and irreversible process between the same end
states?
8–9C
The entropy of a hot baked potato decreases as it
cools. Is this a violation of the increase of entropy principle?
Explain.
8–10C
Is it possible to create entropy? Is it possible to
destroy it?
8–11C
When a system is adiabatic, what can be said about
the entropy change of the substance in the system?
8–12C
Work is entropy free, and sometimes the claim is
made that work will not change the entropy of a fluid passing
through an adiabatic steady-flow system with a single inlet
and outlet. Is this a valid claim?
8–13C
A piston–cylinder device contains helium gas. Dur-
ing a reversible, isothermal process, the entropy of the helium
will (never, sometimes, always) increase.
8–14C
A piston–cylinder device contains nitrogen gas.
During a reversible, adiabatic process, the entropy of the
nitrogen will (never, sometimes, always) increase.
8–15C
A piston–cylinder device contains superheated
steam. During an actual adiabatic process, the entropy of the
steam will (never, sometimes, always) increase.
8–16C
The entropy of steam will (increase, decrease,
remain the same) as it flows through an actual adiabatic 
turbine.
8–17C
The entropy of the working fluid of the ideal Carnot
cycle (increases, decreases, remains the same) during the
isothermal heat addition process.
8–18C
The entropy of the working fluid of the ideal Carnot
cycle (increases, decreases, remains the same) during the
isothermal heat rejection process.
8–19C
During a heat transfer process, the entropy of a sys-
tem (always, sometimes, never) increases.
8–20C
Is it possible for the entropy change of a closed sys-
tem to be zero during an irreversible process? Explain.
8–21C
What three different mechanisms can cause the
entropy of a control volume to change?
8–22C
Steam is accelerated as it flows through an actual
adiabatic nozzle. The entropy of the steam at the nozzle exit
will be (greater than, equal to, less than) the entropy at the
nozzle inlet.
8–23
A rigid tank contains an ideal gas at 40°C that is being
stirred by a paddle wheel. The paddle wheel does 200 kJ of
work on the ideal gas. It is observed that the temperature of the
ideal gas remains constant during this process as a result of
heat transfer between the system and the surroundings at
30°C. Determine the entropy change of the ideal gas.
FIGURE P8–23
8–24
Air is compressed by a 12-kW compressor from P1 to
P2. The air temperature is maintained constant at 25°C during
this process as a result of heat transfer to the surrounding
medium at 10°C. Determine the rate of entropy change of the
air. State the assumptions made in solving this problem.
Answer: 0.0403 kW/K
IDEAL GAS
40°C
200 kJ
Heat
30°C
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems
with the
icon are solved using EES, and complete solutions
together with parametric studies are included on the enclosed DVD.
Problems with the
icon are comprehensive in nature, and are
intended to be solved with a computer, preferably using the EES
software that accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
360
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
355
8–25
Heat in the amount of 100 kJ is transferred directly
from a hot reservoir at 1200 K to a cold reservoir at 600 K.
Calculate the entropy change of the two reservoirs and deter-
mine if the increase of entropy principle is satisfied.
FIGURE P8–25
8–26
In the previous problem, assume that the heat is trans-
ferred from the cold reservoir to the hot reservoir contrary to
the Clausius statement of the second law. Prove that this vio-
lates the increase of entropy principle—as it must according
to Clausius.
8–27
Heat is transferred at a rate of 2 kW from a hot reser-
voir at 800 K to a cold reservoir at 300 K. Calculate the rate
at which the entropy of the two reservoirs change and deter-
mine if the second law is satisfied.
Answer: 0.00417 kW/K
8–28E
A completely reversible air conditioner provides
36,000 Btu/h of cooling for a space maintained at 70ºF while
rejecting heat to the environmental air at 110ºF. Calculate the
rate at which the entropies of the two reservoirs change and
verify that this air conditioner satisfies the increase of entropy
principle.
8–29
A completely reversible heat pump produces heat at a
rate of 100 kW to warm a house maintained at 21ºC. The ex-
terior air, which is at 10ºC, serves as the source. Calculate the
rate of entropy change of the two reservoirs and determine if
this heat pump satisfies the second law according to the in-
crease of entropy principle.
FIGURE P8–29
8–30E
During the isothermal heat rejection process of a
Carnot cycle, the working fluid experiences an entropy
21°C
Win
·
100 kW
QL·
HP
10°C
1200 K
100 kJ
600 K
change of 0.7 Btu/R. If the temperature of the heat sink is
95°F, determine (a) the amount of heat transfer, (b) the
entropy change of the sink, and (c) the total entropy change
for this process.
Answers: (a) 388.5 Btu, (b) 0.7 Btu/R, (c) 0
FIGURE P8–30E
8–31
Refrigerant-134a enters the coils of the evaporator of
a refrigeration system as a saturated liquid–vapor mixture at a
pressure of 160 kPa. The refrigerant absorbs 180 kJ of heat
from the cooled space, which is maintained at 5°C, and
leaves as saturated vapor at the same pressure. Determine
(a) the entropy change of the refrigerant, (b) the entropy
change of the cooled space, and (c) the total entropy change
for this process.
Entropy Changes of Pure Substances
8–32C
Is a process that is internally reversible and adia-
batic necessarily isentropic? Explain.
8–33
A rigid vessel is filled with a fluid from a source
whose properties remain constant. How does the entropy of
the surroundings change if the vessel is filled such that the
specific entropy of the vessel contents remains constant?
8–34
A rigid vessel filled with a fluid is allowed to leak
some fluid out through an opening. During this process, the
specific entropy of the remaining fluid remains constant. How
does the entropy of the environment change during this
process?
8–35E
R-134a vapor enters to a turbine at 250 psia and
175ºF. The temperature of R-134a is reduced to 20ºF in this
turbine while its specific entropy remains constant. Determine
the change in the enthalpy of R-134a as it passes through the
turbine.
FIGURE P8–35E
1
2
TURBINE
Heat
SINK
95°F
95°F
Carnot heat engine

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
361
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
356
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
other part is evacuated. The partition is now removed, and the
water expands to fill the entire tank. Determine the entropy
change of water during this process, if the final pressure in
the tank is 15 kPa.
Answer: 0.114 kJ/K
FIGURE P8–40
8–41
Reconsider Prob. 8–40. Using EES (or other)
software, evaluate and plot the entropy gener-
ated as a function of surrounding temperature, and determine
the values of the surrounding temperatures that are valid for
this problem. Let the surrounding temperature vary from 0 to
100°C. Discuss your results.
8–42E
A piston–cylinder device contains 2 lbm of refriger-
ant-134a at 120 psia and 100°F. The refrigerant is now cooled
at constant pressure until it exists as a liquid at 50°F. Deter-
mine the entropy change of the refrigerant during this process.
8–43
An insulated piston–cylinder device contains 5 L of
saturated liquid water at a constant pressure of 150 kPa. An
electric resistance heater inside the cylinder is now turned on,
and 2200 kJ of energy is transferred to the steam. Determine
the entropy change of the water during this process.
Answer: 5.72 kJ/K
8–44
An insulated piston–cylinder device contains 0.05 m3
of saturated refrigerant-134a vapor at 0.8-MPa pressure. The
refrigerant is now allowed to expand in a reversible manner
until the pressure drops to 0.4 MPa. Determine (a) the final
temperature in the cylinder and (b) the work done by the
refrigerant.
FIGURE P8–44
8–45
Reconsider Prob. 8–44. Using EES (or other)
software, evaluate and plot the work done by the
R-134a
0.05m3
0.8 MPa
Vacuum
1.5 kg
compressed
liquid
300 kPa
60°C
8–36E
2-lbm of water at 300 psia fill a weighted piston-
cylinder device whose volume is 2.5 ft3. The water is then
heated at constant pressure until the temperature reaches
500ºF. Determine the resulting change in the water’s total
entropy. Answer: 0.474 Btu/R
8–37
Water vapor enters a compressor at 35 kPa and
160ºC, and leaves at 300 kPa with the same specific entropy
as at the inlet. What is the temperature and the specific
enthalpy of water at the compressor exit?
FIGURE P8–37
8–38E
1-lbm of R-134a is expanded isentropically in a
closed system from 100 psia and 100ºF to 10 psia. Deter-
mine the total heat transfer and work production for this
process.
8–39
A well-insulated rigid tank contains 2 kg of a satu-
rated liquid–vapor mixture of water at 100 kPa. Initially,
three-quarters of the mass is in the liquid phase. An electric
resistance heater placed in the tank is now turned on and
kept on until all the liquid in the tank is vaporized. Deter-
mine the entropy change of the steam during this process.
Answer: 8.10 kJ/K
FIGURE P8–39
8–40
A rigid tank is divided into two equal parts by
a partition. One part of the tank contains 1.5 kg
of compressed liquid water at 300 kPa and 60°C while the
H
We
2O
2 kg
100 kPa
1
2
COMPRESSOR

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
362
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
357
FIGURE P8–53
8–54
Determine the total heat transfer for the reversible pro-
cess 1-2 shown in Fig. P8–54.
FIGURE P8–54
8–55
Calculate the heat transfer, in kJ/kg, for the reversible
steady-flow process 1-3 shown on a T-s diagram in Fig. P8–55.
Answer: 341 kJ/kg
FIGURE P8–55
0.02
1.0
30
120
100
s, kJ/kgK
T, °C
2
3
1
0.2
1.0
500
100
S, kJ/K
T, °C
2
1
2
3
1
55
360
S, kJ/K
T, °C
2
3
1
refrigerant as a function of final pressure as it varies from 0.8
to 0.4 MPa. Compare the work done for this process to one
for which the temperature is constant over the same pressure
range. Discuss your results.
8–46
Refrigerant-134a enters an adiabatic compressor as
saturated vapor at 160 kPa at a rate of 2 m3/min and is com-
pressed to a pressure of 900 kPa. Determine the minimum
power that must be supplied to the compressor.
8–47
A heavily insulated piston–cylinder device contains
0.05 m3 of steam at 300 kPa and 150°C. Steam is now com-
pressed in a reversible manner to a pressure of 1 MPa. Deter-
mine the work done on the steam during this process.
8–48
Reconsider Prob. 8–47. Using EES (or other)
software, evaluate and plot the work done on the
steam as a function of final pressure as the pressure varies
from 300 kPa to 1 MPa.
8–49
A piston–cylinder device contains 1.2 kg of saturated
water vapor at 200°C. Heat is now transferred to steam, and
steam expands reversibly and isothermally to a final pressure
of 800 kPa. Determine the heat transferred and the work done
during this process.
8–50
Reconsider Prob. 8–49. Using EES (or other)
software, evaluate and plot the heat transferred
to the steam and the work done as a function of final pressure
as the pressure varies from the initial value to the final value
of 800 kPa.
8–51
Water at 10ºC and 81.4 percent quality is compressed
isentropically in a closed system to 3 MPa. How much work
does this process require, in kJ/kg?
8–52
Refrigerant-134a at 240 kPa and 20ºC undergoes an
isothermal process in a closed system until its quality is
20 percent. On per unit mass basis, determine how much work
and heat transfer are required. Answers: 37.0 kJ/kg, 172 kJ/kg
FIGURE P8–52
8–53
Determine the total heat transfer for the reversible pro-
cess 1-3 shown in Fig. P8–53.
R-134a
240 kPa
20C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
363
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–56E
Calculate the heat transfer, in Btu/lbm, for the re-
versible steady-flow process 1-2 shown on a T-s diagram in
Fig. P8–56E.
FIGURE P8–56E
8–57
Using the relation ds  (dQ/T)int rev for the definition
of entropy, calculate the change in the specific entropy of 
R-134a as it is heated at a constant pressure of 200 kPa from
a saturated liquid to a saturated vapor. Use the R-134a tables
to verify your answer.
8–58
Steam is expanded in an isentropic turbine with a sin-
gle inlet and outlet. At the inlet, the steam is at 2 MPa and
360ºC. The steam pressure at the outlet is 100 kPa. Calculate
the work produced by this turbine, in kJ/kg.
8–59E
The compressor in a refrigerator compresses satu-
rated R-134a vapor at 0ºF to 200 psia. Calculate the work re-
quired by this compressor, in Btu/lbm, when the compression
process is isentropic.
8–60
An isentropic steam turbine processes 5 kg/s of steam
at 4 MPa, which is exhausted at 50 kPa and 100ºC. Five per-
cent of this flow is diverted for feedwater heating at 700 kPa.
Determine the power produced by this turbine, in kW. Answer:
6328 kW
FIGURE P8–60
4 MPa
5 kg/s
50 kPa
100°C
700 kPa
STEAM
TURBINE
4 MW
0.2
1.0
500
100
s, Btu/lbmR
T, °F
2
1
358
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
8–61
A rigid, 100-L steam cooker is arranged with a pressure
relief valve set to release vapor and maintain the pressure once
the pressure inside the cooker reaches 200 kPa. Initially, this
cooker is filled with water at 200 kPa with a quality of
10 percent. Heat is now added until the quality inside the
cooker is 50 percent. Determine the minimum entropy change
of the thermal energy reservoir supplying this heat.
8–62
In the preceding problem, the water is stirred at the
same time that it is being heated. Determine the minimum en-
tropy change of the heat-supplying source if 100 kJ of work
is done on the water as it is being heated.
8–63
A piston–cylinder device contains 5 kg of steam at
100°C with a quality of 50 percent. This steam undergoes
two processes as follows:
1-2 Heat is transferred to the steam in a reversible manner
while the temperature is held constant until the steam exists
as a saturated vapor.
2-3 The steam expands in an adiabatic, reversible process
until the pressure is 15 kPa.
(a) Sketch these processes with respect to the saturation lines
on a single T-s diagram.
(b) Determine the heat transferred to the steam in process 1-2,
in kJ.
(c) Determine the work done by the steam in process 2-3, in kJ.
8–64
Steam at 6000 kPa and 500°C enters a steady-flow tur-
bine. The steam expands in the turbine while doing work until
the pressure is 1000 kPa. When the pressure is 1000 kPa, 10
percent of the steam is removed from the turbine for other
uses. The remaining 90 percent of the steam continues to
expand through the turbine while doing work and leaves the
turbine at 10 kPa. The entire expansion process by the steam
through the turbine is reversible and adiabatic.
(a)
Sketch the process on a T-s diagram with respect to the
saturation lines. Be sure to label the data states and the lines
of constant pressure.
(b)
If the turbine has an isentropic efficiency of 85 percent,
what is the work done by the steam as it flows through the tur-
bine per unit mass of steam flowing into the turbine, in kJ/kg?
8–65E
A 1.2-ft3 well-insulated rigid can initially contains
refrigerant-134a at 140 psia and 70°F. Now a crack develops
in the can, and the refrigerant starts to leak out slowly,
Assuming the refrigerant remaining in the can has undergone
a reversible, adiabatic process, determine the final mass in
the can when the pressure drops to 20 psia.
FIGURE P8–65E
R-134a
140 psia
70°F

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
364
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
359
8–72
A 50-kg iron block and a 20-kg copper block, both
initially at 80°C, are dropped into a large lake at 15°C. Ther-
mal equilibrium is established after a while as a result of heat
transfer between the blocks and the lake water. Determine the
total entropy change for this process.
FIGURE P8–72
8–73
An adiabatic pump is to be used to compress saturated
liquid water at 10 kPa to a pressure to 15 MPa in a reversible
manner. Determine the work input using (a) entropy data from
the compressed liquid table, (b) inlet specific volume and pres-
sure values, (c) average specific volume and pressure values.
Also, determine the errors involved in parts (b) and (c).
FIGURE P8–73
Entropy Change of Ideal Gases
8–74C
Prove that the two relations for entropy change 
of ideal gases under the constant-specific-heat assumption
(Eqs. 8–33 and 8–34) are equivalent.
8–75C
Starting with the second T ds relation (Eq. 8–26),
obtain Eq. 8–34 for the entropy change of ideal gases under
the constant-specific-heat assumption.
8–76C
Some properties of ideal gases such as internal
energy and enthalpy vary with temperature only [that is, u 
u(T) and h  h(T)]. Is this also the case for entropy?
8–77C
Starting with Eq. 8–34, obtain Eq. 8–43.
8–78C
What are Pr and vr called? Is their use limited to
isentropic processes? Explain.
8–79C
Can the entropy of an ideal gas change during an
isothermal process?
8–80C
An ideal gas undergoes a process between two spec-
ified temperatures, first at constant pressure and then at con-
stant volume. For which case will the ideal gas experience a
larger entropy change? Explain.
Pump
15 MPa
10 kPa
LAKE  15°C
COPPER
20 kg
IRON
50 kg
Entropy Change of Incompressible Substances
8–66C
Consider two solid blocks, one hot and the other
cold, brought into contact in an adiabatic container. After a
while, thermal equilibrium is established in the container as a
result of heat transfer. The first law requires that the amount
of energy lost by the hot solid be equal to the amount of
energy gained by the cold one. Does the second law require
that the decrease in entropy of the hot solid be equal to the
increase in entropy of the cold one?
8–67
A 50-kg copper block initially at 80°C is dropped into
an insulated tank that contains 120 L of water at 25°C. Deter-
mine the final equilibrium temperature and the total entropy
change for this process.
FIGURE P8–67
8–68
Ten grams of computer chips with a specific heat of
0.3 kJ/kg·K are initially at 20ºC. These chips are cooled by
placement in 5 grams of saturated liquid R-134a at 40ºC.
Presuming that the pressure remains constant while the chips
are being cooled, determine the entropy change of (a) the
chips, (b) the R-134a, and (c) the entire system. Is this pro-
cess possible? Why?
8–69
A 25-kg iron block initially at 350°C is quenched in
an insulated tank that contains 100 kg of water at 18°C.
Assuming the water that vaporizes during the process con-
denses back in the tank, determine the total entropy change
during this process.
8–70
A 20-kg aluminum block initially at 200°C is brought
into contact with a 20-kg block of iron at 100°C in an insu-
lated enclosure. Determine the final equilibrium temperature
and the total entropy change for this process.
Answers:
168.4°C, 0.169 kJ/K
8–71
Reconsider Prob. 8–70. Using EES (or other)
software, study the effect of the mass of the iron
block on the final equilibrium temperature and the total
entropy change for the process. Let the mass of the iron vary
from 1 to 10 kg. Plot the equilibrium temperature and the
total entropy change as a function of iron mass, and discuss
the results.
Water
120 L
Copper
50 kg

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
365
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
8–81
What is the difference between entropies of oxygen at
150 kPa and 39ºC and oxygen at 150 kPa and 337ºC per unit
mass basis.
8–82
Which of the two gases—helium or nitrogen—experi-
ences the greatest entropy change as its state is changed from
2000 kPa and 427ºC to 200 kPa and 27ºC?
8–83E
Air is expanded from 200 psia and 500ºF to 100 psia
and 50ºF. Assuming constant specific heats, determine the
change in the specific entropy of air.
Answer: 0.106 Btu/
lbm · R
8–84
Determine the final temperature when air is expanded
isentropically from 1000 kPa and 477ºC to 100 kPa in a piston-
cylinder device.
8–85E
Air is expanded isentropically from 100 psia and
500ºF to 20 psia in a closed system. Determine its final
temperature.
8–86
Which of the two gases—helium or nitrogen—has the
highest final temperature as it is compressed isentropically
from 100 kPa and 25ºC to 1 MPa in a closed system?
8–87
Which of the two gases—neon or air—has the lowest
final temperature as it is expanded isentropically from 
1000 kPa and 500ºC to 100 kPa in a piston–cylinder device?
8–88
An insulated piston–cylinder device initially contains
300 L of air at 120 kPa and 17°C. Air is now heated for
15 min by a 200-W resistance heater placed inside the cylin-
der. The pressure of air is maintained constant during this
process. Determine the entropy change of air, assuming
(a) constant specific heats and (b) variable specific heats.
8–89
A piston–cylinder device contains 1.2 kg of nitrogen
gas at 120 kPa and 27°C. The gas is now compressed slowly
in a polytropic process during which PV1.3  constant. The
process ends when the volume is reduced by one-half. Deter-
mine the entropy change of nitrogen during this process.
Answer: 0.0617 kJ/K
8–90
Reconsider Prob. 8–89. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of varying the
polytropic exponent from 1 to 1.4 on the entropy change of
the nitrogen. Show the processes on a common P-v diagram.
8–91E
A mass of 15 lbm of helium undergoes a process
from an initial state of 50 ft3/lbm and 80°F to a final state of
10 ft3/lbm and 200°F. Determine the entropy change of
helium during this process, assuming (a) the process is
reversible and (b) the process is irreversible.
8–92
An insulated rigid tank is divided into two equal parts
by a partition. Initially, one part contains 5 kmol of an ideal
gas at 250 kPa and 40°C, and the other side is evacuated. The
partition is now removed, and the gas fills the entire tank.
Determine the total entropy change during this process.
Answer: 28.81 kJ/K
8–93
Air is compressed in a piston–cylinder device from
100 kPa and 17°C to 800 kPa in a reversible, adiabatic
process. Determine the final temperature and the work done
360
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
during this process, assuming (a) constant specific heats and
(b) variable specific heats for air.
Answers: (a) 525.3 K,
171.1 kJ/kg, (b) 522.4 K, 169.3 kJ/kg
8–94
Reconsider Prob. 8–93. Using EES (or other)
software, evaluate and plot the work done and
final temperature during the compression process as func-
tions of the final pressure for the two cases as the final pres-
sure varies from 100 to 800 kPa.
8–95
An insulated rigid tank contains 4 kg of argon gas at
450 kPa and 30°C. A valve is now opened, and argon is
allowed to escape until the pressure inside drops to 200 kPa.
Assuming the argon remaining inside the tank has undergone
a reversible, adiabatic process, determine the final mass in
the tank.
Answer: 2.46 kg
FIGURE P8–95
8–96
Reconsider Prob. 8–95. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the final pres-
sure on the final mass in the tank as the pressure varies from
450 to 150 kPa, and plot the results.
8–97E
Air enters an adiabatic nozzle at 60 psia, 540°F, and
200 ft/s and exits at 12 psia. Assuming air to be an ideal gas
with variable specific heats and disregarding any irreversibili-
ties, determine the exit velocity of the air.
8–98E
Air enters an isentropic turbine at 150 psia and 900ºF
through a 0.5-ft2 inlet section with a velocity of 500 ft/s. It
leaves at 15 psia with a velocity of 100 ft/s. Calculate the air
temperature at the turbine exit and the power produced, in hp,
by this turbine.
8–99
Nitrogen at 120 kPa and 30ºC is compressed to 600
kPa in an adiabatic compressor. Calculate the minimum work
needed for this process, in kJ/kg.
Answer: 184 kJ/kg
FIGURE P8–99
600 kPa
120 kPa
30°C
Nitrogen
compressor
ARGON
4 kg
30°C
450 kPa

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
366
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
361
FIGURE P8–104
8–105
Air at 800 kPa and 400°C enters a steady-flow nozzle
with a low velocity and leaves at 100 kPa. If the air under-
goes an adiabatic expansion process through the nozzle, what
is the maximum velocity of the air at the nozzle exit, in m/s?
8–106
An ideal gas at 100 kPa and 27°C enters a steady-
flow compressor. The gas is compressed to 400 kPa, and
10 percent of the mass that entered the compressor is removed
for some other use. The remaining 90 percent of the inlet gas
is compressed to 600 kPa before leaving the compressor. The
entire compression process is assumed to be reversible and
adiabatic. The power supplied to the compressor is measured
to be 32 kW. If the ideal gas has constant specific heats such
that cv  0.8 kJ/kg  K and cp  1.1 kJ/kg  K, (a) sketch the
compression process on a T-s diagram, (b) determine the tem-
perature of the gas at the two compressor exits, in K, and
(c) determine the mass flow rate of the gas into the compres-
sor, in kg/s.
8–107
A constant-volume tank contains 5 kg of air at 100
kPa and 327°C. The air is cooled to the surroundings temper-
ature of 27°C. Assume constant specific heats at 300 K.
(a) Determine the entropy change of the air in the tank dur-
ing the process, in kJ/K, (b) determine the net entropy change
of the universe due to this process, in kJ/K, and (c) sketch the
processes for the air in the tank and the surroundings on a
single T-s diagram. Be sure to label the initial and final states
for both processes.
Reversible Steady-Flow Work
8–108C
In large compressors, the gas is frequently cooled
while being compressed to reduce the power consumed by
the compressor. Explain how cooling the gas during a com-
pression process reduces the power consumption.
8–109C
The turbines in steam power plants operate essen-
tially under adiabatic conditions. A plant engineer suggests to
end this practice. She proposes to run cooling water through
the outer surface of the casing to cool the steam as it flows
through the turbine. This way, she reasons, the entropy of the
steam will decrease, the performance of the turbine will
improve, and as a result the work output of the turbine will
increase. How would you evaluate this proposal?
Room
90 m3
12°C
Water
45 kg
95°C
8–100
Oxygen at 300 kPa and 90ºC flowing at an average
velocity of 3 m/s is expanded in an adiabatic nozzle. What 
is the maximum velocity of the oxygen at the outlet of this
nozzle when the outlet pressure is 120 kPa?
Answer: 390 m/s
8–101
Air is expanded in an adiabatic nozzle during a poly-
tropic process with n  1.3. It enters the nozzle at 700 kPa
and 100ºC with a velocity of 30 m/s and exits at a pressure of
200 kPa. Calculate the air temperature and velocity at the
nozzle exit.
FIGURE P8–101
8–102
Repeat Prob. 8–101 for the polytropic exponent 
of n  1.2.
8–103E
The well-insulated container shown in Fig. P8–103E
is initially evacuated. The supply line contains air that is main-
tained at 200 psia and 100ºF. The valve is opened until the
pressure in the container is the same as the pressure in the
supply line. Determine the minimum temperature in the con-
tainer when the valve is closed.
FIGURE P8–103E
8–104
A container filled with 45 kg of liquid water at 95°C
is placed in a 90-m3 room that is initially at 12°C. Thermal
equilibrium is established after a while as a result of heat
transfer between the water and the air in the room. Using
constant specific heats, determine (a) the final equilibrium
temperature, (b) the amount of heat transfer between the
water and the air in the room, and (c) the entropy generation.
Assume the room is well sealed and heavily insulated.
Valve
Vessel
Supply line
700 kPa
100C
30 m/s
200 kPa
Air

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
367
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
362
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
8–110C
It is well known that the power consumed by a
compressor can be reduced by cooling the gas during com-
pression. Inspired by this, somebody proposes to cool the liq-
uid as it flows through a pump, in order to reduce the power
consumption of the pump. Would you support this proposal?
Explain.
8–111E
Air is compressed isothermally from 16 psia and
75ºF to 120 psia in a reversible steady-flow device. Calculate
the work required,
in Btu/lbm,
for this compression.
Answer: 73.9 Btu/lbm
8–112
Saturated water vapor at 150ºC is compressed in a
reversible steady-flow device to 1000 kPa while its specific
volume remains constant. Determine the work required, in
kJ/kg.
8–113
Calculate the work produced, in kJ/kg, for the re-
versible steady-flow process 1-3 shown in Fig. P8–113.
FIGURE P8–113
8–114E
Calculate the work produced, in Btu/lbm, for the
reversible steady-flow process 1-2 shown in Fig. P8-114.
FIGURE P8–114E
0.1
1.7
500
100
v, ft3/lbm
P, psia
2
1
0.5
1
400
500
100
v, m3/kg
P, kPa
2
3
1
8–115
Liquid water enters a 25-kW pump at 100-kPa pres-
sure at a rate of 5 kg/s. Determine the highest pressure the liq-
uid water can have at the exit of the pump. Neglect the kinetic
and potential energy changes of water, and take the specific
volume of water to be 0.001 m3/kg.
Answer: 5100 kPa
FIGURE P8–115
8–116
Consider a steam power plant that operates between
the pressure limits of 10 MPa and 20 kPa. Steam enters the
pump as saturated liquid and leaves the turbine as saturated
vapor. Determine the ratio of the work delivered by the tur-
bine to the work consumed by the pump. Assume the entire
cycle to be reversible and the heat losses from the pump and
the turbine to be negligible.
8–117
Reconsider Prob. 8–116. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the quality of
the steam at the turbine exit on the net work output. Vary the
quality from 0.5 to 1.0, and plot the net work output as a
function of this quality.
8–118
Liquid water at 120 kPa enters a 7-kW pump where
its pressure is raised to 5 MPa. If the elevation difference
between the exit and the inlet levels is 10 m, determine the
highest mass flow rate of liquid water this pump can handle.
Neglect the kinetic energy change of water, and take the spe-
cific volume of water to be 0.001 m3/kg.
8–119E
Helium gas is compressed from 14 psia and 70°F to
120 psia at a rate of 5 ft3/s. Determine the power input to the
compressor, assuming the compression process to be (a) isen-
tropic, (b) polytropic with n  1.2, (c) isothermal, and
(d) ideal two-stage polytropic with n  1.2.
8–120E
Reconsider Prob. 8–119E. Using EES (or
other) software, evaluate and plot the work of
compression and entropy change of the helium as functions
of the polytropic exponent as it varies from 1 to 1.667. Dis-
cuss your results.
8–121
The compression stages in the axial compressor of
the industrial gas turbine are close coupled, making intercool-
ing very impractical. To cool the air in such compressors and
to reduce the compression power, it is proposed to spray water
mist with drop size on the order of 5 microns into the air
stream as it is compressed and to cool the air continuously as
the water evaporates. Although the collision of water droplets
with turbine blades is a concern, experience with steam tur-
bines indicates that they can cope with water droplet concen-
trations of up to 14 percent. Assuming air is compressed
100 kPa
P2
PUMP
25 kW

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
368
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
363
isentropically at a rate of 2 kg/s from 300 K and 100 kPa to
1200 kPa and the water is injected at a temperature of 20°C
at a rate of 0.2 kg/s, determine the reduction in the exit tem-
perature of the compressed air and the compressor power
saved. Assume the water vaporizes completely before leaving
the compressor, and assume an average mass flow rate of 
2.1 kg/s throughout the compressor.
8–122
Reconsider Prob. 8–121. The water-injected compres-
sor is used in a gas turbine power plant. It is claimed that the
power output of a gas turbine will increase because of the
increase in the mass flow rate of the gas (air  water vapor)
through the turbine. Do you agree?
Isentropic Efficiencies of Steady-Flow Devices
8–123C
Describe the ideal process for an (a) adiabatic tur-
bine, (b) adiabatic compressor, and (c) adiabatic nozzle, and
define the isentropic efficiency for each device.
8–124C
Is the isentropic process a suitable model for com-
pressors that are cooled intentionally? Explain.
8–125C
On a T-s diagram, does the actual exit state (state
2) of an adiabatic turbine have to be on the right-hand side of
the isentropic exit state (state 2s)? Why?
8–126
100-kg of saturated steam at 100 kPa is to be adiabat-
ically compressed in a closed system to 1000 kPa. How much
work is required if the isentropic compression efficiency is
90 percent?
Answer: 44,200 kJ
8–127E
10-lbm of R-134a is expanded without any heat
transfer in a closed system from 120 psia and 100ºF to 20 psia.
If the isentropic expansion efficiency is 95 percent, what is the
final volume of this steam?
8–128
Steam at 3 MPa and 400ºC is expanded to 30 kPa in
an adiabatic turbine with an isentropic efficiency of 92 per-
cent. Determine the power produced by this turbine, in kW,
when the mass flow rate is 2 kg/s.
8–129
Repeat Prob. 8–128 for a turbine efficiency of 
90 percent.
8–130
An adiabatic steady-ﬂow device compresses argon 
at 200 kPa and 27ºC to 2 MPa. If the argon leaves this com-
pressor at 550ºC, what is the isentropic efficiency of the
compressor?
8–131
The adiabatic compressor of a refrigeration system
compresses saturated R-134a vapor at 0ºC to 600 kPa and
50ºC. What is the isentropic efficiency of this compressor?
FIGURE P8–131
8–132
Steam enters an adiabatic turbine at 7 MPa, 600°C,
and 80 m/s and leaves at 50 kPa, 150°C, and 140 m/s. If the
power output of the turbine is 6 MW, determine (a) the mass
flow rate of the steam flowing through the turbine and (b) the
isentropic efficiency of the turbine.
Answers: (a) 6.95 kg/s,
(b) 73.4 percent
8–133
Argon gas enters an adiabatic turbine at 800°C and
1.5 MPa at a rate of 80 kg/min and exhausts at 200 kPa. If
the power output of the turbine is 370 kW, determine the
isentropic efficiency of the turbine.
8–134E
Combustion gases enter an adiabatic gas turbine at
1540°F and 120 psia and leave at 60 psia with a low velocity.
Treating the combustion gases as air and assuming an isen-
tropic efficiency of 82 percent, determine the work output of
the turbine.
Answer: 71.7 Btu/lbm
8–135
Refrigerant-134a enters an adiabatic compres-
sor as saturated vapor at 120 kPa at a rate of
0.3 m3/min and exits at 1-MPa pressure. If the isentropic effi-
ciency of the compressor is 80 percent, determine (a) the
temperature of the refrigerant at the exit of the compressor
and (b) the power input, in kW. Also, show the process on a
T-s diagram with respect to saturation lines.
FIGURE P8–135
8–136
Reconsider Prob. 8–135. Using EES (or other)
software, redo the problem by including the
R-134a
COMPRESSOR
1 MPa
120 kPa
sat. vapor
600 kPa
50C
0C
sat. vapor
R-134a
COMPRESSOR

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
369
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
effects of the kinetic energy of the flow by assuming an inlet-
to-exit area ratio of 1.5 for the compressor when the com-
pressor exit pipe inside diameter is 2 cm.
8–137
Air enters an adiabatic compressor at 100 kPa and
17°C at a rate of 2.4 m3/s, and it exits at 257°C. The com-
pressor has an isentropic efficiency of 84 percent. Neglecting
the changes in kinetic and potential energies, determine
(a) the exit pressure of air and (b) the power required to drive
the compressor.
8–138
Air is compressed by an adiabatic compressor from
95 kPa and 27°C to 600 kPa and 277°C. Assuming variable
specific heats and neglecting the changes in kinetic and poten-
tial energies, determine (a) the isentropic efficiency of the
compressor and (b) the exit temperature of air if the process
were reversible.
Answers: (a) 81.9 percent, (b) 505.5 K
8–139E
Argon gas enters an adiabatic compressor at 20 psia
and 90°F with a velocity of 60 ft/s, and it exits at 200 psia
and 240 ft/s. If the isentropic efficiency of the compressor is
80 percent, determine (a) the exit temperature of the argon and
(b) the work input to the compressor.
8–140E
Air enters an adiabatic nozzle at 60 psia and
1020°F with low velocity and exits at 800 ft/s. If the isen-
tropic efficiency of the nozzle is 90 percent, determine the
exit temperature and pressure of the air.
8–141E
Reconsider Prob. 8–140E. Using EES (or
other) software, study the effect of varying
the nozzle isentropic efficiency from 0.8 to 1.0 on both the
exit temperature and pressure of the air, and plot the results.
8–142
The exhaust nozzle of a jet engine expands air at 
300 kPa and 180ºC adiabatically to 100 kPa. Determine the
air velocity at the exit when the inlet velocity is low and the
nozzle isentropic efficiency is 96 percent.
8–143E
An adiabatic diffuser at the inlet of a jet engine
increases the pressure of the air that enters the diffuser at
13 psia and 30ºF to 20 psia. What will the air velocity at
the diffuser exit be if the diffuser isentropic efficiency is
82 percent and the diffuser inlet velocity is 1000 ft/s?
Answer: 606 ft/s
FIGURE P8–143E
13 psia
30F
1000 ft/s
20 psia
Air
364
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Entropy Balance
8–144
Refrigerant-134a is throttled from 900 kPa and 35°C
to 200 kPa. Heat is lost from the refrigerant in the amount of
0.8 kJ/kg to the surroundings at 25°C. Determine (a) the exit
temperature of the refrigerant and (b) the entropy generation
during this process.
FIGURE P8–144
8–145
A rigid tank contains 7.5 kg of saturated water mix-
ture at 400 kPa. A valve at the bottom of the tank is now
opened, and liquid is withdrawn from the tank. Heat is trans-
ferred to the steam such that the pressure inside the tank
remains constant. The valve is closed when no liquid is left in
the tank. If it is estimated that a total of 5 kJ of heat is trans-
ferred to the tank, determine (a) the quality of steam in the
tank at the initial state, (b) the amount of mass that has
escaped, and (c) the entropy generation during this process if
heat is supplied to the tank from a source at 500°C.
8–146
Consider a family of four, with each person taking a
5-min shower every morning. The average flow rate through
the shower head is 12 L/min. City water at 15°C is heated to
55°C in an electric water heater and tempered to 42°C by cold
water at the T-elbow of the shower before being routed to the
shower head. Determine the amount of entropy generated by
this family per year as a result of taking daily showers.
8–147
Steam is to be condensed in the condenser of a steam
power plant at a temperature of 60°C with cooling water from
a nearby lake, which enters the tubes of the condenser at 18°C
at a rate of 75 kg/s and leaves at 27°C. Assuming the con-
denser to be perfectly insulated, determine (a) the rate of con-
densation of the steam and (b) the rate of entropy generation in
the condenser.
Answers: (a) 1.20 kg/s, (b) 1.06 kW/K
8–148
Cold water (cp  4.18 kJ/kg · °C) leading to a
shower enters a well-insulated, thin-walled, double-pipe,
counter-flow heat exchanger at 15°C at a rate of 0.25 kg/s
and is heated to 45°C by hot water (cp  4.19 kJ/kg · °C)
that enters at 100°C at a rate of 3 kg/s. Determine (a) the rate
of heat transfer and (b) the rate of entropy generation in the
heat exchanger.
FIGURE P8–148
100°C
3 kg/s
Hot
water
Cold
water
0.25 kg/s
15°C
45°C
200 kPa
q
R-134a
900 kPa
35°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
370
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
365
8–149
Air (cp  1.005 kJ/kg · °C) is to be preheated by hot
exhaust gases in a cross-flow heat exchanger before it enters
the furnace. Air enters the heat exchanger at 95 kPa and 20°C
at a rate of 1.6 m3/s. The combustion gases (cp  1.10 kJ/kg ·
°C) enter at 180°C at a rate of 2.2 kg/s and leave at 95°C.
Determine (a) the rate of heat transfer to the air, (b) the outlet
temperature of the air, and (c) the rate of entropy generation.
8–150
A well-insulated, shell-and-tube heat exchanger is
used to heat water (cp  4.18 kJ/kg · °C) in the tubes from
20 to 70°C at a rate of 4.5 kg/s. Heat is supplied by hot oil
(cp  2.30 kJ/kg · °C) that enters the shell side at 170°C at a
rate of 10 kg/s. Disregarding any heat loss from the heat
exchanger, determine (a) the exit temperature of the oil and
(b) the rate of entropy generation in the heat exchanger.
FIGURE P8–150
8–151E
Refrigerant-134a is expanded adiabatically from
100 psia and 100ºF to a saturated vapor at 10 psia. Determine
the entropy generation for this process, in Btu/lbm·R.
8–152
In an ice-making plant, water at 0ºC is frozen at
atmospheric pressure by evaporating saturated R-134a liquid
at 10ºC. The refrigerant leaves this evaporator as a satu-
rated vapor, and the plant is sized to produce ice at 0ºC at a
rate of 4000 kg/h. Determine the rate of entropy generation in
this plant.
Answer: 0.0505 kW/K
FIGURE P8–152
8–153
Air in a large building is kept warm by heating it
with steam in a heat exchanger. Saturated water vapor enters
this unit at 35ºC at a rate of 10,000 kg/h and leaves as a liq-
uid at 32ºC. Air at 1-atm pressure enters the unit at 20ºC and
leaves at 30ºC. Determine the rate of entropy generation asso-
ciated with this process.
8–154
Oxygen enters an insulated 12-cm-diameter pipe
with a velocity of 70 m/s. At the pipe entrance, the oxygen is
R-134a
–10C
–10C
sat. vapor
Q
Water
20°C
4.5 kg/s
Oil
170°C
10 kg/s
70°C
at 240 kPa and 20ºC; and, at the exit, it is at 200 kPa and 18ºC.
Calculate the rate at which entropy is generated in the pipe.
8–155
Nitrogen is compressed by an adiabatic compressor
from 100 kPa and 17ºC to 600 kPa and 227ºC. Calculate the
entropy generation for this process, in kJ/kg·K.
8–156E
Steam is to be condensed on the shell side of a
heat exchanger at 120°F. Cooling water enters the tubes at
60°F at a rate of 92 lbm/s and leaves at 73°F. Assuming the
heat exchanger to be well-insulated, determine (a) the rate of
heat transfer in the heat exchanger and (b) the rate of entropy
generation in the heat exchanger.
8–157
In a dairy plant, milk at 4°C is pasteurized continu-
ously at 72°C at a rate of 12 L/s for 24 hours a day and 365
days a year. The milk is heated to the pasteurizing temperature
by hot water heated in a natural-gas-fired boiler that has an
efficiency of 82 percent. The pasteurized milk is then cooled
by cold water at 18°C before it is finally refrigerated back to
4°C. To save energy and money, the plant installs a regenerator
that has an effectiveness of 82 percent. If the cost of natural
gas is $1.04/therm (1 therm  105,500 kJ), determine how
much energy and money the regenerator will save this com-
pany per year and the annual reduction in entropy generation.
FIGURE P8–157
8–158
Stainless-steel ball bearings (r  8085 kg/m3 and
cp  0.480 kJ/kg · °C) having a diameter of 1.2 cm are to be
quenched in water at a rate of 1400 per minute. The balls
leave the oven at a uniform temperature of 900°C and are
exposed to air at 30°C for a while before they are dropped
into the water. If the temperature of the balls drops to 850°C
prior to quenching, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer
from the balls to the air and (b) the rate of entropy generation
due to heat loss from the balls to the air.
8–159
An ordinary egg can be approximated as a 5.5-cm-
diameter sphere. The egg is initially at a uniform temperature
of 8°C and is dropped into boiling water at 97°C. Taking the
properties of the egg to be r  1020 kg/m3 and cp  3.32
kJ/kg · °C, determine (a) how much heat is transferred to the
egg by the time the average temperature of the egg rises to
70°C and (b) the amount of entropy generation associated
with this heat transfer process.
72°C
72°C
Hot milk
Regenerator
Cold
milk
4°C
Heat
(Pasteurizing
section)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
371
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
366
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P8–159
8–160
Long cylindrical steel rods (r  7833 kg/m3 and
cp  0.465 kJ/kg · °C) of 10-cm diameter are heat treated by
drawing them at a velocity of 3 m/min through a 7-m-long
oven maintained at 900°C. If the rods enter the oven at 30°C
and leave at 700°C, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer to
the rods in the oven and (b) the rate of entropy generation
associated with this heat transfer process.
FIGURE P8–160
8–161
The inner and outer surfaces of a 5-m 
 7-m brick
wall of thickness 20 cm are maintained at temperatures of
20°C and 5°C, respectively. If the rate of heat transfer
through the wall is 1890 W, determine the rate of entropy
generation within the wall.
8–162
For heat transfer purposes, a standing man can be
modeled as a 30-cm-diameter, 170-cm-long vertical cylinder
with both the top and bottom surfaces insulated and with the
side surface at an average temperature of 34°C. If the rate of
heat loss from this man to the environment at 20°C is 336 W,
determine the rate of entropy transfer from the body of this
person accompanying heat transfer, in W/K.
8–163
A 1000-W iron is left on the ironing board with its
base exposed to the air at 20°C. If the surface temperature is
400°C, determine the rate of entropy generation during this
process in steady operation. How much of this entropy gener-
ation occurs within the iron?
8–164E
A frictionless piston–cylinder device contains satu-
rated liquid water at 25-psia pressure. Now 400 Btu of heat is
transferred to water from a source at 900°F, and part of the
liquid vaporizes at constant pressure. Determine the total
entropy generated during this process, in Btu/R.
3 m/min
Oven
900°C
Stainless
steel, 30°C
7 m
EGG
Ti = 8°C
Boiling
water
97°C
8–165E
Steam enters a diffuser at 20 psia and 240°F with a
velocity of 900 ft/s and exits as saturated vapor at 240°F and
100 ft/s. The exit area of the diffuser is 1 ft2. Determine
(a) the mass flow rate of the steam and (b) the rate of entropy
generation during this process. Assume an ambient tempera-
ture of 77°F.
8–166
Steam expands in a turbine steadily at a rate of
25,000 kg/h, entering at 6 MPa and 450°C and leaving at 
20 kPa as saturated vapor. If the power generated by the tur-
bine is 4 MW, determine the rate of entropy generation for
this process. Assume the surrounding medium is at 25°C.
Answer: 11.0 kW/K
FIGURE P8–166
8–167
A hot-water stream at 70°C enters an adiabatic mix-
ing chamber with a mass flow rate of 3.6 kg/s, where it is
mixed with a stream of cold water at 20°C. If the mixture
leaves the chamber at 42°C, determine (a) the mass flow rate
of the cold water and (b) the rate of entropy generation dur-
ing this adiabatic mixing process. Assume all the streams are
at a pressure of 200 kPa.
8–168
Liquid water at 200 kPa and 20°C is heated in a
chamber by mixing it with superheated steam at 200 kPa and
150°C. Liquid water enters the mixing chamber at a rate of
2.5 kg/s, and the chamber is estimated to lose heat to the sur-
rounding air at 25°C at a rate of 1200 kJ/min. If the mixture
leaves the mixing chamber at 200 kPa and 60°C, determine
(a) the mass flow rate of the superheated steam and (b) the
rate of entropy generation during this mixing process.
Answers: (a) 0.166 kg/s, (b) 0.333 kW/K
FIGURE P8–168
200 kPa
20°C
2.5 kg/s
MIXING
CHAMBER
60°C
150°C
1200 kJ/min
20 kPa
sat. vapor
STEAM
TURBINE
4 MW
6 MPa
450°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
372
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
367
8–169
A 0.3-m3 rigid tank is filled with saturated liquid
water at 150°C. A valve at the bottom of the tank is now
opened, and one-half of the total mass is withdrawn from the
tank in the liquid form. Heat is transferred to water from a
source at 200°C so that the temperature in the tank remains
constant. Determine (a) the amount of heat transfer and
(b) the total entropy generation for this process.
8–170E
An iron block of unknown mass at 185°F is
dropped into an insulated tank that contains 0.8 ft3 of water at
70°F. At the same time, a paddle wheel driven by a 200-W
motor is activated to stir the water. Thermal equilibrium is
established after 10 min with a final temperature of 75°F.
Determine (a) the mass of the iron block and (b) the entropy
generated during this process.
8–171E
Air enters a compressor at ambient conditions of
15 psia and 60°F with a low velocity and exits at 150 psia,
620°F, and 350 ft/s. The compressor is cooled by the ambient
air at 60°F at a rate of 1500 Btu/min. The power input to the
compressor is 400 hp. Determine (a) the mass flow rate of air
and (b) the rate of entropy generation.
8–172
Steam enters an adiabatic nozzle at 4 MPa and
450°C with a velocity of 70 m/s and exits at 3 MPa and 320
m/s. If the nozzle has an inlet area of 7 cm2, determine
(a) the exit temperature and (b) the rate of entropy generation
for this process.
Answers: (a) 422.3°C, (b) 0.0361 kW/K
Review Problems
8–173E
A heat engine whose thermal efficiency is 40 per-
cent uses a hot reservoir at 1300 R and a cold reservoir at 500
R. Calculate the entropy change of the two reservoirs when 1
Btu of heat is transferred from the hot reservoir to the engine.
Does this engine satisfy the increase of entropy principle? If
the thermal efficiency of the heat engine is increased to 70 per-
cent, will the increase of entropy principle still be satisfied?
8–174
A refrigerator with a coefficient of performance of 4
transfers heat from a cold region at –20ºC to a hot region at
30ºC. Calculate the total entropy change of the regions when
1 kJ of heat is transferred from the cold region. Is the second
law satisfied? Will this refrigerator still satisfy the second law
if its coefficient of performance is 6?
FIGURE P8–174
30°C
Win
QH
R
1 kJ
–20°C
8–175
A proposed heat pump design creates a heating
effect of 25 kW while using 5 kW of electrical power. The
thermal energy reservoirs are at 300 K and 260 K. Is this pos-
sible according to the increase of entropy principle?
8–176
What is the minimum internal energy that steam can
achieve as it is expanded adiabatically in a closed system from
1500 kPa and 320ºC to 100 kPa?
8–177E
Is it possible to expand water at 30 psia and 70 per-
cent quality to 10 psia in a closed system undergoing an iso-
thermal, reversible process while exchanging heat with an
energy reservoir at 300ºF?
8–178E
Can 2 lbm of air in a closed system at 16 psia and
100ºF be compressed adiabatically to 100 psia and a volume
of 4 ft3?
8–179
What is the maximum volume that 3 kg of oxygen 
at 950 kPa and 373ºC can be adiabatically expanded to in a
piston–cylinder device if the final pressure is to be 100 kPa?
Answer: 2.66 m3
8–180E
A 100-lbm block of a solid material whose specific
heat is 0.5 Btu/lbm·R is at 70ºF. It is heated with 10 lbm 
of saturated water vapor that has a constant pressure of 
14.7 psia. Determine the final temperature of the block and
water, and the entropy change of (a) the block, (b) the water,
and (c) the entire system. Is this process possible? Why?
8–181
One kilogram of air is in a piston–cylinder apparatus
that can only exchange heat with a reservoir at 300 K. Initially
this air is at 100 kPa and 27ºC. Someone claims that the air
can be compressed to 250 kPa and 27ºC. Determine if this
claim is valid by performing a second-law analysis of the
claimed process.
FIGURE P8–181
8–182
A rigid tank contains 1.5 kg of water at 120°C and
500 kPa. Now 22 kJ of shaft work is done on the system and
the final temperature in the tank is 95°C. If the entropy change
of water is zero and the surroundings are at 15°C, determine
(a) the final pressure in the tank, (b) the amount of heat trans-
fer between the tank and the surroundings, and (c) the entropy
generation during this process.
Answers: (a) 84.6 kPa, (b) 38.5
kJ, (c) 0.134 kJ/K
8–183
A horizontal cylinder is separated into two compart-
ments by an adiabatic, frictionless piston. One side contains
0.2 m3 of nitrogen and the other side contains 0.1 kg of
Air
100 kPa
27°C
Heat

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
373
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
helium, both initially at 20°C and 95 kPa. The sides of the
cylinder and the helium end are insulated. Now heat is added
to the nitrogen side from a reservoir at 500°C until the pres-
sure of the helium rises to 120 kPa. Determine (a) the final
temperature of the helium, (b) the final volume of the nitro-
gen, (c) the heat transferred to the nitrogen, and (d) the
entropy generation during this process.
FIGURE P8–183
8–184
A 0.8-m3 rigid tank contains carbon dioxide (CO2)
gas at 250 K and 100 kPa. A 500-W electric resistance heater
placed in the tank is now turned on and kept on for 40 min
after which the pressure of CO2 is measured to be 175 kPa.
Assuming the surroundings to be at 300 K and using constant
specific heats, determine (a) the final temperature of CO2,
(b) the net amount of heat transfer from the tank, and (c) the
entropy generation during this process.
FIGURE P8–184
8–185
Helium gas is throttled steadily from 500 kPa and
70°C. Heat is lost from the helium in the amount of 2.5 kJ/kg
to the surroundings at 25°C and 100 kPa. If the entropy of
the helium increases by 0.25 kJ/kg  K in the valve, deter-
mine (a) the exit pressure and temperature and (b) the
entropy generation during this process.
Answers: (a) 442 kPa,
69.5°C, (b) 0.258 kJ/kg  K
8–186
Refrigerant-134a enters a compressor as a saturated
vapor at 200 kPa at a rate of 0.03 m3/s and leaves at 700 kPa.
The power input to the compressor is 10 kW. If the surround-
ings at 20°C experience an entropy increase of 0.008 kW/K,
determine (a) the rate of heat loss from the compressor,
(b) the exit temperature of the refrigerant, and (c) the rate of
entropy generation.
8–187
Air at 500 kPa and 400 K enters an adiabatic nozzle
at a velocity of 30 m/s and leaves at 300 kPa and 350 K. Using
variable specific heats, determine (a) the isentropic efficiency,
(b) the exit velocity, and (c) the entropy generation.
CO2
250 K
100 kPa
We·
N2
0.2 m3
Q
He
0.1 kg
368
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P8–187
8–188
Show that the difference between the reversible
steady-flow work and reversible moving boundary work is
equal to the flow energy.
8–189
An insulated tank containing 0.4 m3 of saturated
water vapor at 500 kPa is connected to an initially evacuated,
insulated piston–cylinder device. The mass of the piston is
such that a pressure of 150 kPa is required to raise it. Now
the valve is opened slightly, and part of the steam flows 
to the cylinder, raising the piston. This process continues
until the pressure in the tank drops to 150 kPa. Assuming the
steam that remains in the tank to have undergone a reversible
adiabatic process, determine the final temperature (a) in the
rigid tank and (b) in the cylinder.
FIGURE P8–189
8–190
Carbon dioxide is compressed in a reversible, iso-
thermal process from 100 kPa and 20ºC to 400 kPa using a
steady-flow device with one inlet and one outlet. Determine
the work required and the heat transfer, both in kJ/kg, for this
compression.
8–191
Reconsider Prob. 8–190. Determine the change in the
work and heat transfer when the compression process is isen-
tropic rather than isothermal.
8–192
The compressor of a refrigerator compresses satu-
rated R-134a vapor at 10ºC to 800 kPa. How much work,
in kJ/kg, does this process require when the process is 
isentropic?
8–193
An adiabatic capillary tube is used in some refrigera-
tion systems to drop the pressure of the refrigerant from the
condenser level to the evaporator level. R-134a enters the
capillary tube as a saturated liquid at 50ºC, and leaves at 
–12ºC. Determine the rate of entropy generation in the capil-
150 kPa
0.4 m3
sat. vapor
500 kPa
Air
500 kPa
400 K
30 m/s
300 kPa
350 K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
I. Thermodynamics
8. Entropy
374
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 8
|
369
lary tube for a mass flow rate of 0.2 kg/s. Answer: 0.0077
kW/K
FIGURE P8–193
8–194
A steam turbine is equipped to bleed 6 percent of the
inlet steam for feedwater heating. It is operated with 4 MPa
and 350ºC steam at the inlet, a bleed pressure of 800 kPa,
and an exhaust pressure of 30 kPa. Calculate the work pro-
duced by this turbine when the isentropic efficiency between
the inlet and bleed point is 97 percent and the isentropic effi-
ciency between the bleed point and exhaust is 95 percent.
What is the overall isentropic efficiency of the turbine? Hint:
Treat this turbine as two separate turbines, with one operating
between the inlet and bleed conditions and the other operat-
ing between the bleed and exhaust conditions.
8–195
Air is compressed steadily by a compressor from
100 kPa and 17°C to 700 kPa at a rate of 5 kg/min. Determine
the minimum power input required if the process is (a) adia-
batic and (b) isothermal. Assume air to be an ideal gas with
variable specific heats, and neglect the changes in kinetic and
potential energies.
Answers: (a) 18.0 kW, (b) 13.5 kW
8–196
Refrigerant-134a at 140 kPa and 10°C is com-
pressed by an adiabatic 0.7-kW compressor to an exit state of
700 kPa and 50°C. Neglecting the changes in kinetic and
potential energies, determine (a) the isentropic efficiency of
the compressor, (b) the volume flow rate of the refrigerant at
the compressor inlet, in L/min, and (c) the maximum volume
flow rate at the inlet conditions that this adiabatic 0.7-kW
compressor can handle without violating the second law.
8–197E
Helium gas enters a nozzle whose isentropic effi-
ciency is 94 percent with a low velocity, and it exits at 
14 psia, 180°F, and 1000 ft/s. Determine the pressure and
temperature at the nozzle inlet.
Design and Essay Problems
8–198
It is well-known that the temperature of a gas rises
while it is compressed as a result of the energy input in the
form of compression work. At high compression ratios, the air
R-134a
50C
sat. liq.
–12C
Capillary tube
temperature may rise above the autoignition temperature of
some hydrocarbons, including some lubricating oil. Therefore,
the presence of some lubricating oil vapor in high-pressure air
raises the possibility of an explosion, creating a fire hazard.
The concentration of the oil within the compressor is usually
too low to create a real danger. However, the oil that collects
on the inner walls of exhaust piping of the compressor may
cause an explosion. Such explosions have largely been elimi-
nated by using the proper lubricating oils, carefully designing
the equipment, intercooling between compressor stages, and
keeping the system clean.
A compressor is to be designed for an industrial applica-
tion in Los Angeles. If the compressor exit temperature is not
to exceed 250°C for safety consideration, determine the max-
imum allowable compression ratio that is safe for all possible
weather conditions for that area.
8–199
Obtain the following information about a power
plant that is closest to your town: the net power output; the
type and amount of fuel; the power consumed by the pumps,
fans, and other auxiliary equipment; stack gas losses; temper-
atures at several locations; and the rate of heat rejection at the
condenser. Using these and other relevant data, determine the
rate of entropy generation in that power plant.
8–200
Enthalpy-entropy state diagrams (also known as
Mollier diagrams) are more useful than temperature-entropy
state diagrams for analyzing some systems. Using EES (or
other) software and actual property data, plot an enthalpy-
entropy diagram for water that includes the saturation lines.
Also, sketch isothermal, isobaric, and constant volume pro-
cesses on this diagram.
8–201
You are given the task of compressing a fixed
quantity of gas from P1, T1 to P2, T1. You wish to do this
using a polytropic process coupled with a constant pressure
P2 heat-transfer process. Determine the polytropic process
that minimizes the entropy generation.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
Introduction
375
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
2
HEAT TRANSFER
PART
371

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
376
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
MECHANISMS OF HEAT TRANSFER
|
373
T
he science of thermodynamics deals with the amount
of heat transfer as a system undergoes a process from
one equilibrium state to another, and makes no refer-
ence to how long the process will take. But in engineering,
we are often interested in the rate of heat transfer, which
is the topic of the science of heat transfer.
We start this chapter with an overview of the three basic
mechanisms of heat transfer, which are conduction, convec-
tion, and radiation, and discuss thermal conductivity. Con-
duction is the transfer of energy from the more energetic
particles of a substance to the adjacent, less energetic ones
as a result of interactions between the particles. Convection is
the mode of heat transfer between a surface and the adja-
cent liquid or gas that is in motion, and it involves the com-
bined effects of conduction and fluid motion. Radiation is the
energy emitted by matter in the form of electromagnetic
waves (or photons) as a result of the changes in the elec-
tronic configurations of the atoms or molecules. We close this
chapter with a discussion of simultaneous heat transfer.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Understand the basic mechanisms of heat transfer, which
are conduction, convection, and radiation, and Fourier's
law of heat conduction, Newton's law of cooling, and the
Stefan–Boltzmann law of radiation,
• Identify the mechanisms of heat transfer that occur
simultaneously in practice,
• Develop an awareness of the cost associated with heat
losses, and
• Solve various heat transfer problems encountered in
practice.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
377
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
9–1
■INTRODUCTION
In Chapter 3, we defined heat as the form of energy that can be transferred
from one system to another as a result of temperature difference. A thermo-
dynamic analysis is concerned with the amount of heat transfer as a system
undergoes a process from one equilibrium state to another. The science that
deals with the determination of the rates of such energy transfers is the heat
transfer. The transfer of energy as heat is always from the higher-tempera-
ture medium to the lower-temperature one, and heat transfer stops when the
two mediums reach the same temperature.
Heat can be transferred in three different modes: conduction, convection,
and radiation. All modes of heat transfer require the existence of a tempera-
ture difference, and all modes are from the high-temperature medium to a
lower-temperature one. Below we give a brief description of each mode. A
detailed study of these modes is given in later chapters of this text.
9–2
■CONDUCTION
Conduction is the transfer of energy from the more energetic particles of
a substance to the adjacent less energetic ones as a result of interactions
between the particles. Conduction can take place in solids, liquids, or gases.
In gases and liquids, conduction is due to the collisions and diffusion of the
molecules during their random motion. In solids, it is due to the combina-
tion of vibrations of the molecules in a lattice and the energy transport by
free electrons. A cold canned drink in a warm room, for example, eventually
warms up to the room temperature as a result of heat transfer from the room
to the drink through the aluminum can by conduction.
The rate of heat conduction through a medium depends on the geometry
of the medium, its thickness, and the material of the medium, as well as the
temperature difference across the medium. We know that wrapping a hot
water tank with glass wool (an insulating material) reduces the rate of heat
loss from the tank. The thicker the insulation, the smaller the heat loss. We
also know that a hot water tank loses heat at a higher rate when the temper-
ature of the room housing the tank is lowered. Further, the larger the tank,
the larger the surface area and thus the rate of heat loss.
Consider steady heat conduction through a large plane wall of thickness
x  L and area A, as shown in Fig. 9–1. The temperature difference across
the wall is T  T2  T1. Experiments have shown that the rate of heat
transfer Q· through the wall is doubled when the temperature difference T
across the wall or the area A normal to the direction of heat transfer is dou-
bled, but is halved when the wall thickness L is doubled. Thus we conclude
that the rate of heat conduction through a plane layer is proportional to the
temperature difference across the layer and the heat transfer area, but is
inversely proportional to the thickness of the layer. That is,
Rate of heat conduction 
or,
Q·
cond  kA
 kA
(W)
(9–1)
where the constant of proportionality k is the thermal conductivity of the
material, which is a measure of the ability of a material to conduct heat
T
x
T1  T2
x
(Area)(Temperature difference)
Thickness
374
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
T1
A
A
T2
Δx
.
Q
x
0
FIGURE 9–1
Heat conduction through a large plane
wall of thickness x and area A.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
378
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
(Fig. 9–2). In the limiting case of x →0, the equation above reduces to the
differential form
Q·
cond  kA
(W)
(9–2)
which is called Fourier’s law of heat conduction after J. Fourier, who
expressed it first in his heat transfer text in 1822. Here dT/dx is the tempera-
ture gradient, which is the slope of the temperature curve on a T-x diagram
(the rate of change of T with x), at location x. The relation above indicates
that the rate of heat conduction in a given direction is proportional to the tem-
perature gradient in that direction. Heat is conducted in the direction of
decreasing temperature, and the temperature gradient becomes negative when
temperature decreases with increasing x. The negative sign in Eq. 9–2 ensures
that heat transfer in the positive x direction is a positive quantity.
The heat transfer area A is always normal to the direction of heat transfer.
For heat loss through a 5-m-long, 3-m-high, and 25-cm-thick wall, for
example, the heat transfer area is A  15 m2. Note that the thickness of the
wall has no effect on A (Fig. 9–3).
dT
dx
Chapter 9
|
375
30°C
(a) Copper (k = 401 W/m·°C)
(b) Silicon (k = 148 W/m·°C)
20°C
30°C
20°C
1 m
1 m
Q = 4010 W/m2
.
Q = 1480 W/m2
.
FIGURE 9–2
The rate of heat conduction through a
solid is directly proportional to
its thermal conductivity.
EXAMPLE 9–1
The Cost of Heat Loss through a Roof
The roof of an electrically heated home is 6 m long, 8 m wide, and 0.25 m
thick, and is made of a flat layer of concrete whose thermal conductivity is
k  0.8 W/m · °C (Fig. 9–4). The temperatures of the inner and the outer
surfaces of the roof one night are measured to be 15°C and 4°C, respec-
tively, for a period of 10 hours. Determine (a) the rate of heat loss through
the roof that night and (b) the cost of that heat loss to the home owner if the
cost of electricity is $0.08/kWh.
Solution
The inner and outer surfaces of the flat concrete roof of an electri-
cally heated home are maintained at specified temperatures during a night.
The heat loss through the roof and its cost that night are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist during the entire night
since the surface temperatures of the roof remain constant at the specified
values. 2 Constant properties can be used for the roof.
Properties
The thermal conductivity of the roof is given to be k  0.8
W/m · °C.
Analysis
(a) Noting that heat transfer through the roof is by conduction and
the area of the roof is A  6 m 
 8 m  48 m2, the steady rate of heat
transfer through the roof is
Q·  kA
 (0.8 W/m · °C)(48 m2)
 1690 W  1.69 kW
(b) The amount of heat lost through the roof during a 10-hour period and its
cost is
Q  Q· t  (1.69 kW)(10 h)  16.9 kWh
Cost  (Amount of energy)(Unit cost of energy)
 (16.9 kWh)($0.08/kWh)  $1.35
Discussion
The cost to the home owner of the heat loss through the roof that
night was $1.35. The total heating bill of the house will be much larger since
the heat losses through the walls are not considered in these calculations.
(15  4)°C
0.25 m
T1  T2
L
4°C
8 m
Concrete roof
6 m
15°C
0.25 m
FIGURE 9–4
Schematic for Example 9–1.
W
 A = W × H
H
L
Q·
FIGURE 9–3
In heat conduction analysis, A
represents the area normal to the
direction of heat transfer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
379
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Thermal Conductivity
We have seen that different materials store heat differently, and we have
defined the property specific heat cp as a measure of a material’s ability to
store thermal energy. For example, cp  4.18 kJ/kg · °C for water and cp 
0.45 kJ/kg · °C for iron at room temperature, which indicates that water can
store almost 10 times the energy that iron can per unit mass. Likewise, the
thermal conductivity k is a measure of a material’s ability to conduct heat. For
example, k  0.607 W/m · °C for water and k  80.2 W/m · °C for iron at
room temperature, which indicates that iron conducts heat more than 100 times
faster than water can. Thus we say that water is a poor heat conductor relative
to iron, although water is an excellent medium to store thermal energy.
Equation 9–1 for the rate of conduction heat transfer under steady condi-
tions can also be viewed as the defining equation for thermal conductivity.
Thus the thermal conductivity of a material can be defined as the rate of
heat transfer through a unit thickness of the material per unit area per unit
temperature difference. The thermal conductivity of a material is a measure
of the ability of the material to conduct heat. A high value for thermal con-
ductivity indicates that the material is a good heat conductor, and a low value
indicates that the material is a poor heat conductor or insulator. The thermal
conductivities of some common materials at room temperature are given in
Table 9–1. The thermal conductivity of pure copper at room temperature is
k  401 W/m · °C, which indicates that a 1-m-thick copper wall will conduct
heat at a rate of 401 W per m2 area per °C temperature difference across the
wall. Note that materials such as copper and silver that are good electric con-
ductors are also good heat conductors, and have high values of thermal con-
ductivity. Materials such as rubber, wood, and Styrofoam are poor conductors
of heat and have low conductivity values.
A layer of material of known thickness and area can be heated from one
side by an electric resistance heater of known output. If the outer surfaces of
the heater are well insulated, all the heat generated by the resistance heater
will be transferred through the material whose conductivity is to be deter-
mined. Then measuring the two surface temperatures of the material when
steady heat transfer is reached and substituting them into Eq. 9–1 together
with other known quantities give the thermal conductivity (Fig. 9–5).
The thermal conductivities of materials vary over a wide range, as shown
in Fig. 9–6. The thermal conductivities of gases such as air vary by a factor
of 104 from those of pure metals such as copper. Note that pure crystals and
metals have the highest thermal conductivities, and gases and insulating
materials the lowest.
Temperature is a measure of the kinetic energies of the particles such as the
molecules or atoms of a substance. In a liquid or gas, the kinetic energy of
the molecules is due to their random translational motion as well as their
vibrational and rotational motions. When two molecules possessing differ-
ent kinetic energies collide, part of the kinetic energy of the more energetic
(higher-temperature) molecule is transferred to the less energetic (lower-
temperature) molecule, much the same as when two elastic balls of the same
mass at different velocities collide, part of the kinetic energy of the faster
ball is transferred to the slower one. The higher the temperature, the faster the
molecules move and the higher the number of such collisions, and the better
the heat transfer.
376
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 9–1
The thermal conductivities of some
materials at room temperature
Material
k, W/m · °C*
Diamond
2300
Silver
429
Copper
401
Gold
317
Aluminum
237
Iron
80.2
Mercury (l)
8.54
Glass
0.78
Brick
0.72
Water (l)
0.607
Human skin
0.37
Wood (oak)
0.17
Helium (g)
0.152
Soft rubber
0.13
Glass fiber
0.043
Air (g)
0.026
Urethane, rigid foam
0.026
*Multiply by 0.5778 to convert to Btu/h · ft · °F.
T1
T2
A
L
Q
Q = We
.
.
.
.
k
Sample
material
Insulation
Insulation
Insulation
Electric
heater
We
k = 
L
————
A(T1 – T2)
FIGURE 9–5
A simple experimental setup to
determine the thermal conductivity
of a material.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
380
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The kinetic theory of gases predicts and the experiments confirm that the
thermal conductivity of gases is proportional to the square root of the ther-
modynamic temperature T, and inversely proportional to the square root of
the molar mass M. Therefore, the thermal conductivity of a gas increases
with increasing temperature and decreasing molar mass. So it is not surpris-
ing that the thermal conductivity of helium (M  4) is much higher than
those of air (M  29) and argon (M  40).
The thermal conductivities of gases at 1 atm pressure are listed in Table
A–23. However, they can also be used at pressures other than 1 atm, since
the thermal conductivity of gases is independent of pressure in a wide range
of pressures encountered in practice.
The mechanism of heat conduction in a liquid is complicated by the fact
that the molecules are more closely spaced, and they exert a stronger inter-
molecular force field. The thermal conductivities of liquids usually lie
between those of solids and gases. The thermal conductivity of a substance
is normally highest in the solid phase and lowest in the gas phase. Unlike
gases, the thermal conductivities of most liquids decrease with increasing
temperature, with water being a notable exception. Like gases, the conduc-
tivity of liquids decreases with increasing molar mass. Liquid metals such
as mercury and sodium have high thermal conductivities and are very suit-
able for use in applications where a high heat transfer rate to a liquid is
desired, as in nuclear power plants.
Chapter 9
|
377
GASES
Hydrogen
Helium
Air
Carbon
  dioxide
INSULATORS
LIQUIDS
NONMETALLIC
SOLIDS
METAL
ALLOYS
PURE
METALS
Fibers
Wood
Foams
Mercury
Water
Oils
Oxides
Rock
Food
Rubber
Aluminum
  alloys
Bronze
Steel
Nichrome
Silver
Copper
Iron
Manganese
NONMETALLIC
CRYSTALS
Diamond
Graphite
Silicon
  carbide
Beryllium
  oxide
Quartz
1000
k,
W/m·°C
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
FIGURE 9–6
The range of thermal conductivity of
various materials at room temperature.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
381
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
In solids, heat conduction is due to two effects: the lattice vibrational
waves induced by the vibrational motions of the molecules positioned at
relatively fixed positions in a periodic manner called a lattice, and the energy
transported via the free flow of electrons in the solid (Fig. 9–7). The thermal
conductivity of a solid is obtained by adding the lattice and electronic compo-
nents. The relatively high thermal conductivities of pure metals are primarily
due to the electronic component. The lattice component of thermal conduc-
tivity strongly depends on the way the molecules are arranged. For example,
diamond, which is a highly ordered crystalline solid, has the highest known
thermal conductivity at room temperature.
Unlike metals, which are good electrical and heat conductors, crystalline
solids such as diamond and semiconductors such as silicon are good heat
conductors but poor electrical conductors. As a result, such materials find
widespread use in the electronics industry. Despite their higher price, dia-
mond heat sinks are used in the cooling of sensitive electronic components
because of the excellent thermal conductivity of diamond. Silicon oils 
and gaskets are commonly used in the packaging of electronic compo-
nents because they provide both good thermal contact and good electrical
insulation.
Pure metals have high thermal conductivities, and one would think that
metal alloys should also have high conductivities. One would expect an
alloy made of two metals of thermal conductivities k1 and k2 to have a con-
ductivity k between k1 and k2. But this turns out not to be the case. The ther-
mal conductivity of an alloy of two metals is usually much lower than that
of either metal, as shown in Table 9–2. Even small amounts in a pure 
metal of “foreign” molecules that are good conductors themselves seriously
disrupt the transfer of heat in that metal. For example, the thermal conduc-
tivity of steel containing just 1 percent of chrome is 62 W/m · °C, while the
thermal conductivities of iron and chromium are 83 and 95 W/m · °C,
respectively.
The thermal conductivities of materials vary with temperature
(Table 9–3). The variation of thermal conductivity over certain temperature
ranges is negligible for some materials, but significant for others, as shown
in Fig. 9–8. The thermal conductivities of certain solids exhibit dramatic
increases at temperatures near absolute zero, when these solids become
superconductors. For example, the conductivity of copper reaches a maxi-
mum value of about 20,000 W/m · °C at 20 K, which is about 50 times the
conductivity at room temperature. The thermal conductivities and other
thermal properties of various materials are given in the Appendix.
The temperature dependence of thermal conductivity causes considerable
complexity in conduction analysis. Therefore, it is common practice to eval-
uate the thermal conductivity k at the average temperature and treat it as a
constant in calculations.
In heat transfer analysis, a material is normally assumed to be isotropic;
that is, to have uniform properties in all directions. This assumption is real-
istic for most materials, except those that exhibit different structural charac-
teristics in different directions, such as laminated composite materials and
wood. The thermal conductivity of wood across the grain, for example, is
different than that parallel to the grain.
378
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 9–2
The thermal conductivity of an
alloy is usually much lower than
the thermal conductivity of either
metal of which it is composed
Pure metal or
k, W/m · °C,
alloy
at 300 K
Copper
401
Nickel
91
Constantan
(55% Cu, 45% Ni)
23
Copper
401
Aluminum
237
Commercial bronze
(90% Cu, 10% Al)
52
   GAS
* Molecular
   collisions
* Molecular
   diffusion
   LIQUID
* Molecular
   collisions
* Molecular
   diffusion
   SOLID
* Lattice vibrations
* Flow of free
    electrons
electrons
FIGURE 9–7
The mechanisms of heat conduction in
different phases of a substance.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
382
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
379
TABLE 9–3
Thermal conductivities of materials
vary with temperature
k, W/m · °C
T, K
Copper
Aluminum
100
482
302
200
413
237
300
401
237
400
393
240
600
379
231
800
366
218
Thermal Diffusivity
The product rcp, which is frequently encountered in heat transfer analysis,
is called the heat capacity of a material. Both the specific heat cp and the
heat capacity rcp represent the heat storage capability of a material. But cp
expresses it per unit mass whereas rcp expresses it per unit volume, as can
be noticed from their units J/kg · °C and J/m3 · °C, respectively.
Another material property that appears in the transient heat conduction
analysis is the thermal diffusivity, which represents how fast heat diffuses
through a material and is defined as
a 
(m2/s)
(9–3)
Note that the thermal conductivity k represents how well a material con-
ducts heat, and the heat capacity rcp represents how much energy a material
stores per unit volume. Therefore, the thermal diffusivity of a material can
be viewed as the ratio of the heat conducted through the material to the heat
stored per unit volume. A material that has a high thermal conductivity or a
low heat capacity will obviously have a large thermal diffusivity. The larger
the thermal diffusivity, the faster the propagation of heat into the medium.
A small value of thermal diffusivity means that heat is mostly absorbed by
the material and a small amount of heat is conducted further.
Heat conducted
Heat stored
 k
rcp
FIGURE 9–8
The variation of the thermal 
conductivity of various solids,
liquids, and gases with temperature. 
Diamonds
Type IIa
Type IIb
Type I
Solids
Liquids
Gases
Silver
Gold
Aluminum
Aluminum oxide
Platinum
Pyroceram glass
Clear fused quartz
Water
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
1400
Iron
Tungsten
Copper
Helium
Carbon tetrachloride
Steam
T, K
Air
Argon
10,000
1000
100
10
1
0.1
0.01
k,
W/m·°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
383
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The thermal diffusivities of some common materials at 20°C are given in
Table 9–4. Note that the thermal diffusivity ranges from a  0.14 
 106
m2/s for water to 149 
 106 m2/s for silver, which is a difference of more
than a thousand times. Also note that the thermal diffusivities of beef and
water are the same. This is not surprising, since meat as well as fresh veg-
etables and fruits are mostly water, and thus they possess the thermal prop-
erties of water.
380
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 9–4
The thermal diffusivities of some
materials at room temperature
Material
a, m2/s*
Silver
149 
 106
Gold
127 
 106
Copper
113 
 106
Aluminum
97.5 
 106
Iron
22.8 
 106
Mercury (l)
4.7 
 106
Marble
1.2 
 106
Ice
1.2 
 106
Concrete
0.75 
 106
Brick
0.52 
 106
Heavy soil (dry)
0.52 
 106
Glass
0.34 
 106
Glass wool
0.23 
 106
Water (l)
0.14 
 106
Beef
0.14 
 106
Wood (oak)
0.13 
 106
*Multiply by 10.76 to convert to ft2/s.
EXAMPLE 9–2
Measuring the Thermal Conductivity of a 
Material
A common way of measuring the thermal conductivity of a material is to
sandwich an electric thermofoil heater between two identical samples of the
material, as shown in Fig. 9–9. The thickness of the resistance heater,
including its cover, which is made of thin silicon rubber, is usually less than
0.5 mm. A circulating fluid such as tap water keeps the exposed ends of the
samples at constant temperature. The lateral surfaces of the samples are
well insulated to ensure that heat transfer through the samples is one-
dimensional. Two thermocouples are embedded into each sample some dis-
tance L apart, and a differential thermometer reads the temperature drop T
across this distance along each sample. When steady operating conditions
are reached, the total rate of heat transfer through both samples becomes
equal to the electric power drawn by the heater.
In a certain experiment, cylindrical samples of diameter 5 cm and length
10 cm are used. The two thermocouples in each sample are placed 3 cm
apart. After initial transients, the electric heater is observed to draw 0.4 A at
110 V, and both differential thermometers read a temperature difference of
15°C. Determine the thermal conductivity of the sample.
Solution
The thermal conductivity of a material is to be determined by
ensuring one-dimensional heat conduction, and by measuring temperatures
when steady operating conditions are reached.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist since the temperature
readings do not change with time. 2 Heat losses through the lateral surfaces
of the apparatus are negligible since those surfaces are well insulated, and
thus the entire heat generated by the heater is conducted through the sam-
ples. 3 The apparatus possesses thermal symmetry.
Analysis
The electrical power consumed by the resistance heater and con-
verted to heat is
W·
e  VI  (110 V)(0.4 A)  44 W
The rate of heat flow through each sample is
Q· 
W·
e 

 (44 W)  22 W
since only half of the heat generated flows through each sample because of
symmetry. Reading the same temperature difference across the same dis-
tance in each sample also confirms that the apparatus possesses thermal
symmetry. The heat transfer area is the area normal to the direction of heat
transfer, which is the cross-sectional area of the cylinder in this case:
A 
pD2 
p(0.05 m)2  0.001963 m2
1
4
1
4
1
2
1
2
a
a
L
Thermocouple
Cooling
fluid
Insulation
Resistance
heater
L
ΔT1
Sample
Sample
Cooling
fluid
ΔT1
FIGURE 9–9
Apparatus to measure the thermal
conductivity of a material using two
identical samples and a thin resistance
heater (Example 9–2).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
384
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
381
Noting that the temperature drops by 15°C within 3 cm in the direction of
heat flow, the thermal conductivity of the sample is determined to be
Q·  kA
→
k 

 22.4 W/m · °C
Discussion
Perhaps you are wondering if we really need to use two samples
in the apparatus, since the measurements on the second sample do not give
any additional information. It seems like we can replace the second sample by
insulation. Indeed, we do not need the second sample; however, it enables us
to verify the temperature measurements on the first sample and provides ther-
mal symmetry, which reduces experimental error.
(22 W)(0.03 m)
(0.001963 m2)(15°C)
Q. L
A T
T
L
EXAMPLE 9–3
Conversion between SI and English Units
An engineer who is working on the heat transfer analysis of a brick building in
English units needs the thermal conductivity of brick. But the only value he
can find from his handbooks is 0.72 W/m · °C, which is in SI units. To make
matters worse, the engineer does not have a direct conversion factor between
the two unit systems for thermal conductivity. Can you help him out?
Solution
The situation this engineer is facing is not unique, and most engi-
neers often find themselves in a similar position. A person must be very
careful during unit conversion not to fall into some common pitfalls and to
avoid some costly mistakes. Although unit conversion is a simple process, it
requires utmost care and careful reasoning.
The conversion factors for W and m are straightforward and are given in
conversion tables to be
1 W  3.41214 Btu/h
1 m  3.2808 ft
But the conversion of °C into °F is not so simple, and it can be a source of
error if one is not careful. Perhaps the first thought that comes to mind is to
replace °C by (°F  32)/1.8 since T(°C)  [T(°F)  32]/1.8. But this will be
wrong since the °C in the unit W/m · °C represents per °C change in temper-
ature. Noting that 1°C change in temperature corresponds to 1.8°F, the
proper conversion factor to be used is
1°C  1.8°F
Substituting, we get
1 W/m · °C 
 0.5778 Btu/h · ft · °F
which is the desired conversion factor. Therefore, the thermal conductivity of
the brick in English units is
kbrick  0.72 W/m · °C
 0.72 
 (0.5778 Btu/h · ft · °F)
 0.42 Btu/h · ft · °F
Discussion
Note that the thermal conductivity value of a material in English
units is about half that in SI units (Fig. 9–10). Also note that we rounded the
result to two significant digits (the same number in the original value) since
expressing the result in more significant digits (such as 0.4160 instead of
0.42) would falsely imply a more accurate value than the original one.
3.41214 Btu/h
(3.2808 ft)(1.8°F)
 = 0.72 W/m·°C
 = 0.42 Btu/h·ft·°F
k
FIGURE 9–10
The thermal conductivity value in
English units is obtained by
multiplying the value in SI units by
0.5778.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
385
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
9–3
■CONVECTION
Convection is the mode of energy transfer between a solid surface and the
adjacent liquid or gas that is in motion, and it involves the combined effects
of conduction and fluid motion. The faster the fluid motion, the greater the
convection heat transfer. In the absence of any bulk fluid motion, heat trans-
fer between a solid surface and the adjacent fluid is by pure conduction.
The presence of bulk motion of the fluid enhances the heat transfer between
the solid surface and the fluid, but it also complicates the determination of
heat transfer rates.
Consider the cooling of a hot block by blowing cool air over its top sur-
face (Fig. 9–11). Heat is first transferred to the air layer adjacent to the
block by conduction. This heat is then carried away from the surface by
convection, that is, by the combined effects of conduction within the air that
is due to random motion of air molecules and the bulk or macroscopic
motion of the air that removes the heated air near the surface and replaces it
by the cooler air.
Convection is called forced convection if the fluid is forced to flow over
the surface by external means such as a fan, pump, or the wind. In contrast,
convection is called natural (or free) convection if the fluid motion is
caused by buoyancy forces that are induced by density differences due to the
variation of temperature in the fluid (Fig. 9–12). For example, in the absence
of a fan, heat transfer from the surface of the hot block in Fig. 9–11 is by nat-
ural convection since any motion in the air in this case is due to the rise of the
warmer (and thus lighter) air near the surface and the fall of the cooler (and
thus heavier) air to fill its place. Heat transfer between the block and the sur-
rounding air is by conduction if the temperature difference between the air
and the block is not large enough to overcome the resistance of air to move-
ment and thus to initiate natural convection currents.
Heat transfer processes that involve change of phase of a fluid are also
considered to be convection because of the fluid motion induced during the
process, such as the rise of the vapor bubbles during boiling or the fall of
the liquid droplets during condensation.
Despite the complexity of convection, the rate of convection heat transfer
is observed to be proportional to the temperature difference, and is conve-
niently expressed by Newton’s law of cooling as
Q·
conv  hAs (Ts  T)
(W)
(9–4)
where h is the convection heat transfer coefficient in W/m2 · °C or Btu/h · ft2 ·
°F, As is the surface area through which convection heat transfer takes place,
Ts is the surface temperature, and T is the temperature of the fluid suffi-
ciently far from the surface. Note that at the surface, the fluid temperature
equals the surface temperature of the solid.
The convection heat transfer coefficient h is not a property of the fluid. It
is an experimentally determined parameter whose value depends on all the
variables influencing convection such as the surface geometry, the nature of
fluid motion, the properties of the fluid, and the bulk fluid velocity. Typical
values of h are given in Table 9–5.
Some people do not consider convection to be a fundamental mechanism
of heat transfer since it is essentially heat conduction in the presence of fluid
382
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Temperature
variation
of air
Velocity
variation
of air
Air
flow
T
V
Ts
As
Hot Block
T
Qconv
·
FIGURE 9–11
Heat transfer from a hot
surface to air by convection.
Natural
convection
Air
Forced
convection
Air
hot egg
hot egg
FIGURE 9–12
The cooling of a boiled egg
by forced and natural convection.
TABLE 9–5
Typical values of convection heat
transfer coefficient
Type of
convection
h, W/m2 · °C*
Free convection of 
gases
2–25
Free convection of 
liquids
10–1000
Forced convection 
of gases
25–250
Forced convection 
of liquids
50–20,000
Boiling and 
condensation
2500–100,000
*Multiply by 0.176 to convert to Btu/h · ft2 · °F.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
386
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
383
motion. But we still need to give this combined phenomenon a name, unless
we are willing to keep referring to it as “conduction with fluid motion.” Thus,
it is practical to recognize convection as a separate heat transfer mechanism
despite the valid arguments to the contrary.
EXAMPLE 9–4
Measuring Convection Heat Transfer Coefficient
A 2-m-long, 0.3-cm-diameter electrical wire extends across a room at 15°C,
as shown in Fig. 9–13. Heat is generated in the wire as a result of resistance
heating, and the surface temperature of the wire is measured to be 152°C in
steady operation. Also, the voltage drop and electric current through the wire
are measured to be 60 V and 1.5 A, respectively. Disregarding any heat
transfer by radiation, determine the convection heat transfer coefficient for
heat transfer between the outer surface of the wire and the air in the room.
Solution
The convection heat transfer coefficient for heat transfer from 
an electrically heated wire to air is to be determined by measuring tempera-
tures when steady operating conditions are reached and the electric power
consumed.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist since the temperature
readings do not change with time. 2 Radiation heat transfer is negligible.
Analysis
When steady operating conditions are reached, the rate of heat
loss from the wire equals the rate of heat generation in the wire as a result
of resistance heating. That is,
Q·  E·
generated  VI  (60 V)(1.5 A)  90 W
The surface area of the wire is
As  pDL  p(0.003 m)(2 m)  0.01885 m2
Newton’s law of cooling for convection heat transfer is expressed as
Q·
conv  hAs (Ts  T)
Disregarding any heat transfer by radiation and thus assuming all the heat
loss from the wire to occur by convection, the convection heat transfer coef-
ficient is determined to be
h 
 34.9 W/m2 · °C
Discussion
Note that the simple setup described above can be used to
determine the average heat transfer coefficients from a variety of surfaces in
air. Also, heat transfer by radiation can be eliminated by keeping the sur-
rounding surfaces at the temperature of the wire.
Q#
conv
As1Ts  T2 
90 W
10.01885 m22 1152  152°C
9–4
■RADIATION
Radiation is the energy emitted by matter in the form of electromagnetic
waves (or photons) as a result of the changes in the electronic configura-
tions of the atoms or molecules. Unlike conduction and convection, the
transfer of heat by radiation does not require the presence of an intervening
medium. In fact, heat transfer by radiation is fastest (at the speed of light)
60 V
1.5 A
152°C
T∞ = 15°C
FIGURE 9–13
Schematic for Example 9–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
387
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
and it suffers no attenuation in a vacuum. This is how the energy of the sun
reaches the earth.
In heat transfer studies we are interested in thermal radiation, which is
the form of radiation emitted by bodies because of their temperature. It dif-
fers from other forms of electromagnetic radiation such as x-rays, gamma
rays, microwaves, radio waves, and television waves that are not related to
temperature. All bodies at a temperature above absolute zero emit thermal
radiation.
Radiation is a volumetric phenomenon, and all solids, liquids, and gases
emit, absorb, or transmit radiation to varying degrees. However, radiation is
usually considered to be a surface phenomenon for solids that are opaque to
thermal radiation such as metals, wood, and rocks since the radiation emit-
ted by the interior regions of such material can never reach the surface, and
the radiation incident on such bodies is usually absorbed within a few
microns from the surface.
The maximum rate of radiation that can be emitted from a surface at a ther-
modynamic temperature Ts (in K or R) is given by the Stefan–Boltzmann
law as
Q·
emit, max  sAsT4
s
(W)
(9–5)
where s  5.670 
 108 W/m2 · K4 or 0.1714 
 108 Btu/h · ft2 · R4 is the
Stefan–Boltzmann constant. The idealized surface that emits radiation at this
maximum rate is called a blackbody, and the radiation emitted by a black-
body is called blackbody radiation (Fig. 9–14). The radiation emitted by
all real surfaces is less than the radiation emitted by a blackbody at the
same temperature, and is expressed as
Q·
emit  esAsT4
s
(W)
(9–6)
where  is the emissivity of the surface. The property emissivity, whose
value is in the range 0  e  1, is a measure of how closely a surface
approximates a blackbody for which e  1. The emissivities of some sur-
faces are given in Table 9–6.
Another important radiation property of a surface is its absorptivity a,
which is the fraction of the radiation energy incident on a surface that is
absorbed by the surface. Like emissivity, its value is in the range 0  a  1.
A blackbody absorbs the entire radiation incident on it. That is, a blackbody
is a perfect absorber (a  1) as it is a perfect emitter.
In general, both e and a of a surface depend on the temperature and the
wavelength of the radiation. Kirchhoff’s law of radiation states that the
emissivity and the absorptivity of a surface at a given temperature and
wavelength are equal. In many practical applications, the surface tempera-
ture and the temperature of the source of incident radiation are of the same
order of magnitude, and the average absorptivity of a surface is taken to be
equal to its average emissivity. The rate at which a surface absorbs radiation
is determined from (Fig. 9–15)
Q·
absorbed  aQ·
incident
(W)
(9–7)
where Q·
incident is the rate at which radiation is incident on the surface and 
is the absorptivity of the surface. For opaque (nontransparent) surfaces, the
portion of incident radiation not absorbed by the surface is reflected back.
384
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Ts = 400 K
Blackbody (   = 1)
ε
Qemit, max=
Ts
4
= 1452 W/m2
·
σ
FIGURE 9–14
Blackbody radiation represents the
maximum amount of radiation that
can be emitted from a surface
at a specified temperature.
TABLE 9–6
Emissivities of some materials
at 300 K
Material
Emissivity
Aluminum foil
0.07
Anodized aluminum
0.82
Polished copper
0.03
Polished gold
0.03
Polished silver
0.02
Polished stainless steel
0.17
Black paint
0.98
White paint
0.90
White paper
0.92–0.97
Asphalt pavement
0.85–0.93
Red brick
0.93–0.96
Human skin
0.95
Wood
0.82–0.92
Soil
0.93–0.96
Water
0.96
Vegetation
0.92–0.96
Qincident
·
Qref = (1 –    ) Qincident
·
·
α
Qabs =
Qincident
·
·
α
FIGURE 9–15
The absorption of radiation 
incident on an opaque surface of
absorptivity .

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
388
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The difference between the rates of radiation emitted by the surface and
the radiation absorbed is the net radiation heat transfer. If the rate of radia-
tion absorption is greater than the rate of radiation emission, the surface is
said to be gaining energy by radiation. Otherwise, the surface is said to be
losing energy by radiation. In general, the determination of the net rate of
heat transfer by radiation between two surfaces is a complicated matter
since it depends on the properties of the surfaces, their orientation relative
to each other, and the interaction of the medium between the surfaces with
radiation.
When a surface of emissivity  and surface area As at a thermodynamic
temperature Ts is completely enclosed by a much larger (or black) surface at
thermodynamic temperature Tsurr separated by a gas (such as air) that does
not intervene with radiation, the net rate of radiation heat transfer between
these two surfaces is given by (Fig. 9–16)
Q·
rad  esAs (T4
s  T4
surr)
(W)
(9–8)
In this special case, the emissivity and the surface area of the surrounding
surface do not have any effect on the net radiation heat transfer.
Radiation heat transfer to or from a surface surrounded by a gas such as
air occurs parallel to conduction (or convection, if there is bulk gas motion)
between the surface and the gas. Thus the total heat transfer is determined
by adding the contributions of both heat transfer mechanisms. For simplic-
ity and convenience, this is often done by defining a combined heat trans-
fer coefficient hcombined that includes the effects of both convection and
radiation. Then the total heat transfer rate to or from a surface by convec-
tion and radiation is expressed as
Q·
total  hcombined As (Ts  T)
(W)
(9–9)
Note that the combined heat transfer coefficient is essentially a convection
heat transfer coefficient modified to include the effects of radiation.
Radiation is usually significant relative to conduction or natural con-
vection, but negligible relative to forced convection. Thus radiation in forced
convection applications is usually disregarded, especially when the surfaces
involved have low emissivities and low to moderate temperatures.
Chapter 9
|
385
Air
Surrounding
surfaces at
Tsurr
Qemitted
·
, As, Ts
ε
Qincident
·
Qrad =
As(T s
4 – T 4
surr)
·
εσ
FIGURE 9–16
Radiation heat transfer between a
surface and the surfaces surrounding it.
Room
30°C
1.4 m2
Tsurr
Qrad
·
FIGURE 9–17
Schematic for Example 9–5.
EXAMPLE 9–5
Radiation Effect on Thermal Comfort
It is a common experience to feel “chilly” in winter and “warm” in summer in
our homes even when the thermostat setting is kept the same. This is due to
the so called “radiation effect” resulting from radiation heat exchange
between our bodies and the surrounding surfaces of the walls and the ceiling.
Consider a person standing in a room maintained at 22°C at all times. The
inner surfaces of the walls, floors, and the ceiling of the house are observed to
be at an average temperature of 10°C in winter and 25°C in summer. Deter-
mine the rate of radiation heat transfer between this person and the surround-
ing surfaces if the exposed surface area and the average outer surface
temperature of the person are 1.4 m2 and 30°C, respectively (Fig. 9–17).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
389
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
9–5
■SIMULTANEOUS HEAT TRANSFER
MECHANISMS
We mentioned that there are three mechanisms of heat transfer, but not
all three can exist simultaneously in a medium. For example, heat transfer
is only by conduction in opaque solids, but by conduction and radiation in
semitransparent solids. Thus, a solid may involve conduction and radiation
but not convection. However, a solid may involve heat transfer by convection
and/or radiation on its surfaces exposed to a fluid or other surfaces. For
example, the outer surfaces of a cold piece of rock will warm up in a warmer
environment as a result of heat gain by convection (from the air) and radia-
tion (from the sun or the warmer surrounding surfaces). But the inner parts of
the rock will warm up as this heat is transferred to the inner region of the rock
by conduction.
Heat transfer is by conduction and possibly by radiation in a still fluid (no
bulk fluid motion) and by convection and radiation in a flowing fluid. In the
absence of radiation, heat transfer through a fluid is either by conduction or
convection, depending on the presence of any bulk fluid motion. Convection
can be viewed as combined conduction and fluid motion, and conduction in
a fluid can be viewed as a special case of convection in the absence of any
fluid motion (Fig. 9–18).
386
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Solution
The rates of radiation heat transfer between a person and the sur-
rounding surfaces at specified temperatures are to be determined in summer
and winter.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Heat transfer by con-
vection is not considered. 3 The person is completely surrounded by the
interior surfaces of the room. 4 The surrounding surfaces are at a uniform
temperature.
Properties
The emissivity of a person is e  0.95 (Table 9–6).
Analysis
The net rates of radiation heat transfer from the body to the sur-
rounding walls, ceiling, and floor in winter and summer are
Q·
rad, winter  esAs (T 4
s  T 4
surr, winter)
 (0.95)(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(1.4 m2)

 [(30  273)4  (10  273)4] K4
 152 W
and
Q·
rad, summer  esAs (T 4
s  T 4
surr, summer)
 (0.95)(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(1.4 m2)

 [(30  273)4  (25  273)4] K4
 40.9 W
Discussion
Note that we must use thermodynamic (i.e., absolute) tempera-
tures in radiation calculations. Also note that the rate of heat loss from the
person by radiation is almost four times as large in winter than it is in sum-
mer, which explains the “chill” we feel in winter even if the thermostat setting
is kept the same.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
390
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Thus, when we deal with heat transfer through a fluid, we have either
conduction or convection, but not both. Also, gases are practically transpar-
ent to radiation, except that some gases are known to absorb radiation
strongly at certain wavelengths. Ozone, for example, strongly absorbs ultra-
violet radiation. But in most cases, a gas between two solid surfaces does
not interfere with radiation and acts effectively as a vacuum. Liquids, on the
other hand, are usually strong absorbers of radiation.
Finally, heat transfer through a vacuum is by radiation only since conduc-
tion or convection requires the presence of a material medium.
Chapter 9
|
387
OPAQUE
SOLID
Conduction
1 mode
T1
T2
GAS
Radiation
Conduction or
convection
2 modes
T1
T2
VACUUM
Radiation
1 mode
T1
T2
FIGURE 9–18
Although there are three mechanisms
of heat transfer, a medium may
involve only two of them
simultaneously.
EXAMPLE 9–6
Heat Loss from a Person
Consider a person standing in a breezy room at 20°C. Determine the total rate
of heat transfer from this person if the exposed surface area and the average
outer surface temperature of the person are 1.6 m2 and 29°C, respectively,
and the convection heat transfer coefficient is 6 W/m2 · K (Fig. 9–19).
Solution
The total rate of heat transfer from a person by both convection
and radiation to the surrounding air and surfaces at specified temperatures
is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The person is completely
surrounded by the interior surfaces of the room. 3 The surrounding surfaces
are at the same temperature as the air in the room. 4 Heat conduction to the
floor through the feet is negligible.
Properties
The emissivity of a person is e  0.95 (Table 9–6).
Analysis
The heat transfer between the person and the air in the room is
by convection (instead of conduction) since it is conceivable that the air in
the vicinity of the skin or clothing warms up and rises as a result of heat
transfer from the body, initiating natural convection currents. It appears that
the experimentally determined value for the rate of convection heat transfer in
this case is 6 W per unit surface area (m2) per unit temperature difference (in
K or °C) between the person and the air away from the person. Thus, the rate
of convection heat transfer from the person to the air in the room is
Q·
conv  hAs (Ts  T)
 (6 W/m2 · °C)(1.6 m2)(29  20)°C
 86.4 W
The person also loses heat by radiation to the surrounding wall surfaces. We
take the temperature of the surfaces of the walls, ceiling, and floor to be
equal to the air temperature in this case for simplicity, but we recognize that
this does not need to be the case. These surfaces may be at a higher or lower
temperature than the average temperature of the room air, depending on the
outdoor conditions and the structure of the walls. Considering that air does
not intervene with radiation and the person is completely enclosed by the sur-
rounding surfaces, the net rate of radiation heat transfer from the person to
the surrounding walls, ceiling, and floor is
Q·
rad  esAs (T 4
s  T 4
surr)
 (0.95)(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(1.6 m2)

 [(29  273)4  (20  273)4] K4
 81.7 W
Room
air
29°C
20°C
Qrad
·
Qconv
·
Qcond
·
FIGURE 9–19
Heat transfer from the person
described in Example 9–6.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
391
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
388
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Note that we must use thermodynamic temperatures in radiation calcula-
tions. Also note that we used the emissivity value for the skin and clothing at
room temperature since the emissivity is not expected to change significantly
at a slightly higher temperature.
Then the rate of total heat transfer from the body is determined by adding
these two quantities:
Q·
total  Q·
conv  Q·
rad  (86.4  81.7) W  168 W
Discussion
The heat transfer would be much higher if the person were not
dressed since the exposed surface temperature would be higher. Thus, an
important function of the clothes is to serve as a barrier against heat transfer.
In these calculations, heat transfer through the feet to the floor by con-
duction, which is usually very small, is neglected. Heat transfer from the
skin by perspiration, which is the dominant mode of heat transfer in hot
environments, is not considered here.
Also, the units W/m2 · °C and W/m2 · K for heat transfer coefficient are
equivalent, and can be interchanged.
EXAMPLE 9–7
Heat Transfer between Two Isothermal Plates
Consider steady heat transfer between two large parallel plates at constant
temperatures of T1  300 K and T2  200 K that are L  1 cm apart, as
shown in Fig. 9–20. Assuming the surfaces to be black (emissivity e  1),
determine the rate of heat transfer between the plates per unit surface area
assuming the gap between the plates is (a) filled with atmospheric air,
(b) evacuated, (c) filled with urethane insulation, and (d) filled with superin-
sulation that has an apparent thermal conductivity of 0.00002 W/m · K.
Solution
The total rate of heat transfer between two large parallel plates at
specified temperatures is to be determined for four different cases.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 There are no natural
convection currents in the air between the plates. 3 The surfaces are black
and thus e  1.
Properties
The thermal conductivity at the average temperature of 250 K 
is k  0.0219 W/m · K for air (Table A–22), 0.026 W/m · K for urethane
insulation, and 0.00002 W/m · K for the superinsulation.
Analysis
(a) The rates of conduction and radiation heat transfer between
the plates through the air layer are
Q·
cond  kA
 (0.0219 W/m · K)(1 m2)
 219 W
and
Q·
rad  esA(T 4
1  T 4
2)
 (1)(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(1 m2)[(300 K)4  (200 K)4]  369 W
Therefore,
Q·
total  Q·
cond  Q·
rad  219  369  588 W
(300  200)K
0.01 m
T1  T2
L
T2 = 200 K
T1 = 300 K
 = 1
ε
Q·
L = 1 cm
FIGURE 9–20
Schematic for Example 9–7.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
392
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
389
The heat transfer rate in reality will be higher because of the natural convec-
tion currents that are likely to occur in the air space between the plates.
(b) When the air space between the plates is evacuated, there will be no
conduction or convection, and the only heat transfer between the plates will
be by radiation. Therefore,
Q·
total  Q·
rad  369 W
(c) An opaque solid material placed between two plates blocks direct radia-
tion heat transfer between the plates. Also, the thermal conductivity of an
insulating material accounts for the radiation heat transfer that may be
occurring through the voids in the insulating material. The rate of heat trans-
fer through the urethane insulation is
Q·
total  Q·
cond  kA
 (0.026 W/m · K)(1 m2)
 260 W
Note that heat transfer through the urethane material is less than the heat
transfer through the air determined in (a), although the thermal conductivity
of the insulation is higher than that of air. This is because the insulation
blocks the radiation whereas air transmits it.
(d) The layers of the superinsulation prevent any direct radiation heat trans-
fer between the plates. However, radiation heat transfer between the sheets
of superinsulation does occur, and the apparent thermal conductivity of the
superinsulation accounts for this effect. Therefore,
Q·
total  kA
 (0.00002 W/m · K)(1 m2)
 0.2 W
which is 
of the heat transfer through the vacuum. The results of this
example are summarized in Fig. 9–21 to put them into perspective.
Discussion
This example demonstrates the effectiveness of superinsulations
and explains why they are the insulation of choice in critical applications
despite their high cost.
1
1845
(300  200)K
0.01 m
T1  T2
L
(300  200)K
0.01 m
T1  T2
L
FIGURE 9–21
Different ways of reducing heat transfer between two isothermal plates, and their effectiveness.
1 cm
(a) Air space
(b) Vacuum
(c) Insulation
(d) Superinsulation
300 K
200 K
300 K
200 K
300 K
200 K
300 K
200 K
Q = 588 W
·
Q = 369 W
·
Q = 260 W
·
Q = 0.2 W
·
1 cm
1 cm
1 cm

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
393
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
390
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 9–8
Heat Transfer in Conventional
and Microwave Ovens
The fast and efficient cooking of microwave ovens made them one of the
essential appliances in modern kitchens (Fig. 9–22). Discuss the heat transfer
mechanisms associated with the cooking of a chicken in microwave and con-
ventional ovens, and explain why cooking in a microwave oven is more
efficient.
Solution
Food is cooked in a microwave oven by absorbing the electromag-
netic radiation energy generated by the microwave tube, called the mag-
netron. The radiation emitted by the magnetron is not thermal radiation,
since its emission is not due to the temperature of the magnetron; rather, it
is due to the conversion of electrical energy into electromagnetic radiation at
a specified wavelength. The wavelength of the microwave radiation is such
that it is reflected by metal surfaces; transmitted by the cookware made of
glass, ceramic, or plastic; and absorbed and converted to internal energy by
food (especially the water, sugar, and fat) molecules.
In a microwave oven, the radiation that strikes the chicken is absorbed by
the skin of the chicken and the outer parts. As a result, the temperature of
the chicken at and near the skin rises. Heat is then conducted toward the
inner parts of the chicken from its outer parts. Of course, some of the heat
absorbed by the outer surface of the chicken is lost to the air in the oven by
convection.
In a conventional oven, the air in the oven is first heated to the desired
temperature by the electric or gas heating element. This preheating may take
several minutes. The heat is then transferred from the air to the skin of the
chicken by natural convection in older ovens or by forced convection in the
newer convection ovens that utilize a fan. The air motion in convection ovens
increases the convection heat transfer coefficient and thus decreases the
cooking time. Heat is then conducted toward the inner parts of the chicken
from its outer parts as in microwave ovens.
Microwave ovens replace the slow convection heat transfer process in con-
ventional ovens by the instantaneous radiation heat transfer. As a result,
microwave ovens transfer energy to the food at full capacity the moment they
are turned on, and thus they cook faster while consuming less energy.
FIGURE 9–22
A chicken being cooked in a
microwave oven (Example 9–8).
EXAMPLE 9–9
Heating of a Plate by Solar Energy
A thin metal plate is insulated on the back and exposed to solar radiation at
the front surface (Fig. 9–23). The exposed surface of the plate has an
absorptivity of 0.6 for solar radiation. If solar radiation is incident on the
plate at a rate of 700 W/m2 and the surrounding air temperature is 25°C,
determine the surface temperature of the plate when the heat loss by con-
vection and radiation equals the solar energy absorbed by the plate. Assume
the combined convection and radiation heat transfer coefficient to be 
50 W/m2 · °C.
Solution
The back side of the thin metal plate is insulated and the front
side is exposed to solar radiation. The surface temperature of the plate is to
be determined when it stabilizes.
700 W/m2
 = 0.6
25°C
α
FIGURE 9–23
Schematic for Example 9–9.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
394
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
391
Heat can be transferred in three different modes: conduction,
convection, and radiation. Conduction is the transfer of heat
from the more energetic particles of a substance to the adja-
cent less energetic ones as a result of interactions between 
the particles, and is expressed by Fourier’s law of heat 
conduction as
Q·
cond  kA
where k is the thermal conductivity of the material, A is the
area normal to the direction of heat transfer, and dT/dx is the
temperature gradient. The magnitude of the rate of heat con-
duction across a plane layer of thickness L is given by
Q·
cond  kA
where T is the temperature difference across the layer.
Convection is the mode of heat transfer between a solid
surface and the adjacent liquid or gas that is in motion, and
involves the combined effects of conduction and fluid
motion. The rate of convection heat transfer is expressed by
Newton’s law of cooling as
T
L
dT
dx
Q·
convection  hAs (Ts  T∞)
where h is the convection heat transfer coefficient in W/m2 · K
or Btu/h · ft2 · R, As is the surface area through which con-
vection heat transfer takes place, Ts is the surface temperature,
and T∞is the temperature of the fluid sufficiently far from the
surface.
Radiation is the energy emitted by matter in the form of
electromagnetic waves (or photons) as a result of the changes
in the electronic configurations of the atoms or molecules. The
maximum rate of radiation that can be emitted from a surface
at a thermodynamic temperature Ts is given by the Stefan–
Boltzmann law as Q·
emit, max  sAsT 4
s, where s  5.67 
 108
W/m2 · K4 or 0.1714 
 108 Btu/h · ft2 · R4 is the
Stefan–Boltzmann constant.
When a surface of emissivity  and surface area As at a
temperature Ts is completely enclosed by a much larger (or
black) surface at a temperature Tsurr separated by a gas (such
as air) that does not intervene with radiation, the net rate of
radiation heat transfer between these two surfaces is given by
Q·
rad  esAs (T 4
s  T 4
surr)
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Heat transfer through
the insulated side of the plate is negligible. 3 The heat transfer coefficient
remains constant.
Properties
The solar absorptivity of the plate is given to be a  0.6.
Analysis
The absorptivity of the plate is 0.6, and thus 60 percent of the 
solar radiation incident on the plate is absorbed continuously. As a result,
the temperature of the plate rises, and the temperature difference between
the plate and the surroundings increases. This increasing temperature differ-
ence causes the rate of heat loss from the plate to the surroundings to
increase. At some point, the rate of heat loss from the plate equals the rate
of solar energy absorbed, and the temperature of the plate no longer
changes. The temperature of the plate when steady operation is established
is determined from
E·
gained  E·
lost
or
aAs q·
incident, solar  hcombined As(Ts  T)
Solving for Ts and substituting, the plate surface temperature is determined
to be
Ts  T  a
 25°C 
 33.4°C
Discussion
Note that the heat losses prevent the plate temperature from
rising above 33.4°C. Also, the combined heat transfer coefficient accounts
for the effects of both convection and radiation, and thus it is very conve-
nient to use in heat transfer calculations when its value is known with 
reasonable accuracy.
0.6 
 (700 W/m2)
50 W/m2 · °C
q.
incident, solar
hcombined
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
395
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
In this case, the emissivity and the surface area of the sur-
rounding surface do not have any effect on the net radiation
heat transfer.
392
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
The rate at which a surface absorbs radiation is determined
from Q·
absorbed  aQ·
incident where Q·
incident is the rate at which
radiation is incident on the surface and  is the absorptivity
of the surface.
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
1. Y. A. Çengel. Heat and Mass Transfer: A Practical
Approach. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.
2. Y. A. Çengel and M. A. Boles. Thermodynamics: An
Engineering Approach. 6th ed. New York: McGraw-Hill,
2008.
3. Robert J. Ribando. Heat Transfer Tools. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 2002.
PROBLEMS*
Heat Transfer Mechanisms
9–1C
Consider two houses that are identical, except that
the walls are built using bricks in one house, and wood in the
other. If the walls of the brick house are twice as thick, which
house do you think will be more energy efficient?
9–2C
Define thermal conductivity and explain its signifi-
cance in heat transfer.
9–3C
What are the mechanisms of heat transfer? How are
they distinguished from each other?
9–4C
What is the physical mechanism of heat conduction
in a solid, a liquid, and a gas?
9–5C
Consider heat transfer through a windowless wall of
a house on a winter day. Discuss the parameters that affect
the rate of heat conduction through the wall.
9–6C
Write down the expressions for the physical laws that
govern each mode of heat transfer, and identify the variables
involved in each relation.
9–7C
How does heat conduction differ from convection?
9–8C
Does any of the energy of the sun reach the earth by
conduction or convection?
9–9C
How does forced convection differ from natural
convection?
9–10C
Define emissivity and absorptivity. What is Kirch-
hoff’s law of radiation?
9–11C
What is a blackbody? How do real bodies differ
from blackbodies?
9–12C
Judging from its unit W/m · K, can we define ther-
mal conductivity of a material as the rate of heat transfer
through the material per unit thickness per unit temperature
difference? Explain.
9–13C
Consider heat loss through the two walls of a house
on a winter night. The walls are identical, except that one of
them has a tightly fit glass window. Through which wall will
the house lose more heat? Explain.
9–14C
Which is a better heat conductor, diamond or silver?
9–15C
Consider two walls of a house that are identical
except that one is made of 10-cm-thick wood, while the other
is made of 25-cm-thick brick. Through which wall will the
house lose more heat in winter?
9–16C
How do the thermal conductivity of gases and liq-
uids vary with temperature?
9–17C
Why is the thermal conductivity of superinsulation
orders of magnitude lower than the thermal conductivity of
ordinary insulation?
9–18C
Why do we characterize the heat conduction ability
of insulators in terms of their apparent thermal conductivity
instead of the ordinary thermal conductivity?
9–19C
Consider an alloy of two metals whose thermal con-
ductivities are k1 and k2. Will the thermal conductivity of the
alloy be less than k1, greater than k2, or between k1 and k2?
9–20
The inner and outer surfaces of a 4-m 
 7-m
brick wall of thickness 30 cm and thermal conductivity
0.69 W/m · K are maintained at temperatures of 20°C and 5°C,
respectively. Determine the rate of heat transfer through the
wall, in W.
* Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems
with the
icon are solved using EES, and complete solutions
together with parametric studies are included on the enclosed DVD.
Problems with the
icon are comprehensive in nature and are
intended to be solved with a computer, preferably using the EES
software that accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
396
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
393
9–21
The inner and outer surfaces of a 0.5-cm thick 2-m 
2-m window glass in winter are 10°C and 3°C, respectively. If
the thermal conductivity of the glass is 0.78 W/m · K, deter-
mine the amount of heat loss through the glass over a period of
5 h. What would your answer be if the glass were 1 cm thick?
Answers: 78.6 MJ, 39.3 MJ
9–22
Reconsider Prob. 9–21. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the amount of heat loss through
the glass as a function of the window glass thickness in the
range of 0.1 cm to 1.0 cm. Discuss the results.
9–23
An aluminum pan whose thermal conductivity is
237 W/m · °C has a flat bottom with diameter 15 cm and
thickness 0.4 cm. Heat is transferred steadily to boiling water
in the pan through its bottom at a rate of 800 W. If the inner
surface of the bottom of the pan is at 105°C, determine the
temperature of the outer surface of the bottom of the pan.
9–24E
The north wall of an electrically heated home is 
20 ft long, 10 ft high, and 1 ft thick, and is made of brick
whose thermal conductivity is k  0.42 Btu/h · ft · °F. On a
certain winter night, the temperatures of the inner and the
outer surfaces of the wall are measured to be at about 62°F
and 25°F, respectively, for a period of 8 h. Determine (a) the
rate of heat loss through the wall that night and (b) the cost
of that heat loss to the home owner if the cost of electricity is
$0.07/kWh.
9–25
In a certain experiment, cylindrical samples of di-
ameter 4 cm and length 7 cm are used (see Fig. 9–9). The
two thermocouples in each sample are placed 3 cm apart.
After initial transients, the electric heater is observed to draw
0.6 A at 110 V, and both differential thermometers read a
temperature difference of 10°C. Determine the thermal con-
ductivity of the sample.
Answer: 78.8 W/m · °C
9–26
One way of measuring the thermal conductivity of a
material is to sandwich an electric thermofoil heater between
two identical rectangular samples of the material and to
heavily insulate the four outer edges, as shown in the figure.
Thermocouples attached to the inner and outer surfaces of the
samples record the temperatures.
During an experiment, two 0.5 cm thick samples 10 cm

 10 cm in size are used. When steady operation is
reached, the heater is observed to draw 25 W of electric
power, and the temperature of each sample is observed to
drop from 82°C at the inner surface to 74°C at the outer sur-
face. Determine the thermal conductivity of the material at
the average temperature.
30 cm
Brick
wall
20°C
5°C
FIGURE P9–20
800 W
105°C
0.4 cm
FIGURE P9–23
Wattmeter
Source
Resistance
heater
Insulation
Insulation
Samples
0.5 cm
~
FIGURE P9–26
9–27
Repeat Prob. 9–26 for an electric power consumption
of 20 W.
9–28
A heat flux meter attached to the inner surface of a 
3-cm-thick refrigerator door indicates a heat flux of 25 W/m2
through the door. Also, the temperatures of the inner and the
outer surfaces of the door are measured to be 7°C and 15°C,
respectively. Determine the average thermal conductivity of
the refrigerator door.
Answer: 0.0938 W/m · °C
9–29
Consider a person standing in a room maintained
at 20°C at all times. The inner surfaces of the walls, floors,
and ceiling of the house are observed to be at an average
temperature of 12°C in winter and 23°C in summer.
Determine the rates of radiation heat transfer between this
person and the surrounding surfaces in both summer and
winter if the exposed surface area, emissivity, and the average
outer surface temperature of the person are 1.6 m2, 0.95, and
32°C, respectively.
9–30
Reconsider Prob. 9–29. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate of radiation heat transfer
in winter as a function of the temperature of the inner surface
of the room in the range of 8°C to 18°C. Discuss the results.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
397
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
9–31
For heat transfer purposes, a standing man can be
modeled as a 30-cm-diameter, 170-cm-long vertical cylinder
with both the top and bottom surfaces insulated and with the
side surface at an average temperature of 34°C. For a convec-
tion heat transfer coefficient of 20 W/m2 · °C, determine the
rate of heat loss from this man by convection in an environ-
ment at 18°C.
Answer: 513 W
9–32
Hot air at 80°C is blown over a 2-m 
 4-m flat sur-
face at 30°C. If the average convection heat transfer coeffi-
cient is 55 W/m2 · °C, determine the rate of heat transfer
from the air to the plate, in kW.
Answer: 22 kW
9–33
Reconsider 
Prob. 
9–32. 
Using 
EES 
(or
other) software, plot the rate of heat transfer
as a function of the heat transfer coefficient in the range of
20 W/m2 · °C to 100 W/m2 · °C. Discuss the results.
9–34
The heat generated in the circuitry on the surface of a
silicon chip (k  130 W/m · °C) is conducted to the ceramic
substrate to which it is attached. The chip is 6 mm 
 6 mm
in size and 0.5 mm thick and dissipates 3 W of power. Disre-
garding any heat transfer through the 0.5 mm high side sur-
faces, determine the temperature difference between the front
and back surfaces of the chip in steady operation.
9–35
A 40-cm-long, 800-W electric resistance heating ele-
ment with diameter 0.5 cm and surface temperature 120°C is
immersed in 75 kg of water initially at 20°C. Determine
how long it will take for this heater to raise the water tem-
perature to 80°C. Also, determine the convection heat transfer
coefficients at the beginning and at the end of the heating
process.
9–36
A 5-cm-external-diameter, 10-m-long hot-water pipe
at 80°C is losing heat to the surrounding air at 5°C by natural
convection with a heat transfer coefficient of 25 W/m2 · °C.
Determine the rate of heat loss from the pipe by natural
convection.
Answer: 2945 W
9–37
A hollow spherical iron container with outer diameter
20 cm and thickness 0.4 cm is filled with iced water at 0°C.
If the outer surface temperature is 5°C, determine the approx-
imate rate of heat loss from the sphere, in kW, and the rate at
which ice melts in the container. The heat of fusion of water
is 333.7 kJ/kg.
394
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
9–38
Reconsider Prob. 9–37. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate at which ice melts as a
function of the container thickness in the range of 0.2 cm to
2.0 cm. Discuss the results.
9–39E
Theinnerandouterglassesofa4-ft
4-ftdouble-pane
window are at 60°F and 48°F, respectively. If the 0.25-in.
space between the two glasses is filled with still air, determine
the rate of heat transfer through the window.
Answer: 131
Btu/h
9–40
Two surfaces of a 2-cm-thick plate are maintained at
0°C and 80°C, respectively. If it is determined that heat is
transferred through the plate at a rate of 500 W/m2, determine
its thermal conductivity.
9–41
Four power transistors, each dissipating 15 W, are
mounted on a thin vertical aluminum plate 22 cm 
 22 cm in
size. The heat generated by the transistors is to be dissipated
by both surfaces of the plate to the surrounding air at 25°C,
which is blown over the plate by a fan. The entire plate can be
assumed to be nearly isothermal, and the exposed surface area
of the transistor can be taken to be equal to its base area. If the
average convection heat transfer coefficient is 25 W/m2 · °C,
determine the temperature of the aluminum plate. Disregard
any radiation effects.
9–42
An ice chest whose outer dimensions are 30 cm 
40 cm 
 40 cm is made of 3-cm-thick Styrofoam (k  0.033
W/m · °C). Initially, the chest is filled with 28 kg of ice at
0°C, and the inner surface temperature of the ice chest can be
taken to be 0°C at all times. The heat of fusion of ice at 0°C
is 333.7 kJ/kg, and the surrounding ambient air is at 25°C.
Disregarding any heat transfer from the 40-cm 
 40-cm base
of the ice chest, determine how long it will take for the ice in
the chest to melt completely if the outer surfaces of the ice
chest are at 8°C.
Answer: 22.9 days
0.5 mm
Silicon
chip
Ceramic
substrate
6 mm
6 mm
3 W
FIGURE P9–34
0.4 cm
5°C
Iced
water
FIGURE P9–37

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
398
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
395
9–43
A transistor with a height of 0.4 cm and a diameter
of 0.6 cm is mounted on a circuit board. The transistor is
cooled by air flowing over it with an average heat transfer
coefficient of 30 W/m2 · °C. If the air temperature is 55°C
and the transistor case temperature is not to exceed 70°C,
determine the amount of power this transistor can dissipate
safely. Disregard any heat transfer from the transistor base.
the temperature of liquid nitrogen in a tank open to the atmo-
sphere remains constant at 196°C until the liquid nitrogen
in the tank is depleted. Any heat transfer to the tank results
in the evaporation of some liquid nitrogen, which has a 
heat of vaporization of 198 kJ/kg and a density of 810 kg/m3
at 1 atm.
Consider a 4-m-diameter spherical tank initially filled
with liquid nitrogen at 1 atm and 196°C. The tank is
exposed to 20°C ambient air with a heat transfer coefficient
of 25 W/m2 · °C. The temperature of the thin-shelled spheri-
cal tank is observed to be almost the same as the temperature
of the nitrogen inside. Disregarding any radiation heat
exchange, determine the rate of evaporation of the liquid
nitrogen in the tank as a result of the heat transfer from the
ambient air.
0.6 cm
Air
55°C
0.4 cm
Power
transistor
Ts  ≤ 70°C
FIGURE P9–43
1 atm
Liquid N2
–196°C
N2 vapor
Tair = 20°C
FIGURE P9–46
3 cm
Styrofoam
0°C
Ice chest
0°C
Tair = 25°C
FIGURE P9–42
9–44
Reconsider Prob. 9–43. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the amount of power the transis-
tor can dissipate safely as a function of the maximum case
temperature in the range of 60°C to 90°C. Discuss the
results.
9–45E
A 200-ft-long section of a steam pipe whose outer
diameter is 4 in passes through an open space at 50°F. The
average temperature of the outer surface of the pipe is mea-
sured to be 280°F, and the average heat transfer coefficient on
that surface is determined to be 6 Btu/h · ft2 · °F. Determine
(a) the rate of heat loss from the steam pipe and (b) the annual
cost of this energy loss if steam is generated in a natural gas
furnace having an efficiency of 86 percent, and the price of
natural gas is $1.10/therm (1 therm  100,000 Btu).
Answers:
(a) 289,000 Btu/h, (b) $32,380/yr
9–46
The boiling temperature of nitrogen at atmospheric
pressure at sea level (1 atm) is 196°C. Therefore, nitrogen
is commonly used in low temperature scientific studies since
9–47
Repeat Prob. 9–46 for liquid oxygen, which has
a boiling temperature of 183°C, a heat of vaporization of
213 kJ/kg, and a density of 1140 kg/m3 at 1 atm pressure.
9–48
Reconsider Prob. 9–46. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate of evaporation of liquid
nitrogen as a function of the ambient air temperature in the
range of 0°C to 35°C. Discuss the results.
9–49
Consider a person whose exposed surface area is
1.7 m2, emissivity is 0.5, and surface temperature is 32°C.
Determine the rate of heat loss from that person by radiation
in a large room having walls at a temperature of (a) 300 K
and (b) 280 K.
Answers: (a) 26.7 W, (b) 121 W
9–50
A 0.3-cm-thick, 12-cm-high, and 18-cm-long circuit
board houses 80 closely spaced logic chips on one side, each
dissipating 0.06 W. The board is impregnated with copper fill-
ings and has an effective thermal conductivity of 16 W/m · °C.
All the heat generated in the chips is conducted across the
circuit board and is dissipated from the back side of the board
to the ambient air. Determine the temperature difference
between the two sides of the circuit board.
Answer: 0.042°C
9–51
Consider a sealed 20-cm-high electronic box whose
base dimensions are 40 cm 
 40 cm placed in a vacuum

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
399
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
chamber. The emissivity of the outer surface of the box is
0.95. If the electronic components in the box dissipate a total
of 100 W of power and the outer surface temperature of the
box is not to exceed 55°C, determine the temperature at
which the surrounding surfaces must be kept if this box is to
be cooled by radiation alone. Assume the heat transfer from
the bottom surface of the box to the stand to be negligible.
9–52E
Using the conversion factors between W and Btu/h,
m and ft, and K and R, express the Stefan–Boltzmann
constant s  5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4 in the English unit
Btu/h · ft2 · R4.
9–53E
An engineer who is working on the heat transfer
analysis of a house in English units needs the convection heat
transfer coefficient on the outer surface of the house. But the
only value he can find from his handbooks is 14 W/m2 · °C,
which is in SI units. The engineer does not have a direct
conversion factor between the two unit systems for the con-
vection heat transfer coefficient. Using the conversion factors
between W and Btu/h, m and ft, and °C and °F, express the
given convection heat transfer coefficient in Btu/h · ft2 · °F.
Answer: 2.47 Btu/h · ft2 · °F
9–54
A 2.5-cm-diameter and 8-cm-long cylindrical sample
of a material is used to determine its thermal conductivity
experimentally. In the thermal conductivity apparatus, the
sample is placed in a well-insulated cylindrical cavity to
ensure one-dimensional heat transfer in the axial direction,
and a heat flux generated by a resistance heater whose elec-
tricity consumption is measured is applied on one of its faces
(say, the left face). A total of 9 thermocouples are imbedded
into the sample, 1 cm apart, to measure the temperatures
along the sample and on its faces. When the power consump-
tion was fixed at 83.45 W, it is observed that the thermocou-
ple readings are stabilized at the following values:
396
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Plot the variation of temperature along the sample, and calcu-
late the thermal conductivity of the sample material. Based
on these temperature readings, do you think steady operating
conditions are established? Are there any temperature read-
ings that do not appear right and should be discarded? Also,
discuss when and how the temperature profile in a plane wall
will deviate from a straight line.
9–55
Water at 0°C releases 333.7 kJ/kg of heat as it freezes
to ice (r  920 kg/m3) at 0°C. An aircraft flying under icing
conditions maintains a heat transfer coefficient of 150 W/m2 ·
°C between the air and wing surfaces. What temperature must
the wings be maintained at to prevent ice from forming on
them during icing conditions at a rate of 1 mm/min or less?
Simultaneous Heat Transfer Mechanisms
9–56C
Can all three modes of heat transfer occur simulta-
neously (in parallel) in a medium?
9–57C
Can a medium involve (a) conduction and con-
vection, (b) conduction and radiation, or (c) convection and
radiation simultaneously? Give examples for the “yes”
answers.
9–58C
The deep human body temperature of a healthy
person remains constant at 37°C while the temperature and
the humidity of the environment change with time. Discuss
the heat transfer mechanisms between the human body and
the environment both in summer and winter, and explain how
a person can keep cooler in summer and warmer in winter.
9–59C
We often turn the fan on in summer to help us cool.
Explain how a fan makes us feel cooler in the summer. Also
explain why some people use ceiling fans also in winter.
Distance from 
Temperature,
left face, cm
°C
0
89.38
1
83.25
2
78.28
3
74.10
4
68.25
5
63.73
6
49.65
7
44.40
8
40.00
20 cm
Stand
40 cm
40 cm
100 W
 = 0.95
 = 55°C
ε
Ts
Electronic
box
FIGURE P9–51
Q·
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
x, cm
0
FIGURE P9–54

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
400
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
397
9–60
Consider a person standing in a room at 23°C.
Determine the total rate of heat transfer from this person if
the exposed surface area and the skin temperature of the per-
son are 1.7 m2 and 32°C, respectively, and the convection
heat transfer coefficient is 5 W/m2 · °C. Take the emissivity
of the skin and the clothes to be 0.9, and assume the temper-
ature of the inner surfaces of the room to be the same as the
air temperature.
Answer: 161 W
9–61
Consider steady heat transfer between two large
parallel plates at constant temperatures of T1  290 K and
T2  150 K that are L  2 cm apart. Assuming the surfaces
to be black (emissivity e  1), determine the rate of heat
transfer between the plates per unit surface area assuming the
gap between the plates is (a) filled with atmospheric air,
(b) evacuated, (c) filled with fiberglass insulation, and
(d) filled with superinsulation having an apparent thermal
conductivity of 0.00015 W/m · °C.
9–62
The inner and outer surfaces of a 25-cm-thick wall in
summer are at 27°C and 44°C, respectively. The outer surface
of the wall exchanges heat by radiation with surrounding
surfaces at 40°C, and convection with ambient air also at 40°C
with a convection heat transfer coefficient of 8 W/m2 · °C.
Solar radiation is incident on the surface at a rate of 150 W/m2.
If both the emissivity and the solar absorptivity of the outer
surface are 0.8, determine the effective thermal conductivity of
the wall.
9–63
A 1.4-m-long, 0.2-cm-diameter electrical wire extends
across a room that is maintained at 20ºC. Heat is generated
in the wire as a result of resistance heating, and the surface
temperature of the wire is measured to be 240ºC in steady
operation. Also, the voltage drop and electric current through
the wire are measured to be 110 V and 3 A, respectively.
Disregarding any heat transfer by radiation, determine the con-
vection heat transfer coefficient for heat transfer between the
outer surface of the wire and the air in the room.
Answer:
170.5 W/m2 · °C
9–64
Reconsider Prob. 9–63. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the convection heat transfer coef-
ficient as a function of the wire surface temperature in the
range of 100°C to 300°C. Discuss the results.
9–65E
A 2-in-diameter spherical ball whose surface is
maintained at a temperature of 170°F is suspended in the
middle of a room at 70°F. If the convection heat transfer
coefficient is 15 Btu/h · ft2 · °F and the emissivity of the sur-
face is 0.8, determine the total rate of heat transfer from 
the ball.
9–66
A 1000-W iron is left on the iron board with its
base exposed to the air at 20°C. The convection
heat transfer coefficient between the base surface and the sur-
rounding air is 35 W/m2 · °C. If the base has an emissivity of
0.6 and a surface area of 0.02 m2, determine the temperature
of the base of the iron.
Answer: 674°C
9–67
The outer surface of a spacecraft in space has an
emissivity of 0.8 and a solar absorptivity of 0.3. If solar radi-
ation is incident on the spacecraft at a rate of 950 W/m2,
determine the surface temperature of the spacecraft when the
radiation emitted equals the solar energy absorbed.
9–68
A 3-m-internal-diameter spherical tank made of 
1-cm-thick stainless steel is used to store iced water at 0°C.
The tank is located outdoors at 25°C. Assuming the entire
steel tank to be at 0°C and thus the thermal resistance of the
tank to be negligible, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer to
the iced water in the tank and (b) the amount of ice at 0°C
that melts during a 24-hour period. The heat of fusion of
water at atmospheric pressure is hif  333.7 kJ/kg. The emis-
sivity of the outer surface of the tank is 0.75, and the convec-
tion heat transfer coefficient on the outer surface can be taken
to be 30 W/m2 · °C. Assume the average surrounding surface
temperature for radiation exchange to be 15°C.
Answers:
(a) 23.1 kW, (b) 5980 kg
150 W/m2
44°C
27°C
h
as= e=0.8
air, 40°C
Q·
rad
FIGURE P9–62
240°C
Room
20°C
Electric resistance heater
FIGURE P9–63
Iron
1000 W
20°C
FIGURE P9–66

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
401
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
9–69
The roof of a house consists of a 15-cm-thick
concrete slab (k  2 W/m · °C) that is 15 m
wide and 20 m long. The emissivity of the outer surface of
the roof is 0.9, and the convection heat transfer coefficient on
that surface is estimated to be 15 W/m2 · °C. The inner sur-
face of the roof is maintained at 15°C. On a clear winter
night, the ambient air is reported to be at 10°C while the
night sky temperature for radiation heat transfer is 255 K.
Considering both radiation and convection heat transfer,
determine the outer surface temperature and the rate of heat
transfer through the roof.
If the house is heated by a furnace burning natural gas
with an efficiency of 85 percent, and the unit cost of natural
gas is $0.60/therm (1 therm  105,500 kJ of energy content),
determine the money lost through the roof that night during a
14-hour period.
9–70E
Consider a flat-plate solar collector placed horizon-
tally on the flat roof of a house. The collector is 5 ft wide and
15 ft long, and the average temperature of the exposed sur-
face of the collector is 100°F. The emissivity of the exposed
surface of the collector is 0.9. Determine the rate of heat loss
from the collector by convection and radiation during a calm
day when the ambient air temperature is 70°F and the effec-
tive sky temperature for radiation exchange is 50°F. Take the
convection heat transfer coefficient on the exposed surface to
be 2.5 Btu/h · ft2 · °F.
398
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
the top and bottom surfaces insulated and with the side sur-
face at an average temperature of 34°C. For a convection heat
transfer coefficient of 15 W/m2 · °C, determine the rate of
heat loss from this man by convection in still air at 20°C.
What would your answer be if the convection heat transfer
coefficient is increased to 50 W/m2 · °C as a result of winds?
What is the windchill factor in this case?
Answers: 336 W,
1120 W, 32.7°C
9–72
A thin metal plate is insulated on the back and exposed
to solar radiation on the front surface. The exposed surface of
the plate has an absorptivity of 0.7 for solar radiation. If solar
radiation
is
incident
on
the
plate
at
a
rate
of
550 W/m2 and the surrounding air temperature is 10°C,
determine the surface temperature of the plate when the
heat loss by convection equals the solar energy absorbed by
the plate. Take the convection heat transfer coefficient to be
25 W/m2 · °C, and disregard any heat loss by radiation.
9–73
A 4-m 
 5-m 
 6-m room is to be heated by one ton
(1000 kg) of liquid water contained in a tank placed in the
room. The room is losing heat to the outside at an average rate
of 10,000 kJ/h. The room is initially at 20°C and 100 kPa, and
is maintained at an average temperature of 20°C at all times. If
the hot water is to meet the heating requirements of this room
for a 24-h period, determine the minimum temperature of the
water when it is first brought into the room. Assume constant
specific heats for both air and water at room temperature.
Answer: 77.4°C
9–74
Consider a 3-m 
 3-m 
 3-m cubical furnace whose
top and side surfaces closely approximate black surfaces at a
temperature of 1200 K. The base surface has an emissivity of
e  0.7, and is maintained at 800 K. Determine the net rate
of radiation heat transfer to the base surface from the top and
side surfaces.
Answer: 594  kW
70°F
Tsky = 50°F
Solar collector
FIGURE P9–70E
550 W/m2
 = 0.7
10°C
α
FIGURE P9–72
Review Problems
9–71
It is well known that wind makes the cold air feel much
colder as a result of the windchill effect that is due to the
increase in the convection heat transfer coefficient with
increasing air velocity. The windchill effect is usually
expressed in terms of the windchill factor, which is the differ-
ence between the actual air temperature and the equivalent
calm-air temperature. For example, a windchill factor of 20°C
for an actual air temperature of 5°C means that the windy air
at 5°C feels as cold as the still air at 15°C. In other words, a
person will lose as much heat to air at 5°C with a windchill
factor of 20°C as he or she would in calm air at 15°C.
For heat transfer purposes, a standing man can be modeled
as a 30-cm-diameter, 170-cm-long vertical cylinder with both

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
402
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 9
|
399
9–75
Consider a refrigerator whose dimensions are 1.8 m 
1.2 m 
 0.8 m and whose walls are 3 cm thick. The refrigera-
tor consumes 600 W of power when operating and has a COP
of 1.5. It is observed that the motor of the refrigerator remains
on for 5 min and then is off for 15 min periodically. If the
average temperatures at the inner and outer surfaces of the
refrigerator are 6°C and 17°C, respectively, determine the
average thermal conductivity of the refrigerator walls. Also,
determine the annual cost of operating this refrigerator if the
unit cost of electricity is $0.08/kWh.
9–76
Engine valves (cp  440 J/kg · °C and r  7840
kg/m3) are to be heated from 40°C to 800°C in 5 min in the
heat treatment section of a valve manufacturing facility. The
valves have a cylindrical stem with a diameter of 8 mm and a
length of 10 cm. The valve head and the stem may be
assumed to be of equal surface area, with a total mass of
0.0788 kg. For a single valve, determine (a) the amount of
heat transfer, (b) the average rate of heat transfer, (c) the
average heat flux, and (d) the number of valves that can be
heat treated per day if the heating section can hold 25 valves
and it is used 10 h per day.
9–77
Consider a flat-plate solar collector placed on the roof
of a house. The temperatures at the inner and outer surfaces of
the glass cover are measured to be 28°C and 25°C, respec-
tively. The glass cover has a surface area of 2.5 m2, a thickness
of 0.6 cm, and a thermal conductivity of 0.7 W/m · °C. Heat
is lost from the outer surface of the cover by convection and
radiation with a convection heat transfer coefficient of
10 W/m2 · °C and an ambient temperature of 15°C. Determine
the fraction of heat lost from the glass cover by radiation.
9–78
The rate of heat loss through a unit surface area
of a window per unit temperature difference between the
indoors and the outdoors is called the U-factor. The value
of the U-factor ranges from about 1.25 W/m2 · °C (or
0.22 Btu/h · ft2 · °F) for low-e coated, argon-filled, quadru-
ple-pane windows to 6.25 W/m2 · °C (or 1.1 Btu/h · ft2 · °F)
for a single-pane window with aluminum frames. Determine
the range for the rate of heat loss through a 1.2-m 
 1.8-m
window of a house that is maintained at 20°C when the out-
door air temperature is 8°C.
9–79
Reconsider Prob. 9–78. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate of heat loss through the
window as a function of the U-factor. Discuss the results.
6°C
17°C
FIGURE P9–75
Indoors
20°C
Outdoors
–8°C
1.2 m
1.8 m
Q.
FIGURE P9–79
FIGURE P9–81
130°C
1 atm
4.1 kW
9–80
Consider a house in Atlanta, Georgia, that is main-
tained at 22°C and has a total of 20 m2 of window area. The
windows are double-door type with wood frames and metal
spacers and have a U-factor of 2.5 W/m2 · °C (see Prob. 9–78
for the definition of U-factor). The winter average tem-
perature of Atlanta is 11.3°C. Determine the average rate of
heat loss through the windows in winter.
9–81
A 50-cm-long, 2-mm-diameter electric resistance wire
submerged in water is used to determine the boiling heat
transfer coefficient in water at 1 atm experimentally. The
wire temperature is measured to be 130°C when a wattmeter
indicates the electric power consumed to be 4.1 kW. Using
Newton’s law of cooling, determine the boiling heat transfer
coefficient.
9–82
An electric heater with the total surface area of 0.25 m2
and emissivity 0.75 is in a room where the air has a tempera-
ture of 20°C and the walls are at 10°C. When the heater
consumes 500 W of electric power, its surface has a steady
temperature of 120°C. Determine the temperature of the
heater surface when it consumes 700 W. Solve the problem
(a) assuming negligible radiation and (b) taking radiation into
consideration. Based on your results, comment on the assump-
tion made in part (a)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
9. Mechanisms of Heat 
Transfer
403
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Design and Essay Problems
9–83
Write an essay on how microwave ovens work, and
explain how they cook much faster than conventional ovens.
Discuss whether conventional electric or microwave ovens
consume more electricity for the same task.
9–84
Using information from the utility bills for the coldest
month last year, estimate the average rate of heat loss from
your house for that month. In your analysis, consider the con-
400
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
tribution of the internal heat sources such as people, lights,
and appliances. Identify the primary sources of heat loss from
your house and propose ways of improving the energy effi-
ciency of your house.
9–85
Conduct this experiment to determine the combined
heat transfer coefficient between an incandescent lightbulb
and the surrounding air and surfaces using a 60-W lightbulb.
You will need a thermometer, which can be purchased in a
hardware store, and a metal glue. You will also need a piece
of string and a ruler to calculate the surface area of the light-
bulb. First, measure the air temperature in the room, and then
glue the tip of the thermocouple wire of the thermometer to
the glass of the lightbulb. Turn the light on and wait until 
the temperature reading stabilizes. The temperature reading
will give the surface temperature of the lightbulb. Assuming
10 percent of the rated power of the bulb is converted to light
and is transmitted by the glass, calculate the heat transfer
coefficient from Newton’s law of cooling.
W·
e
T∞, h
Tw
Ts
Qrad
Qconv
A, e
.
.
FIGURE P9–82

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
404
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
STEADY HEAT CONDUCTION
|
401
I
n heat transfer analysis, we are often interested in the rate
of heat transfer through a medium under steady conditions
and surface temperatures. Such problems can be solved
easily by the introduction of the thermal resistance concept in
an analogous manner to electrical circuit problems. In this
case, the thermal resistance corresponds to electrical resis-
tance, temperature difference corresponds to voltage, and the
heat transfer rate corresponds to electric current.
We start this chapter with one-dimensional steady heat
conduction in a plane wall, a cylinder, and a sphere, and
develop relations for thermal resistances in these geometries.
We also develop thermal resistance relations for convection
and radiation conditions at the boundaries. We apply this
concept to heat conduction problems in multilayer plane
walls, cylinders, and spheres and generalize it to systems that
involve heat transfer in two or three dimensions. We also dis-
cuss the thermal contact resistance and the overall heat
transfer coefficient and develop relations for the critical radius
of insulation for a cylinder and a sphere. Finally, we discuss
steady heat transfer from finned surfaces and some complex
geometrics commonly encountered in practice through the
use of conduction shape factors.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Understand the concept of thermal resistance and its
limitations, and develop thermal resistance networks for
practical heat conduction problems,
• Solve steady conduction problems that involve multilayer
rectangular, cylindrical, or spherical geometries,
• Develop an intuitive understanding of thermal contact
resistance, and circumstances under which it may be
significant,
• Identify applications in which insulation may actually
increase heat transfer,
• Analyze finned surfaces, and assess how efficiently and
effectively fins enhance heat transfer, and
• Solve multidimensional practical heat conduction problems
using conduction shape factors.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
405
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–1
■STEADY HEAT CONDUCTION 
IN PLANE WALLS
Consider steady heat conduction through the walls of a house during a win-
ter day. We know that heat is continuously lost to the outdoors through the
wall. We intuitively feel that heat transfer through the wall is in the normal
direction to the wall surface, and no significant heat transfer takes place in
the wall in other directions (Fig. 10–1).
Recall that heat transfer in a certain direction is driven by the temperature
gradient in that direction. There is no heat transfer in a direction in which
there is no change in temperature. Temperature measurements at several
locations on the inner or outer wall surface will confirm that a wall surface
is nearly isothermal. That is, the temperatures at the top and bottom of a
wall surface as well as at the right and left ends are almost the same. There-
fore, there is no heat transfer through the wall from the top to the bottom, or
from left to right, but there is considerable temperature difference between
the inner and the outer surfaces of the wall, and thus significant heat trans-
fer in the direction from the inner surface to the outer one.
The small thickness of the wall causes the temperature gradient in that
direction to be large. Further, if the air temperatures in and outside the
house remain constant, then heat transfer through the wall of a house can be
modeled as steady and one-dimensional. The temperature of the wall in this
case depends on one direction only (say the x-direction) and can be
expressed as T(x).
Noting that heat transfer is the only energy interaction involved in this
case and there is no heat generation, the energy balance for the wall can be
expressed as
or
in 
out 
(10–1)
But dEwall /dt  0 for steady operation, since there is no change in the tem-
perature of the wall with time at any point. Therefore, the rate of heat trans-
fer into the wall must be equal to the rate of heat transfer out of it. In other
words, the rate of heat transfer through the wall must be constant,
cond, wall 
constant.
Consider a plane wall of thickness L and average thermal conductivity k.
The two surfaces of the wall are maintained at constant temperatures of
T1 and T2. For one-dimensional steady heat conduction through the wall,
we have T(x). Then Fourier’s law of heat conduction for the wall can be
expressed as
cond, wall  kA
(W)
(10–2)
where the rate of conduction heat transfer 
cond, wall and the wall area A are
constant. Thus dT/dx  constant, which means that the temperature through
Q
dT
dx
Q
Q
dEwall
dt
Q
Q
£
Rate of
heat transfer
into the wall
≥ £
Rate of
heat transfer
out of the wall
≥ £
Rate of change
of the energy
of the wall
≥
402
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Q·
20°C
20°C
20°C
20°C
20°C
20°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
3°C
20°C
20°C
11°C
11°C
11°C
11°C
11°C
11°C
11°C
11°C
A
x
z
y
T(x)
FIGURE 10–1
Heat transfer through a wall is one-
dimensional when the temperature of
the wall varies in one direction only.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
406
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the wall varies linearly with x. That is, the temperature distribution in the
wall under steady conditions is a straight line (Fig. 10–2).
Separating the variables in the preceding equation and integrating from
x  0, where T(0)  T1, to x  L, where T(L)  T2, we get
cond, wall dx  
kA dT
Performing the integrations and rearranging gives
cond, wall  kA
(W)
(10–3)
which is identical to Eq. 1–21. Again, the rate of heat conduction through
a plane wall is proportional to the average thermal conductivity, the wall
area, and the temperature difference, but is inversely proportional to the
wall thickness. Also, once the rate of heat conduction is available, the tem-
perature T(x) at any location x can be determined by replacing T2 in
Eq. 10–3 by T, and L by x.
Thermal Resistance Concept
Equation 10–3 for heat conduction through a plane wall can be rearranged as
cond, wall 
(W)
(10–4)
where
Rwall 
(C/W)
(10–5)
is the thermal resistance of the wall against heat conduction or simply the
conduction resistance of the wall. Note that the thermal resistance of a
medium depends on the geometry and the thermal properties of the medium.
This equation for heat transfer is analogous to the relation for electric
current flow I, expressed as
I 
(10–6)
where Re  L/se A is the electric resistance and V1  V2 is the voltage dif-
ference across the resistance (se is the electrical conductivity). Thus, the
rate of heat transfer through a layer corresponds to the electric current, the
thermal resistance corresponds to electrical resistance, and the temperature
difference corresponds to voltage difference across the layer (Fig. 10–3).
Consider convection heat transfer from a solid surface of area As and tem-
perature Ts to a fluid whose temperature sufficiently far from the surface is
T, with a convection heat transfer coefficient h. Newton’s law of cooling
for convection heat transfer rate 
conv  hAs (Ts  T) can be rearranged as
conv 
(W)
(10–7)
Ts  T
Rconv
Q
Q
V1  V2
Re
L
kA
T1  T2
Rwall
Q
T1  T2
L
Q

T2
TT1
Q

L
x0
Chapter 10
|
403
x
0
L
dx
dT
T2
T1
T(x)
Qcond
·
A
FIGURE 10–2
Under steady conditions,
the temperature distribution in
a plane wall is a straight line.
T2
(a) Heat flow
(b) Electric current flow
R
Re
V2
T1
V1
T1 – T2
———
R
Q =
·
V1 – V2
———
Re
I =
FIGURE 10–3
Analogy between thermal
and electrical resistance concepts.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
407
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where
Rconv 
(C/W)
(10–8)
is the thermal resistance of the surface against heat convection, or simply the
convection resistance of the surface (Fig. 10–4). Note that when the convec-
tion heat transfer coefficient is very large (h →), the convection resistance
becomes zero and Ts 
 T. That is, the surface offers no resistance to convec-
tion, and thus it does not slow down the heat transfer process. This situation is
approached in practice at surfaces where boiling and condensation occur.
Also note that the surface does not have to be a plane surface. Equation 10–8
for convection resistance is valid for surfaces of any shape, provided that the
assumption of h  constant and uniform is reasonable.
When the wall is surrounded by a gas, the radiation effects, which we
have ignored so far, can be significant and may need to be considered. The
rate of radiation heat transfer between a surface of emissivity e and area As
at temperature Ts and the surrounding surfaces at some average temperature
Tsurr can be expressed as
rad  es As (

)  hrad As (Ts  Tsurr) 
(W)
(10–9)
where
Rrad 
(K/W)
(10–10)
is the thermal resistance of a surface against radiation, or the radiation
resistance, and
hrad 
 es(

(Ts  Tsurr)
(W/m2  K)
(10–11)
is the radiation heat transfer coefficient. Note that both Ts and Tsurr must
be in K in the evaluation of hrad. The definition of the radiation heat transfer
coefficient enables us to express radiation conveniently in an analogous
manner to convection in terms of a temperature difference. But hrad depends
strongly on temperature while hconv usually does not.
A surface exposed to the surrounding air involves convection and radia-
tion simultaneously, and the total heat transfer at the surface is determined
by adding (or subtracting, if in the opposite direction) the radiation and con-
vection components. The convection and radiation resistances are parallel to
each other, as shown in Fig. 10–5, and may cause some complication in the
thermal resistance network. When Tsurr 
 T, the radiation effect can prop-
erly be accounted for by replacing h in the convection resistance relation by
hcombined  hconv  hrad
(W/m2  K)
(10–12)
where hcombined is the combined heat transfer coefficient. This way all
complications associated with radiation are avoided.
T 2
surr)
T 2
s
Qrad
As(Ts  Tsurr)
1
hrad As
Ts  Tsurr
Rrad
T 4
surr
T 4
s
Q
1
hAs
404
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Solid
Q·
T
h
As
T
Ts
Rconv = 1—
hAs
Ts
FIGURE 10–4
Schematic for convection
resistance at a surface.
Solid
Q·
Ts
Qconv
·
Rconv
T
Qrad
·
Q = Qconv + Qrad
·
·
·
Rrad
Tsurr
As
FIGURE 10–5
Schematic for convection and
radiation resistances at a surface.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
408
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Thermal Resistance Network
Now consider steady one-dimensional heat transfer through a plane wall of
thickness L, area A, and thermal conductivity k that is exposed to convection
on both sides to fluids at temperatures T1 and T2 with heat transfer coeffi-
cients h1 and h2, respectively, as shown in Fig. 10–6. Assuming T2  T1,
the variation of temperature will be as shown in the figure. Note that the
temperature varies linearly in the wall, and asymptotically approaches T1
and T2 in the fluids as we move away from the wall.
Under steady conditions we have
or
 h1 A(T1  T1)  kA
 h2 A(T2  T2)
(10–13)
which can be rearranged as


(10–14)
T1  T1
Rconv, 1  T1  T2
Rwall
 T2  T2
Rconv, 2
T1  T1
1/h1A
 T1  T2
L/kA  T2  T2
1/h2A
Q
T1  T2
L
Q
£
Rate of
heat convection
into the wall
≥ £
Rate of
heat conduction
through the wall
≥ £
Rate of
heat convection
from the wall
≥
Chapter 10
|
405
FIGURE 10–6
The thermal resistance network for heat transfer through a plane wall subjected to convection on both sides,
and the electrical analogy.
Thermal
network
Electrical
analogy
Wall
Q·
T1
T2
T2
T1
Rconv, 2
Rconv, 1
Rwall
Re, 3
Re, 1
I
Re, 2
T2
T2
V2
T1
T1
V1
T1 – T2
——————————
Rconv, 1 + Rwall + Rconv, 2
Q =
·
V1 – V2
——————————
Re, 1 + Re, 2 + Re, 3
I =

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
409
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Adding the numerators and denominators yields (Fig. 10–7)

(W)
(10–15)
where
Rtotal  Rconv, 1  Rwall  Rconv, 2 
(C/W)
(10–16)
Note that the heat transfer area A is constant for a plane wall, and the rate of
heat transfer through a wall separating two mediums is equal to the temper-
ature difference divided by the total thermal resistance between the medi-
ums. Also note that the thermal resistances are in series, and the equivalent
thermal resistance is determined by simply adding the individual resis-
tances, just like the electrical resistances connected in series. Thus, the elec-
trical analogy still applies. We summarize this as the rate of steady heat
transfer between two surfaces is equal to the temperature difference divided
by the total thermal resistance between those two surfaces.
Another observation that can be made from Eq. 10–15 is that the ratio of
the temperature drop to the thermal resistance across any layer is constant,
and thus the temperature drop across any layer is proportional to the thermal
resistance of the layer. The larger the resistance, the larger the temperature
drop. In fact, the equation 
 T/R can be rearranged as
T 
R
(C)
(10–17)
which indicates that the temperature drop across any layer is equal to the
rate of heat transfer times the thermal resistance across that layer (Fig.
10–8). You may recall that this is also true for voltage drop across an elec-
trical resistance when the electric current is constant.
It is sometimes convenient to express heat transfer through a medium in
an analogous manner to Newton’s law of cooling as
 UA T
(W)
(10–18)
where U is the overall heat transfer coefficient. A comparison of Eqs.
10–15 and 10–18 reveals that
UA 
(C/K)
(10–19)
Therefore, for a unit area, the overall heat transfer coefficient is equal to the
inverse of the total thermal resistance.
Note that we do not need to know the surface temperatures of the wall in
order to evaluate the rate of steady heat transfer through it. All we need to
know is the convection heat transfer coefficients and the fluid temperatures
on both sides of the wall. The surface temperature of the wall can be deter-
1
Rtotal
Q
Q
Q
1
h1 A  L
kA  1
h2 A
T1  T2
Rtotal
Q
406
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 10–8
The temperature drop across a layer is
proportional to its thermal resistance.
Rwall
Rconv, 2
Rconv, 1 T1
T2
T2
T1
T1
T2
2°C/W
20°C
150°C
30°C
15°C/W
3°C/W
ΔT = QR
T2
T1
·
Q = 10 W
·
If
then
For example,
and
a1
—
b1
a1 + a2 + . . . + an
———————
b1 + b2 + . . . + bn
a2
—
b2
=
= . . .
= c
= c
=
an
—
bn
=
1—4
2—8 = 5—
20 = 0.25
1 + 2 + 5
————
4 + 8 + 20 = 0.25
FIGURE 10–7
A useful mathematical identity.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
410
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
mined as described above using the thermal resistance concept, but by tak-
ing the surface at which the temperature is to be determined as one of the
terminal surfaces. For example, once 
is evaluated, the surface temperature
T1 can be determined from

(10–20)
Multilayer Plane Walls
In practice we often encounter plane walls that consist of several layers of
different materials. The thermal resistance concept can still be used to deter-
mine the rate of steady heat transfer through such composite walls. As you
may have already guessed, this is done by simply noting that the conduction
resistance of each wall is L/kA connected in series, and using the electrical
analogy. That is, by dividing the temperature difference between two sur-
faces at known temperatures by the total thermal resistance between them.
Consider a plane wall that consists of two layers (such as a brick wall
with a layer of insulation). The rate of steady heat transfer through this two-
layer composite wall can be expressed as (Fig. 10–9)

(10–21)
where Rtotal is the total thermal resistance, expressed as
Rtotal  Rconv, 1  Rwall, 1  Rwall, 2  Rconv, 2

(10–22)
1
h1 A  L1
k1 A  L2
k2 A  1
h2 A
T1  T2
Rtotal
Q
T1  T1
Rconv, 1  T1  T1
1/h1 A
Q
Q
Chapter 10
|
407
FIGURE 10–9
The thermal resistance network for
heat transfer through a two-layer
plane wall subjected to
convection on both sides.
Wall 1
Wall 2
T1
T2
T2
T1
T1
T2
L1
k2
k1
T3
Rwall, 1
L1
k1A
T1
A
T2
T3
h2
h1
= —––
Rwall, 2
L2
k2A
= —––
Rconv, 2
1
h2A
= —––
Rconv, 1
1
h1A
= —––
Q·
L2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
411
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The subscripts 1 and 2 in the Rwall relations above indicate the first and the
second layers, respectively. We could also obtain this result by following the
approach already used for the single-layer case by noting that the rate of
steady heat transfer 
through a multilayer medium is constant, and thus it
must be the same through each layer. Note from the thermal resistance net-
work that the resistances are in series, and thus the total thermal resistance
is simply the arithmetic sum of the individual thermal resistances in the path
of heat transfer.
This result for the two-layer case is analogous to the single-layer case,
except that an additional resistance is added for the additional layer. This
result can be extended to plane walls that consist of three or more layers by
adding an additional resistance for each additional layer.
Once 
is known, an unknown surface temperature Tj at any surface or
interface j can be determined from

(10–23)
where Ti is a known temperature at location i and Rtotal, i  j is the total ther-
mal resistance between locations i and j. For example, when the fluid tem-
peratures T1 and T2 for the two-layer case shown in Fig. 10–9 are
available and 
is calculated from Eq. 10–21, the interface temperature T2
between the two walls can be determined from (Fig. 10–10)

(10–24)
The temperature drop across a layer is easily determined from Eq. 10–17 by
multiplying 
by the thermal resistance of that layer.
The thermal resistance concept is widely used in practice because it is
intuitively easy to understand and it has proven to be a powerful tool in the
solution of a wide range of heat transfer problems. But its use is limited to
systems through which the rate of heat transfer 
remains constant; that is,
to systems involving steady heat transfer with no heat generation (such as
resistance heating or chemical reactions) within the medium.
Q
Q
T1  T2
Rconv, 1  Rwall, 1  T1  T2
1
h1 A  L1
k1 A
Q
Q
Ti  Tj
Rtotal, ij
Q
Q
Q
408
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Wall 1
Wall 2
T1
T2
T2
T1
T1
T1
–
T2
Rwall, 1
Rconv,1
Rconv,2
Rconv,1
Rwall, 2
T3
T1
Q
To find T1:
= ————
T1
 T2
–
Rconv,1 + Rwall, 1
Q
To find T2:
=  ——————
T3
T2
–
Rconv,2
Q
To find T3:
= ————
Q·
·
·
·
FIGURE 10–10
The evaluation of the surface and
interface temperatures when T1 and
T2 are given and 
is calculated.
Q
Wall
2°C
16°C
L = 0.3 m
A
5 m
3 m
Q·
FIGURE 10–11
Schematic for Example 10–1.
EXAMPLE 10–1
Heat Loss through a Wall
Consider a 3-m-high, 5-m-wide, and 0.3-m-thick wall whose thermal con-
ductivity is k  0.9 W/m  K (Fig. 10–11). On a certain day, the tempera-
tures of the inner and the outer surfaces of the wall are measured to be
16C and 2C, respectively. Determine the rate of heat loss through the wall
on that day.
SOLUTION
The two surfaces of a wall are maintained at specified tempera-
tures. The rate of heat loss through the wall is to be determined.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
412
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
409
Assumptions
1 Heat transfer through the wall is steady since the surface
temperatures remain constant at the specified values. 2 Heat transfer is one-
dimensional since any significant temperature gradients exist in the direction
from the indoors to the outdoors. 3 Thermal conductivity is constant.
Properties
The thermal conductivity is given to be k  0.9 W/m  K.
Analysis
Noting that heat transfer through the wall is by conduction and the
area of the wall is A  3 m 
 5 m  15 m2, the steady rate of heat transfer
through the wall can be determined from Eq. 10–3 to be
 kA
 (0.9 W/m  C)(15 m2)
 630 W
We could also determine the steady rate of heat transfer through the wall by
making use of the thermal resistance concept from

where
Rwall 
 0.02222C/W
Substituting, we get

 630 W
Discussion
This is the same result obtained earlier. Note that heat conduc-
tion through a plane wall with specified surface temperatures can be deter-
mined directly and easily without utilizing the thermal resistance concept.
However, the thermal resistance concept serves as a valuable tool in more
complex heat transfer problems, as you will see in the following examples.
Also, the units W/m  C and W/m  K for thermal conductivity are equiva-
lent, and thus interchangeable. This is also the case for C and K for tem-
perature differences.
(16  2)°C
0.02222°C/ W
Q
L
kA 
0.3 m
(0.9 W/m  C)(15 m2)
Twall
Rwall
Q
(16  2)C
0.3 m
T1  T2
L
Q
EXAMPLE 10–2
Heat Loss through a Single-Pane Window
Consider a 0.8-m-high and 1.5-m-wide glass window with a thickness of 8
mm and a thermal conductivity of k  0.78 W/m  K. Determine the steady
rate of heat transfer through this glass window and the temperature of its
inner surface for a day during which the room is maintained at 20C while the
temperature of the outdoors is 10C. Take the heat transfer coefficients on
the inner and outer surfaces of the window to be h1  10 W/m2  C and h2 
40 W/m2  C, which includes the effects of radiation.
SOLUTION
Heat loss through a window glass is considered. The rate of
heat transfer through the window and the inner surface temperature are to be
determined.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
413
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
410
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Assumptions
1 Heat transfer through the window is steady since the surface
temperatures remain constant at the specified values. 2 Heat transfer through
the wall is one-dimensional since any significant temperature gradients exist
in the direction from the indoors to the outdoors. 3 Thermal conductivity is
constant.
Properties
The thermal conductivity is given to be k  0.78 W/m  K.
Analysis
This problem involves conduction through the glass window and
convection at its surfaces, and can best be handled by making use of the
thermal resistance concept and drawing the thermal resistance network, as
shown in Fig. 10–12. Noting that the area of the window is A  0.8 m 
1.5 m  1.2 m2, the individual resistances are evaluated from their
definitions to be
Ri  Rconv, 1 
 0.08333C/W
Rglass 
 0.00855C/W
Ro  Rconv, 2 
 0.02083C/W
Noting that all three resistances are in series, the total resistance is
Rtotal  Rconv, 1  Rglass  Rconv, 2  0.08333  0.00855  0.02083
 0.1127C/W
Then the steady rate of heat transfer through the window becomes

 266 W
Knowing the rate of heat transfer, the inner surface temperature of the
window glass can be determined from

⎯→
T1  T1 
Rconv, 1
 20C  (266 W)(0.08333C/W)
 2.2C
Discussion
Note that the inner surface temperature of the window glass is
2.2C even though the temperature of the air in the room is maintained at
20C. Such low surface temperatures are highly undesirable since they cause
the formation of fog or even frost on the inner surfaces of the glass when the
humidity in the room is high.
Q
T1  T1
Rconv, 1
Q
T1  T2
Rtotal
 [20  (10)]C
0.1127C/ W
Q
1
h2 A 
1
(40 W/m2  C)(1.2 m2)
L
kA 
0.008 m
(0.78 W/m  C)(1.2 m2)
1
h1 A 
1
(10 W/m2  C)(1.2 m2)
EXAMPLE 10–3
Heat Loss through Double-Pane Windows
Consider a 0.8-m-high and 1.5-m-wide double-pane window consisting of
two 4-mm-thick layers of glass (k  0.78 W/m  K) separated by a 10-mm-
wide stagnant air space (k  0.026 W/m  K). Determine the steady rate of 
T2
Rglass
Ro
L = 8 mm
Ri
T1
T2
T1
h1 = 10 W/m2·°C
h2 = 40 W/m2·°C
Glass
20°C
–10°C
T1
T2
FIGURE 10–12
Schematic for Example 10–2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
414
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
411
heat transfer through this double-pane window and the temperature of its
inner surface for a day during which the room is maintained at 20C while
the temperature of the outdoors is 10C. Take the convection heat transfer
coefficients on the inner and outer surfaces of the window to be h1  10
W/m2  C and h2  40 W/m2  C, which includes the effects of radiation.
Solution
A double-pane window is considered. The rate of heat transfer
through the window and the inner surface temperature are to be determined.
Analysis
This example problem is identical to the previous one except that
the single 8-mm-thick window glass is replaced by two 4-mm-thick glasses
that enclose a 10-mm-wide stagnant air space. Therefore, the thermal resis-
tance network of this problem involves two additional conduction resistances
corresponding to the two additional layers, as shown in Fig. 10–13. Noting
that the area of the window is again A  0.8 m 
 1.5 m  1.2 m2, the
individual resistances are evaluated from their definitions to be
Ri  Rconv, 1 
 0.08333C/W
R1  R3  Rglass 
 0.00427C/W
R2  Rair 
 0.3205C/W
Ro  Rconv, 2 
 0.02083C/W
Noting that all three resistances are in series, the total resistance is
Rtotal  Rconv, 1  Rglass, 1  Rair  Rglass, 2  Rconv, 2
 0.08333  0.00427  0.3205  0.00427  0.02083
 0.4332C/ W
Then the steady rate of heat transfer through the window becomes

 69.2 W
which is about one-fourth of the result obtained in the previous example.
This explains the popularity of the double- and even triple-pane windows in
cold climates. The drastic reduction in the heat transfer rate in this case is
due to the large thermal resistance of the air layer between the glasses.
The inner surface temperature of the window in this case will be
T1  T1 
Rconv, 1  20C  (69.2 W)(0.08333C/W)  14.2C
which is considerably higher than the 2.2C obtained in the previous ex-
ample. Therefore, a double-pane window will rarely get fogged. A double-
pane window will also reduce the heat gain in summer, and thus reduce the
air-conditioning costs.
Q
T1  T2
Rtotal
 [20  (10)]C
0.4332C/ W
Q
1
h2 A 
1
(40 W/m2  C)(1.2 m2)
L2
k2 A 
0.01 m
(0.026 W/m  C)(1.2 m2)
L1
k1 A 
0.004 m
(0.78 W/m  C)(1.2 m2)
1
h1 A 
1
(10 W/m2  C)(1.2 m2)
T1
T2
T3
R1
Ri
R3
R2
T4
10 mm
20°C
Air
Glass
–10°C
4 mm
4 mm
Ro
T2
T1
Glass
FIGURE 10–13
Schematic for Example 10–3.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
415
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–2
■THERMAL CONTACT RESISTANCE
In the analysis of heat conduction through multilayer solids, we assumed
“perfect contact” at the interface of two layers, and thus no temperature
drop at the interface. This would be the case when the surfaces are perfectly
smooth and they produce a perfect contact at each point. In reality, however,
even flat surfaces that appear smooth to the eye turn out to be rather rough
when examined under a microscope, as shown in Fig. 10–14, with numer-
ous peaks and valleys. That is, a surface is microscopically rough no matter
how smooth it appears to be.
When two such surfaces are pressed against each other, the peaks form
good material contact but the valleys form voids filled with air. As a result,
an interface contains numerous air gaps of varying sizes that act as
insulation because of the low thermal conductivity of air. Thus, an interface
offers some resistance to heat transfer, and this resistance per unit interface
area is called the thermal contact resistance, Rc. The value of Rc is deter-
mined experimentally using a setup like the one shown in Fig. 10–15, and
as expected, there is considerable scatter of data because of the difficulty in
characterizing the surfaces.
Consider heat transfer through two metal rods of cross-sectional area A
that are pressed against each other. Heat transfer through the interface of
these two rods is the sum of the heat transfers through the solid contact
spots and the gaps in the noncontact areas and can be expressed as

contact 
gap
(10–25)
It can also be expressed in an analogous manner to Newton’s law of 
cooling as
 hc A Tinterface
(10–26)
Q
Q
Q
Q
412
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 10–14
Temperature distribution and heat flow
lines along two solid plates pressed
against each other for the case of
perfect and imperfect contact.
Layer 1
(a) Ideal (perfect) thermal contact
(b) Actual (imperfect) thermal contact
Layer 2
Layer 1
Layer 2
Temperature
drop
ΔT
No
temperature
drop
Temperature
distribution
Interface
T1 = T2
T1
T2
Interface
Cold
fluid
Applied load
Loading shaft
Alignment collar
Top plate
Steel ball
Pencil heaters
Heaters block
Bell jar
base plate
Bottom plate
Steel ball
Lower heat flux meter
Lower test specimen
Upper test specimen
Load cell
Cold plate
Thermocouples
Interface
FIGURE 10–15
A typical experimental setup for
the determination of thermal contact
resistance
From Song et al. (1993).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
416
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where A is the apparent interface area (which is the same as the cross-sec-
tional area of the rods) and Tinterface is the effective temperature difference
at the interface. The quantity hc, which corresponds to the convection heat
transfer coefficient, is called the thermal contact conductance and is
expressed as
hc 
(W/m2  C)
(10–27)
It is related to thermal contact resistance by
Rc 
(m2  C/W)
(10–28)
That is, thermal contact resistance is the inverse of thermal contact conduc-
tance. Usually, thermal contact conductance is reported in the literature, but
the concept of thermal contact resistance serves as a better vehicle for
explaining the effect of interface on heat transfer. Note that Rc represents
thermal contact resistance per unit area. The thermal resistance for the
entire interface is obtained by dividing Rc by the apparent interface area A.
The thermal contact resistance can be determined from Eq. 10–28 by
measuring the temperature drop at the interface and dividing it by the heat
flux under steady conditions. The value of thermal contact resistance
depends on the surface roughness and the material properties as well as
the temperature and pressure at the interface and the type of fluid trapped
at the interface. The situation becomes more complex when plates are fas-
tened by bolts, screws, or rivets since the interface pressure in this case is
nonuniform. The thermal contact resistance in that case also depends on
the plate thickness, the bolt radius, and the size of the contact zone. Ther-
mal contact resistance is observed to decrease with decreasing surface
roughness and increasing interface pressure, as expected. Most experimen-
tally determined values of the thermal contact resistance fall between
0.000005 and 0.0005 m2  C/W (the corresponding range of thermal con-
tact conductance is 2000 to 200,000 W/m2  C).
When we analyze heat transfer in a medium consisting of two or more
layers, the first thing we need to know is whether the thermal contact re-
sistance is significant or not. We can answer this question by comparing
the magnitudes of the thermal resistances of the layers with typical values
of thermal contact resistance. For example, the thermal resistance of a 
1-cm-thick layer of an insulating material per unit surface area is
Rc, insulation 
 0.25 m2  C/W
whereas for a 1-cm-thick layer of copper, it is
Rc, copper 
 0.000026 m2  C/W
Comparing the values above with typical values of thermal contact resis-
tance, we conclude that thermal contact resistance is significant and can
even dominate the heat transfer for good heat conductors such as metals, but
L
k 
0.01 m
386 W/m  C
L
k 
0.01 m
0.04 W/m  C
1
hc  Tinterface
Q/A
Q/A
Tinterface
Chapter 10
|
413

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
417
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
can be disregarded for poor heat conductors such as insulations. This is not
surprising since insulating materials consist mostly of air space just like the
interface itself.
The thermal contact resistance can be minimized by applying a thermally
conducting liquid called a thermal grease such as silicon oil on the surfaces
before they are pressed against each other. This is commonly done when
attaching electronic components such as power transistors to heat sinks. The
thermal contact resistance can also be reduced by replacing the air at the
interface by a better conducting gas such as helium or hydrogen, as shown
in Table 10–1.
Another way to minimize the contact resistance is to insert a soft metallic
foil such as tin, silver, copper, nickel, or aluminum between the two surfaces.
Experimental studies show that the thermal contact resistance can be reduced
by a factor of up to 7 by a metallic foil at the interface. For maximum effec-
tiveness, the foils must be very thin. The effect of metallic coatings on ther-
mal contact conductance is shown in Fig. 10–16 for various metal surfaces.
There is considerable uncertainty in the contact conductance data reported
in the literature, and care should be exercised when using them. In Table
10–2 some experimental results are given for the contact conductance
between similar and dissimilar metal surfaces for use in preliminary design
calculations. Note that the thermal contact conductance is highest (and thus
the contact resistance is lowest) for soft metals with smooth surfaces at high
pressure.
414
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 10–1
Thermal contact conductance
for aluminum plates with different
fluids at the interface for a surface
roughness of 10 m and interface
pressure of 1 atm (from Fried,
1969).
Contact
Fluid at the 
conductance, hc,
interface
W/m2 · K
Air
3640
Helium
9520
Hydrogen
13,900
Silicone oil
19,000
Glycerin
37,700
105
102
103
Bronze
Uncoated
Coated with
nickel alloy
Coated with
aluminum
alloy
Nickel
Stainless
Steel
Coated with
tin/nickel alloy
104
103
Thermal contact conductance (W/m2·K)
Thermal contact conductance
Btu
——–—
h·ft2·°F
(
)
104
103
102
102
103
Contact pressure (kN/m2)
Contact pressure (psi)
104
Coated
FIGURE 10–16
Effect of metallic coatings on
thermal contact conductance 
From Peterson (1987).
EXAMPLE 10–4
Equivalent Thickness for Contact Resistance
The thermal contact conductance at the interface of two 1-cm-thick
aluminum plates is measured to be 11,000 W/m2  K. Determine the
thickness of the aluminum plate whose thermal resistance is equal to the
thermal resistance of the interface between the plates (Fig. 10–17).
Solution
The thickness of the aluminum plate whose thermal resistance
is equal to the thermal contact resistance is to be determined.
Properties
The thermal conductivity of aluminum at room temperature is
k  237 W/m  K (Table A–24).
Analysis
Noting that thermal contact resistance is the inverse of thermal
contact conductance, the thermal contact resistance is
Rc 
 0.909 
 104 m2  K/W
For a unit surface area, the thermal resistance of a flat plate is defined as
R 
where L is the thickness of the plate and k is the thermal conductivity.
Setting R  Rc, the equivalent thickness is determined from the relation above
to be
L  kRc  (237 W/m  K)(0.909 
 104 m2  K/W)  0.0215 m  2.15 cm
L
k
1
hc 
1
11,000 W/m2  K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
418
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
415
Discussion
Note that the interface between the two plates offers as much
resistance to heat transfer as a 2.15-cm-thick aluminum plate. It is
interesting that the thermal contact resistance in this case is greater than the
sum of the thermal resistances of both plates.
TABLE 10–2
Thermal contact conductance of some metal surfaces in air (from various sources)
Surface
Pressure,
hc,*
Material
condition
Roughness, m
Temperature, C
MPa
W/m2 · C
Identical Metal Pairs
416 Stainless steel
Ground
2.54
90–200
0.17–2.5
3800
304 Stainless steel
Ground
1.14
20
4–7
1900
Aluminum
Ground
2.54
150
1.2–2.5
11,400
Copper
Ground
1.27
20
1.2–20
143,000
Copper
Milled
3.81
20
1–5
55,500
Copper (vacuum)
Milled
0.25
30
0.17–7
11,400
Dissimilar Metal Pairs
Stainless steel–
10
2900
Aluminum
20–30
20
20
3600
Stainless steel–
10
16,400
Aluminum
1.0–2.0
20
20
20,800
Steel Ct-30–
10
50,000
Aluminum
Ground
1.4–2.0
20
15–35
59,000
Steel Ct-30–
10
4800
Aluminum
Milled
4.5–7.2
20
30
8300
5
42,000
Aluminum-Copper
Ground
1.17–1.4
20
15
56,000
10
12,000
Aluminum-Copper
Milled
4.4–4.5
20
20–35
22,000
*Divide the given values by 5.678 to convert to Btu/h · ft2 · F.
Plate
1
1 cm
Plate
2
Interface
1 cm
Plate
1
Equivalent
aluminum
layer
1 cm
Plate
2
2.15 cm
1 cm
FIGURE 10–17
Schematic for Example 10–4.
EXAMPLE 10–5
Contact Resistance of Transistors
Four identical power transistors with aluminum casing are attached on one side
of a 1-cm-thick 20-cm 
 20-cm square copper plate (k  386 W/m  C)
by screws that exert an average pressure of 6 MPa (Fig. 10–18). The base area
of each transistor is 8 cm2, and each transistor is placed at the center of a
10-cm 
 10-cm quarter section of the plate. The interface roughness is
estimated to be about 1.5 m. All transistors are covered by a thick Plexiglas
layer, which is a poor conductor of heat, and thus all the heat generated at the
junction of the transistor must be dissipated to the ambient at 20C through the
back surface of the copper plate. The combined convection/radiation heat
transfer coefficient at the back surface can be taken to be 25 W/m2  C. If 
the case temperature of the transistor is not to exceed 70C, determine the 

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
419
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
416
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
maximum power each transistor can dissipate safely, and the temperature jump
at the case-plate interface.
Solution
Four identical power transistors are attached on a copper plate.
For a maximum case temperature of 70C, the maximum power dissipation
and the temperature jump at the interface are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Heat transfer can be
approximated as being one-dimensional, although it is recognized that heat
conduction in some parts of the plate will be two-dimensional since the plate
area is much larger than the base area of the transistor. But the large thermal
conductivity of copper will minimize this effect. 3 All the heat generated at
the junction is dissipated through the back surface of the plate since the
transistors are covered by a thick Plexiglas layer. 4 Thermal conductivities are
constant.
Properties
The thermal conductivity of copper is given to be k  386
W/m  C. The contact conductance is obtained from Table 10–2 to be hc 
42,000 W/m2  C, which corresponds to copper-aluminum interface for the
case of 1.10–1.4 m roughness and 5 MPa pressure, which is sufficiently
close to what we have.
Analysis
The contact area between the case and the plate is given to be
8 cm2, and the plate area for each transistor is 100 cm2. The thermal
resistance network of this problem consists of three resistances in series
(interface, plate, and convection), which are determined to be
Rinterface 
 0.030C/W
Rplate 
 0.0026C/W
Rconv 
 4.0C/W
The total thermal resistance is then
Rtotal  Rinterface  Rplate  Rambient  0.030  0.0026  4.0  4.0326C/W
Note that the thermal resistance of a copper plate is very small and can be
ignored altogether. Then the rate of heat transfer is determined to be

 12.4 W
Therefore, the power transistor should not be operated at power levels greater
than 12.4 W if the case temperature is not to exceed 70C.
The temperature jump at the interface is determined from
Tinterface 
R interface  (12.4 W)(0.030C/W)  0.37C
which is not very large. Therefore, even if we eliminate the thermal contact
resistance at the interface completely, we lower the operating temperature of
the transistor in this case by less than 0.4C.
Q
T
Rtotal  (70  20)C
4.0326C/ W
Q
1
ho A 
1
(25 W/m2  C)(0.01 m2)
L
kA 
0.01 m
(386 W/m  C)(0.01 m2)
1
hc Ac 
1
(42,000 W/m2  C)(8 
 104 m2)
20°C
Copper
plate
70°C
20 cm
1 cm
Plexiglas cover
FIGURE 10–18
Schematic for Example 10–5.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
420
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–3
■GENERALIZED THERMAL RESISTANCE
NETWORKS
The thermal resistance concept or the electrical analogy can also be used to
solve steady heat transfer problems that involve parallel layers or combined
series-parallel arrangements. Although such problems are often two- or even
three-dimensional, approximate solutions can be obtained by assuming one-
dimensional heat transfer and using the thermal resistance network.
Consider the composite wall shown in Fig. 10–19, which consists of two
parallel layers. The thermal resistance network, which consists of two paral-
lel resistances, can be represented as shown in the figure. Noting that the total
heat transfer is the sum of the heat transfers through each layer, we have

1 
2 
 (T1  T2)
(10–29)
Utilizing electrical analogy, we get

(10–30)
where
⎯→
Rtotal 
(10–31)
since the resistances are in parallel.
Now consider the combined series-parallel arrangement shown in Fig.
10–20. The total rate of heat transfer through this composite system can
again be expressed as

(10–32)
where
Rtotal  R12  R3  Rconv 
 R3  Rconv
(10–33)
and
R1 
R2 
R3 
Rconv 
(10–34)
Once the individual thermal resistances are evaluated, the total resistance
and the total rate of heat transfer can easily be determined from the relations
above.
The result obtained is somewhat approximate, since the surfaces of the
third layer are probably not isothermal, and heat transfer between the first
two layers is likely to occur.
Two assumptions commonly used in solving complex multidimensional
heat transfer problems by treating them as one-dimensional (say, in the
1
hA3
L 3
k3 A3
L 2
k2 A2
L1
k1 A1
R1R2
R1  R2
T1  T
Rtotal
Q
R1R2
R1  R2
1
Rtotal  1
R1  1
R2
T1  T2
Rtotal
Q
a 1
R1  1
R2b
T1  T2
R1
 T1  T2
R2
Q
Q
Q
Chapter 10
|
417
T1
T2
R1
R2
k1
A1
A2
T1
T2
k2
Insulation
L
1
2
Q2
·
Q = Q1 + Q2
·
·
·
Q1
·
Q·
Q·
FIGURE 10–19
Thermal resistance
network for two parallel layers.
T1
R1
R2
R3
Rconv
k1
A1
A2
T1
A3
k2
Insulation
L1 = L2
L3
1
2
3
k3
h, T
T
Q2
·
Q1
·
Q·
Q·
FIGURE 10–20
Thermal resistance network for
combined series-parallel arrangement.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
421
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
x-direction) using the thermal resistance network are (1) any plane wall nor-
mal to the x-axis is isothermal (i.e., to assume the temperature to vary in the
x-direction only) and (2) any plane parallel to the x-axis is adiabatic (i.e., to
assume heat transfer to occur in the x-direction only). These two assumptions
result in different resistance networks, and thus different (but usually close)
values for the total thermal resistance and thus heat transfer. The actual result
lies between these two values. In geometries in which heat transfer occurs
predominantly in one direction, either approach gives satisfactory results.
418
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 10–6
Heat Loss through a Composite Wall
A 3-m-high and 5-m-wide wall consists of long 16-cm 
 22-cm cross section
horizontal bricks (k  0.72 W/m  C) separated by 3-cm-thick plaster layers
(k  0.22 W/m  C). There are also 2-cm-thick plaster layers on each side of
the brick and a 3-cm-thick rigid foam (k  0.026 W/m  C) on the inner side
of the wall, as shown in Fig. 10–21. The indoor and the outdoor temperatures
are 20C and 10C, respectively, and the convection heat transfer coeffi-
cients on the inner and the outer sides are h1  10 W/m2  C and h2 
25 W/m2  C, respectively. Assuming one-dimensional heat transfer and dis-
regarding radiation, determine the rate of heat transfer through the wall.
Solution
The composition of a composite wall is given. The rate of heat
transfer through the wall is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Heat transfer is steady since there is no indication of change
with time. 2 Heat transfer can be approximated as being one-dimensional
since it is predominantly in the x-direction. 3 Thermal conductivities are
constant. 4 Heat transfer by radiation is negligible.
Properties
The thermal conductivities are given to be k  0.72 W/m  C
for bricks, k  0.22 W/m  C for plaster layers, and k  0.026 W/m  C for
the rigid foam.
Analysis
There is a pattern in the construction of this wall that repeats
itself every 25-cm distance in the vertical direction. There is no variation in
the horizontal direction. Therefore, we consider a 1-m-deep and 0.25-m-high
portion of the wall, since it is representative of the entire wall.
Assuming any cross section of the wall normal to the x-direction to be
isothermal, the thermal resistance network for the representative section of
the wall becomes as shown in Fig. 10–21. The individual resistances are
evaluated as:
Ri  Rconv, 1 
 0.40C/W
R1  Rfoam 
 4.62C/W
R2  R6  Rplaster, side 
 0.36C/W
R3  R5  Rplaster, center 
 48.48C/W
L
kA 
0.16 m
(0.22 W/m  C)(0.015 
 1 m2)
L
kA 
0.02 m
(0.22 W/m  C)(0.25 
 1 m2)
L
kA 
0.03 m
(0.026 W/m  C)(0.25 
 1 m2)
1
h1 A 
1
(10 W/m2  C)(0.25 
 1 m2)
Brick
h1
T1
h2
T2
1.5 cm
22 cm
1.5 cm
3
x
2
16 cm
2
Plaster
Foam
R5
R4
R3
R6
Ri
R1
R2
Ro
T2
T1
FIGURE 10–21
Schematic for Example 10–6.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
422
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
419
R4  Rbrick 
 1.01C/W
Ro  Rconv, 2 
 0.16C/W
The three resistances R3, R4, and R5 in the middle are parallel, and their
equivalent resistance is determined from
 1.03 W/C
which gives
Rmid  0.97C/W
Now all the resistances are in series, and the total resistance is
Rtotal  Ri  R1  R2  Rmid  R6  Ro
 0.40  4.62  0.36  0.97  0.36  0.16
 6.87C/ W
Then the steady rate of heat transfer through the wall becomes

 4.37 W
(per 0.25 m2 surface area)
or 4.37/0.25  17.5 W per m2 area. The total area of the wall is A  3 m

 5 m  15 m2. Then the rate of heat transfer through the entire wall
becomes
total  (17.5 W/m2)(15 m2)  263 W
Of course, this result is approximate, since we assumed the temperature
within the wall to vary in one direction only and ignored any temperature
change (and thus heat transfer) in the other two directions.
Discussion
In the above solution, we assumed the temperature at any cross
section of the wall normal to the x-direction to be isothermal. We could also
solve this problem by going to the other extreme and assuming the surfaces
parallel to the x-direction to be adiabatic. The thermal resistance network in
this case will be as shown in Fig. 10–22. By following the approach outlined
above, the total thermal resistance in this case is determined to be Rtotal 
6.97C/W, which is very close to the value 6.85C/W obtained before. Thus
either approach gives roughly the same result in this case. This example
demonstrates that either approach can be used in practice to obtain satisfac-
tory results.
Q
T1  T2
Rtotal
 [20  (10)]C
6.87C/ W
Q
1
Rmid  1
R3  1
R4  1
R5 
1
48.48 
1
1.01 
1
48.48
1
h2 A 
1
(25 W/m2  C)(0.25 
 1 m2)
L
kA 
0.16 m
(0.72 W/m  C)(0.22 
 1 m2)
x
Ro
T2
Ri
T1
Adiabatic
lines
FIGURE 10–22
Alternative thermal resistance
network for Example 10–6 for the
case of surfaces parallel to the
primary direction of heat
transfer being adiabatic.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
423
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–4
■HEAT CONDUCTION IN
CYLINDERS AND SPHERES
Consider steady heat conduction through a hot-water pipe. Heat is continu-
ously lost to the outdoors through the wall of the pipe, and we intuitively
feel that heat transfer through the pipe is in the normal direction to the pipe
surface and no significant heat transfer takes place in the pipe in other direc-
tions (Fig. 10–23). The wall of the pipe, whose thickness is rather small,
separates two fluids at different temperatures, and thus the temperature gra-
dient in the radial direction is relatively large. Further, if the fluid tempera-
tures inside and outside the pipe remain constant, then heat transfer through
the pipe is steady. Thus heat transfer through the pipe can be modeled as
steady and one-dimensional. The temperature of the pipe in this case
depends on one direction only (the radial r-direction) and can be expressed
as T  T(r). The temperature is independent of the azimuthal angle or the
axial distance. This situation is approximated in practice in long cylindrical
pipes and spherical containers.
In steady operation, there is no change in the temperature of the pipe with
time at any point. Therefore, the rate of heat transfer into the pipe must be
equal to the rate of heat transfer out of it. In other words, heat transfer
through the pipe must be constant,
cond, cyl  constant.
Consider a long cylindrical layer (such as a circular pipe) of inner 
radius r1, outer radius r2, length L, and average thermal conductivity k (Fig.
10–24). The two surfaces of the cylindrical layer are maintained at constant
temperatures T1 and T2. There is no heat generation in the layer and the
thermal conductivity is constant. For one-dimensional heat conduction
through the cylindrical layer, we have T(r). Then Fourier’s law of heat con-
duction for heat transfer through the cylindrical layer can be expressed as
cond, cyl  kA
(W)
(10–35)
where A  2prL is the heat transfer area at location r. Note that A depends
on r, and thus it varies in the direction of heat transfer. Separating the vari-
ables in the above equation and integrating from r  r1, where T(r1)  T1,
to r  r2, where T(r2)  T2, gives
dr  
k dT
(10–36)
Substituting A  2prL and performing the integrations give
cond, cyl  2pLk
(W)
(10–37)
since
cond, cyl  constant. This equation can be rearranged as
cond, cyl 
(W)
(10–38)
T1  T2
Rcyl
Q
Q
T1  T2
ln(r2/r1)
Q

T2
TT1

r2
rr1
Q cond, cyl
A
dT
dr
Q
Q
420
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
h
T
r
Q·
FIGURE 10–23
Heat is lost from a hot-water pipe to
the air outside in the radial direction,
and thus heat transfer from a long
pipe is one-dimensional.
r1
k
r2
T1
T2
FIGURE 10–24
A long cylindrical pipe (or spherical
shell) with specified inner and outer
surface temperatures T1 and T2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
424
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where
Rcyl 
(10–39)
is the thermal resistance of the cylindrical layer against heat conduction, or
simply the conduction resistance of the cylinder layer.
We can repeat the analysis for a spherical layer by taking A  4pr2 and
performing the integrations in Eq. 10–36. The result can be expressed as
cond, sph 
(10–40)
where
Rsph 

(10–41)
is the thermal resistance of the spherical layer against heat conduction, or
simply the conduction resistance of the spherical layer.
Now consider steady one-dimensional heat transfer through a cylindrical or
spherical layer that is exposed to convection on both sides to fluids at temper-
atures T1 and T2 with heat transfer coefficients h1 and h2, respectively, as
shown in Fig. 10–25. The thermal resistance network in this case consists of
one conduction and two convection resistances in series, just like the one for
the plane wall, and the rate of heat transfer under steady conditions can be
expressed as

(10–42)
where
Rtotal  Rconv, 1  Rcyl  Rconv, 2

(10–43)
for a cylindrical layer, and
Rtotal  Rconv, 1  Rsph  Rconv, 2

(10–44)
for a spherical layer. Note that A in the convection resistance relation
Rconv  1/hA is the surface area at which convection occurs. It is equal to
A  2prL for a cylindrical surface and A  4pr2 for a spherical surface of
radius r. Also note that the thermal resistances are in series, and thus the
total thermal resistance is determined by simply adding the individual resis-
tances, just like the electrical resistances connected in series.
1
(4pr 2
1)h1
 r2  r1
4pr1r2k 
1
(4pr 2
2)h2
1
(2pr1L)h1  ln(r2/r1)
2pLk 
1
(2pr2L)h2
T1  T2
Rtotal
Q
Outer radius  Inner radius
4p(Outer radius)(Inner radius)(Thermal conductivity)
r2  r1
4pr1r2k
T1  T2
Rsph
Q
ln(r2/r1)
2pLk

ln(Outer radius/Inner radius)
2p 
 Length 
 Thermal conductivity
Chapter 10
|
421
FIGURE 10–25
The thermal resistance network
for a cylindrical (or spherical)
shell subjected to convection from
both the inner and the outer sides.
r1
r2
T1
Rconv, 2
Rconv, 1
Rtotal = Rconv, 1 + Rcyl + Rconv, 2
Rcyl
T2
T2
T1
h2
h1
Q·

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
425
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Multilayered Cylinders and Spheres
Steady heat transfer through multilayered cylindrical or spherical shells can be
handled just like multilayered plane walls discussed earlier by simply add-
ing an additional resistance in series for each additional layer. For example, the
steady heat transfer rate through the three-layered composite cylinder of length
L shown in Fig. 10–26 with convection on both sides can be expressed as

(10–45)
where Rtotal is the total thermal resistance, expressed as
Rtotal  Rconv, 1  Rcyl, 1  Rcyl, 2  Rcyl, 3  Rconv, 2

(10–46)
where A1  2pr1L and A4  2pr4L. Equation 10–46 can also be used for a
three-layered spherical shell by replacing the thermal resistances of cylindri-
cal layers by the corresponding spherical ones. Again, note from the thermal
resistance network that the resistances are in series, and thus the total ther-
mal resistance is simply the arithmetic sum of the individual thermal resis-
tances in the path of heat flow.
Once 
is known, we can determine any intermediate temperature Tj by
applying the relation 
 (Ti  Tj)/Rtotal, i  j across any layer or layers such
that Ti is a known temperature at location i and Rtotal, i  j is the total thermal
resistance between locations i and j (Fig. 10–27). For example, once 
has
been calculated, the interface temperature T2 between the first and second
cylindrical layers can be determined from
Q
Q
Q
1
h1 A1  ln(r2/r1)
2pLk1  ln(r3/r2)
2pLk2  ln(r4/r3)
2pLk3 
1
h2 A4
T1  T2
Rtotal
Q
422
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 10–26
The thermal resistance network for heat transfer through a three-layered composite cylinder
subjected to convection on both sides.
T2
T4
T3
T2
T1
h1
r1
r2
r3
r4
T1
T1
h2
T2
Rconv, 1
Rcyl, 1
Rcyl, 2
Rcyl, 3
Rconv, 2
k1
k2
k3
1
2
3

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
426
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008

(10–47)
We could also calculate T2 from

(10–48)
Although both relations give the same result, we prefer the first one since it
involves fewer terms and thus less work.
The thermal resistance concept can also be used for other geometries,
provided that the proper conduction resistances and the proper surface areas
in convection resistances are used.
T2  T2
R2  R3  Rconv, 2 
T2  T2
ln(r3/r2)
2pLk2  ln(r4/r3)
2pLk3 
1
ho(2pr4L)
Q
T1  T2
Rconv, 1  Rcyl, 1 
T1  T2
1
h1(2pr1L)  ln(r2/r1)
2pLk1
Q
Chapter 10
|
423
T1
T1
–
Rconv,1
= ————
T1
T2
–
Rconv,1 + R1
= ————
T1
T3
–
R1 + R2
= ————
T2
T3
–
R2
= ————
T2
T2
–
R2 + Rconv,2
= ————
= . . .
T2
T1
R1
T1
T2
T3
Rconv, 1
Rconv, 2
R2
Q·
FIGURE 10–27
The ratio T/R across any layer is
equal to , which remains constant in
one-dimensional steady conduction.
Q
T1
T1
T2
T2
Ri
h2
R1
Rrad
Ro
1.5 m
2 cm
0°C
Iced
water
h1
FIGURE 10–28
Schematic for Example 10–7.
EXAMPLE 10–7
Heat Transfer to a Spherical Container
A 3-m internal diameter spherical tank made of 2-cm-thick stainless steel
(k  15 W/m  C) is used to store iced water at T1  0C. The tank is
located in a room whose temperature is T2  22C. The walls of the room are
also at 22C. The outer surface of the tank is black and heat transfer between
the outer surface of the tank and the surroundings is by natural convection
and radiation. The convection heat transfer coefficients at the inner and the
outer surfaces of the tank are h1  80 W/m2  C and h2  10 W/m2  C,
respectively. Determine (a) the rate of heat transfer to the iced water in the
tank and (b) the amount of ice at 0C that melts during a 24-h period.
Solution
A spherical container filled with iced water is subjected to con-
vection and radiation heat transfer at its outer surface. The rate of heat
transfer and the amount of ice that melts per day are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Heat transfer is steady since the specified thermal condi-
tions at the boundaries do not change with time. 2 Heat transfer is one-
dimensional since there is thermal symmetry about the midpoint. 3 Thermal
conductivity is constant.
Properties
The thermal conductivity of steel is given to be k  15 W/m  C.
The heat of fusion of water at atmospheric pressure is hif  333.7 kJ/kg.
The outer surface of the tank is black and thus its emissivity is e  1.
Analysis
(a) The thermal resistance network for this problem is given in
Fig. 10–28. Noting that the inner diameter of the tank is D1  3 m and the
outer diameter is D2  3.04 m, the inner and the outer surface areas of the
tank are
A1  p
 p(3 m)2  28.3 m2
A2  p
 p(3.04 m)2  29.0 m2
Also, the radiation heat transfer coefficient is given by
hrad  es(
)(T2  T2)
But we do not know the outer surface temperature T2 of the tank, and thus
we cannot calculate hrad. Therefore, we need to assume a T2 value now and 
T 2
2  T 2
2
D2
2
D2
1

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
427
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
424
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
check the accuracy of this assumption later. We will repeat the calculations
if necessary using a revised value for T2.
We note that T2 must be between 0C and 22C, but it must be closer 
to 0C, since the heat transfer coefficient inside the tank is much larger. Tak-
ing T2  5C  278 K, the radiation heat transfer coefficient is determined
to be
hrad  (1)(5.67 
 108 W/m2  K4)[(295 K)2  (278 K)2][(295  278) K]
 5.34 W/m2  K  5.34 W/m2  C
Then the individual thermal resistances become
Ri  Rconv, 1 
 0.000442C/W
R1  Rsphere 
 0.000047C/W
Ro  Rconv, 2 
 0.00345C/W
Rrad 
 0.00646C/W
The two parallel resistances Ro and Rrad can be replaced by an equivalent
resistance Requiv determined from
 444.7 W/C
which gives
Requiv  0.00225C/W
Now all the resistances are in series, and the total resistance is 
Rtotal  Ri  R1  Requiv  0.000442  0.000047  0.00225  0.00274C/W
Then the steady rate of heat transfer to the iced water becomes

 8029 W
(or
 8.029 kJ/s)
To check the validity of our original assumption, we now determine the outer
surface temperature from

⎯→
T2  T2 
R equiv
 22C  (8029 W)(0.00225C/W)  4C
which is sufficiently close to the 5C assumed in the determination of the
radiation heat transfer coefficient. Therefore, there is no need to repeat the
calculations using 4C for T2.
Q
T2  T2
Requiv
Q
Q
T2  T1
Rtotal

(22  0)C
0.00274C/ W
Q
1
Requiv  1
Ro  1
Rrad 
1
0.00345 
1
0.00646
1
hrad A2 
1
(5.34 W/m2  C)(29.0 m2)
1
h2 A2 
1
(10 W/m2  C)(29.0 m2)
r2  r1
4pkr1r2 
(1.52  1.50) m
4p (15 W/m  C)(1.52 m)(1.50 m)
1
h1 A1 
1
(80 W/m2  C)(28.3 m2)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
428
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
425
(b) The total amount of heat transfer during a 24-h period is
Q 
t  (8.029 kJ/s)(24 
 3600 s)  693,700 kJ
Noting that it takes 333.7 kJ of energy to melt 1 kg of ice at 0C, the
amount of ice that will melt during a 24-h period is
mice 
 2079 kg
Therefore, about 2 metric tons of ice will melt in the tank every day.
Discussion
An easier way to deal with combined convection and radiation at
a surface when the surrounding medium and surfaces are at the same tem-
perature is to add the radiation and convection heat transfer coefficients and
to treat the result as the convection heat transfer coefficient. That is, to take
h  10  5.34  15.34 W/m2  C in this case. This way, we can ignore
radiation since its contribution is accounted for in the convection heat trans-
fer coefficient. The convection resistance of the outer surface in this case
would be
Rcombined 
 0.00225C/W
which is identical to the value obtained for equivalent resistance for the par-
allel convection and the radiation resistances.
1
hcombined A2 
1
(15.34 W/m2  C)(29.0 m2)
Q
hif  693,700 kJ
333.7 kJ/kg
Q
EXAMPLE 10–8
Heat Loss through an Insulated Steam Pipe
Steam at T1  320C flows in a cast iron pipe (k  80 W/m  C) whose inner
and outer diameters are D1  5 cm and D2  5.5 cm, respectively. The pipe
is covered with 3-cm-thick glass wool insulation with k  0.05 W/m  C. Heat
is lost to the surroundings at T2  5C by natural convection and radiation,
with a combined heat transfer coefficient of h2  18 W/m2  C. Taking the
heat transfer coefficient inside the pipe to be h1  60 W/m2  C, determine
the rate of heat loss from the steam per unit length of the pipe. Also deter-
mine the temperature drops across the pipe shell and the insulation.
Solution
A steam pipe covered with glass wool insulation is subjected to
convection on its surfaces. The rate of heat transfer per unit length and the
temperature drops across the pipe and the insulation are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Heat transfer is steady since there is no indication of any
change with time. 2 Heat transfer is one-dimensional since there is thermal
symmetry about the centerline and no variation in the axial direction. 3 Ther-
mal conductivities are constant. 4 The thermal contact resistance at the
interface is negligible.
Properties
The thermal conductivities are given to be k  80 W/m  C for
cast iron and k  0.05 W/m  C for glass wool insulation.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
429
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–5
■CRITICAL RADIUS OF INSULATION
We know that adding more insulation to a wall or to the attic always
decreases heat transfer. The thicker the insulation, the lower the heat trans-
fer rate. This is expected, since the heat transfer area A is constant, and
adding insulation always increases the thermal resistance of the wall with-
out increasing the convection resistance.
Adding insulation to a cylindrical pipe or a spherical shell, however, is a
different matter. The additional insulation increases the conduction resis-
426
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
The thermal resistance network for this problem involves four
resistances in series and is given in Fig. 10–29. Taking L  1 m, the areas
of the surfaces exposed to convection are determined to be
A1  2pr1L  2p(0.025 m)(1 m)  0.157 m2
A3  2pr3L  2p(0.0575 m)(1 m)  0.361 m2
Then the individual thermal resistances become
Ri  Rconv, 1 
 0.106C/W
R1  Rpipe 
 0.0002C/W
R2  Rinsulation 
 2.35C/W
Ro  Rconv, 2 
 0.154C/W
Noting that all resistances are in series, the total resistance is determined 
to be
Rtotal  Ri  R1  R2  Ro  0.106  0.0002  2.35  0.154  2.61C/W
Then the steady rate of heat loss from the steam becomes

 121 W
(per m pipe length)
The heat loss for a given pipe length can be determined by multiplying the
above quantity by the pipe length L.
The temperature drops across the pipe and the insulation are deter-
mined from Eq. 10–17 to be
Tpipe 
R pipe  (121 W)(0.0002C/W)  0.02C
Tinsulation 
R insulation  (121 W)(2.35C/W)  284C
That is, the temperatures between the inner and the outer surfaces of the
pipe differ by 0.02C, whereas the temperatures between the inner and the
outer surfaces of the insulation differ by 284C.
Discussion
Note that the thermal resistance of the pipe is too small relative
to the other resistances and can be neglected without causing any signifi-
cant error. Also note that the temperature drop across the pipe is practically
zero, and thus the pipe can be assumed to be isothermal. The resistance to
heat flow in insulated pipes is primarily due to insulation.
Q
Q
T1  T2
Rtotal
 (320  5)C
2.61C/W
Q
1
h2 A3 
1
(18 W/m2  C)(0.361 m2)
ln(r3 /r2)
2pk2L 
ln(5.75/2.75)
2p(0.05 W/m  C)(1 m)
ln(r2 /r1)
2pk1L 
ln(2.75/2.5)
2p(80 W/m  C)(1 m)
1
h1 A1 
1
(60 W/m2  C)(0.157 m2)
T1
T2
T3
h2
T2
T1
T2
R1
Ri
Ro
R2
Insulation
T1
h1
r3
Q·
T1
T2
T3
Steam
r1
r2
FIGURE 10–29
Schematic for Example 10–8.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
430
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
tance of the insulation layer but decreases the convection resistance of the
surface because of the increase in the outer surface area for convection. The
heat transfer from the pipe may increase or decrease, depending on which
effect dominates.
Consider a cylindrical pipe of outer radius r1 whose outer surface temper-
ature T1 is maintained constant (Fig. 10–30). The pipe is now insulated with
a material whose thermal conductivity is k and outer radius is r2. Heat is lost
from the pipe to the surrounding medium at temperature T, with a convec-
tion heat transfer coefficient h. The rate of heat transfer from the insulated
pipe to the surrounding air can be expressed as (Fig. 10–31)

(10–49)
The variation of 
with the outer radius of the insulation r2 is plotted in
Fig. 10–31. The value of r2 at which 
reaches a maximum is determined
from the requirement that d /dr2  0 (zero slope). Performing the differen-
tiation and solving for r2 yields the critical radius of insulation for a cylin-
drical body to be
rcr, cylinder 
(m)
(10–50)
Note that the critical radius of insulation depends on the thermal conductiv-
ity of the insulation k and the external convection heat transfer coefficient h.
The rate of heat transfer from the cylinder increases with the addition of
insulation for r2  rcr, reaches a maximum when r2  rcr, and starts to
decrease for r2  rcr. Thus, insulating the pipe may actually increase the
rate of heat transfer from the pipe instead of decreasing it when r2  rcr.
The important question to answer at this point is whether we need to be
concerned about the critical radius of insulation when insulating hot-water
pipes or even hot-water tanks. Should we always check and make sure that
the outer radius of insulation sufficiently exceeds the critical radius before
we install any insulation? Probably not, as explained here.
The value of the critical radius rcr is the largest when k is large and h is
small. Noting that the lowest value of h encountered in practice is about
5 W/m2  C for the case of natural convection of gases, and that the thermal
conductivity of common insulating materials is about 0.05 W/m2  C, the
largest value of the critical radius we are likely to encounter is
rcr, max 

 0.01 m  1 cm
This value would be even smaller when the radiation effects are considered.
The critical radius would be much less in forced convection, often less than
1 mm, because of much larger h values associated with forced convection.
Therefore, we can insulate hot-water or steam pipes freely without worrying
about the possibility of increasing the heat transfer by insulating the pipes.
The radius of electric wires may be smaller than the critical radius. There-
fore, the plastic electrical insulation may actually enhance the heat transfer
0.05 W/m  C
5 W/m2  C
kmax, insulation
hmin
k
h
Q
Q
Q
T1  T
Rins  Rconv 
T1  T
ln(r2/r1)
2pLk 
1
h(2pr2L)
Q
Chapter 10
|
427
T1
Rconv
Rins
r2
r1
Insulation
T
T
h
k
FIGURE 10–30
An insulated cylindrical pipe
exposed to convection from the outer
surface and the thermal resistance
network associated with it.
r2
k
h
r1
r1
0
r2
rcr = k/h
Q·
Q·
Qmax
·
Qbare
·
FIGURE 10–31
The variation of heat transfer rate with
the outer radius of the insulation r2
when r1  rcr.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
431
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
from electric wires and thus keep their steady operating temperatures at
lower and thus safer levels.
The discussions above can be repeated for a sphere, and it can be shown in
a similar manner that the critical radius of insulation for a spherical shell is
rcr, sphere 
(10–51)
where k is the thermal conductivity of the insulation and h is the convection
heat transfer coefficient on the outer surface.
2k
h
428
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 10–9
Heat Loss from an Insulated Electric Wire
A 3-mm-diameter and 5-m-long electric wire is tightly wrapped with a 
2-mm-thick plastic cover whose thermal conductivity is k  0.15 W/m  C.
Electrical measurements indicate that a current of 10 A passes through the
wire and there is a voltage drop of 8 V along the wire. If the insulated wire is
exposed to a medium at T  30C with a heat transfer coefficient of h 
12 W/m2  C, determine the temperature at the interface of the wire and the
plastic cover in steady operation. Also determine whether doubling the thick-
ness of the plastic cover will increase or decrease this interface temperature.
SOLUTION
An electric wire is tightly wrapped with a plastic cover. The
interface temperature and the effect of doubling the thickness of the plastic
cover on the interface temperature are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Heat transfer is steady since there is no indication of any
change with time. 2 Heat transfer is one-dimensional since there is thermal
symmetry about the centerline and no variation in the axial direction. 3 Ther-
mal conductivities are constant. 4 The thermal contact resistance at the
interface is negligible. 5 Heat transfer coefficient incorporates the radiation
effects, if any.
Properties
The thermal conductivity of plastic is given to be k

0.15 W/m  C.
Analysis
Heat is generated in the wire and its temperature rises as a result
of resistance heating. We assume heat is generated uniformly throughout the
wire and is transferred to the surrounding medium in the radial direction. In
steady operation, the rate of heat transfer becomes equal to the heat gener-
ated within the wire, which is determined to be

 VI  (8 V)(10 A)  80 W
The thermal resistance network for this problem involves a conduction resis-
tance for the plastic cover and a convection resistance for the outer surface
in series, as shown in Fig. 10–32. The values of these two resistances are 
A2  (2pr2)L  2p(0.0035 m)(5 m)  0.110 m2
Rconv 
 0.76C/W
Rplastic 
 0.18C/W
ln(r2 /r1)
2pkL

ln(3.5/1.5)
2p(0.15 W/m  C)(5 m)
1
hA2 
1
(12 W/m2  C)(0.110 m2)
We
Q
h
T1
T2
T
T
Rplastic
Rconv
r2
Q·
Q·
k
T1
r1
T2
FIGURE 10–32
Schematic for Example 10–9.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
432
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–6
■HEAT TRANSFER FROM FINNED SURFACES
The rate of heat transfer from a surface at a temperature Ts to the surround-
ing medium at T is given by Newton’s law of cooling as
conv  hAs (Ts  T)
where As is the heat transfer surface area and h is the convection heat trans-
fer coefficient. When the temperatures Ts and T are fixed by design consid-
erations, as is often the case, there are two ways to increase the rate of heat
transfer: to increase the convection heat transfer coefficient h or to increase
the surface area As. Increasing h may require the installation of a pump or
fan, or replacing the existing one with a larger one, but this approach may
or may not be practical. Besides, it may not be adequate. The alternative is
to increase the surface area by attaching to the surface extended surfaces
called fins made of highly conductive materials such as aluminum. Finned
surfaces are manufactured by extruding, welding, or wrapping a thin metal
sheet on a surface. Fins enhance heat transfer from a surface by exposing a
larger surface area to convection and radiation.
Finned surfaces are commonly used in practice to enhance heat transfer,
and they often increase the rate of heat transfer from a surface severalfold.
Q
Chapter 10
|
429
and therefore
Rtotal  Rplastic  Rconv  0.76  0.18  0.94C/W
Then the interface temperature can be determined from

⎯→
T1  T 
R total
 30C  (80 W)(0.94C/W)  105C
Note that we did not involve the electrical wire directly in the thermal resis-
tance network, since the wire involves heat generation.
To answer the second part of the question, we need to know the criti-
cal radius of insulation of the plastic cover. It is determined from Eq. 10–50
to be
rcr 
 0.0125 m  12.5 mm
which is larger than the radius of the plastic cover. Therefore, increasing the
thickness of the plastic cover will enhance heat transfer until the outer
radius of the cover reaches 12.5 mm. As a result, the rate of heat transfer 
will increase when the interface temperature T1 is held constant, or T1 will
decrease when 
is held constant, which is the case here.
Discussion
It can be shown by repeating the calculations above for a 4-mm-
thick plastic cover that the interface temperature drops to 90.6C when the
thickness of the plastic cover is doubled. It can also be shown in a similar
manner that the interface reaches a minimum temperature of 83C when the
outer radius of the plastic cover equals the critical radius.
Q
Q
k
h  0.15 W/m  C
12 W/m2  C
Q
T1  T
Rtotal
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
433
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The car radiator shown in Fig. 10–33 is an example of a finned surface. The
closely packed thin metal sheets attached to the hot-water tubes increase
the surface area for convection and thus the rate of convection heat transfer
from the tubes to the air many times. There are a variety of innovative fin
designs available in the market, and they seem to be limited only by imagi-
nation (Fig. 10–34).
In the analysis of fins, we consider steady operation with no heat genera-
tion in the fin, and we assume the thermal conductivity k of the material to
remain constant. We also assume the convection heat transfer coefficient h
to be constant and uniform over the entire surface of the fin for convenience
in the analysis. We recognize that the convection heat transfer coefficient h,
in general, varies along the fin as well as its circumference, and its value at a
point is a strong function of the fluid motion at that point. The value of h is
usually much lower at the fin base than it is at the fin tip because the fluid is
surrounded by solid surfaces near the base, which seriously disrupt its motion
to the point of “suffocating” it, while the fluid near the fin tip has little con-
tact with a solid surface and thus encounters little resistance to flow. There-
fore, adding too many fins on a surface may actually decrease the overall heat
transfer when the decrease in h offsets any gain resulting from the increase in
the surface area.
Fin Equation
Consider a volume element of a fin at location x having a length of  x,
cross-sectional area of Ac, and a perimeter of p, as shown in Fig. 10–35.
Under steady conditions, the energy balance on this volume element can be
expressed as
or
cond, x 
cond, x  x 
conv
Q
Q
Q
£
Rate of heat
conduction into
the element at x
≥ £
Rate of heat
conduction from the
element at x  x
≥ £
Rate of heat
convection from
the element
≥
430
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 10–34
Some innovative fin designs.
x
x
h, T
Volume
element
L
Δx
0
T0
Ac
Qconv
·
Qcond, x + Δx
·
Qcond, x
·
FIGURE 10–35
Volume element of a fin at location x
having a length of x, cross-sectional
area of Ac, and perimeter of p.
FIGURE 10–33
The thin plate fins of a car radiator
greatly increase the rate of heat transfer
to the air. 
© Yunus Çengel, photo by James Kleiser.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
434
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where
conv  h(p x)(T  T)
Substituting and dividing by x, we obtain
 hp(T  T)  0
(10–52)
Taking the limit as x →0 gives
 hp(T  T)  0
(10–53)
From Fourier’s law of heat conduction we have
cond  kAc
(10–54)
where Ac is the cross-sectional area of the fin at location x. Substitution of
this relation into Eq. 10–53 gives the differential equation governing heat
transfer in fins,
 hp(T  T)  0
(10–55)
In general, the cross-sectional area Ac and the perimeter p of a fin vary with
x, which makes this differential equation difficult to solve. In the special
case of constant cross section and constant thermal conductivity, the differ-
ential equation 10–55 reduces to
 m2u  0
(10–56)
where
m2 
(10–57)
and u  T  T is the temperature excess. At the fin base we have 
ub  Tb  T.
Equation 10–56 is a linear, homogeneous, second-order differential equa-
tion with constant coefficients. A fundamental theory of differential equa-
tions states that such an equation has two linearly independent solution
functions, and its general solution is the linear combination of those two
solution functions. A careful examination of the differential equation reveals
that subtracting a constant multiple of the solution function u from its second
derivative yields zero. Thus we conclude that the function u and its second
derivative must be constant multiples of each other. The only functions
whose derivatives are constant multiples of the functions themselves are the
exponential functions (or a linear combination of exponential functions such
as sine and cosine hyperbolic functions). Therefore, the solution functions
of the differential equation above are the exponential functions emx or emx
or constant multiples of them. This can be verified by direct substitution.
For example, the second derivative of emx is m2emx, and its substitution
hp
kAc
d 2u
dx 2
d
dx akAc dT
dx b
dT
dx
Q
d Q cond
dx
Q cond, x  x  Q cond, x
x
Q
Chapter 10
|
431

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
435
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
into Eq. 10–56 yields zero. Therefore, the general solution of the differential
equation Eq. 10–56 is
u(x)  C1emx  C2emx
(10–58)
where C1 and C2 are arbitrary constants whose values are to be determined
from the boundary conditions at the base and at the tip of the fin. Note that
we need only two conditions to determine C1 and C2 uniquely.
The temperature of the plate to which the fins are attached is normally
known in advance. Therefore, at the fin base we have a specified tempera-
ture boundary condition, expressed as
Boundary condition at fin base:
u(0)  ub  Tb  T
(10–59)
At the fin tip we have several possibilities, including specified temperature,
negligible heat loss (idealized as an adiabatic tip), convection, and com-
bined convection and radiation (Fig. 10–36). Next, we consider each case
separately.
1
Infinitely Long Fin (Tfin tip  T)
For a sufficiently long fin of uniform cross section (Ac  constant), the tem-
perature of the fin at the fin tip approaches the environment temperature T
and thus u approaches zero. That is,
Boundary condition at fin tip:
u(L)  T(L)  T  0
as
L
→

This condition is satisfied by the function emx, but not by the other prospec-
tive solution function emx since it tends to infinity as x gets larger. Therefore,
the general solution in this case will consist of a constant multiple of emx.
The value of the constant multiple is determined from the requirement that at
the fin base where x  0 the value of u is ub. Noting that emx  e0  1, the
proper value of the constant is ub, and the solution function we are looking for
is u(x)  ubemx. This function satisfies the differential equation as well as the
requirements that the solution reduce to ub at the fin base and approach zero 
at the fin tip for large x. Noting that u  T  T and m 
, the vari-
ation of temperature along the fin in this case can be expressed as
Very long fin:
 emx 
(10–60)
Note that the temperature along the fin in this case decreases exponentially
from Tb to T, as shown in Fig. 10–37. The steady rate of heat transfer from
the entire fin can be determined from Fourier’s law of heat conduction
Very long fin:
long fin  kAc

(Tb  T)
(10–61)
where p is the perimeter, Ac is the cross-sectional area of the fin, and x is the
distance from the fin base. Alternatively, the rate of heat transfer from the fin
could also be determined by considering heat transfer from a differential
volume element of the fin and integrating it over the entire surface of the fin:
fin 
h[T(x)  T] dAfin 
hu(x) dAfin
(10–62)
Afin
Afin
Q
2hpkAc
dT
dx
2
x0
Q
ex2hp/kAc
T(x)  T
Tb  T
2hp/kAc
432
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Tb
0
Specified
temperature
(a) Specified temperature
(b) Negligible heat loss
(c) Convection
(d) Convection and radiation
T
L
x
FIGURE 10–36
Boundary conditions at the
fin base and the fin tip.
Tb
T
Tb
T(x) = T + (Tb – T)e
T
L
0
x
Ab = Ac
k
h, T
hp
—–
kAc
–x
D
(p =
D, Ac =
D2/4 for a cylindrical fin)
π
π
FIGURE 10–37
A long circular fin of uniform cross
section and the variation of
temperature along it.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
436
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The two approaches described are equivalent and give the same result since,
under steady conditions, the heat transfer from the exposed surfaces of the
fin is equal to the heat transfer to the fin at the base (Fig. 10–38).
2
Negligible Heat Loss from the Fin Tip
(Adiabatic fin tip,
fin tip  0)
Fins are not likely to be so long that their temperature approaches the sur-
rounding temperature at the tip. A more realistic situation is for heat transfer
from the fin tip to be negligible since the heat transfer from the fin is pro-
portional to its surface area, and the surface area of the fin tip is usually a
negligible fraction of the total fin area. Then the fin tip can be assumed to
be adiabatic, and the condition at the fin tip can be expressed as
Boundary condition at fin tip:
 0
(10–63)
The condition at the fin base remains the same as expressed in Eq. 10–59.
The application of these two conditions on the general solution (Eq. 10–58)
yields, after some manipulations, this relation for the temperature distribution:
Adiabatic fin tip:
(10–64)
The rate of heat transfer from the fin can be determined again from
Fourier’s law of heat conduction:
Adiabatic fin tip:
adiabatic tip  kAc

(Tb  T) tanh mL
(10–65)
Note that the heat transfer relations for the very long fin and the fin with
negligible heat loss at the tip differ by the factor tanh mL, which approaches 1
as L becomes very large.
3
Convection (or Combined Convection and Radiation)
from Fin Tip
The fin tips, in practice, are exposed to the surroundings, and thus the
proper boundary condition for the fin tip is convection that also includes the
effects of radiation. The fin equation can still be solved in this case using
the convection at the fin tip as the second boundary condition, but the analy-
sis becomes more involved, and it results in rather lengthy expressions for
the temperature distribution and the heat transfer. Yet, in general, the fin tip
area is a small fraction of the total fin surface area, and thus the complexi-
ties involved can hardly justify the improvement in accuracy.
A practical way of accounting for the heat loss from the fin tip is to
replace the fin length L in the relation for the insulated tip case by a cor-
rected length defined as (Fig. 10–39)
Corrected fin length:
Lc  L 
(10–66)
Ac
p
2hpkAc
dT
dx
2
x  0
Q
T(x)  T
Tb  T  cosh m(L  x)
cosh mL
du
dx
2
x  L
Q
Chapter 10
|
433
Qbase
·
Qbase = Qfin
·
·
Qfin
·
FIGURE 10–38
Under steady conditions, heat transfer
from the exposed surfaces of the
fin is equal to heat conduction
to the fin at the base.
Lc
Insulated
(b) Equivalent fin with insulated tip
Qfin
·
L
Convection
(a) Actual fin with
     convection at the tip
Qfin
·
Ac
–—
p
FIGURE 10–39
Corrected fin length Lc is defined such
that heat transfer from a fin of length
Lc with insulated tip is equal to heat
transfer from the actual fin of length L
with convection at the fin tip.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
437
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where Ac is the cross-sectional area and p is the perimeter of the fin at the
tip. Multiplying the relation above by the perimeter gives Acorrected 
Afin (lateral)  Atip, which indicates that the fin area determined using the cor-
rected length is equivalent to the sum of the lateral fin area plus the fin tip
area.
The corrected length approximation gives very good results when the
variation of temperature near the fin tip is small (which is the case when
mL  1) and the heat transfer coefficient at the fin tip is about the same as
that at the lateral surface of the fin. Therefore, fins subjected to convection
at their tips can be treated as fins with insulated tips by replacing the actual
fin length by the corrected length in Eqs. 10–64 and 10–65.
Using the proper relations for Ac and p, the corrected lengths for rectangu-
lar and cylindrical fins are easily determined to be
Lc, rectangular fin  L 
and
Lc, cylindrical fin  L 
where t is the thickness of the rectangular fins and D is the diameter of the
cylindrical fins.
Fin Efficiency
Consider the surface of a plane wall at temperature Tb exposed to a medium
at temperature T. Heat is lost from the surface to the surrounding medium
by convection with a heat transfer coefficient of h. Disregarding radiation or
accounting for its contribution in the convection coefficient h, heat transfer
from a surface area As is expressed as 
 hAs (Ts  T).
Now let us consider a fin of constant cross-sectional area Ac  Ab and
length L that is attached to the surface with a perfect contact (Fig. 10–40).
This time heat is transfered from the surface to the fin by conduction and
from the fin to the surrounding medium by convection with the same heat
transfer coefficient h. The temperature of the fin is Tb at the fin base and grad-
ually decreases toward the fin tip. Convection from the fin surface causes the
temperature at any cross section to drop somewhat from the midsection
toward the outer surfaces. However, the cross-sectional area of the fins is usu-
ally very small, and thus the temperature at any cross section can be consid-
ered to be uniform. Also, the fin tip can be assumed for convenience and
simplicity to be adiabatic by using the corrected length for the fin instead of
the actual length.
In the limiting case of zero thermal resistance or infinite thermal conduc-
tivity (k →), the temperature of the fin is uniform at the base value of 
Tb. The heat transfer from the fin is maximum in this case and can be
expressed as
fin, max  hAfin (Tb  T)
(10–67)
In reality, however, the temperature of the fin drops along the fin, and thus
the heat transfer from the fin is less because of the decreasing temperature
difference T(x)  T toward the fin tip, as shown in Fig. 10–41. To account
for the effect of this decrease in temperature on heat transfer, we define a
fin efficiency as
hfin 
(10–68)
Qfin
Qfin, max 
Actual heat transfer rate from the fin
Ideal heat transfer rate from the fin
if the entire fin were at base temperature
Q
Q
D
4
t
2
434
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(a) Surface without fins 
(b) Surface with a fin 
L
w
t
Tb
Ab
Afin
Afin = 2 × w × L + w × t
≅ 2 × w × L
Ab = w × t
FIGURE 10–40
Fins enhance heat transfer from
a surface by enhancing surface area.
80°C
70
65
61
58
56°C
(b) Actual
80°C
80
80
80
80
80°C
(a) Ideal
FIGURE 10–41
Ideal and actual
temperature distribution along a fin.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
438
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
435
Straight rectangular fins
Lc  L  t/2
Afin  2wLc
Straight triangular fins
Straight parabolic fins
Circular fins of rectangular profile
r2c  r2  t/2
Pin fins of rectangular profile
Lc  L  D/4
Afin  pDLc
Pin fins of triangular profile
Pin fins of parabolic profile
C3  1  2(D/L)2
Pin fins of parabolic profile
(blunt tip)
Afin  pD4
96L2e316(L/D)2  143/2  1f
m  24h/kD
C4  21  (D/L)2
Afin  pL3
8D 3C3C4  L
2Dln(2DC4/L  C3)4
m  24h/kD
Afin  pD
2 2L2  (D/2)2
m  24h/kD
m  24h/kD
Afin  2p(r2c
2  r1
2)
m  22h/kt
C1  21  (t/L)2
Afin  wL3C1  (L/t)ln(t/L  C1)4
m  22h/kt
Afin  2w2L2  (t/2)2
m  22h/kt
m  22h/kt
hfin 
3
2mL
l1(4mL/3)
l0(4mL/3)
hfin 
2
1  2(2mL/3)2  1
hfin  2
mL
l2(2mL)
l1(2mL)
hfin  tanhmLc
mLc
C2  2r1/m
r2c
2  r1
2
hfin  C2
K1(mr1)I1(mr2c)  I1(mr1)K1(mr2c)
I0(mr1)K1(mr2c)  K0(mr1)I1(mr2c)
hfin 
2
1  2(2mL)2  1
hfin  1
mL
l1(2mL)
l0(2mL)
hfin  tanhmLc
mLc
TABLE 10–3 
Efficiency and surface areas of common fin configurations
w
L
x
t
y =(t/2) (1– x/L)
t
w
L
t
L
w
y =(t/2) (1x/L)2
r2
r1
t
L
D
L
y =(D/2) (1x/L)
D
L
y =(D/2) (1x/L)2
D
L
y =(D/2) (1x/L)1/2
D
L

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
439
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
or
fin  hfin 
fin, max  hfin hAfin (Tb  T)
(10–69)
where Afin is the total surface area of the fin. This relation enables us to
determine the heat transfer from a fin when its efficiency is known. For the
cases of constant cross section of very long fins and fins with adiabatic tips,
the fin efficiency can be expressed as
hlong fin 
(10–70)
and
hadiabatic tip 

(10–71)
since Afin  pL for fins with constant cross section. Equation 10–71 can also
be used for fins subjected to convection provided that the fin length L is
replaced by the corrected length Lc.
Fin efficiency relations are developed for fins of various profiles, listed in
Table 10–3. The mathematical functions I and K that appear in some of
these relations are the modified Bessel functions, and their values are given
in Table 10–4. Efficiencies are plotted in Fig. 10–42 for fins on a plain sur-
face and in Fig. 10–43 for circular fins of constant thickness. For most fins
of constant thickness encountered in practice, the fin thickness t is too small
relative to the fin length L, and thus the fin tip area is negligible.
Note that fins with triangular and parabolic profiles contain less material
and are more efficient than the ones with rectangular profiles, and thus are
more suitable for applications requiring minimum weight such as space
applications.
An important consideration in the design of finned surfaces is the selec-
tion of the proper fin length L. Normally the longer the fin, the larger the
heat transfer area and thus the higher the rate of heat transfer from the fin.
But also the larger the fin, the bigger the mass, the higher the price, and the
larger the fluid friction. Therefore, increasing the length of the fin beyond a
certain value cannot be justified unless the added benefits outweigh the
added cost. Also, the fin efficiency decreases with increasing fin length
because of the decrease in fin temperature with length. Fin lengths that
cause the fin efficiency to drop below 60 percent usually cannot be justified
economically and should be avoided. The efficiency of most fins used in
practice is above 90 percent.
Fin Effectiveness
Fins are used to enhance heat transfer, and the use of fins on a surface can-
not be recommended unless the enhancement in heat transfer justifies the
added cost and complexity associated with the fins. In fact, there is no
assurance that adding fins on a surface will enhance heat transfer. The per-
formance of the fins is judged on the basis of the enhancement in heat trans-
tanh mL
mL
Q fin
Q fin, max
 2hpkAc (Tb  T) tanh aL
hAfin (Tb  T)
Q fin
Q fin, max
 2hpkAc (Tb  T)
hAfin (Tb  T)
 1
L B
kAc
hp  1
mL
Q
Q
436
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 10–4
Modified Bessel functions of the first
and second kinds*
x
exI0(x)
exI1(x)
exK0(x)
exK1(x)
0.0
1.0000
0.0000
—
—
0.2
0.8269
0.0823
2.1408
5.8334
0.4
0.6974
0.1368
1.6627
3.2587
0.6
0.5993
0.1722
1.4167
2.3739
0.8
0.5241
0.1945
1.2582
1.9179
1.0
0.4658
0.2079
1.1445
1.6362
1.2
0.4198
0.2153
1.0575
1.4429
1.4
0.3831
0.2185
0.9881
1.3011
1.6
0.3533
0.2190
0.9309
1.1919
1.8
0.3289
0.2177
0.8828
1.1048
2.0
0.3085
0.2153
0.8416
1.0335
2.2
0.2913
0.2121
0.8057
0.9738
2.4
0.2766
0.2085
0.7740
0.9229
2.6
0.2639
0.2047
0.7459
0.8790
2.8
0.2528
0.2007
0.7206
0.8405
3.0
0.2430
0.1968
0.6978
0.8066
3.2
0.2343
0.1930
0.6770
0.7763
3.4
0.2264
0.1892
0.6580
0.7491
3.6
0.2193
0.1856
0.6405
0.7245
3.8
0.2129
0.1821
0.6243
0.7021
4.0
0.2070
0.1788
0.6093
0.6816
4.2
0.2016
0.1755
0.5953
0.6627
4.4
0.1966
0.1725
0.5823
0.6454
4.6
0.1919
0.1695
0.5701
0.6292
4.8
0.1876
0.1667
0.5586
0.6143
5.0
0.1835
0.1640
0.5478
0.6003
5.2
0.1797
0.1614
0.5376
0.5872
5.4
0.1762
0.1589
0.5280
0.5749
5.6
0.1728
0.1565
0.5188
0.5634
5.8
0.1697
0.1542
0.5101
0.5525
6.0
0.1667
0.1521
0.5019
0.5422
6.5
0.1598
0.1469
0.4828
0.5187
7.0
0.1537
0.1423
0.4658
0.4981
7.5
0.1483
0.1380
0.4505
0.4797
8.0
0.1434
0.1341
0.4366
0.4631
8.5
0.1390
0.1305
0.4239
0.4482
9.0
0.1350
0.1272
0.4123
0.4346
9.5
0.1313
0.1241
0.4016
0.4222
10.0
0.1278
0.1213
0.3916
0.4108
*Evaluated from EES using the mathematical
functions Bessel_I(x) and Bessel_K(x)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
440
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
fer relative to the no-fin case. The performance of fins is expressed in terms
of the fin effectiveness efin defined as (Fig. 10–44)
efin 
(10–72)
Qfin
Qno fin

Qfin
hAb (Tb  T) 
Heat transfer rate from
the fin of base area Ab
Heat transfer rate from
the surface of area Ab
Chapter 10
|
437
FIGURE 10–42
Efficiency of straight fins of rectangular, triangular, and parabolic profiles. 
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
0
3
j = Lc
3/2(h/kAp)1/2
1
Fin efficiency, hfin
w
L
t
t
w
L
t
L
w
Lc = L
Ap = Lct/3 y = (t/2) (1x/L)2
Lc = L
Ap = Lct/2
x
Lc = L+t/2
Ap = Lct
FIGURE 10–43
Efficiency of annular fins of constant thickness t.
r2
r1
t
L
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8
2
2.2
2.4
2.6
2.8
r2c = r2+t/2
Lc = L+t/2
Ap = L2t
0
3
j = Lc
3/2(h/kAp)1/2
1
Fin efficiency, hfin
0
2
3
5
1 = r2c/r1
4

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
441
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Here, Ab is the cross-sectional area of the fin at the base and 
no fin repre-
sents the rate of heat transfer from this area if no fins are attached to the
surface. An effectiveness of efin  1 indicates that the addition of fins to the
surface does not affect heat transfer at all. That is, heat conducted to the fin
through the base area Ab is equal to the heat transferred from the same area
Ab to the surrounding medium. An effectiveness of efin  1 indicates that the
fin actually acts as insulation, slowing down the heat transfer from the sur-
face. This situation can occur when fins made of low thermal conductivity
materials are used. An effectiveness of efin  1 indicates that fins are
enhancing heat transfer from the surface, as they should. However, the use
of fins cannot be justified unless efin is sufficiently larger than 1. Finned sur-
faces are designed on the basis of maximizing effectiveness for a specified
cost or minimizing cost for a desired effectiveness.
Note that both the fin efficiency and fin effectiveness are related to the
performance of the fin, but they are different quantities. However, they are
related to each other by
efin 
hfin
(10–73)
Therefore, the fin effectiveness can be determined easily when the fin effi-
ciency is known, or vice versa.
The rate of heat transfer from a sufficiently long fin of uniform cross sec-
tion under steady conditions is given by Eq. 10–61. Substituting this rela-
tion into Eq. 10–72, the effectiveness of such a long fin is determined to be
elong fin 
(10–74)
since Ac  Ab in this case. We can draw several important conclusions from
the fin effectiveness relation above for consideration in the design and selec-
tion of the fins:
• The thermal conductivity k of the fin material should be as high as
possible. Thus it is no coincidence that fins are made from metals, with
copper, aluminum, and iron being the most common ones. Perhaps the
most widely used fins are made of aluminum because of its low cost and
weight and its resistance to corrosion.
• The ratio of the perimeter to the cross-sectional area of the fin p/Ac
should be as high as possible. This criterion is satisfied by thin plate fins
and slender pin fins.
• The use of fins is most effective in applications involving a low convection
heat transfer coefficient. Thus, the use of fins is more easily justified
when the medium is a gas instead of a liquid and the heat transfer is by
natural convection instead of by forced convection. Therefore, it is no
coincidence that in liquid-to-gas heat exchangers such as the car radiator,
fins are placed on the gas side.
When determining the rate of heat transfer from a finned surface, we must
consider the unfinned portion of the surface as well as the fins. Therefore,
the rate of heat transfer for a surface containing n fins can be expressed as
Q fin
Q no fin
 2hpkAc (Tb  T)
hAb (Tb  T)
 B
kp
hAc
Qfin
Qno fin

Qfin
hAb (Tb  T)  hfin hAfin (Tb  T)
hAb (Tb  T)
 Afin
Ab
Q
438
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Ab
Ab
fin
ε
= ———
Tb
Tb
Qfin
·
Qno fin
·
Qfin
·
Qno fin
·
FIGURE 10–44
The effectiveness of a fin.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
442
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
total, fin 
unfin 
fin
 hAunfin (Tb  T)  hfin hAfin (Tb  T)
 h(Aunfin  hfin Afin)(Tb  T)
(10–75)
We can also define an overall effectiveness for a finned surface as the
ratio of the total heat transfer from the finned surface to the heat transfer
from the same surface if there were no fins,
efin, overall 
(10–76)
where Ano fin is the area of the surface when there are no fins, Afin is the total sur-
face area of all the fins on the surface, and Aunfin is the area of the unfinned por-
tion of the surface (Fig. 10–45). Note that the overall fin effectiveness depends
on the fin density (number of fins per unit length) as well as the effectiveness of
the individual fins. The overall effectiveness is a better measure of the perfor-
mance of a finned surface than the effectiveness of the individual fins.
Proper Length of a Fin
An important step in the design of a fin is the determination of the appropri-
ate length of the fin once the fin material and the fin cross section are spec-
ified. You may be tempted to think that the longer the fin, the larger the
surface area and thus the higher the rate of heat transfer. Therefore, for
maximum heat transfer, the fin should be infinitely long. However, the tem-
perature drops along the fin exponentially and reaches the environment tem-
perature at some length. The part of the fin beyond this length does not
contribute to heat transfer since it is at the temperature of the environment,
as shown in Fig. 10–46. Therefore, designing such an “extra long” fin is out
of the question since it results in material waste, excessive weight, and
increased size and thus increased cost with no benefit in return (in fact, such
a long fin will hurt performance since it will suppress fluid motion and thus
reduce the convection heat transfer coefficient). Fins that are so long that
the temperature approaches the environment temperature cannot be recom-
mended either since the little increase in heat transfer at the tip region can-
not justify the disproportionate increase in the weight and cost.
To get a sense of the proper length of a fin, we compare heat transfer
from a fin of finite length to heat transfer from an infinitely long fin under
the same conditions. The ratio of these two heat transfers is
 tanh mL
(10–77)
Using a hand calculator, the values of tanh mL are evaluated for some values
of mL and the results are given in Table 10–5. We observe from the table that
heat transfer from a fin increases with mL almost linearly at first, but the
curve reaches a plateau later and reaches a value for the infinitely long fin at
about mL  5. Therefore, a fin whose length is L  m can be considered to
be an infinitely long fin. We also observe that reducing the fin length by half
in that case (from mL  5 to mL  2.5) causes a drop of just 1 percent in heat
1
5
Qfin
Qlong fin
 2hpkAc (Tb  T) tanh mL
2hpkAc (Tb  T)
Heat transfer
ratio:
Qtotal, fin
Qtotal, no fin
 h(Aunfin  hfin Afin)(Tb  T)
hAno fin (Tb  T)
Q
Q
Q
Chapter 10
|
439
t
w
L
Afin
Ano fin = w × H
Aunfin = w × H – 3 × (t × w)
Afin = 2 × L × w + t × w
 2 × L × w (one fin)
Aunfin
H
FIGURE 10–45
Various surface areas associated with a
rectangular surface with three fins.
T
Tb
T
h, T
0
x
T(x)
High
heat
transfer
Low
heat
transfer
ΔT = low
ΔT = high
ΔT = 0
No
heat
transfer
L
Tb
ΔT
FIGURE 10–46
Because of the gradual temperature
drop along the fin, the region
near the fin tip makes little or
no contribution to heat transfer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
443
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
transfer. We certainly would not hesitate sacrificing 1 percent in heat transfer
performance in return for 50 percent reduction in the size and possibly the
cost of the fin. In practice, a fin length that corresponds to about mL  1 will
transfer 76.2 percent of the heat that can be transferred by an infinitely long
fin, and thus it should offer a good compromise between heat transfer perfor-
mance and the fin size.
440
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 10–6
Combined natural convection and radiation thermal resistance of various
heat sinks used in the cooling of electronic devices between the heat sink and
the surroundings. All fins are made of aluminum 6063T-5, are black anodized,
and are 76 mm (3 in) long.
R  0.9C/W (vertical)
R  1.2C/W (horizontal)
Dimensions: 76 mm 
 105 mm 
 44 mm
Surface area: 677 cm2
R  5C/W
Dimensions: 76 mm 
 38 mm 
 24 mm
Surface area: 387 cm2
R  1.4C/W (vertical)
R  1.8C/W (horizontal)
Dimensions: 76 mm 
 92 mm 
 26 mm
Surface area: 968 cm2
R  1.8C/W (vertical)
R  2.1C/W (horizontal)
Dimensions: 76 mm 
 127 mm 
 91 mm
Surface area: 677 cm2
R  1.1C/W (vertical)
R  1.3C/W (horizontal)
Dimensions: 76 mm 
 102 mm 
 25 mm
Surface area: 929 cm2
R  2.9C/W (vertical)
R  3.1C/W (horizontal)
Dimensions: 76 mm 
 97 mm 
 19 mm
Surface area: 290 cm2
TABLE 10–5
The variation of heat transfer from
a fin relative to that from an
infinitely long fin
mL
 tanh mL
0.1
0.100
0.2
0.197
0.5
0.462
1.0
0.762
1.5
0.905
2.0
0.964
2.5
0.987
3.0
0.995
4.0
0.999
5.0
1.000
Q
.
fin
Q
.
long fin

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
444
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
A common approximation used in the analysis of fins is to assume the fin
temperature to vary in one direction only (along the fin length) and the tem-
perature variation along other directions is negligible. Perhaps you are won-
dering if this one-dimensional approximation is a reasonable one. This is
certainly the case for fins made of thin metal sheets such as the fins on a car
radiator, but we wouldn’t be so sure for fins made of thick materials. Stud-
ies have shown that the error involved in one-dimensional fin analysis is
negligible (less than about 1 percent) when
 0.2
where d is the characteristic thickness of the fin, which is taken to be the
plate thickness t for rectangular fins and the diameter D for cylindrical ones.
Specially designed finned surfaces called heat sinks, which are commonly
used in the cooling of electronic equipment, involve one-of-a-kind complex
geometries, as shown in Table 10–6. The heat transfer performance of heat
sinks is usually expressed in terms of their thermal resistances R in C/W,
which is defined as
fin 
 hAfin hfin (Tb  T)
(10–78)
A small value of thermal resistance indicates a small temperature drop
across the heat sink, and thus a high fin efficiency.
Tb  T
R
Q
hd
k
Chapter 10
|
441
EXAMPLE 10–10
Maximum Power Dissipation of a Transistor
Power transistors that are commonly used in electronic devices consume
large amounts of electric power. The failure rate of electronic components
increases almost exponentially with operating temperature. As a rule of
thumb, the failure rate of electronic components is halved for each 10C
reduction in the junction operating temperature. Therefore, the operating
temperature of electronic components is kept below a safe level to minimize
the risk of failure.
The sensitive electronic circuitry of a power transistor at the junction is
protected by its case, which is a rigid metal enclosure. Heat transfer
characteristics of a power transistor are usually specified by the manufacturer
in terms of the case-to-ambient thermal resistance, which accounts for both
the natural convection and radiation heat transfers.
The case-to-ambient thermal resistance of a power transistor that has a
maximum power rating of 10 W is given to be 20C/W. If the case
temperature of the transistor is not to exceed 85C, determine the power at
which this transistor can be operated safely in an environment at 25C.
Solution
The maximum power rating of a transistor whose case temperature
is not to exceed 85C is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The transistor case is iso-
thermal at 85C.
Properties
The case-to-ambient thermal resistance is given to be 20C/W.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
445
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
442
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
The power transistor and the thermal resistance network associated
with it are shown in Fig. 10–47. We notice from the thermal resistance
network that there is a single resistance of 20C/W between the case at Tc 
85C and the ambient at T  25C, and thus the rate of heat transfer is



 3 W
Therefore, this power transistor should not be operated at power levels above
3 W if its case temperature is not to exceed 85C.
Discussion
This transistor can be used at higher power levels by attaching it to
a heat sink (which lowers the thermal resistance by increasing the heat transfer
surface area, as discussed in the next example) or by using a fan (which lowers
the thermal resistance by increasing the convection heat transfer coefficient).
(85  25)°C
20°C/ W
Tc  T
Rcase-ambient
aT
R b
case-ambient
Q
EXAMPLE 10–11
Selecting a Heat Sink for a Transistor
A 60-W power transistor is to be cooled by attaching it to one of the com-
mercially available heat sinks shown in Table 10–6. Select a heat sink that
will allow the case temperature of the transistor not to exceed 90C in the
ambient air at 30C.
Solution
A commercially available heat sink from Table 10–6 is to be
selected to keep the case temperature of a transistor below 90C.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The transistor case is
isothermal at 90C. 3 The contact resistance between the transistor and the
heat sink is negligible.
Analysis
The rate of heat transfer from a 60-W transistor at full power is 
 60 W. The thermal resistance between the transistor attached to the
heat sink and the ambient air for the specified temperature difference is
determined to be

⎯→
R 
 1.0C/W
Therefore, the thermal resistance of the heat sink should be below 1.0C/W.
An examination of Table 10–6 reveals that the HS 5030, whose thermal
resistance is 0.9C/W in the vertical position, is the only heat sink that will
meet this requirement.
T
Q  (90  30)C
60 W
T
R
Q
Q
EXAMPLE 10–12
Effect of Fins on Heat Transfer from Steam
Pipes
Steam in a heating system flows through tubes whose outer diameter is
D1  3 cm and whose walls are maintained at a temperature of 120C. Circular
aluminum alloy fins (k  180 W/m · C) of outer diameter D2  6 cm and
constant thickness t  2 mm are attached to the tube, as shown in Fig. 10–48.
The space between the fins is 3 mm, and thus there are 200 fins per meter
length of the tube. Heat is transferred to the surrounding air at T  25C, with a
t = 2 mm
S = 3 mm
T
h
Tb
r2 = 3 cm
r1 = 1.5 cm
FIGURE 10–48
Schematic for Example 10–12.
T
Tc
R
Q·
FIGURE 10–47
Schematic for Example 10–10.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
446
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
443
combined heat transfer coefficient of h  60 W/m2 · C. Determine the increase
in heat transfer from the tube per meter of its length as a result of adding fins.
Solution
Circular aluminum alloy fins are to be attached to the tubes of a
heating system. The increase in heat transfer from the tubes per unit length
as a result of adding fins is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The heat transfer
coefficient is uniform over the entire fin surfaces. 3 Thermal conductivity is
constant. 4 Heat transfer by radiation is negligible.
Properties
The thermal conductivity of the fins is given to be
k  180 W/m · C.
Analysis
In the case of no fins, heat transfer from the tube per meter of its
length is determined from Newton’s law of cooling to be
Ano fin  pD1L  p(0.03 m)(1 m)  0.0942 m2
no fin  hAno fin(Tb  T)
 (60 W/m2 · C)(0.0942 m2)(120  25)C
 537 W
The efficiency of the circular fins attached to a circular tube is plotted in
Fig. 10–43. Noting that L 
(D2  D1) 
(0.06  0.03)  0.015 m in
this case, we have
r2c  r2  t/2  0.03  0.002/2  0.031 m
Lc  L  t/2  0.015  0.002/2  0.016 m
Ap  Lct  (0.016 m)(0.002 m)  3.20 
 105 m2
Afin  2p(

)  2p[(0.031 m)2  (0.015 m)2]
 0.004624 m2
fin  hfin
fin, max  hfinhAfin (Tb  T)
 0.96(60 W/m2 · C)(0.004624 m2)(120  25)C
 25.3 W
Heat transfer from the unfinned portion of the tube is
Aunfin  pD1S  p(0.03 m)(0.003 m)  0.000283 m2
unfin  hAunfin(Tb  T)
 (60 W/m2 · C)(0.000283 m2)(120  25)C
 1.6 W
Noting that there are 200 fins and thus 200 interfin spacings per meter
length of the tube, the total heat transfer from the finned tube becomes
Q
Q
Q
r 2
1
r 2
2c
hfin  0.96
r2c
r1
 0.031 m
0.015 m  2.07
1
2
1
2
Q
Lc
3>2
B
h
kAp
 10.016 m2 3>2
B
60 W>m2 # °C
1180 W>m # °C2 13.20 
 105 m22  0.207

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
447
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–7
■HEAT TRANSFER IN
COMMON CONFIGURATIONS
So far, we have considered heat transfer in simple geometries such as large
plane walls, long cylinders, and spheres. This is because heat transfer in
such geometries can be approximated as one-dimensional, and simple ana-
lytical solutions can be obtained easily. But many problems encountered in
practice are two- or three-dimensional and involve rather complicated
geometries for which no simple solutions are available.
An important class of heat transfer problems for which simple solutions
are obtained encompasses those involving two surfaces maintained at con-
stant temperatures T1 and T2. The steady rate of heat transfer between these
two surfaces is expressed as
Q  Sk(T1  T2)
(10–79)
where S is the conduction shape factor, which has the dimension of length,
and k is the thermal conductivity of the medium between the surfaces. The
conduction shape factor depends on the geometry of the system only.
Conduction shape factors have been determined for a number of configura-
tions encountered in practice and are given in Table 10–7 for some common
cases. More comprehensive tables are available in the literature. Once the
value of the shape factor is known for a specific geometry, the total steady
heat transfer rate can be determined from the equation above using the speci-
fied two constant temperatures of the two surfaces and the thermal conductiv-
ity of the medium between them. Note that conduction shape factors are
applicable only when heat transfer between the two surfaces is by conduc-
tion. Therefore, they cannot be used when the medium between the surfaces
is a liquid or gas, which involves natural or forced convection currents.
A comparison of Eqs. 10–4 and 10–79 reveals that the conduction shape
factor S is related to the thermal resistance R by R  1/kS or S  1/kR. Thus,
these two quantities are the inverse of each other when the thermal conductiv-
ity of the medium is unity. The use of the conduction shape factors is illus-
trated with Examples 10–13 and 10–14.
444
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
total, fin  n(
fin 
unfin)  200(25.3  1.6) W  5380 W
Therefore, the increase in heat transfer from the tube per meter of its length
as a result of the addition of fins is
increase 
total, fin 
no fin  5380  537  4843 W
(per m tube length)
Discussion
The overall effectiveness of the finned tube is
efin, overall 
 10.0
That is, the rate of heat transfer from the steam tube increases by a factor of 10
as a result of adding fins. This explains the widespread use of finned surfaces.
Q
#
total, fin
Q
#
total, no fin
 5380 W
537 W
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
448
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
445
TABLE 10–7
Conduction shape factors S for several configurations for use in 
 kS(T1  T2) to determine the steady rate of heat
transfer through a medium of thermal conductivity k between the surfaces at temperatures T1 and T2
(continued)
Q
(1) Isothermal cylinder of length L
      buried in a semi-infinite medium
      (L >> D and z > 1.5D)
(2) Vertical isothermal cylinder of length L
      buried in a semi-infinite medium
      (L >> D)
(3) Two parallel isothermal cylinders
      placed in an infinite medium
      (L >> D1, D2, z)
(4) A row of equally spaced parallel isothermal
     cylinders buried in a semi-infinite medium
      (L >> D, z,  and w > 1.5D)
(5) Circular isothermal cylinder of length L
      in the midplane of an infinite wall
      (z > 0.5D)
(6) Circular isothermal cylinder of length L
      at the center of a square solid bar of the
      same length
(7) Eccentric circular isothermal cylinder
      of length L in a cylinder of the same
      length (L > D2)
(8) Large plane wall
S = ———–
2 L
ln (4z/D)
π
S = ———–
2 L
ln(4L /D)
S = —————–————
2 L
4z2 – D2
1 – D2
2
2D1D2
cosh–1   –———————
S = —————–————
2 L
D2
1 + D2
2 –4z2
2D1D2
cosh–1   –———————
S = —————–——
2 L
2w
D
2 z
w
 ln  —— sinh ——
S = ———––
2   L
ln(8z/  D)
S = —————–
2 L
ln (1.08w/D)
S = —–
A
L
T1
z
T2
T1
T1
T2
T2
T1
T2
T2
T1
A
L
L
w
D
L
z
L
z
L
z
z
D
(per cylinder)
T2
π
π
π
π
π
π
π
π
π
T2
D1
D2
L
T1
z
D2
D1
L
L
D
T2
T1
D
w
w
w
T2
T1
D

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
449
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
446
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 10–7 (Continued)
(9) A long cylindrical layer
(10) A square flow passage
(a) For a/b > 1.4,
(11) A spherical layer
(12) Disk buried parallel to
        the surface in a semi-infinite
         medium (z >> D)
(13) The edge of two adjoining
       walls of equal thickness
(14) Corner of three walls
       of equal thickness
L
(inside)
L
L
T1
(outside)
T2
(15) Isothermal sphere buried in a
       semi-infinite medium
(16) Isothermal sphere buried
        in a semi-infinite medium at T2
        whose surface is insulated
S = ———–—
2 L
ln (D2/D1)
S = ————–
2 D1D2
D2– D1
S = ———–———–
2   L
0.93 ln (0.948a/b)
(b) For a/b < 1.41,
S = ———–———–
2 L
0.785 ln (a/b)
S = —————
2 D
1 – 0.25D/z
S = —————
2 D
1 + 0.25D/z
S = 4 D
(S = 2D when z = 0)
S = 0.54 w
S = 0.15L
D1
D2
T1
T2
L
L
T2
T2
T1
D
T1
T2
Insulated
w
z
T2 (medium)
D
T2
T2
T1
T1
z
b
a
L
D
T1
z
T2
T1
D1
L
D2
π
π
π
π
π
π

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
450
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
447
EXAMPLE 10–13
Heat Loss from Buried Steam Pipes
A 30-m-long, 10-cm-diameter hot-water pipe of a district heating system is
buried in the soil 50 cm below the ground surface, as shown in Fig. 10–49.
The outer surface temperature of the pipe is 80C. Taking the surface
temperature of the earth to be 10C and the thermal conductivity of the soil at
that location to be 0.9 W/m · C, determine the rate of heat loss from the pipe.
Solution
The hot-water pipe of a district heating system is buried in the
soil. The rate of heat loss from the pipe is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Heat transfer is two-
dimensional (no change in the axial direction). 3 Thermal conductivity of the
soil is constant.
Properties
The thermal conductivity of the soil is given to be k  0.9
W/m · C.
Analysis
The shape factor for this configuration is given in Table 10–7 to be
S 
since z  1.5D, where z is the distance of the pipe from the ground surface,
and D is the diameter of the pipe. Substituting,
S 
 62.9 m
Then the steady rate of heat transfer from the pipe becomes
 Sk(T1  T2)  (62.9 m)(0.9 W/m · C)(80  10)C  3963 W
Discussion
Note that this heat is conducted from the pipe surface to the
surface of the earth through the soil and then transferred to the atmosphere
by convection and radiation.
Q
2p 
 (30 m)
ln(4 
 0.5/0.1)
2pL
ln(4z/D)
EXAMPLE 10–14
Heat Transfer between Hot- and Cold-Water
Pipes
A 5-m-long section of hot- and cold-water pipes run parallel to each other in
a thick concrete layer, as shown in Fig. 10–50. The diameters of both pipes
are 5 cm, and the distance between the centerline of the pipes is 30 cm. The
surface temperatures of the hot and cold pipes are 70C and 15C,
respectively. Taking the thermal conductivity of the concrete to be k  0.75
W/m · C, determine the rate of heat transfer between the pipes.
Solution
Hot- and cold-water pipes run parallel to each other in a thick
concrete layer. The rate of heat transfer between the pipes is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Heat transfer is two-
dimensional (no change in the axial direction). 3 Thermal conductivity of the
concrete is constant.
Properties
The 
thermal 
conductivity 
of 
concrete 
is 
given 
to 
be
k  0.75 W/m · C.
D2 = 5 cm
T1 = 70°C
L = 5 m
z = 30 cm
T2 = 15°C
D1 = 5 cm
FIGURE 10–50
Schematic for Example 10–14.
L = 30 m
D = 10 cm
T1 = 80°C
z = 0.5 m
T2 = 10°C
FIGURE 10–49
Schematic for Example 10–13.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
451
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
It is well known that insulation reduces heat transfer and saves energy and
money. Decisions on the right amount of insulation are based on a heat
transfer analysis, followed by an economic analysis to determine the “mon-
etary value” of energy loss. This is illustrated with Example 10–15.
448
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
The shape factor for this configuration is given in Table 10–7 to be
S 
where z is the distance between the centerlines of the pipes and L is their
length. Substituting,
S 
 6.34 m
Then the steady rate of heat transfer between the pipes becomes
 Sk(T1  T2)  (6.34 m)(0.75 W/m · C)(70  15)C  262 W
Discussion
We can reduce this heat loss by placing the hot- and cold-water
pipes further away from each other.
Q
2p 
 (5 m)
cosh1a4 
 0.32  0.052  0.052
2 
 0.05 
 0.05
b
2pL
cosh1a4z2  D2
1  D2
2
2D1D2
b
EXAMPLE 10–15
Cost of Heat Loss through Walls in Winter
Consider an electrically heated house whose walls are 9 ft high and have an
R-value of insulation of 13 (i.e., a thickness-to-thermal conductivity ratio of
L/k  13 h · ft2 · F/Btu). Two of the walls of the house are 40 ft long and the
others are 30 ft long. The house is maintained at 75F at all times, while
the temperature of the outdoors varies. Determine the amount of heat lost
through the walls of the house on a certain day during which the average
temperature of the outdoors is 45F. Also, determine the cost of this heat loss
to the home owner if the unit cost of electricity is $0.075/kWh. For combined
convection and radiation heat transfer coefficients, use the ASHRAE
(American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air Conditioning Engineers)
recommended values of hi  1.46 Btu/h · ft2 · F for the inner surface of the
walls and ho  4.0 Btu/h · ft2 · F for the outer surface of the walls under 
15 mph wind conditions in winter.
Solution
An electrically heated house with R-13 insulation is considered.
The amount of heat lost through the walls and its cost are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The indoor and outdoor air temperatures have remained at
the given values for the entire day so that heat transfer through the walls is
steady. 2 Heat transfer through the walls is one-dimensional since any
significant temperature gradients in this case exists in the direction from the
indoors to the outdoors. 3 The radiation effects are accounted for in the heat
transfer coefficients.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
452
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
449
One-dimensional heat transfer through a simple or composite
body exposed to convection from both sides to mediums at
temperatures T1 and T2 can be expressed as

where Rtotal is the total thermal resistance between the two
mediums. For a plane wall exposed to convection on both
sides, the total resistance is expressed as
Rtotal  Rconv, 1  Rwall  Rconv, 2  1
h1 A  L
kA  1
h2 A
T1  T2
Rtotal
Q
This relation can be extended to plane walls that consist of
two or more layers by adding an additional resistance for
each additional layer. The elementary thermal resistance rela-
tions can be expressed as follows:
Conduction resistance (plane wall): Rwall 
Conduction resistance (cylinder):
Rcyl 
Conduction resistance (sphere):
Rsph 
Convection resistance:
Rconv  1
hA
r2  r1
4pr1r2k
ln(r2/r1)
2pLk
L
kA
Analysis
This problem involves conduction through the wall and convection
at its surfaces and can best be handled by making use of the thermal
resistance concept and drawing the thermal resistance network, as shown in
Fig. 10–51. The heat transfer area of the walls is
A  Circumference 
 Height  (2 
 30 ft  2 
 40 ft)(9 ft)  1260 ft2
Then the individual resistances are evaluated from their definitions to be
Ri  Rconv, i 
 0.00054 h · F/Btu
Rwall 
 0.01032 h · F/Btu
Ro  Rconv, o 
 0.00020 h · F/Btu
Noting that all three resistances are in series, the total resistance is
Rtotal  Ri  Rwall  Ro  0.00054  0.01032  0.00020  0.01106 h · F/Btu
Then the steady rate of heat transfer through the walls of the house becomes

 2712 Btu/h
Finally, the total amount of heat lost through the walls during a 24-h period
and its cost to the home owner are

t  (2712 Btu/h)(24-h/day)  65,100 Btu/day  19.1 kWh/day
since 1 kWh  3412 Btu, and
Heating cost  (Energy lost)(Cost of energy)  (19.1 kWh/day)($0.075/kWh)
 $1.43/day
Discussion
The heat losses through the walls of the house that day cost
the home owner $1.43 worth of electricity. Most of this loss can be saved by
insulation.
Q
Q
T1  T2
Rtotal

(75  45)F
0.01106 h  F/Btu
Q
1
ho A 
1
(4.0 Btu/h  ft2  F)(1260 ft2)
L
kA  R-value
A
 13 h  ft2  F/Btu
1260 ft2
1
hi A 
1
(1.46 Btu/h  ft2  F)(1260 ft2)
Rwall
Ro
Ri
T1
T2
T1
T2
Wall, R-13
75°F
45°F
T1
T2
FIGURE 10–51
Schematic for Example 10–15.
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
453
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Interface resistance:
Rinterface 
Radiation resistance:
Rrad 
where hc is the thermal contact conductance, Rc is the thermal
contact resistance, and the radiation heat transfer coefficient
is defined as
hrad  es
(Ts  Tsurr)
Once the rate of heat transfer is available, the temperature
drop across any layer can be determined from
T 
R
The thermal resistance concept can also be used to solve
steady heat transfer problems involving parallel layers or
combined series-parallel arrangements.
Adding insulation to a cylindrical pipe or a spherical shell
increases the rate of heat transfer if the outer radius of the in-
sulation is less than the critical radius of insulation, defined as
rcr, cylinder 
rcr, sphere 
The effectiveness of an insulation is often given in terms of
its R-value, the thermal resistance of the material per unit
surface area, expressed as
R-value 
(flat insulation)
where L is the thickness and k is the thermal conductivity of
the material.
Finned surfaces are commonly used in practice to enhance
heat transfer. Fins enhance heat transfer from a surface by
exposing a larger surface area to convection. The temperature
distribution along the fin for very long fins and for fins with
negligible heat transfer at the fin tip are given by
Very long fin:
Adiabatic fin tip:
where m 
, p is the perimeter, and Ac is the cross-
sectional area of the fin. The rates of heat transfer for both
cases are given to be
Very long fin:
long fin  kAc
dT
dx
2
x  0 2hpkAc (Tb  T)
Q
2hp/kAc
T(x)  T
Tb  T  cosh m(L  x)
cosh mL
T(x)  T
Tb  T  ex2hp/kAc
L
k
2kins
h
kins
h
Q
(T 2
s  T 2
surr)
1
hrad A
1
hc A  Rc
A
450
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Adiabatic fin tip:
adiabatic tip  kAc
Fins exposed to convection at their tips can be treated as fins
with adiabatic tips by using the corrected length Lc  L 
Ac/p instead of the actual fin length.
The temperature of a fin drops along the fin, and thus the
heat transfer from the fin is less because of the decreasing
temperature difference toward the fin tip. To account for the
effect of this decrease in temperature on heat transfer, we
define fin efficiency as
hfin 
When the fin efficiency is available, the rate of heat transfer
from a fin can be determined from
fin  hfin
fin, max  hfinhAfin (Tb  T)
The performance of the fins is judged on the basis of the
enhancement in heat transfer relative to the no-fin case and is
expressed in terms of the fin effectiveness efin, defined as
efin 
Here, Ab is the cross-sectional area of the fin at the base and 
no fin represents the rate of heat transfer from this area if no
fins are attached to the surface. The overall effectiveness for
a finned surface is defined as the ratio of the total heat trans-
fer from the finned surface to the heat transfer from the same
surface if there were no fins,
efin, overall 
Fin efficiency and fin effectiveness are related to each other by
efin 
hfin
Certain multidimensional heat transfer problems involve two
surfaces maintained at constant temperatures T1 and T2. The
steady rate of heat transfer between these two surfaces is
expressed as
 Sk(T1  T2)
where S is the conduction shape factor that has the dimen-
sion of length and k is the thermal conductivity of the
medium between the surfaces.
Q
Afin
Ab
Qtotal, fin
Qtotal, no fin
 h(Aunfin  hfin Afin)(Tb  T)
hAno fin (Tb  T)
Q
Qfin
Qno fin

Qfin
hAb (Tb  T) 
Heat transfer rate from
the fin of base area Ab
Heat transfer rate from
the surface of area Ab
Q
Q
Qfin
Qfin, max
 Actual heat transfer rate from the fin
Ideal heat transfer rate from the fin if
the entire fin were at base temperature
dT
dx `
x  0 2hpkAc (Tb  T) tanh mL
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
454
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
451
Steady Heat Conduction in Plane Walls
10–1C
Consider one-dimensional heat conduction through
a cylindrical rod of diameter D and length L. What is the
heat transfer area of the rod if (a) the lateral surfaces of the rod
are insulated and (b) the top and bottom surfaces of the rod are
insulated?
10–2C
Consider heat conduction through a plane wall. Does
the energy content of the wall change during steady heat con-
duction? How about during transient conduction? Explain.
10–3C
Consider heat conduction through a wall of thick-
ness L and area A. Under what conditions will the tempera-
ture distributions in the wall be a straight line?
10–4C
What does the thermal resistance of a medium
represent?
10–5C
How is the combined heat transfer coefficient
defined? What convenience does it offer in heat transfer 
calculations?
10–6C
Can we define the convection resistance per unit
surface area as the inverse of the convection heat transfer
coefficient?
10–7C
Why are the convection and the radiation resistances
at a surface in parallel instead of being in series?
10–8C
Consider a surface of area A at which the convec-
tion and radiation heat transfer coefficients are hconv and hrad,
respectively. Explain how you would determine (a) the single
equivalent heat transfer coefficient, and (b) the equivalent
thermal resistance. Assume the medium and the surrounding
surfaces are at the same temperature.
10–9C
How does the thermal resistance network associated
with a single-layer plane wall differ from the one associated
with a five-layer composite wall?
10–10C
Consider steady one-dimensional heat transfer
through a multilayer medium. If the rate of heat transfer 
is
known, explain how you would determine the temperature
drop across each layer.
10–11C
Consider steady one-dimensional heat transfer
through a plane wall exposed to convection from both sides
to environments at known temperatures T1 and T2 with
known heat transfer coefficients h1 and h2. Once the rate of
heat transfer
has been evaluated, explain how you would
determine the temperature of each surface.
Q
Q
1. American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air
Conditioning Engineers. Handbook of Fundamentals.
Atlanta: ASHRAE, 1993.
2. R. V. Andrews. “Solving Conductive Heat Transfer
Problems with Electrical-Analogue Shape Factors.”
Chemical Engineering Progress 5 (1955), p. 67.
3. R. Barron. Cryogenic Systems. New York: McGraw-Hill,
1967.
4. L. S. Fletcher. “Recent Developments in Contact
Conductance Heat Transfer.” Journal of Heat Transfer
110, no. 4B (1988), pp. 1059–79.
5. E. Fried. “Thermal Conduction Contribution to Heat
Transfer at Contacts.” Thermal Conductivity, vol. 2, ed.
R. P. Tye. London: Academic Press, 1969.
6. K. A. Gardner. “Efficiency of Extended Surfaces.” Trans.
ASME 67 (1945), pp. 621–31. Reprinted by permission of
ASME International.
7. D. Q. Kern and A. D. Kraus. Extended Surface Heat
Transfer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972.
8. G. P. Peterson. “Thermal Contact Resistance in Waste
Heat Recovery Systems.” Proceedings of the 18th
ASME/ETCE Hydrocarbon Processing Symposium.
Dallas, TX, 1987, pp. 45–51. Reprinted by permission of
ASME International.
9. S. Song, M. M. Yovanovich, and F. O. Goodman.
“Thermal Gap Conductance of Conforming Surfaces in
Contact.” Journal of Heat Transfer 115 (1993), p. 533.
10. J. E. Sunderland and K. R. Johnson. “Shape Factors for
Heat Conduction through Bodies with Isothermal or
Convective Boundary Conditions.” Trans. ASME 10
(1964), pp. 2310–41.
11. W. M. Edmunds. “Residential Insulation.” ASTM
Standardization News (Jan. 1989), pp. 36–39.
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
PROBLEMS*
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and
students are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated
by an “E” are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them.
Problems with the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete
solutions together with parametric studies are included on the
enclosed DVD. Problems with the 
icon are comprehensive in
nature, and are intended to be solved with a computer, preferably
using the EES software that accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
455
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–12C
Someone comments that a microwave oven can be
viewed as a conventional oven with zero convection resis-
tance at the surface of the food. Is this an accurate statement?
10–13C
Consider a window glass consisting of two
4-mm-thick glass sheets pressed tightly against each other.
Compare the heat transfer rate through this window with that
of one consisting of a single 8-mm-thick glass sheet under
identical conditions.
10–14C
Consider steady heat transfer through the wall of a
room in winter. The convection heat transfer coefficient at the
outer surface of the wall is three times that of the inner sur-
face as a result of the winds. On which surface of the wall do
you think the temperature will be closer to the surrounding
air temperature? Explain.
10–15C
The bottom of a pan is made of a 4-mm-thick alu-
minum layer. In order to increase the rate of heat transfer
through the bottom of the pan, someone proposes a design
for the bottom that consists of a 3-mm-thick copper layer
sandwiched between two 2-mm-thick aluminum layers. Will
the new design conduct heat better? Explain. Assume perfect
contact between the layers.
FIGURE P10–15C
10–16C
Consider two cold canned drinks, one wrapped in a
blanket and the other placed on a table in the same room.
Which drink will warm up faster?
10–17
Consider a 3-m-high, 6-m-wide, and 0.3-m-thick
brick wall whose thermal conductivity is k  0.8 W/m · C .
On a certain day, the temperatures of the inner and the outer
surfaces of the wall are measured to be 14C and 2C, respec-
tively. Determine the rate of heat loss through the wall on
that day.
10–18
A 1.0 m 
 1.5 m double-pane window consists of
two 4-mm thick layers of glass (k  0.78 W/m · K) that are the
separated by a 5-mm air gap (kair  0.025 W/m · K). The heat
flow through the air gap is assumed to be by condition. The
inside and outside air temperatures are 20C and 20C,
respectively, and the inside and outside heat transfer coeffi-
cients are 40 and 20 W/m2 · K. Determine (a) the daily rate of
2 mm
3 mm
2 mm
Aluminum
Copper
452
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
heat loss through the window in steady operation and (b) the
temperature difference across the largest thermal resistence.
10–19
Consider a 1.2-m-high and 2-m-wide glass window
whose thickness is 6 mm and thermal conductivity is k 
0.78 W/m · C. Determine the steady rate of heat transfer
through this glass window and the temperature of its inner
surface for a day during which the room is maintained
at 24C while the temperature of the outdoors is 5C. Take
the convection heat transfer coefficients on the inner and
outer surfaces of the window to be h1  10 W/m2 · C and
h2  25 W/m2 · C, and disregard any heat transfer by
radiation.
10–20
Consider a 1.2-m-high and 2-m-wide double-pane
window consisting of two 3-mm-thick layers of glass (k 
0.78 W/m · C) separated by a 12-mm-wide stagnant air space
(k  0.026 W/m · C). Determine the steady rate of heat trans-
fer through this double-pane window and the temperature of its
inner surface for a day during which the room is maintained
at 24C while the temperature of the outdoors is 5C. Take
the convection heat transfer coefficients on the inner and
outer surfaces of the window to be h1  10 W/m2 · C
and h2  25 W/m2 · C, and disregard any heat transfer by
radiation.
Answers: 114 W, 19.2C
FIGURE P10–20
10–21
Repeat Prob. 10–20, assuming the space between the
two glass layers is evacuated.
10–22
Reconsider Prob. 10–20. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate of heat transfer through
the window as a function of the width of air space in the
range of 2 mm to 20 mm, assuming pure conduction through
the air. Discuss the results.
10–23E
Consider an electrically heated brick house (k 
0.40 Btu/h · ft · F) whose walls are 9 ft high and 1 ft thick.
Two of the walls of the house are 50 ft long and the others are
35 ft long. The house is maintained at 70F at all times while
Frame
3
12
3 mm
Glass

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
456
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
453
the temperature of the outdoors varies. On a certain day, the
temperature of the inner surface of the walls is measured to be
at 55F while the average temperature of the outer surface is
observed to remain at 45F during the day for 10 h and at 35F
at night for 14 h. Determine the amount of heat lost from the
house that day. Also determine the cost of that heat loss to the
home owner for an electricity price of $0.09/kWh.
FIGURE P10–23E
10–24
A cylindrical resistor element on a circuit board dis-
sipates 0.15 W of power in an environment at 40C. The
resistor is 1.2 cm long, and has a diameter of 0.3 cm. Assum-
ing heat to be transferred uniformly from all surfaces, deter-
mine (a) the amount of heat this resistor dissipates during a
24-h period; (b) the heat flux on the surface of the resistor, in
W/m2; and (c) the surface temperature of the resistor for a
combined convection and radiation heat transfer coefficient
of 9 W/m2 · C.
10–25
Consider a power transistor that dissipates 0.2 W of
power in an environment at 30C. The transistor is 0.4 cm long
and has a diameter of 0.5 cm. Assuming heat to be transferred
uniformly from all surfaces, determine (a) the amount of heat
this resistor dissipates during a 24-h period, in kWh; (b) the
heat flux on the surface of the transistor, in W/m2; and (c) the
surface temperature of the resistor for a combined convection
and radiation heat transfer coefficient of 18 W/m2 · C.
FIGURE P10–25
10–26
A 12-cm 
 18-cm circuit board houses on its sur-
face 100 closely spaced logic chips, each dissipating 0.06 W
in an environment at 40C. The heat transfer from the back
surface of the board is negligible. If the heat transfer coeffi-
cient on the surface of the board is 10 W/m2 · C, determine
Power
transistor
0.2 W
0.5 cm
30°C
0.4 cm
35 ft
50 ft
9 ft
Tin = 70°F
(a) the heat flux on the surface of the circuit board, in W/m2;
(b) the surface temperature of the chips; and (c) the thermal
resistance between the surface of the circuit board and the
cooling medium, in C/W.
10–27
Consider a person standing in a room at 20C with
an exposed surface area of 1.7 m2. The deep body tempera-
ture of the human body is 37C, and the thermal conductivity
of the human tissue near the skin is about 0.3 W/m · C. The
body is losing heat at a rate of 150 W by natural convection
and radiation to the surroundings. Taking the body tempera-
ture 0.5 cm beneath the skin to be 37C, determine the skin
temperature of the person.
Answer: 35.5C
10–28
Water is boiling in a 25-cm-diameter aluminum pan
(k  237 W/m · C) at 95C. Heat is transferred steadily to
the boiling water in the pan through its 0.5-cm-thick flat bot-
tom at a rate of 800 W. If the inner surface temperature of the
bottom of the pan is 108C, determine (a) the boiling heat
transfer coefficient on the inner surface of the pan and (b) the
outer surface temperature of the bottom of the pan.
10–29E
A wall is constructed of two layers of 0.7-in-thick
sheetrock (k  0.10 Btu/h · ft · F), which is a plasterboard
made of two layers of heavy paper separated by a layer of
gypsum, placed 7 in apart. The space between the sheetrocks
is filled with fiberglass insulation (k  0.020 Btu/h · ft · F).
Determine (a) the thermal resistance of the wall and (b) its
R-value of insulation in English units.
FIGURE P10–29E
10–30
The roof of a house consists of a 15-cm-thick con-
crete slab (k  2 W/m · C) that is 15 m wide and 20 m long.
The convection heat transfer coefficients on the inner and
outer surfaces of the roof are 5 and 12 W/m2 · C, respectively.
On a clear winter night, the ambient air is reported to be at
10C, while the night sky temperature is 100 K. The house and
the interior surfaces of the wall are maintained at a constant
temperature of 20C. The emissivity of both surfaces of the
concrete roof is 0.9. Considering both radiation and convec-
tion heat transfers, determine the rate of heat transfer through
the roof, and the inner surface temperature of the roof.
Sheetrock
7 in
0.7 in
0.7 in
Fiberglass
insulation

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
457
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
If the house is heated by a furnace burning natural gas with
an efficiency of 80 percent, and the price of natural gas is
$1.20/therm (1 therm  105,500 kJ of energy content), deter-
mine the money lost through the roof that night during a 14-h
period.
FIGURE P10–30
10–31
A 2-m 
 1.5-m section of wall of an industrial fur-
nace burning natural gas is not insulated, and the temperature
at the outer surface of this section is measured to be 80C.
The temperature of the furnace room is 30C, and the com-
bined convection and radiation heat transfer coefficient at the
surface of the outer furnace is 10 W/m2 · C. It is proposed to
insulate this section of the furnace wall with glass wool insu-
lation (k  0.038 W/m · C) in order to reduce the heat loss
by 90 percent. Assuming the outer surface temperature of the
metal section still remains at about 80C, determine the thick-
ness of the insulation that needs to be used.
The furnace operates continuously and has an efficiency 
of 78 percent. The price of the natural gas is $1.10/therm 
(1 therm  105,500 kJ of energy content). If the installation
of the insulation will cost $250 for materials and labor, deter-
mine how long it will take for the insulation to pay for itself
from the energy it saves.
10–32
Repeat Prob. 10–31 for expanded perlite insulation
assuming conductivity is k  0.052 W/m · C.
10–33
Reconsider Prob. 10–31. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of thermal con-
ductivity on the required insulation thickness. Plot the thick-
ness of insulation as a function of the thermal conductivity of
the insulation in the range of 0.02 W/m · C to 0.08 W/m · C,
and discuss the results.
10–34E
Consider a house whose walls are 12 ft high and
40 ft long. Two of the walls of the house have no windows,
while each of the other two walls has four windows made of
0.25-in-thick glass (k  0.45 Btu/h · ft · F), 3 ft 
 5 ft in size.
The walls are certified to have an R-value of 19 (i.e., an L/k
value of 19 h · ft2 · F/Btu). Disregarding any direct radiation
gain or loss through the windows and taking the heat transfer
coefficients at the inner and outer surfaces of the house to be
Concrete
roof
20 m
15 cm
15 m
Tin = 20°C
Tair = 10°C
Tsky = 100 K
454
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
2 and 4 Btu/h · ft2 · F, respectively, determine the ratio of the
heat transfer through the walls with and without windows.
FIGURE P10–34E
10–35
Consider a house that has a 10-m 
 20-m base and
a 4-m-high wall. All four walls of the house have an R-value
of 2.31 m2 · C/W. The two 10-m 
 4-m walls have no
windows. The third wall has five windows made of 0.5-cm-
thick glass (k  0.78 W/m · C), 1.2 m 
 1.8 m in size. The
fourth wall has the same size and number of windows, but
they are double-paned with a 1.5-cm-thick stagnant air space
(k  0.026 W/m · C) enclosed between two 0.5-cm-thick
glass layers. The thermostat in the house is set at 24C and
the average temperature outside at that location is 8C
during the seven-month-long heating season. Disregarding
any direct radiation gain or loss through the windows and
taking the heat transfer coefficients at the inner and outer sur-
faces of the house to be 7 and 18 W/m2 · C, respectively,
determine the average rate of heat transfer through each wall.
If the house is electrically heated and the price of electricity
is $0.08/kWh, determine the amount of money this household
will save per heating season by converting the single-pane
windows to double-pane windows.
10–36
The wall of a refrigerator is constructed of fiberglass
insulation (k  0.035 W/m · C) sandwiched between two
layers of 1-mm-thick sheet metal (k  15.1 W/m · C). The
refrigerated space is maintained at 3C, and the average heat
transfer coefficients at the inner and outer surfaces of the wall
FIGURE P10–36
Refrigerated
space
3°C
Kitchen
air
25°C
10°C
L
1 mm
1 mm
Insulation
Sheet metal
40 ft
40 ft
12 ft
Attic
space
Windows

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
458
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
455
are 4 W/m2 · C and 9 W/m2 · C, respectively. The kitchen
temperature averages 25C. It is observed that condensation
occurs on the outer surfaces of the refrigerator when the
temperature of the outer surface drops to 20C. Determine
the minimum thickness of fiberglass insulation that needs to
be used in the wall in order to avoid condensation on the
outer surfaces.
10–37
Reconsider Prob. 10–36. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the thermal
conductivities of the insulation material and the sheet metal
on the thickness of the insulation. Let the thermal conductiv-
ity vary from 0.02 W/m · C to 0.08 W/m · C for insulation
and 10 W/m · C to 400 W/m · C for sheet metal. Plot the
thickness of the insulation as the functions of the thermal
conductivities of the insulation and the sheet metal, and dis-
cuss the results.
10–38
Heat is to be conducted along a circuit board that has
a copper layer on one side. The circuit board is 15 cm long and
15 cm wide, and the thicknesses of the copper and epoxy lay-
ers are 0.1 mm and 1.2 mm, respectively. Disregarding heat
transfer from side surfaces, determine the percentages of heat
conduction along the copper (k  386 W/m · C) and epoxy
(k  0.26 W/m · C) layers. Also determine the effective ther-
mal conductivity of the board.
Answers: 0.8 percent, 99.2
percent, and 29.9 W/m · C
10–39E
A 0.03-in-thick copper plate (k  223 Btu/h ·
ft · F) is sandwiched between two 0.15-in-thick epoxy
boards (k  0.15 Btu/h · ft · F) that are 7 in 
 9 in in size.
Determine the effective thermal conductivity of the board
along its 9-in-long side. What fraction of the heat conducted
along that side is conducted through copper?
FIGURE P10–39E
Thermal Contact Resistance
10–40C
What is thermal contact resistance? How is it
related to thermal contact conductance?
0.03 in
7 in
9 in
Epoxy
boards
Copper
plate
10–41C
Will the thermal contact resistance be greater for
smooth or rough plain surfaces?
10–42C
A wall consists of two layers of insulation pressed
against each other. Do we need to be concerned about the
thermal contact resistance at the interface in a heat transfer
analysis or can we just ignore it?
10–43C
A plate consists of two thin metal layers pressed
against each other. Do we need to be concerned about the
thermal contact resistance at the interface in a heat transfer
analysis or can we just ignore it?
10–44C
Consider two surfaces pressed against each other.
Now the air at the interface is evacuated. Will the thermal
contact resistance at the interface increase or decrease as a
result?
10–45C
Explain how the thermal contact resistance can be
minimized.
10–46
The thermal contact conductance at the interface 
of two 1-cm-thick copper plates is measured to be 18,000
W/m2 · C. Determine the thickness of the copper plate
whose thermal resistance is equal to the thermal resistance
of the interface between the plates.
10–47
Six identical power transistors with aluminum casing
are attached on one side of a 1.2-cm-thick 20-cm 
 30-cm
copper plate (k  386 W/m · C) by screws that exert an aver-
age pressure of 10 MPa. The base area of each transistor is
9 cm2, and each transistor is placed at the center of a 10-cm 
10-cm section of the plate. The interface roughness is esti-
mated to be about 1.4 mm. All transistors are covered by a thick
Plexiglas layer, which is a poor conductor of heat, and thus all
the heat generated at the junction of the transistor must be dis-
sipated to the ambient at 23C through the back surface of the
FIGURE P10–47
23°C
Copper
plate
Transistor
75°C
Plexiglas
cover
1.2 cm

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
459
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
copper plate. The combined convection/radiation heat transfer
coefficient at the back surface can be taken to be 30 W/m2 · C.
If the case temperature of the transistor is not to exceed 75C,
determine the maximum power each transistor can dissipate
safely, and the temperature jump at the case-plate interface.
10–48
Two 5-cm-diameter,
15-cm-long aluminum bars
(k  176 W/m · C) with ground surfaces are pressed against
each other with a pressure of 20 atm. The bars are enclosed
in an insulation sleeve and, thus, heat transfer from the lateral
surfaces is negligible. If the top and bottom surfaces of the
two-bar system are maintained at temperatures of 150C and
20C, respectively, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer
along the cylinders under steady conditions and (b) the tem-
perature drop at the interface.
Answers: (a) 142.4 W, (b) 6.4C
10–49
A 1-mm-thick copper plate (k  386 W/m · C) is 
sandwiched between two 5-mm-thick epoxy boards (k 
0.26 W/m · C) that are 15 cm 
 20 cm in size. If the thermal
contact conductance on both sides of the copper plate is esti-
mated to be 6000 W/m · C, determine the error involved in the
total thermal resistance of the plate if the thermal contact con-
ductances are ignored.
FIGURE P10–49
Generalized Thermal Resistance Networks
10–50C
When plotting the thermal resistance network asso-
ciated with a heat transfer problem, explain when two resis-
tances are in series and when they are in parallel.
10–51C
The thermal resistance networks can also be used
approximately for multidimensional problems. For what kind
of multidimensional problems will the thermal resistance
approach give adequate results?
10–52C
What are the two approaches used in the develop-
ment of the thermal resistance network for two-dimensional
problems?
10–53
A typical section of a building wall is shown in
Fig. P10–53. This section extends in and out of the page and
is repeated in the vertical direction. The wall support mem-
bers are made of steel (k  50 W/m · K). The support mem-
bers are 8 cm (t23) 
 0.5 cm (LB). The remainder of the inner
wall space is filled with insulation (k  0.03 W/m · K) and
5
mm
5
mm
Epoxy
hc
Copper
Epoxy
Q.
456
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
measures 8 cm (t23) 
 60 cm (LB). The inner wall is made of
gypsum board (k  0.5 W/m · K) that is 1 cm thick (t12) and
the outer wall is made of brick (k  1.0 W/m · K) that is
10 cm thick (t34). What is the average heat flux through this
wall when T1  20C and T4  35C?
FIGURE P10–53
10–54
A 4-m-high and 6-m-wide wall consists of a long
18-cm 
 30-cm cross section of horizontal bricks (k 
0.72 W/m · C) separated by 3-cm-thick plaster layers (k 
0.22 W/m · C). There are also 2-cm-thick plaster layers on
each side of the wall, and a 2-cm-thick rigid foam (k 
0.026 W/m · C) on the inner side of the wall. The indoor and
the outdoor temperatures are 22C and 4C, and the con-
vection heat transfer coefficients on the inner and the outer
sides are h1  10 W/m2 · C and h2  20 W/m2 · C, respec-
tively. Assuming one-dimensional heat 
FIGURE P10–54
Brick
1.5 cm
30 cm
1.5 cm
2
18 cm
2
Plaster
Foam
2
LA
LB
0
1
2
3
4
5

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
460
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
457
transfer and disregarding radiation, determine the rate of heat
transfer through the wall.
10–55
Reconsider Prob. 10–54. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate of heat transfer through
the wall as a function of the thickness of the rigid foam in the
range of 1 cm to 10 cm. Discuss the results.
10–56
A 10-cm-thick wall is to be constructed with 2.5-m-
long wood studs (k  0.11 W/m · C) that have a cross section
of 10 cm 
 10 cm. At some point the builder ran out of those
studs and started using pairs of 2.5-m-long wood studs that
have a cross section of 5 cm 
 10 cm nailed to eachother
instead. The manganese steel nails (k  50 W/m · C) are
10 cm long and have a diameter of 0.4 cm. A total of 50 nails
are used to connect the two studs, which are mounted to
the wall such that the nails cross the wall. The temperature
difference between the inner and outer surfaces of the wall is
8C. Assuming the thermal contact resistance between the
two layers to be negligible, determine the rate of heat transfer
(a) through a solid stud and (b) through a stud pair of
equal length and width nailed to each other. (c) Also determine
the effective conductivity of the nailed stud pair.
10–57
A 12-m-long and 5-m-high wall is constructed of
two layers of 1-cm-thick sheetrock (k  0.17 W/m · C)
spaced 16 cm by wood studs (k  0.11 W/m · C) whose cross
section is 12 cm 
 5 cm. The studs are placed vertically 60 cm
apart, and the space between them is filled with fiberglass
insulation (k  0.034 W/m · C). The house is maintained
at 20C and the ambient temperature outside is 9C. Taking
the heat transfer coefficients at the inner and outer surfaces of
the house to be 8.3 and 34 W/m2 · C, respectively, determine
(a) the thermal resistance of the wall considering a representa-
tive section of it and (b) the rate of heat transfer through
the wall.
10–58E
A 10-in-thick,
30-ft-long,
and 10-ft-high wall
is to be constructed using 9-in-long solid bricks (k 
FIGURE P10–58E
Plaster
0.5 in
0.5 in
Brick
0.5 in
7 in
0.5 in
Air channels
1.5 in × 1.5 in × 9 in
9 in
0.40 Btu/h · ft · F) of cross section 7 in 
 7 in, or identical
size bricks with nine square air holes (k  0.015 Btu/h · ft · F)
that are 9 in long and have a cross section of 1.5 in 
 1.5 in.
There is a 0.5-in-thick plaster layer (k  0.10 Btu/h · ft · F)
between two adjacent bricks on all four sides and on both
sides of the wall. The house is maintained at 80F and the
ambient temperature outside is 30F. Taking the heat transfer
coefficients at the inner and outer surfaces of the wall to be
1.5 and 4 Btu/h · ft2 · F, respectively, determine the rate of
heat transfer through the wall constructed of (a) solid bricks
and (b) bricks with air holes.
10–59
Consider a 5-m-high, 8-m-long, and 0.22-m-thick
wall whose representative cross section is as given in the fig-
ure. The thermal conductivities of various materials used, in
W/m · C, are kA  kF  2, kB  8, kC  20, kD  15, and kE 
35. The left and right surfaces of the wall are maintained at
uniform temperatures of 300C and 100C, respectively.
Assuming heat transfer through the wall to be one-dimen-
sional, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer through the
wall; (b) the temperature at the point where the sections B, D,
and E meet; and (c) the temperature drop across the section F.
Disregard any contact resistances at the interfaces.
FIGURE P10–59
10–60
Repeat Prob. 10–59 assuming that the thermal con-
tact resistance at the interfaces D-F and E-F is 0.00012 m2 ·
C/W.
10–61
Clothing made of several thin layers of fabric with
trapped air in between, often called ski clothing, is com-
monly used in cold climates because it is light, fashionable,
and a very effective thermal insulator. So it is no surprise that
such clothing has largely replaced thick and heavy old-
fashioned coats.
Consider a jacket made of five layers of 0.1-mm-thick syn-
thetic fabric (k  0.13 W/m · C) with 1.5-mm-thick air space
(k  0.026 W/m · C) between the layers. Assuming the inner
surface temperature of the jacket to be 28C and the surface
area to be 1.25 m2, determine the rate of heat loss through the
jacket when the temperature of the outdoors is 0C and the
heat transfer coefficient at the outer surface is 25 W/m2 · C.
A
B
C
C
D
E
F

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
461
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
What would your response be if the jacket is made of a
single layer of 0.5-mm-thick synthetic fabric? What should
be the thickness of a wool fabric (k  0.035 W/m · C) if the
person is to achieve the same level of thermal comfort wear-
ing a thick wool coat instead of a five-layer ski jacket?
FIGURE P10–61
10–62
Repeat Prob. 10–61 assuming the layers of the jacket
are made of cotton fabric (k  0.06 W/m · C).
10–63
A 5-m-wide, 4-m-high, and 40-m-long kiln used to
cure concrete pipes is made of 20-cm-thick concrete walls and
ceiling (k  0.9 W/m · C). The kiln is maintained at 40C by
injecting hot steam into it. The two ends of the kiln, 4 m 
 5
m in size, are made of a 3-mm-thick sheet metal covered with
2-cm-thick Styrofoam (k  0.033 W/m · C). The convection
heat transfer coefficients on the inner and the outer surfaces of
the kiln are 3000 W/m2 · C and 25 W/m2 · C, respectively.
Disregarding any heat loss through the floor, determine the
rate of heat loss from the kiln when the ambient air is at 4C.
FIGURE P10–63
10–64
Reconsider Prob. 10–63. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the thickness
of the wall and the convection heat transfer coefficient on the
outer surface of the rate of heat loss from the kiln. Let the
thickness vary from 10 cm to 30 cm and the convection heat
transfer coefficient from 5 W/m2 · C to 50 W/m2 · C. Plot the
rate of heat transfer as functions of wall thickness and the con-
vection heat transfer coefficient, and discuss the results.
40 m
5 m
4 m
20 cm
Tin = 40°C
Tout = –4°C
Multilayered
ski jacket
458
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
10–65E
Consider a 6-in 
 8-in epoxy glass laminate (k 
0.10 Btu/h · ft · F) whose thickness is 0.05 in. In order to
reduce the thermal resistance across its thickness, cylindrical
copper fillings (k  223 Btu/h · ft · F) of 0.02 in diameter are
to be planted throughout the board, with a center-to-center
distance of 0.06 in. Determine the new value of the thermal
resistance of the epoxy board for heat conduction across its
thickness as a result of this modification.
Answer: 0.00064 h ·
F/Btu
FIGURE P10–65E
Heat Conduction in Cylinders and Spheres
10–66C
What is an infinitely long cylinder? When is it
proper to treat an actual cylinder as being infinitely long, and
when is it not?
10–67C
Consider a short cylinder whose top and bottom
surfaces are insulated. The cylinder is initially at a uniform
temperature Ti and is subjected to convection from its side
surface to a medium at temperature T, with a heat transfer
coefficient of h. Is the heat transfer in this short cylinder one-
or two-dimensional? Explain.
10–68C
Can the thermal resistance concept be used for a
solid cylinder or sphere in steady operation? Explain.
10–69
Chilled water enters a thin-shelled 5-cm-diameter,
150-m-long pipe at 7C at a rate of 0.98 kg/s and leaves at
8C. The pipe is exposed to ambient air at 30C with a heat
transfer coefficient of 9 W/m2 · C. If the pipe is to be insu-
lated with glass wool insulation (k  0.05 W/m · C) in order
to decrease the temperature rise of water to 0.25C, deter-
mine the required thickness of the insulation.
10–70
Superheated steam at an average temperature 200C
is transported through a steel pipe (k  50 W/m · , Do 
8.0 cm, Di  6.0 cm, and L  20.0 m). The pipe is insulated
with a 4-cm thick layer of gypsum plaster (k  0.5 W/m · ).
The insulated pipe is placed horizontally inside a warehouse
where the average air temperature is 10C. The steam and the
0.02 in
0.06 in
Copper filling
Epoxy board

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
462
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
459
air heat transfer coefficients are estimated to be 800 and
200 W/m2 · K, respectively. Calculate (a) the daily rate of heat
transfer from the superheated steam, and (b) the temperature
on the outside surface of the gypsum plaster insulation.
10–71
An 8-m-internal-diameter spherical tank made of
1.5-cm-thick stainless steel (k  15 W/m · C) is used to store
iced water at 0C. The tank is located in a room whose temper-
ature is 25C. The walls of the room are also at 25C. The
outer surface of the tank is black (emissivity e  1), and heat
transfer between the outer surface of the tank and the sur-
roundings is by natural convection and radiation. The convec-
tion heat transfer coefficients at the inner and the outer
surfaces of the tank are 80 W/m2 · C and 10 W/m2 · C,
respectively. Determine (a) the rate of heat transfer to the iced
water in the tank and (b) the amount of ice at 0C that melts
during a 24-h period. The heat of fusion of water at atmos-
pheric pressure is hif  333.7 kJ/kg.
FIGURE P10–71
10–72
Steam at 320C flows in a stainless steel pipe
(k  15 W/m · C) whose inner and outer diameters are 5 cm
and 5.5 cm, respectively. The pipe is covered with 3-cm-thick
glass wool insulation (k  0.038 W/m · C). Heat is lost to
the surroundings at 5C by natural convection and radiation,
with a combined natural convection and radiation heat trans-
fer coefficient of 15 W/m2 · C. Taking the heat transfer coef-
ficient inside the pipe to be 80 W/m2 · C, determine the rate
of heat loss from the steam per unit length of the pipe. Also
determine the temperature drops across the pipe shell and the
insulation.
10–73
Reconsider Prob. 10–72. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the thickness
of the insulation on the rate of heat loss from the steam and
the temperature drop across the insulation layer. Let the insu-
lation thickness vary from 1 cm to 10 cm. Plot the rate of
heat loss and the temperature drop as a function of insulation
thickness, and discuss the results.
10–74
A 50-m-long section of a steam pipe whose
outer diameter is 10 cm passes through an open
space at 15C. The average temperature of the outer surface of
the pipe is measured to be 150C. If the combined heat transfer
coefficient on the outer surface of the pipe is 20 W/m2 · C,
Iced water
1.5 cm
Di = 8 m
Tin = 0°C
Troom = 25°C
determine (a) the rate of heat loss from the steam pipe; (b) the
annual cost of this energy lost if steam is generated in a natural
gas furnace that has an efficiency of 75 percent and the price
of natural gas is $0.52/therm (1 therm  105,500 kJ); and (c)
the thickness of fiberglass insulation (k  0.035 W/m · C)
needed in order to save 90 percent of the heat lost. Assume the
pipe temperature to remain constant at 150C.
FIGURE P10–74
10–75
Consider a 2-m-high electric hot-water heater that has
a diameter of 40 cm and maintains the hot water at 55C. The
tank is located in a small room whose average temperature is
27C, and the heat transfer coefficients on the inner and outer
surfaces of the heater are 50 and 12 W/m2 · C, respectively.
The tank is placed in another 46-cm-diameter sheet metal tank
of negligible thickness, and the space between the two tanks is
filled with foam insulation (k  0.03 W/m · C). The thermal
resistances of the water tank and the outer thin sheet metal
shell are very small and can be neglected. The price of elec-
tricity is $0.08/kWh, and the home owner pays $280 a year for
water heating. Determine the fraction of the hot-water energy
cost of this household that is due to the heat loss from the tank.
FIGURE P10–75
3 cm
Foam
insulation
40 cm
Water
heater
Tw = 55°C
27°C
2 m
150°C
Tair = 15°C
50 m
Fiberglass
insulation
Steam

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
463
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Hot-water tank insulation kits consisting of 3-cm-thick
fiberglass insulation (k  0.035 W/m · C) large enough to
wrap the entire tank are available in the market for about $30.
If such an insulation is installed on this water tank by the
home owner himself, how long will it take for this additional
insulation to pay for itself?
Answers: 17.5 percent, 1.5 years
10–76
Reconsider Prob. 10–75. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the fraction of energy cost of hot
water due to the heat loss from the tank as a function of the
hot-water temperature in the range of 40C to 90C. Discuss
the results.
10–77
Consider a cold aluminum canned drink that is ini-
tially at a uniform temperature of 4C. The can is 12.5 cm
high and has a diameter of 6 cm. If the combined convec-
tion/radiation heat transfer coefficient between the can and
the surrounding air at 25C is 10 W/m2 · C, determine how
long it will take for the average temperature of the drink to
rise to 15C.
In an effort to slow down the warming of the cold drink, a
person puts the can in a perfectly fitting 1-cm-thick cylindri-
cal rubber insulator (k  0.13 W/m · C). Now how long will
it take for the average temperature of the drink to rise to
15C? Assume the top of the can is not covered.
FIGURE P10–77
10–78
Repeat Prob. 10–77, assuming a thermal contact
resistance of 0.00008 m2 · C/W between the can and the
insulation.
10–79E
Steam at 450F is flowing through a steel pipe
(k  8.7 Btu/h · ft · F) whose inner and outer diameters are
3.5 in and 4.0 in, respectively, in an environment at 55F.
The pipe is insulated with 2-in-thick fiberglass insulation
(k  0.020 Btu/h · ft · F). If the heat transfer coefficients on
the inside and the outside of the pipe are 30 and 5 Btu/h · ft2
· F, respectively, determine the rate of heat loss from the
steam per foot length of the pipe. What is the error involved
in neglecting the thermal resistance of the steel pipe in 
calculations?
12.5 cm
6 cm
4°C
Tair = 25°C
460
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P10–79E
10–80
Hot water at an average temperature of 70C is flow-
ing through a 15-m section of a cast iron pipe (k  52 W/m ·
C) whose inner and outer diameters are 4 cm and 4.6 cm,
respectively. The outer surface of the pipe, whose emissivity is
0.7, is exposed to the cold air at 10C in the basement, with a
heat transfer coefficient of 15 W/m2 · C. The heat transfer
coefficient at the inner surface of the pipe is 120 W/m2 · C.
Taking the walls of the basement to be at 10C also, determine
the rate of heat loss from the hot water. Also, determine the
average velocity of the water in the pipe if the temperature of
the water drops by 3C as it passes through the basement.
10–81
Repeat Prob. 10–80 for a pipe made of copper
(k  386 W/m · C) instead of cast iron.
10–82E
Steam exiting the turbine of a steam power plant at
100F is to be condensed in a large condenser by cooling
water flowing through copper pipes (k  223 Btu/h · ft · F)
of inner diameter 0.4 in and outer diameter 0.6 in at an aver-
age temperature of 70F. The heat of vaporization of water at
100F is 1037 Btu/lbm. The heat transfer coefficients are
1500 Btu/h · ft2 · F on the steam side and 35 Btu/h · ft2 · F
on the water side. Determine the length of the tube required
to condense steam at a rate of 120 lbm/h.
Answer: 1148 ft
FIGURE P10–82E
Liquid water
Steam, 100°F
120 lbm/h
Cooling
water
Steel pipe
Insulation
Steam
450°F

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
464
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
461
10–83E
Repeat Prob. 10–82E, assuming that a 0.01-in-
thick layer of mineral deposit (k  0.5 Btu/h · ft · F) has
formed on the inner surface of the pipe.
10–84E
Reconsider Prob. 10–82E. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effects of the
thermal conductivity of the pipe material and the outer di-
ameter of the pipe on the length of the tube required. Let
the thermal conductivity vary from 10 Btu/h · ft · F to 400
Btu/h · ft · F and the outer diameter from 0.5 in to 1.0 in. Plot
the length of the tube as functions of pipe conductivity and the
outer pipe diameter, and discuss the results.
10–85
The boiling temperature of nitrogen at atmospheric
pressure at sea level (1 atm pressure) is 196C. Therefore,
nitrogen is commonly used in low-temperature scientific stud-
ies since the temperature of liquid nitrogen in a tank open to
the atmosphere will remain constant at 196C until it is
depleted. Any heat transfer to the tank will result in the evapo-
ration of some liquid nitrogen, which has a heat of vaporiza-
tion of 198 kJ/kg and a density of 810 kg/m3 at 1 atm.
Consider a 3-m-diameter spherical tank that is initially filled
with liquid nitrogen at 1 atm and 196C. The tank is exposed
to ambient air at 15C, with a combined convection and radia-
tion heat transfer coefficient of 35 W/m2 · C. The temperature
of the thin-shelled spherical tank is observed to be almost the
same as the temperature of the nitrogen inside. Determine
the rate of evaporation of the liquid nitrogen in the tank as a
result of the heat transfer from the ambient air if the tank is
(a) not insulated, (b) insulated with 5-cm-thick fiberglass insu-
lation (k  0.035 W/m · C), and (c) insulated with 2-cm-thick
superinsulation which has an effective thermal conductivity of
0.00005 W/m · C.
FIGURE P10–85
10–86
Repeat Prob. 10–85 for liquid oxygen, which has
a boiling temperature of 183C, a heat of vaporization of
213 kJ/kg, and a density of 1140 kg/m3 at 1 atm pressure.
Critical Radius of Insulation
10–87C
What is the critical radius of insulation? How is it
defined for a cylindrical layer?
1 atm
Liquid N2
–196°C
N2 vapor
Insulation
Tair = 15°C
10–88C
A pipe is insulated such that the outer radius of the
insulation is less than the critical radius. Now the insulation
is taken off. Will the rate of heat transfer from the pipe
increase or decrease for the same pipe surface temperature?
10–89C
A pipe is insulated to reduce the heat loss from it.
However, measurements indicate that the rate of heat loss
has increased instead of decreasing. Can the measurements
be right?
10–90C
Consider a pipe at a constant temperature whose
radius is greater than the critical radius of insulation. Someone
claims that the rate of heat loss from the pipe has increased
when some insulation is added to the pipe. Is this claim valid?
10–91C
Consider an insulated pipe exposed to the atmo-
sphere. Will the critical radius of insulation be greater on
calm days or on windy days? Why?
10–92
A 2.2-mm-diameter and 10-m-long electric wire is
tightly wrapped with a 1-mm-thick plastic cover whose ther-
mal conductivity is k  0.15 W/m · C. Electrical measure-
ments indicate that a current of 13 A passes through the wire
and there is a voltage drop of 8 V along the wire. If the insu-
lated wire is exposed to a medium at T  30C with a heat
transfer coefficient of h  24 W/m2 · C, determine the tem-
perature at the interface of the wire and the plastic cover in
steady operation. Also determine if doubling the thickness of
the plastic cover will increase or decrease this interface 
temperature.
FIGURE P10–92
10–93E
A 0.083-in-diameter electrical wire at 90F is
covered by 0.02-in-thick plastic insulation (k  0.075
Btu/h · ft · F). The wire is exposed to a medium at 50F, with a
combined convection and radiation heat transfer coefficient
of 2.5 Btu/h · ft2 · F. Determine if the plastic insulation on the
wire will increase or decrease heat transfer from the wire.
Answer: It helps
10–94E
Repeat Prob. 10–93E, assuming a thermal contact
resistance of 0.001 h · ft2 · F/Btu at the interface of the wire
and the insulation.
10–95
A 5-mm-diameter spherical ball at 50C is covered
by a 1-mm-thick plastic insulation (k  0.13 W/m · C). The
ball is exposed to a medium at 15C, with a combined convec-
tion and radiation heat transfer coefficient of 20 W/m2 · C.
10 m
Insulation
Electrical
wire
T = 30°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
465
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Determine if the plastic insulation on the ball will help or hurt
heat transfer from the ball.
FIGURE P10–95
10–96
Reconsider Prob. 10–95. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate of heat transfer from the
ball as a function of the plastic insulation thickness in the
range of 0.5 mm to 20 mm. Discuss the results.
Heat Transfer from Finned Surfaces
10–97C
What is the reason for the widespread use of fins
on surfaces?
10–98C
What is the difference between the fin effective-
ness and the fin efficiency?
10–99C
The fins attached to a surface are determined to
have an effectiveness of 0.9. Do you think the rate of heat
transfer from the surface has increased or decreased as a
result of the addition of these fins?
10–100C
Explain how the fins enhance heat transfer from a
surface. Also, explain how the addition of fins may actually
decrease heat transfer from a surface.
10–101C
How does the overall effectiveness of a finned
surface differ from the effectiveness of a single fin?
10–102C
Hot water is to be cooled as it flows through the
tubes exposed to atmospheric air. Fins are to be attached in
order to enhance heat transfer. Would you recommend attach-
ing the fins inside or outside the tubes? Why?
10–103C
Hot air is to be cooled as it is forced to flow
through the tubes exposed to atmospheric air. Fins are to be
added in order to enhance heat transfer. Would you recom-
mend attaching the fins inside or outside the tubes? Why?
When would you recommend attaching fins both inside and
outside the tubes?
10–104C
Consider two finned surfaces that are identical
except that the fins on the first surface are formed by casting
or extrusion, whereas they are attached to the second surface
afterwards by welding or tight fitting. For which case do you
think the fins will provide greater enhancement in heat trans-
fer? Explain.
10–105C
The heat transfer surface area of a fin is equal to
the sum of all surfaces of the fin exposed to the surrounding
medium, including the surface area of the fin tip. Under what
conditions can we neglect heat transfer from the fin tip?
10–106C
Does the (a) efficiency and (b) effectiveness of a
fin increase or decrease as the fin length is increased?
10–107C
Two pin fins are identical, except that the diame-
ter of one of them is twice the diameter of the other. For
5 mm
1 mm
Plastic
insulation
462
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
which fin is the (a) fin effectiveness and (b) fin efficiency
higher? Explain.
10–108C
Two plate fins of constant rectangular cross sec-
tion are identical, except that the thickness of one of them is
twice the thickness of the other. For which fin is the (a) fin
effectiveness and (b) fin efficiency higher? Explain.
10–109C
Two finned surfaces are identical, except that the
convection heat transfer coefficient of one of them is twice
that of the other. For which finned surface is the (a) fin effec-
tiveness and (b) fin efficiency higher? Explain.
10–110
Obtain a relation for the fin efficiency for a fin of
constant cross-sectional area Ac, perimeter p, length L, and
thermal conductivity k exposed to convection to a medium at
T with a heat transfer coefficient h. Assume the fins are suf-
ficiently long so that the temperature of the fin at the tip is
nearly T. Take the temperature of the fin at the base to be Tb
and neglect heat transfer from the fin tips. Simplify the rela-
tion for (a) a circular fin of diameter D and (b) rectangular
fins of thickness t.
FIGURE P10–110
10–111
The case-to-ambient thermal resistance of a power
transistor that has a maximum power rating of 15 W is given
to be 25C/W. If the case temperature of the transistor is not
to exceed 80C, determine the power at which this transistor
can be operated safely in an environment at 40C.
10–112
A 4-mm-diameter and 10-cm-long aluminum fin
(k  237 W/m · C) is attached to a surface. If the heat transfer
coefficient is 12 W/m2 · C, determine the percent error in the
rate of heat transfer from the fin when the infinitely long fin
assumption is used instead of the adiabatic fin tip assumption.
FIGURE P10–112
10–113
Consider a very long rectangular fin attached to a
flat surface such that the temperature at the end of the fin 
is essentially that of the surrounding air, i.e. 20C. Its width
is 5.0 cm; thickness is 1.0 mm; thermal conductivity is
200 W/m · K; and base temperature is 40C. The heat transfer
coefficient is 20 W/m2 · K. Estimate the fin temperature at a
distance of 5.0 cm from the base and the rate of heat loss
from the entire fin.
10–114
Circular cooling fins of diameter D  1 mm and
length L  25.4 mm, made of copper (k  400 W/m · K), are
h, T
L = 10 cm
Tb
k
D = 4 mm
h, T
Ab = Ac
Tb
k
D

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
466
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
463
used to enhance heat transfer from a surface that is maintained
at temperature Ts1  132C. Each rod has one end attached to
this surface (x  0), while the opposite end (x  L) is joined to
a second surface, which is maintained at Ts2  0C. The air
flowing between the surfaces and the rods is also at T  0C,
and the convection coefficient is h  100 W/m2 · K. For fin
with prescribed tip temperature, the temperature distribution
and the rate of heat transfer are given by
(a) Express the function u(x)  T(x)  T along a fin, and
calculate the temperature at x  L/2.
(b) Determine the rate of heat transferred from the hot sur-
face through each fin and the fin effectiveness. Is the
use of fins justified? Why?
(c) What is the total rate of heat transfer from a 10-cm by
10-cm section of the wall, which has 625 uniformly
distributed fins? Assume the same convection coeffi-
cient for the fin and for the unfinned wall surface.
FIGURE P10–114
10–115
A 40-W power transistor is to be cooled by attach-
ing it to one of the commercially available heat sinks shown
in Table 10–6. Select a heat sink that will allow the case tem-
perature of the transistor not to exceed 90C in the ambient
air at 20C.
FIGURE P10–115
90°C
40 W
Tair = 20°C
L
D
x
Ts2
Ts1
T∞,h
Q#  ub1hpkAc
cosh 1mL2
sinh 1mL2
u
ub

uL>ub sinh 1mx2  sinh3m 1L  x2 4
sinh 1mL2
and
10–116
A 25-W power transistor is to be cooled by attach-
ing it to one of the commercially available heat sinks shown
in Table 10–6. Select a heat sink that will allow the case tem-
perature of the transistor not to exceed 55C in the ambient
air at 18C.
10–117
Steam in a heating system flows through tubes
whose outer diameter is 5 cm and whose walls are main-
tained at a temperature of 180C. Circular aluminum alloy
2024-T6 fins (k  186 W/m · C) of outer diameter 6 cm and
constant thickness 1 mm are attached to the tube. The space
between the fins is 3 mm, and thus there are 250 fins per
meter length of the tube. Heat is transferred to the surround-
ing air at T  25C, with a heat transfer coefficient of 
40 W/m2 · C. Determine the increase in heat transfer from
the tube per meter of its length as a result of adding fins.
Answer: 2639 W
FIGURE P10–117
10–118E
Consider
a
stainless
steel
spoon
(k

8.7
Btu/h · ft · F) partially immersed in boiling water at 200F in a
kitchen at 75F. The handle of the spoon has a cross section of
0.08 in 
 0.5 in, and extends 7 in in the air from the free sur-
face of the water. If the heat transfer coefficient at the exposed
surfaces of the spoon handle is 3 Btu/h · ft2 · F, determine the
temperature difference across the exposed surface of the spoon
handle. State your assumptions.
Answer: 124.6F
FIGURE P10–118E
10–119E
Repeat Prob. 10–118E for a silver spoon (k 
247 Btu/h · ft · F).
7 in
Boiling
water
200°F
Tair = 75°F
Spoon
1 mm
3 mm
180°C
T = 25°C
3 cm
2.5 cm

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
467
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
10–120E
Reconsider Prob. 10–118E. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effects of the
thermal conductivity of the spoon material and the length of
its extension in the air on the temperature difference across
the exposed surface of the spoon handle. Let the thermal con-
ductivity vary from 5 Btu/h · ft · F to 225 Btu/h · ft · F and
the length from 5 in to 12 in. Plot the temperature difference
as the functions of thermal conductivity and length, and dis-
cuss the results.
10–121
A 0.3-cm-thick, 12-cm-high, and 18-cm-long circuit
board houses 80 closely spaced logic chips on one side, each
dissipating 0.04 W. The board is impregnated with copper fill-
ings and has an effective thermal conductivity of 30 W/m · C.
All the heat generated in the chips is conducted across the cir-
cuit board and is dissipated from the back side of the board
to a medium at 40C, with a heat transfer coefficient of
40 W/m2 · C. (a) Determine the temperatures on the two sides
of the circuit board. (b) Now a 0.2-cm-thick, 12-cm-high, and
18-cm-long aluminum plate (k  237 W/m · C) with 864
2-cm-long aluminum pin fins of diameter 0.25 cm is attached
to the back side of the circuit board with a 0.02-cm-thick
epoxy adhesive (k  1.8 W/m · C). Determine the new tem-
peratures on the two sides of the circuit board.
10–122
Repeat Prob. 10–121 using a copper plate with cop-
per fins (k  386 W/m · C) instead of aluminum ones.
10–123
A hot surface at 100C is to be cooled by attach-
ing 
3-cm-long,
0.25-cm-diameter 
aluminum 
pin 
fins
(k  237 W/m · C) to it, with a center-to-center distance
of 0.6 cm. The temperature of the surrounding medium is
30C, and the heat transfer coefficient on the surfaces is
35 W/m2 · C. Determine the rate of heat transfer from the
surface for a 1-m 
 1-m section of the plate. Also determine
the overall effectiveness of the fins.
FIGURE P10–123
10–124
Repeat Prob. 10–123 using copper fins (k  386
W/m · C) instead of aluminum ones.
10–125
Reconsider
Prob.
10–123.
Using
EES (or
other) software, investigate the effect of the
3 cm
0.6 cm
0.25 cm
464
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
center-to-center distance of the fins on the rate of heat transfer
from the surface and the overall effectiveness of the fins. Let
the center-to-center distance vary from 0.4 cm to 2.0 cm. Plot
the rate of heat transfer and the overall effectiveness as a func-
tion of the center-to-center distance, and discuss the results.
10–126
Two 3-m-long and 0.4-cm-thick cast iron (k 
52 W/m · C) steam pipes of outer diameter 10 cm are con-
nected to each other through two 1-cm-thick flanges of outer
diameter 20 cm. The steam flows inside the pipe at an aver-
age temperature of 200C with a heat transfer coefficient of
180 W/m2 · C. The outer surface of the pipe is exposed to
an ambient at 12C, with a heat transfer coefficient of
25 W/m2 · C. (a) Disregarding the flanges, determine the aver-
age outer surface temperature of the pipe. (b) Using this tem-
perature for the base of the flange and treating the flanges as the
fins, determine the fin efficiency and the rate of heat transfer
from the flanges. (c) What length of pipe is the flange section
equivalent to for heat transfer purposes?
FIGURE P10–126
Heat Transfer in Common Configurations
10–127C
What is a conduction shape factor? How is it
related to the thermal resistance?
10–128C
What is the value of conduction shape factors in
engineering?
10–129
A 20-m-long and 8-cm-diameter hot-water pipe of
a district heating system is buried in the soil 80 cm below the
ground surface. The outer surface temperature of the pipe is
60C. Taking the surface temperature of the earth to be 5C
and the thermal conductivity of the soil at that location to be
0.9 W/m · C, determine the rate of heat loss from the pipe.
Tair = 12°C
Steam
200°C
9.2 cm
1 cm
1 cm
10 cm
20 cm

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
468
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
465
FIGURE P10–129
10–130
Reconsider Prob. 10–129. Using EES (or
other) software, plot the rate of heat loss from
the pipe as a function of the burial depth in the range of 
20 cm to 2.0 m. Discuss the results.
10–131
Hot- and cold-water pipes 8 m long run parallel to
each other in a thick concrete layer. The diameters of both pipes
are 5 cm, and the distance between the centerlines of the pipes
is 40 cm. The surface temperatures of the hot and cold pipes are
60C and 15C, respectively. Taking the thermal conductivity of
the concrete to be k  0.75 W/m · C, determine the rate of heat
transfer between the pipes.
Answer: 306 W
10–132
Reconsider Prob. 10–131. Using EES (or
other) software, plot the rate of heat transfer
between the pipes as a function of the distance between the
centerlines of the pipes in the range of 10 cm to 1.0 m. Dis-
cuss the results.
10–133E
A row of 3-ft-long and 1-in-diameter used ura-
nium fuel rods that are still radioactive are buried in the
ground parallel to each other with a center-to-center distance
of 8 in at a depth 15 ft from the ground surface at a location
where the thermal conductivity of the soil is 0.6 Btu/h · ft · F.
If the surface temperature of the rods and the ground are
350F and 60F, respectively, determine the rate of heat trans-
fer from the fuel rods to the atmosphere through the soil.
FIGURE P10–133E
10–134
Hot water at an average temperature of 53C and an
average velocity of 0.4 m/s is flowing through a 5-m section
of a thin-walled hot-water pipe that has an outer diameter of
2.5 cm. The pipe passes through the center of a 14-cm-thick
wall filled with fiberglass insulation (k  0.035 W/m · C). If
the surfaces of the wall are at 18C, determine (a) the rate of
heat transfer from the pipe to the air in the rooms and (b) the
8 in
15 ft
350°F
60°F
1 in
8 in
8 in
3 ft
20 m
D = 8 cm
60°C
80 cm
5°C
temperature drop of the hot water as it flows through this
5-m-long section of the wall.
Answers: 19.6 W, 0.024C
FIGURE P10–134
10–135
Hot water at an average temperature of 80C and an
average velocity of 1.5 m/s is flowing through a 25-m section
of a pipe that has an outer diameter of 5 cm. The pipe extends
2 m in the ambient air above the ground, dips into the ground
(k  1.5 W/m · C) vertically for 3 m, and continues horizon-
tally at this depth for 20 m more before it enters the next build-
ing. The first section of the pipe is exposed to the ambient air
at 8C, with a heat transfer coefficient of 22 W/m2 · C. If the
surface of the ground is covered with snow at 0C, determine
(a) the total rate of heat loss from the hot water and (b) the
temperature drop of the hot water as it flows through this
25-m-long section of the pipe.
FIGURE P10–135
10–136
Consider a house with a flat roof whose outer
dimensions are 12 m 
 12 m. The outer walls of the house
are 6 m high. The walls and the roof of the house are made
of 20-cm-thick concrete (k  0.75 W/m · C). The tempera-
tures of the inner and outer surfaces of the house are 15C
and 3C, respectively. Accounting for the effects of the edges
of adjoining surfaces, determine the rate of heat loss from
the house through its walls and the roof. What is the error
involved in ignoring the effects of the edges and corners and
treating the roof as a 12 m 
 12 m surface and the walls as 
6 m 
 12 m surfaces for simplicity?
10–137
Consider a 25-m-long thick-walled concrete duct
(k  0.75 W/m · C) of square cross section. The outer dimen-
sions of the duct are 20 cm 
 20 cm, and the thickness of the
Hot water pipe
0°C
8°C
3 m
20 m
80°C
Hot
water
Wall
2.5
cm
53°C
18°C
5 m

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
469
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
duct wall is 2 cm. If the inner and outer surfaces of the duct are
at 100C and 30C, respectively, determine the rate of heat
transfer through the walls of the duct.
Answer: 47.1 kW
FIGURE P10–137
10–138
A 3-m-diameter spherical tank containing some
radioactive material is buried in the ground (k  1.4 W/m ·
C). The distance between the top surface of the tank and the
ground surface is 4 m. If the surface temperatures of the tank
and the ground are 140C and 15C, respectively, determine
the rate of heat transfer from the tank.
10–139
Reconsider Prob. 10–138. Using EES (or
other) software, plot the rate of heat transfer
from the tank as a function of the tank diameter in the range
of 0.5 m to 5.0 m. Discuss the results.
10–140
Hot water at an average temperature of 85C passes
through a row of eight parallel pipes that are 4 m long and
have an outer diameter of 3 cm, located vertically in the mid-
dle of a concrete wall (k  0.75 W/m · C) that is 4 m high,
8 m long, and 15 cm thick. If the surfaces of the concrete
walls are exposed to a medium at 32C, with a heat transfer
coefficient of 12 W/m2 · C, determine the rate of heat loss
from the hot water and the surface temperature of the wall.
Review Problems
10–141E
Steam 
is 
produced 
in 
the 
copper 
tubes
(k  223 Btu/h · ft · F) of a heat exchanger at a temperature
of 250F by another fluid condensing on the outside surfaces
of the tubes at 350F. The inner and outer diameters of the
tube are 1 in and 1.3 in, respectively. When the heat
exchanger was new, the rate of heat transfer per foot length
of the tube was 2 
 104 Btu/h. Determine the rate of heat
transfer per foot length of the tube when a 0.01-in-thick layer
of limestone (k  1.7 Btu/h · ft · F) has formed on the inner
surface of the tube after extended use.
10–142E
Repeat Prob. 10–141E, assuming that a 0.01-in-
thick limestone layer has formed on both the inner and outer
surfaces of the tube.
10–143
A 1.2-m-diameter and 6-m-long cylindrical propane
tank is initially filled with liquid propane whose density is
581 kg/m3. The tank is exposed to the ambient air at 30C,
30°C
16 cm
20 cm
25 m
100°C
466
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
with a heat transfer coefficient of 25 W/m2 · C. Now a crack
develops at the top of the tank and the pressure inside drops
to 1 atm while the temperature drops to 42C, which is the
boiling temperature of propane at 1 atm. The heat of vapor-
ization of propane at 1 atm is 425 kJ/kg. The propane is
slowly vaporized as a result of the heat transfer from the
ambient air into the tank, and the propane vapor escapes the
tank at 42C through the crack. Assuming the propane tank
to be at about the same temperature as the propane inside 
at all times, determine how long it will take for the propane
tank to empty if the tank is (a) not insulated and (b) insulated
with 5-cm-thick glass wool insulation (k  0.038 W/m · C).
FIGURE P10–143
10–144
Hot water is flowing at an average velocity of
1.5 m/s through a cast iron pipe (k  52 W/m · C) whose
inner and outer diameters are 3 cm and 3.5 cm, respectively.
The pipe passes through a 15-m-long section of a basement
whose temperature is 15C. If the temperature of the water
drops from 70C to 67C as it passes through the basement
and the heat transfer coefficient on the inner surface of the
pipe is 400 W/m2 · C, determine the combined convection
and radiation heat transfer coefficient at the outer surface of
the pipe.
Answer: 272.5 W/m2 · C
10–145
Newly formed concrete pipes are usually cured first
overnight by steam in a curing kiln maintained at a tempera-
ture of 45C before the pipes are cured for several days out-
side. The heat and moisture to the kiln is provided by steam
flowing in a pipe whose outer diameter is 12 cm. During a
plant inspection, it was noticed that the pipe passes through a
10-m section that is completely exposed to the ambient air
before it reaches the kiln. The temperature measurements
indicate that the average temperature of the outer surface of
the steam pipe is 82C when the ambient temperature is 8C.
The combined convection and radiation heat transfer coeffi-
cient at the outer surface of the pipe is estimated to be 
35 W/m2 · C. Determine the amount of heat lost from the
steam during a 10-h curing process that night.
Steam is supplied by a gas-fired steam generator that has
an efficiency of 85 percent, and the plant pays $1.20/therm of
natural gas (1 therm  105,500 kJ). If the pipe is insulated
PROPANE TANK
T = –42°C
Tair = 30°C
P = 1 atm
Propane
vapor
1.2 m
6 m

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
470
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
467
and 90 percent of the heat loss is saved as a result, determine
the amount of money this facility will save a year as a result
of insulating the steam pipes. Assume that the concrete pipes
are cured 110 nights a year. State your assumptions.
FIGURE P10–145
10–146
Consider an 18-cm 
 18-cm multilayer circuit
board dissipating 27 W of heat. The board consists of four
layers of 0.2-mm-thick copper (k  386 W/m · C) and three
layers of 1.5-mm-thick epoxy glass (k  0.26 W/m · C) sand-
wiched together, as shown in the figure. The circuit board is
attached to a heat sink from both ends, and the temperature of
the board at those ends is 35C. Heat is considered to be uni-
formly generated in the epoxy layers of the board at a rate of
0.5 W per 1-cm 
 18-cm epoxy laminate strip (or 1.5 W per
1-cm 
 18-cm strip of the board). Considering only a portion
of the board because of symmetry, determine the magnitude
and location of the maximum temperature that occurs in the
board. Assume heat transfer from the top and bottom faces of
the board to be negligible.
FIGURE P10–146
10–147
The plumbing system of a house involves a 0.5-m
section of a plastic pipe (k  0.16 W/m · C) of inner diameter
2 cm and outer diameter 2.4 cm exposed to the ambient air.
During a cold and windy night, the ambient air temperature
remains at about 5C for a period of 14 h. The combined
convection and radiation heat transfer coefficient on the outer
surface of the pipe is estimated to be 40 W/m2 · C, and the
heat of fusion of water is 333.7 kJ/kg. Assuming the pipe to
contain stationary water initially at 0C, determine if the water
in that section of the pipe will completely freeze that night.
18 cm
18 cm
Epoxy glass
Copper
10 m
Steam pipe
Tair = 8°C
82°C
Kiln
Furnace
Steam
12 cm
FIGURE P10–147
10–148
Repeat Prob. 10–147 for the case of a heat transfer
coefficient of 10 W/m2 · C on the outer surface as a result of
putting a fence around the pipe that blocks the wind.
10–149E
The surface temperature of a 3-in-diameter baked
potato is observed to drop from 300F to 200F in 5 min in
an environment at 70F. Determine the average heat transfer
coefficient between the potato and its surroundings. Using
this heat transfer coefficient and the same surface tem-
perature, determine how long it will take for the potato to
experience the same temperature drop if it is wrapped com-
pletely in a 0.12-in-thick towel (k  0.035 Btu/h · ft · F).
You may use the properties of water for potato.
10–150E
Repeat Prob. 10–149E assuming there is a 
0.02-in-thick air space (k  0.015 Btu/h · ft · F) between the
potato and the towel.
10–151
An ice chest whose outer dimensions are 30 cm 
40 cm 
 50 cm is made of 3-cm-thick Styrofoam (k 
0.033 W/m · C). Initially, the chest is filled with 50 kg of ice
at 0C, and the inner surface temperature of the ice chest can
be taken to be 0C at all times. The heat of fusion of ice at
0C is 333.7 kJ/kg, and the heat transfer coefficient between
the outer surface of the ice chest and surrounding air at 28C
is 18 W/m2 · C. Disregarding any heat transfer from the 
40-cm 
 50-cm base of the ice chest, determine how long it
will take for the ice in the chest to melt completely.
FIGURE P10–151
10–152
A 4-m-high and 6-m-long wall is constructed of two
large 2-cm-thick steel plates (k  15 W/m · C) separated by
1-cm-thick and 20-cm-wide steel bars placed 99 cm apart. The
remaining space between the steel plates is filled with fiber-
glass insulation (k  0.035 W/m · C). If the temperature dif-
ference between the inner and the outer surfaces of the walls is
3 cm
Styrofoam
0°C
Ice chest
0°C
Tair = 28°C
Exposed
water pipe
2.4 cm
AIR
Tair = –5°C
SOIL
Water

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
471
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
22C, determine the rate of heat transfer through the wall. Can
we ignore the steel bars between the plates in heat transfer
analysis since they occupy only 1 percent of the heat transfer
surface area?
FIGURE P10–152
10–153
A 0.2-cm-thick, 10-cm-high, and 15-cm-long circuit
board houses electronic components on one side that dissipate a
total of 15 W of heat uniformly. The board is impregnated with
conducting metal fillings and has an effective thermal conductiv-
ity of 12 W/m · C. All the heat generated in the components is
conducted across the circuit board and is dissipated from
the back side of the board to a medium at 37C, with a heat
transfer coefficient of 45 W/m2 · C. (a) Determine the surface
temperatures on the two sides of the circuit board. (b) Now a
0.1-cm-thick, 10-cm-high, and 15-cm-long aluminum plate (k 
237 W/m · C) with 20 0.2-cm-thick, 2-cm-long, and 15-cm-
wide aluminum fins of rectangular profile are attached to the
back side of the circuit board with a 0.03-cm-thick epoxy adhe-
sive (k  1.8 W/m · C). Determine the new temperatures on the
two sides of the circuit board.
FIGURE P10–153
0.3 cm
0.2 cm
20 fins
Fin
2 mm
2 cm
1 mm
15 cm
Electronic
components
10 cm
Fiberglass
insulation
2 cm
2 cm
20 cm
Steel plates
99 cm
1 cm
468
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
10–154
Repeat Prob. 10–153 using a copper plate with cop-
per fins (k  386 W/m · C) instead of aluminum ones.
10–155
A row of 10 parallel pipes that are 5 m long and
have an outer diameter of 6 cm are used to transport steam at
145C through the concrete floor (k  0.75 W/m · C) of a
10-m 
 5-m room that is maintained at 20C. The combined
convection and radiation heat transfer coefficient at the floor is
12 W/m2 · C. If the surface temperature of the concrete floor
is not to exceed 35C, determine how deep the steam pipes
should be buried below the surface of the concrete floor.
FIGURE P10–155
10–156
Consider two identical people each generating 
60 W of metabolic heat steadily while doing sedentary
work, and dissipating it by convection and perspiration. The
first person is wearing clothes made of 1-mm-thick leather
(k  0.159 W/m · C) that covers half of the body while the
second one is wearing clothes made of 1-mm-thick syn-
thetic fabric (k  0.13 W/m · C) that covers the body com-
pletely. The ambient air is at 30C, the heat transfer
coefficient at the outer surface is 15 W/m2 · C, and the
inner surface temperature of the clothes can be taken to be
32C. Treating the body of each person as a 25-cm-diame-
ter, 1.7-m-long cylinder, determine the fractions of heat lost
from each person by perspiration.
10–157
A 6-m-wide, 2.8-m-high wall is constructed of one
layer of common brick (k  0.72 W/m · C) of thickness
20 cm, one inside layer of light-weight plaster (k 
0.36 W/m · C) of thickness 1 cm, and one outside layer of
cement based covering (k  1.40 W/m · C) of thickness 
2 cm. The inner surface of the wall is maintained at 23C
while the outer surface is exposed to outdoors at 8C with a
combined convection and radiation heat transfer coefficient
of 17 W/m2 · C. Determine the rate of heat transfer through
the wall and temperature drops across the plaster, brick, cov-
ering, and surface-ambient air.
10–158
Reconsider Prob. 10–157. It is desired to insulate
the wall in order to decrease the heat loss by 85 percent. For
the same inner surface temperature, determine the thickness
of insulation and the outer surface temperature if the wall is
insulated with (a) polyurethane foam (k  0.025 W/m · C)
and (b) glass fiber (k  0.036 W/m · C).
D = 6 cm
35°C
Room
20°C
Steam pipes
Concrete floor
10 m

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
472
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 10
|
469
10–159
Cold conditioned air at 12C is flowing inside a
1.5-cm-thick square aluminum (k  237 W/m · C) duct of
inner cross section 22 cm 
 22 cm at a mass flow rate of
0.8 kg/s. The duct is exposed to air at 33C with a combined
convection-radiation heat transfer coefficient of 13 W/m2 · C.
The convection heat transfer coefficient at the inner surface is
75 W/m2 · C. If the air temperature in the duct should not
increase by more than 1C determine the maximum length of
the duct.
10–160
When analyzing heat transfer through windows, it
is important to consider the frame as well as the glass area.
Consider a 2-m-wide, 1.5-m-high wood-framed window with
85 percent of the area covered by 3-mm-thick single-pane
glass (k  0.7 W/m · C). The frame is 5 cm thick, and is
made of pine wood (k  0.12 W/m · C). The heat transfer
coefficient is 7 W/m2 · C inside and 13 W/m2 · C outside.
The room is maintained at 24C, and the outdoor temperature
is 40C. Determine the percent error involved in heat transfer
when the window is assumed to consist of glass only.
10–161
Steam at 235C is flowing inside a steel pipe
(k  61 W/m · C) whose inner and outer diameters are 10 cm
and 12 cm, respectively, in an environment at 20C. The heat
transfer coefficients inside and outside the pipe are 105 W/m2 ·
C and 14 W/m2 · C, respectively. Determine (a) the thick-
ness of the insulation (k  0.038 W/m · C) needed to reduce
the heat loss by 95 percent and (b) the thickness of the insu-
lation needed to reduce the exposed surface temperature of
insulated pipe to 40C for safety reasons.
10–162
When the transportation of natural gas in a
pipeline is not feasible for economic or other reasons, it is
first liquefied at about 160C, and then transported in spe-
cially insulated tanks placed in marine ships. Consider a 
4-m-diameter spherical tank that is filled with liquefied nat-
ural gas (LNG) at 160C. The tank is exposed to ambient
air at 24C with a heat transfer coefficient of 22 W/m2 · C.
The tank is thin shelled and its temperature can be taken to
be the same as the LNG temperature. The tank is insulated
with 5-cm-thick super insulation that has an effective ther-
mal conductivity of 0.00008 W/m · C. Taking the density
and the specific heat of LNG to be 425 kg/m3 and 3.475
kJ/kg · C, respectively, estimate how long it will take for the
LNG temperature to rise to 150C.
10–163
A 15-cm 
 20-cm hot surface at 85C is to be
cooled by attaching 4-cm-long aluminum (k  237 W/m ·
C) fins of 2-mm 
 2-mm square cross section. The tempera-
ture of surrounding medium is 25C and the heat transfer
coefficient on the surfaces can be taken to be 20 W/m2 · C.
If it is desired to triple the rate of heat transfer from the bare
hot surface, determine the number of fins that needs to be
attached.
10–164
Reconsider Prob. 10–163. Using EES (or
other) software, plot the number of fins as a
function of the increase in the heat loss by fins relative to no
fin case (i.e., overall effectiveness of the fins) in the range of
1.5 to 5. Discuss the results. Is it realistic to assume the heat
transfer coefficient to remain constant?
10–165
A 1.4-m-diameter spherical steel tank filled with
iced water at 0C is buried underground at a location where
the thermal conductivity of the soil is k  0.55 W/m · C.
The distance between the tank center and the ground surface
is 2.4 m. For ground surface temperature of 18C, determine
the rate of heat transfer to the iced water in the tank. What
would your answer be if the soil temperature were 18C and
the ground surface were insulated?
10–166
A 0.6-m-diameter, 1.9-m-long cylindrical tank con-
taining liquefied natural gas (LNG) at 160C is placed at the
center of a 1.9-m-long 1.4-m 
 1.4-m square solid bar made
of an insulating material with k  0.0002 W/m · C. If the
outer surface temperature of the bar is 12C, determine the rate
of heat transfer to the tank. Also, determine the LNG tempera-
ture after one month. Take the density and the specific heat of
LNG to be 425 kg/m3 and 3.475 kJ/kg · C, respectively.
10–167
A typical section of a building wall is shown in
Fig. P10–167. This section extends in and out of the page and
is repeated in the vertical direction. The wall support mem-
bers are made of steel (k  50 W/m · K). The support mem-
bers are 8 cm (t23) 
 0.5 cm (LB). The remainder of the inner
wall space is filled with insulation (k  0.03 W/m · K) and
measures 8 cm (t23) 
 60 cm (LB). The inner wall is made of
gypsum board (k  0.5 W/m · K) that is 1 cm thick (t12) and
the outer wall is made of brick (k  1.0 W/m · K) that is
10 cm thick (t34). What is the temperature on the interior
brick surface, 3, when T1  20 C and T4  35C?
FIGURE P10–167
10–168
A total of 10 rectangular aluminum fins (k 
203 W/m · K) are placed on the outside flat surface of an elec-
tronic device. Each fin is 100 mm wide, 20 mm high and
4 mm thick. The fins are located parallel to each other at a
LA
LB
0
1 2
3
4
5

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
10. Steady Heat Conduction
473
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
center-to-center distance of 8 mm. The temperature at the out-
side surface of the electronic device is 60C. The air is at
20C, and the heat transfer coefficient is 100 W/m2 · K. Deter-
mine (a) the rate of heat loss from the electronic device to the
surrounding air and (b) the fin effectiveness.
10–169
One wall of a refrigerated warehouse is 10.0-m-
high and 5.0-m-wide. The wall is made of three layers:
1.0-cm-thick aluminum (k  200 W/m · K), 8.0-cm-thick
fibreglass (k  0.038 W/m · K), and 3.0-cm thick gypsum
board (k  0.48 W/m · K). The warehouse inside and outside
tem-peratures are 10C and 20C, respectively, and the
average value of both inside and outside heat transfer coeffi-
cients is 40 W/m2 · K.
(a) Calculate the rate of heat transfer across the warehouse
wall in steady operation.
(b) Suppose that 400 metal bolts (k  43 W/m · K), each
2.0 cm in diameter and 12.0 cm long, are used to fas-
ten (i.e. hold together) the three wall layers. Calculate
the rate of heat transfer for the “bolted” wall.
(c) What is the percent change in the rate of heat transfer
across the wall due to metal bolts?
Design and Essay Problems
10–170
The temperature in deep space is close to absolute
zero, which presents thermal challenges for the astronauts
who do space walks. Propose a design for the clothing of the
astronauts that will be most suitable for the thermal environ-
ment in space. Defend the selections in your design.
10–171
In the design of electronic components, it is very
desirable to attach the electronic circuitry to a substrate mate-
rial that is a very good thermal conductor but also a very
470
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
effective electrical insulator. If the high cost is not a major
concern, what material would you propose for the substrate?
10–172
A house with 200-m2 floor space is to be heated
with geothermal water flowing through pipes laid in the
ground under the floor. The walls of the house are 4 m high,
and there are 10 single-paned windows in the house that are
1.2 m wide and 1.8 m high. The house has R-19 (in h · ft2 ·
F/Btu) insulation in the walls and R-30 on  the ceiling. The
floor temperature is not to exceed 40C. Hot geothermal
water is available at 90C, and the inner and outer diameter
of the pipes to be used are 2.4 cm and 3.0 cm. Design such a
heating system for this house in your area.
10–173
Using a timer (or watch) and a thermometer, con-
duct this experiment to determine the rate of heat gain of
your refrigerator. First, make sure that the door of the refrig-
erator is not opened for at least a few hours to make sure that
steady operating conditions are established. Start the timer
when the refrigerator stops running and measure the time t1
it stays off before it kicks in. Then measure the time t2 it
stays on. Noting that the heat removed during t2 is equal to
the heat gain of the refrigerator during t1  t2 and using
the power consumed by the refrigerator when it is running,
determine the average rate of heat gain for your refrigerator,
in watts. Take the COP (coefficient of performance) of your
refrigerator to be 1.3 if it is not available.
Now, clean the condenser coils of the refrigerator and
remove any obstacles on the way of airflow through the coils.
By replacing these measurements, determine the improvement
in the COP of the refrigerator.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
474
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
TRANSIENT HEAT CONDUCTION
|
471
T
he temperature of a body, in general, varies with time as
well as position. In rectangular coordinates, this varia-
tion is expressed as T(x, y, z, t), where (x, y, z) indicate
variation in the x-, y-, and z-directions, and t indicates variation
with time. In the preceding chapter, we considered heat con-
duction under steady conditions, for which the temperature of
a body at any point does not change with time. This certainly
simplified the analysis, especially when the temperature varied
in one direction only, and we were able to obtain analyti-
cal solutions. In this chapter, we consider the variation of
temperature with time as well as position in one- and multi-
dimensional systems.
We start this chapter with the analysis of lumped systems
in which the temperature of a body varies with time but
remains uniform throughout at any time. Then we consider the
variation of temperature with time as well as position for one-
dimensional heat conduction problems such as those asso-
ciated with a large plane wall, a long cylinder, a sphere,
and a semi-infinite medium using transient temperature charts
and analytical solutions. Finally, we consider transient heat
conduction in multidimensional systems by utilizing the prod-
uct solution.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Assess when the spatial variation of temperature is
negligible, and temperature varies nearly uniformly with
time, making the simplified lumped system analysis
applicable,
• Obtain analytical solutions for transient one-dimensional
conduction problems in rectangular, cylindrical, and
spherical geometries using the method of separation of
variables, and understand why a one-term solution is usually
a reasonable approximation,
• Solve the transient conduction problem in large mediums
using the similarity variable, and predict the variation of
temperature with time and distance from the exposed
surface, and
• Construct solutions for multi-dimensional transient
conduction problems using the product solution approach.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
475
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
11–1
■LUMPED SYSTEM ANALYSIS
In heat transfer analysis, some bodies are observed to behave like a “lump”
whose interior temperature remains essentially uniform at all times during a
heat transfer process. The temperature of such bodies can be taken to be a
function of time only, T(t). Heat transfer analysis that utilizes this idealiza-
tion is known as lumped system analysis, which provides great simplifica-
tion in certain classes of heat transfer problems without much sacrifice from
accuracy.
Consider a small hot copper ball coming out of an oven (Fig. 11–1). Mea-
surements indicate that the temperature of the copper ball changes with
time, but it does not change much with position at any given time. Thus the
temperature of the ball remains nearly uniform at all times, and we can talk
about the temperature of the ball with no reference to a specific location.
Now let us go to the other extreme and consider a large roast in an oven.
If you have done any roasting, you must have noticed that the temperature
distribution within the roast is not even close to being uniform. You can eas-
ily verify this by taking the roast out before it is completely done and cut-
ting it in half. You will see that the outer parts of the roast are well done
while the center part is barely warm. Thus, lumped system analysis is not
applicable in this case. Before presenting a criterion about applicability of
lumped system analysis, we develop the formulation associated with it.
Consider a body of arbitrary shape of mass m, volume V, surface area As,
density r, and specific heat cp initially at a uniform temperature Ti (Fig.
11–2). At time t  0, the body is placed into a medium at temperature T, and
heat transfer takes place between the body and its environment, with a heat
transfer coefficient h. For the sake of discussion, we assume that T  Ti, but
the analysis is equally valid for the opposite case. We assume lumped system
analysis to be applicable, so that the temperature remains uniform within the
body at all times and changes with time only, T  T(t).
During a differential time interval dt, the temperature of the body rises
by a differential amount dT. An energy balance of the solid for the time
interval dt can be expressed as
or
hAs(T  T) dt  mcp dT
(11–1)
Noting that m  rV and dT  d(T  T) since T  constant, Eq. 11–1 can
be rearranged as
dt
(11–2)
Integrating from t  0, at which T  Ti, to any time t, at which T  T(t),
gives
ln
t
(11–3)
T(t)  T
Ti  T   hAs
rVcp
d(T  T)
T  T
  hAs
rVcp
aHeat transfer into the body
during dt
b  £
The increase in the
energy of the body
during dt
≥
472
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
70°C
70°C
70°C
70°C
70°C
(a) Copper ball
(b) Roast beef
110°C
90°C
40°C
FIGURE 11–1
A small copper ball can be modeled
as a lumped system, but a roast
beef cannot.
 SOLID BODY
m = mass
V = volume
   = density
Ti = initial temperature
         T = T(t)
ρ
= hAs[T – T(t)]
As
h
T
Q·
FIGURE 11–2
The geometry and parameters involved
in the lumped system analysis.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
476
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Taking the exponential of both sides and rearranging, we obtain
 ebt
(11–4)
where
b 
(1/s)
(11–5)
is a positive quantity whose dimension is (time)1. The reciprocal of b has
time unit (usually s), and is called the time constant. Equation 11–4 is plot-
ted in Fig. 11–3 for different values of b. There are two observations that
can be made from this figure and the relation above:
1. Equation 11–4 enables us to determine the temperature T(t) of a body at
time t, or alternatively, the time t required for the temperature to reach
a specified value T(t).
2. The temperature of a body approaches the ambient temperature T
exponentially. The temperature of the body changes rapidly at the
beginning, but rather slowly later on. A large value of b indicates that the
body approaches the environment temperature in a short time. The larger
the value of the exponent b, the higher the rate of decay in temperature.
Note that b is proportional to the surface area, but inversely proportional
to the mass and the specific heat of the body. This is not surprising since
it takes longer to heat or cool a larger mass, especially when it has a
large specific heat.
Once the temperature T(t) at time t is available from Eq. 11–4, the rate of
convection heat transfer between the body and its environment at that time
can be determined from Newton’s law of cooling as
Q· (t)  hAs[T(t)  T]
(W)
(11–6)
The total amount of heat transfer between the body and the surrounding
medium over the time interval t  0 to t is simply the change in the energy
content of the body:
Q  mcp[T(t)  Ti]
(kJ)
(11–7)
The amount of heat transfer reaches its upper limit when the body reaches
the surrounding temperature T. Therefore, the maximum heat transfer
between the body and its surroundings is (Fig. 11–4)
Qmax  mcp(T  Ti)
(kJ)
(11–8)
We could also obtain this equation by substituting the T(t) relation from
Eq. 11–4 into the Q·(t) relation in Eq. 11–6 and integrating it from t  0 to 
t →.
Criteria for Lumped System Analysis
The lumped system analysis certainly provides great convenience in heat
transfer analysis, and naturally we would like to know when it is appropri-
hAs
rVcp
T(t)  T
Ti  T
Chapter 11
|
473
T(t)
T
Ti
b3
b3 > b2 > b1
b2 b1
t
FIGURE 11–3
The temperature of a lumped
system approaches the environment
temperature as time gets larger.
Ti
Ti
Q = Qmax = mcp (Ti – T)
h
T
t = 0
t →
Ti
Ti
Ti
Ti
Ti
T
T
T
T
T
T
T
FIGURE 11–4
Heat transfer to or from a body
reaches its maximum value
when the body reaches
the environment temperature.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
477
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
ate to use it. The first step in establishing a criterion for the applicability of
the lumped system analysis is to define a characteristic length as
Lc 
and a Biot number Bi as
Bi 
(11–9)
It can also be expressed as (Fig. 11–5)
Bi 
or
Bi 
When a solid body is being heated by the hotter fluid surrounding it (such
as a potato being baked in an oven), heat is first convected to the body and
subsequently conducted within the body. The Biot number is the ratio of the
internal resistance of a body to heat conduction to its external resistance to
heat convection. Therefore, a small Biot number represents small resistance
to heat conduction, and thus small temperature gradients within the body.
Lumped system analysis assumes a uniform temperature distribution
throughout the body, which is the case only when the thermal resistance of
the body to heat conduction (the conduction resistance) is zero. Thus, lumped
system analysis is exact when Bi  0 and approximate when Bi  0. Of
course, the smaller the Bi number, the more accurate the lumped system
analysis. Then the question we must answer is, How much accuracy are we
willing to sacrifice for the convenience of the lumped system analysis?
Before answering this question, we should mention that a 15 percent
uncertainty in the convection heat transfer coefficient h in most cases is con-
sidered “normal” and “expected.” Assuming h to be constant and uniform is
also an approximation of questionable validity, especially for irregular
geometries. Therefore, in the absence of sufficient experimental data for the
specific geometry under consideration, we cannot claim our results to be
better than 	15 percent, even when Bi  0. This being the case, introduc-
ing another source of uncertainty in the problem will not have much effect
on the overall uncertainty, provided that it is minor. It is generally accepted
that lumped system analysis is applicable if
Bi  0.1
When this criterion is satisfied, the temperatures within the body relative to
the surroundings (i.e., T  T) remain within 5 percent of each other even
for well-rounded geometries such as a spherical ball. Thus, when Bi  0.1,
the variation of temperature with location within the body is slight and can
reasonably be approximated as being uniform.
Lc/k
1/h 
Conduction resistance within the body
Convection resistance at the surface of the body
h
k/Lc
T
T  Convection at the surface of the body
Conduction within the body
hLc
k
V
As
474
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Convection
h
T
Conduction
SOLID
BODY
Bi = ———————–
heat convection
heat conduction
FIGURE 11–5
The Biot number can be viewed as the
ratio of the convection at the surface to
conduction within the body.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
478
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The first step in the application of lumped system analysis is the calcula-
tion of the Biot number, and the assessment of the applicability of this
approach. One may still wish to use lumped system analysis even when the
criterion Bi  0.1 is not satisfied, if high accuracy is not a major concern.
Note that the Biot number is the ratio of the convection at the surface to
conduction within the body, and this number should be as small as possible
for lumped system analysis to be applicable. Therefore, small bodies with
high thermal conductivity are good candidates for lumped system analysis,
especially when they are in a medium that is a poor conductor of heat (such
as air or another gas) and motionless. Thus, the hot small copper ball placed
in quiescent air, discussed earlier, is most likely to satisfy the criterion for
lumped system analysis (Fig. 11–6).
Some Remarks on Heat Transfer in Lumped Systems
To understand the heat transfer mechanism during the heating or cooling of a
solid by the fluid surrounding it, and the criterion for lumped system analy-
sis, consider this analogy (Fig. 11–7). People from the mainland are to go by
boat to an island whose entire shore is a harbor, and from the harbor to their
destinations on the island by bus. The overcrowding of people at the harbor
depends on the boat traffic to the island and the ground transportation system
on the island. If there is an excellent ground transportation system with
plenty of buses, there will be no overcrowding at the harbor, especially when
the boat traffic is light. But when the opposite is true, there will be a huge
overcrowding at the harbor, creating a large difference between the popula-
tions at the harbor and inland. The chance of overcrowding is much lower in a
small island with plenty of fast buses.
In heat transfer, a poor ground transportation system corresponds to poor
heat conduction in a body, and overcrowding at the harbor to the accumula-
tion of thermal energy and the subsequent rise in temperature near the surface
of the body relative to its inner parts. Lumped system analysis is obviously
not applicable when there is overcrowding at the surface. Of course, we have
disregarded radiation in this analogy and thus the air traffic to the island. Like
passengers at the harbor, heat changes vehicles at the surface from convection
to conduction. Noting that a surface has zero thickness and thus cannot store
any energy, heat reaching the surface of a body by convection must continue
its journey within the body by conduction.
Consider heat transfer from a hot body to its cooler surroundings. Heat is
transferred from the body to the surrounding fluid as a result of a temperature
difference. But this energy comes from the region near the surface, and thus
the temperature of the body near the surface will drop. This creates a temper-
ature gradient between the inner and outer regions of the body and initiates
heat transfer by conduction from the interior of the body toward the outer
surface.
When the convection heat transfer coefficient h and thus the rate of convec-
tion from the body are high, the temperature of the body near the surface
drops quickly (Fig. 11–8). This creates a larger temperature difference
between the inner and outer regions unless the body is able to transfer heat
from the inner to the outer regions just as fast. Thus, the magnitude of the
maximum temperature difference within the body depends strongly on the
ability of a body to conduct heat toward its surface relative to the ability of
Chapter 11
|
475
Spherical
copper
ball
k = 401 W/m·°C
h = 15 W/m2·°C
D = 12 cm
Lc = — = ——— =        = 0.02 m
Bi = —– = ———— = 0.00075 < 0.1
hLc
V
  D3
  D2
π
π
As
k
15 × 0.02
401
1–6
D
1–6
FIGURE 11–6
Small bodies with high thermal
conductivities and low convection
coefficients are most likely
to satisfy the criterion for
lumped system analysis.
ISLAND
Boat
Bus
FIGURE 11–7
Analogy between heat transfer to a
solid and passenger traffic to an island.
50°C
70°C
85°C
110°C
130°C
Convection
T = 20°C
h = 2000 W/m2·°C
FIGURE 11–8
When the convection coefficient h is
high and k is low, large temperature
differences occur between the inner
and outer regions of a large solid.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
479
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the surrounding medium to convect heat away from the surface. The
Biot number is a measure of the relative magnitudes of these two competing
effects.
Recall that heat conduction in a specified direction n per unit surface area
is expressed as q·  k T/n, where T/n is the temperature gradient and
k is the thermal conductivity of the solid. Thus, the temperature distribution
in the body will be uniform only when its thermal conductivity is infinite,
and no such material is known to exist. Therefore, temperature gradients
and thus temperature differences must exist within the body, no matter how
small, in order for heat conduction to take place. Of course, the temperature
gradient and the thermal conductivity are inversely proportional for a given
heat flux. Therefore, the larger the thermal conductivity, the smaller the
temperature gradient.
476
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Gas
Junction
D = 1 mm
T(t)
Thermocouple
wire
T, h
FIGURE 11–9
Schematic for Example 11–1.
EXAMPLE 11–1
Temperature Measurement by Thermocouples
The temperature of a gas stream is to be measured by a thermocouple whose
junction can be approximated as a 1-mm-diameter sphere, as shown in
Fig. 11–9. The properties of the junction are k  35 W/m · C, r  8500
kg/m3, and cp  320 J/kg · C, and the convection heat transfer coefficient
between the junction and the gas is h  210 W/m2 · C. Determine how long
it will take for the thermocouple to read 99 percent of the initial temperature
difference.
Solution
The temperature of a gas stream is to be measured by a thermo-
couple. The time it takes to register 99 percent of the initial T is to be
determined.
Assumptions
1 The junction is spherical in shape with a diameter of
D  0.001 m. 2 The thermal properties of the junction and the heat transfer
coefficient are constant. 3 Radiation effects are negligible.
Properties
The properties of the junction are given in the problem
statement.
Analysis
The characteristic length of the junction is
Lc 
(0.001 m)  1.67 
 104 m
Then the Biot number becomes
Bi 
 0.001  0.1
Therefore, lumped system analysis is applicable, and the error involved in this
approximation is negligible.
In order to read 99 percent of the initial temperature difference Ti  T
between the junction and the gas, we must have
 0.01
For example, when Ti  0C and T  100C, a thermocouple is considered
to have read 99 percent of this applied temperature difference when its
reading indicates T (t)  99C.
T (t )  T
Ti  T
hLc
k  (210 W/m2  C)(1.67 
 104 m)
35 W/m  C
V
As 
1
6pD 3
pD 2  1
6 D  1
6

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
480
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
477
The value of the exponent b is
b 
 0.462 s1
We now substitute these values into Eq. 11–4 and obtain
 ebt
⎯→
0.01 
which yields
t  10 s
Therefore, we must wait at least 10 s for the temperature of the thermo-
couple junction to approach within 99 percent of the initial junction-gas
temperature difference.
Discussion
Note that conduction through the wires and radiation exchange
with the surrounding surfaces affect the result, and should be considered in a
more refined analysis.
e(0.462 s1)t
T (t )  T
Ti  T
hAs
rcpV 
h
rcp Lc 
210 W/m2  C
(8500 kg/m3)(320 J/kg  C)(1.67 
 104 m)
EXAMPLE 11–2
Predicting the Time of Death
A person is found dead at 5 PM in a room whose temperature is 20C. The
temperature of the body is measured to be 25C when found, and the heat
transfer coefficient is estimated to be h  8 W/m2 · C. Modeling the body
as a 30-cm-diameter, 1.70-m-long cylinder, estimate the time of death of
that person (Fig. 11–10).
Solution
A body is found while still warm. The time of death is to be
estimated.
Assumptions
1 The body can be modeled as a 30-cm-diameter, 1.70-m-long
cylinder. 2 The thermal properties of the body and the heat transfer coeffi-
cient are constant. 3 The radiation effects are negligible. 4 The person was
healthy(!) when he or she died with a body temperature of 37C.
Properties
The average human body is 72 percent water by mass, and thus
we can assume the body to have the properties of water at the average tem-
perature of (37  25)/2  31C; k  0.617 W/m · C, r  996 kg/m3, and
cp  4178 J/kg · C (Table A–15).
Analysis
The characteristic length of the body is
Lc 
 0.0689 m
Then the Biot number becomes
Bi 
 0.89  0.1
Therefore, lumped system analysis is not applicable. However, we can still use
it to get a “rough” estimate of the time of death. The exponent b in this case is
hLc
k  (8 W/m2  C)(0.0689 m)
0.617 W/m  C
V
As 
pr2
o L
2pro L  2pr2
o

p(0.15 m)2(1.7 m)
2p(0.15 m)(1.7 m)  2p(0.15 m)2
FIGURE 11–10
Schematic for Example 11–2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
481
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
11–2
■TRANSIENT HEAT CONDUCTION IN LARGE
PLANE WALLS, LONG CYLINDERS, AND
SPHERES WITH SPATIAL EFFECTS
In Section 11–1, we considered bodies in which the variation of temperature
within the body is negligible; that is, bodies that remain nearly isothermal dur-
ing a process. Relatively small bodies of highly conductive materials approxi-
mate this behavior. In general, however, the temperature within a body
changes from point to point as well as with time. In this section, we consider
the variation of temperature with time and position in one-dimensional prob-
lems such as those associated with a large plane wall, a long cylinder, and a
sphere.
Consider a plane wall of thickness 2L, a long cylinder of radius ro, and
a sphere of radius ro initially at a uniform temperature Ti, as shown in
Fig. 11–11. At time t  0, each geometry is placed in a large medium that is
at a constant temperature T and kept in that medium for t  0. Heat trans-
fer takes place between these bodies and their environments by convection
with a uniform and constant heat transfer coefficient h. Note that all three
cases possess geometric and thermal symmetry: the plane wall is symmetric
about its center plane (x  0), the cylinder is symmetric about its centerline
(r  0), and the sphere is symmetric about its center point (r  0). We
neglect radiation heat transfer between these bodies and their surrounding
surfaces, or incorporate the radiation effect into the convection heat transfer
coefficient h.
The variation of the temperature profile with time in the plane wall is
illustrated in Fig. 11–12. When the wall is first exposed to the surrounding
medium at T  Ti at t  0, the entire wall is at its initial temperature Ti.
But the wall temperature at and near the surfaces starts to drop as a result of
heat transfer from the wall to the surrounding medium. This creates a tem-
perature gradient in the wall and initiates heat conduction from the inner
478
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
b 
 2.79 
 105 s1
We now substitute these values into Eq. 11–4,
 ebt
⎯→
 e(2.79 
 105 s1)t
which yields
t  43,860 s  12.2 h
Therefore, as a rough estimate, the person died about 12 h before the body
was found, and thus the time of death is 5 AM.
Discussion
This example demonstrates how to obtain “ball park” values
using a simple analysis. A similar analysis is used in practice by incorporat-
ing constants to account for deviation from lumped system analysis.
25  20
37  20
T (t )  T
Ti  T
hAs
rcpV 
h
rcp Lc 
8 W/m2  C
(996 kg/m3)(4178 J/kg  C)(0.0689 m)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
482
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
parts of the wall toward its outer surfaces. Note that the temperature at the
center of the wall remains at Ti until t  t2, and that the temperature profile
within the wall remains symmetric at all times about the center plane. The
temperature profile gets flatter and flatter as time passes as a result of heat
transfer, and eventually becomes uniform at T  T. That is, the wall
reaches thermal equilibrium with its surroundings. At that point, heat trans-
fer stops since there is no longer a temperature difference. Similar discus-
sions can be given for the long cylinder or sphere.
Nondimensionalized One-Dimensional Transient
Conduction Problem
The formulation of heat conduction problems for the determination of the
one-dimensional transient temperature distribution in a plane wall, a cylinder,
or a sphere results in a partial differential equation whose solution typically
involves infinite series and transcendental equations, which are inconvenient
to use. But the analytical solution provides valuable insight to the physical
problem, and thus it is important to go through the steps involved. Below we
demonstrate the solution procedure for the case of plane wall.
Consider a plane wall of thickness 2L initially at a uniform temperature of
Ti, as shown in Fig. 11–11a. At time t  0, the wall is immersed in a fluid at
temperature T∞and is subjected to convection heat transfer from both sides
with a convection coefficient of h. The height and the width of the wall are
large relative to its thickness, and thus heat conduction in the wall can be
approximated to be one-dimensional. Also, there is thermal symmetry about
the midplane passing through x  0, and thus the temperature distribution
must be symmetrical about the midplane. Therefore, the value of temperature
at any x value in L  x  0 at any time t must be equal to the value at x
in 0  x  L at the same time. This means we can formulate and solve the
heat conduction problem in the positive half domain 0  x  L, and then
apply the solution to the other half.
Under the conditions of constant thermophysical properties, no heat gen-
eration, thermal symmetry about the midplane, uniform initial temperature,
and constant convection coefficient, the one-dimensional transient heat 
Chapter 11
|
479
FIGURE 11–11
Schematic of the simple
geometries in which heat
transfer is one-dimensional.
Initially
T = Ti
L
0
(a) A large plane wall
(b) A long cylinder
(c) A sphere
x
r
T
h
T
h
Initially
T = Ti
Initially
T = Ti
0
T
h
T
h
T
h
ro
r
0
ro
L
t = 0
t = t1
t = t2
t = t3
t → 
0
x
T
h
T
h
Initially
T = Ti
Ti
FIGURE 11–12
Transient temperature profiles in a
plane wall exposed to convection
from its surfaces for Ti  T.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
483
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
conduction problem in the half-domain 0  x  L of the plain wall can be
expressed as (see Chapter 2 of Çengal, Heat and Mass Transfer)
Differential equation:
(11–10a)
Boundary conditions:
and
(11–10b)
Initial condition:
(11–10c)
where the property a  k/rcp is the thermal diffusivity of the material.
We now attempt to nondimensionalize the problem by defining a dimen-
sionless space variable X  x/L and dimensionless temperature u(x, t) 
[T(x, t)  T]/[Ti  T]. These are convenient choices since both X and u
vary between 0 and 1. However, there is no clear guidance for the proper
form of the dimensionless time variable and the h/k ratio, so we will let the
analysis indicate them. We note that
and
Substituting into Eqs. 11–10a and 11–10b and rearranging give
and
(11–11)
Therefore, the proper form of the dimensionless time is t  at/L2, which is
called the Fourier number Fo, and we recognize Bi  k/hL as the Biot
number defined in Section 11–1. Then the formulation of the one-dimen-
sional transient heat conduction problem in a plane wall can be expressed in
nondimensional form as
Dimensionless differential equation:
(11–12a)
Dimensionless BC’s:
and
(11–12b)
Dimensionless initial condition:
(11–12c)
where
Dimensionless temperature
Dimensionless distance from the center
Dimensionless heat transfer coefficient (Biot number)
Dimensionless time (Fourier number)
The heat conduction equation in cylindrical or spherical coordinates can be
nondimensionalized in a similar way. Note that nondimensionalization
t  at
L2  Fo
Bi  hL
k
X  x
L
u(X, t)  T(x, t)  Ti
T  Ti
u(X, 0)  1
u(1, t)
X
 Biu(1, t)
u(0, t)
X
 0
2u
X2  u
t
u(1, t)
X
 hL
k u(1, t)
u
t
L2
a
2u
X2 
T
t
1
Ti  T
u
t 
T
x
L2
Ti  T
2u
X2 
T
x
,

L
Ti  T
u
(x/L)
u
X 
T(x, 0)  Ti
 k T(L, t)
x
 h[T(L, t)  T]
T(0, t)
x
 0
2T
x2  1
a
T
t
480
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(a) Original heat conduction problem:

,
T(x, 0)  Ti
T  F(x, L, t, k, , h, Ti)
(b) Nondimensionalized problem:
u(X, 0) 1
 Biu(1, t)
u  f(X, Bi, t)
u(0, t)
X
 0,  u(1, t)
X
02u
0X2  0u
0t,
T(0, t)
x
 0,  k T(L, t)
x
 h[T(L, t)  T]
1
a
0T
0t
2T
x2
FIGURE 11–13
Nondimensionalization reduces the
number of independent variables in
one-dimensional transient conduction
problems from 8 to 3, offering great
convenience in the presentation of
results.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
484
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
reduces the number of independent variables and parameters from 8 to 3—
from x, L, t, k, a, h, Ti, and T to X, Bi, and Fo (Fig. 11–13). That is,
(11–13)
This makes it very practical to conduct parametric studies and to present
results in graphical form. Recall that in the case of lumped system analysis,
we had u  f (Bi, Fo) with no space variable.
Exact Solution of One-Dimensional
Transient Conduction Problem*
The non-dimensionalized partial differential equation given in Eqs. 11–12
together with its boundary and initial conditions can be solved using several
analytical and numerical techniques, including the Laplace or other transform
methods, the method of separation of variables, the finite difference method,
and the finite-element method. Here we use the method of separation of
variables developed by J. Fourier in 1820s and is based on expanding an
arbitrary function (including a constant) in terms of Fourier series. The
method is applied by assuming the dependent variable to be a product of a
number of functions, each being a function of a single independent variable.
This reduces the partial differential equation to a system of ordinary differen-
tial equations, each being a function of a single independent variable. In the
case of transient conduction in a plane wall, for example, the dependent vari-
able is the solution function u(X, t), which is expressed as u(X, t) 
F(X)G(t), and the application of the method results in two ordinary differen-
tial equation, one in X and the other in t.
The method is applicable if (1) the geometry is simple and finite (such as a
rectangular block, a cylinder, or a sphere) so that the boundary surfaces can
be described by simple mathematical functions, and (2) the differential equa-
tion and the boundary and initial conditions in their most simplified form are
linear (no terms that involve products of the dependent variable or its deriva-
tives) and involve only one nonhomogeneous term (a term without the depen-
dent variable or its derivatives). If the formulation involves a number of
nonhomogeneous terms, the problem can be split up into an equal number of
simpler problems each involving only one nonhomogeneous term, and then
combining the solutions by superposition.
Now we demonstrate the use of the method of separation of variables by
applying it to the one-dimensional transient heat conduction problem given
in Eqs. 11–12. First, we express the dimensionless temperature function
u(X, t) as a product of a function of X only and a function of t only as
(11–14)
Substituting Eq. 11–14 into Eq. 11–12a and dividing by the product FG
gives
(11–15)
Observe that all the terms that depend on X are on the left-hand side of the
equation and all the terms that depend on t are on the right-hand side. That
1
F
d2F
dX2  1
G
dG
dt
u(X, t)  F(X)G(t)
u  f (X, Bi, Fo)
Chapter 11
|
481
*This section can be skipped if desired without a loss of continuity.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
485
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
is, the terms that are function of different variables are separated (and thus
the name separation of variables). The left-hand side of this equation is a
function of X only and the right-hand side is a function of only t. Consider-
ing that both X and t can be varied independently, the equality in Eq. 11–15
can hold for any value of X and t only if Eq. 11–15 is equal to a constant.
Further, it must be a negative constant that we will indicate by l2 since a
positive constant will cause the function G(t) to increase indefinitely with
time (to be infinite), which is unphysical, and a value of zero for the con-
stant means no time dependence, which is again inconsistent with the phys-
ical problem. Setting Eq. 11–15 equal to l2 gives
(11–16)
whose general solutions are
(11–17)
and
(11–18)
where A  C1C3 and B  C2C3 are arbitrary constants. Note that we need to
determine only A and B to obtain the solution of the problem.
Applying the boundary conditions in Eq. 11–12b gives
But tangent is a periodic function with a period of p, and the equation
ltanl  Bi has the root l1 between 0 and p, the root l2 between p and 2p,
the root ln between (n1)p and np, etc. To recognize that the transcenden-
tal equation l tan l  Bi has an infinite number of roots, it is expressed as
(11–19)
Eq. 11–19 is called the characteristic equation or eigenfunction, and its
roots are called the characteristic values or eigenvalues. The characteristic
equation is implicit in this case, and thus the characteristic values need to be
determined numerically. Then it follows that there are an infinite number of
solutions of the form 
, and the solution of this linear heat
conduction problem is a linear combination of them,
(11–20)
The constants An are determined from the initial condition, Eq. 11–12c,
(11–21)
u(X, 0)  1 → 1  a

n1
Ancos(ln X)
u  a

n1
Anel2
ntcos(ln X)
Ael2tcos(lX)
lntanln  Bi
u(1, t)
X
 Biu(1,t) →Ael2tlsinl  BiAel2tcosl → ltanl  Bi
u(0, t)
X
 0 →el2t(Alsin0  Blcos0)  0 → B  0 → u  Ael2tcos(lX)
u  FG  C3el2t[C1cos(lX)  C2sin(lX)]  el2t[Acos(lX)  Bsin(lX)]
F  C1cos(lX)  C2sin(lX)  and G  C3el2t
d2F
dX2  l2F  0  and  dG
dt  l2G  0
482
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
486
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
This is a Fourier series expansion that expresses a constant in terms of an
infinite series of cosine functions. Now we multiply both sides of Eq. 11–21
by cos(lmX), and integrate from X  0 to X  1. The right-hand side
involves an infinite number of integrals of the form 
1
0cos(lmX) cos(lnX)dx.
It can be shown that all of these integrals vanish except when n  m, and
the coefficient An becomes
(11–22)
This completes the analysis for the solution of one-dimensional transient
heat conduction problem in a plane wall. Solutions in other geometries such
as a long cylinder and a sphere can be determined using the same approach.
The results for all three geometries are summarized in Table 11–1. The
solution for the plane wall is also applicable for a plane wall of thickness L
whose left surface at x  0 is insulated and the right surface at x  L is
subjected to convection since this is precisely the mathematical problem we
solved.
The analytical solutions of transient conduction problems typically involve
infinite series, and thus the evaluation of an infinite number of terms to deter-
mine the temperature at a specified location and time. This may look intimi-
dating at first, but there is no need to worry. As demonstrated in Fig. 11–14,
the terms in the summation decline rapidly as n and thus ln increases because
of the exponential decay function
. This is especially the case when the
dimensionless time t is large. Therefore, the evaluation of the first few terms
of the infinite series (in this case just the first term) is usually adequate to
determine the dimensionless temperature u.
Approximate Analytical and Graphical Solutions
The analytical solution obtained above for one-dimensional transient heat
conduction in a plane wall involves infinite series and implicit equations,
which are difficult to evaluate. Therefore, there is clear motivation to sim-
el2
nt

1
0
cos (ln X)dX  An 
1
0
cos 2(ln X)dx → An 
4sinln
2ln  sin(2ln)
Chapter 11
|
483
cos(ln X)
ln tan ln Bi
For Bi  5, X  1, and t  0.2:
An 
4 sin ln
2ln  sin(2ln)
un  An el2nt
FIGURE 11–14
The term in the series solution of
transient conduction problems decline
rapidly as n and thus ln increases
because of the exponential decay
function with the exponent lnt.
n
ln
An
un
1
1.3138
1.2402
0.22321
2
4.0336
0.3442
0.00835
3
6.9096
0.1588
0.00001
4
9.8928
0.876
0.00000
TABLE 11–1
Summary of the solutions for one-dimensional transient conduction in a plane wall of
thickness 2L, a cylinder of radius ro and a sphere of radius ro subjected to convention from
all surfaces.*
Geometry
Solution
ln’s are the roots of
Plane wall
cos (lnx /L)
ln tan ln  Bi
Cylinder
J0 (lnr /ro)
ln
 Bi
Sphere
l  ln cot ln  Bi
*Here u  (T  Ti)/(T  Ti) is the dimensionless temperature, Bi  hL/k or hro /k is the Biot number, 
or 
is the Fourier number, and J0 and J1 are the Bessel functions of the first kind whose values are given in
Table 11–3.
at  ro
2
Fo  t  at  L2  
sin (ln x / L)
ln x / L
el2
nt
u  a

n1
4(sin ln  ln cos ln)
2ln  sin(2ln)
J1 (ln)
J0 (ln)
el2
nt
u  a

n1
2
ln
J1 1ln2
J 2
0 1ln2  J 2
1 1ln2
el2
nt
u  a

n1
4 sin ln
2ln  sin(2ln)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
487
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
plify the analytical solutions and to present the solutions in tabular or
graphical form using simple relations.
The dimensionless quantities defined above for a plane wall can also be
used for a cylinder or sphere by replacing the space variable x by r and the
half-thickness L by the outer radius ro. Note that the characteristic length in
the definition of the Biot number is taken to be the half-thickness L for the
plane wall, and the radius ro for the long cylinder and sphere instead of V/A
used in lumped system analysis.
We mentioned earlier that the terms in the series solutions in Table 11–1
converge rapidly with increasing time, and for t  0.2, keeping the first
term and neglecting all the remaining terms in the series results in an error
under 2 percent. We are usually interested in the solution for times with
t  0.2, and thus it is very convenient to express the solution using this
one-term approximation, given as
Plane wall:
uwall 
 A1el2
1t cos (l1x/L),
t  0.2
(11–23)
Cylinder:
ucyl 
 A1el2
1t J0(l1r/ro),
t  0.2
(11–24)
Sphere:
usph  
 A1el2
1t
,
t  0.2
(11–25)
where the constants A1 and l1 are functions of the Bi number only, and their
values are listed in Table 11–2 against the Bi number for all three geome-
tries. The function J0 is the zeroth-order Bessel function of the first kind,
whose value can be determined from Table 11–3. Noting that cos (0) 
J0(0)  1 and the limit of (sin x)/x is also 1, these relations simplify to the
next ones at the center of a plane wall, cylinder, or sphere:
Center of plane wall (x  0):
u0, wall 
 A1el2
1t
(11–26)
Center of cylinder (r  0):
u0, cyl 
 A1el2
1t
(11–27)
Center of sphere (r  0):
u0, sph 
 A1el2
1t
(11–28)
Comparing the two sets of equations above, we notice that the dimension-
less temperatures anywhere in a plane wall, cylinder, and sphere are related
to the center temperature by
(11-29)
which shows that time dependence of dimensionless temperature within a
given geometry is the same throughout. That is, if the dimensionless center
temperature u0 drops by 20 percent at a specified time, so does the dimen-
sionless temperature u0 anywhere else in the medium at the same time.
Once the Bi number is known, these relations can be used to determine the
temperature anywhere in the medium. The determination of the constants A1
uwall
u0, wall
 cos al1x
L b,  
ucyl
u0, cyl
 J0al1r
ro
b,  and  
usph
u0, sph
 sin(l1rro)
l1rro
T0  T
Ti  T
T0  T
Ti  T
T0  T
Ti  T
sin(l1r/ro)
l1r/ro
T(r, t)  T
Ti  T
T(r, t)  T
Ti  T
T(x, t)  T
Ti  T
484
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
488
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
and l1 usually requires interpolation. For those who prefer reading charts to
interpolating, these relations are plotted and the one-term approximation
solutions are presented in graphical form, known as the transient temperature
charts. Note that the charts are sometimes difficult to read, and they are sub-
ject to reading errors. Therefore, the relations above should be preferred to
the charts.
The transient temperature charts in Figs. 11–15, 11–16, and 11–17 for a
large plane wall, long cylinder, and sphere were presented by M. P. Heisler
in 1947 and are called Heisler charts. They were supplemented in 1961
with transient heat transfer charts by H. Gröber. There are three charts asso-
ciated with each geometry: the first chart is to determine the temperature T0
Chapter 11
|
485
TABLE 11–2
Coefficients used in the one-term approximate solution of transient one-
dimensional heat conduction in plane walls, cylinders, and spheres (Bi  hL/k
for a plane wall of thickness 2L, and Bi  hro/k for a cylinder or sphere of
radius ro)
Plane Wall
Cylinder
Sphere
Bi
l1
A1
l1
A1
l1
A1
0.01
0.0998
1.0017
0.1412
1.0025
0.1730
1.0030
0.02
0.1410
1.0033
0.1995
1.0050
0.2445
1.0060
0.04
0.1987
1.0066
0.2814
1.0099
0.3450
1.0120
0.06
0.2425
1.0098
0.3438
1.0148
0.4217
1.0179
0.08
0.2791
1.0130
0.3960
1.0197
0.4860
1.0239
0.1
0.3111
1.0161
0.4417
1.0246
0.5423
1.0298
0.2
0.4328
1.0311
0.6170
1.0483
0.7593
1.0592
0.3
0.5218
1.0450
0.7465
1.0712
0.9208
1.0880
0.4
0.5932
1.0580
0.8516
1.0931
1.0528
1.1164
0.5
0.6533
1.0701
0.9408
1.1143
1.1656
1.1441
0.6
0.7051
1.0814
1.0184
1.1345
1.2644
1.1713
0.7
0.7506
1.0918
1.0873
1.1539
1.3525
1.1978
0.8
0.7910
1.1016
1.1490
1.1724
1.4320
1.2236
0.9
0.8274
1.1107
1.2048
1.1902
1.5044
1.2488
1.0
0.8603
1.1191
1.2558
1.2071
1.5708
1.2732
2.0
1.0769
1.1785
1.5995
1.3384
2.0288
1.4793
3.0
1.1925
1.2102
1.7887
1.4191
2.2889
1.6227
4.0
1.2646
1.2287
1.9081
1.4698
2.4556
1.7202
5.0
1.3138
1.2403
1.9898
1.5029
2.5704
1.7870
6.0
1.3496
1.2479
2.0490
1.5253
2.6537
1.8338
7.0
1.3766
1.2532
2.0937
1.5411
2.7165
1.8673
8.0
1.3978
1.2570
2.1286
1.5526
2.7654
1.8920
9.0
1.4149
1.2598
2.1566
1.5611
2.8044
1.9106
10.0
1.4289
1.2620
2.1795
1.5677
2.8363
1.9249
20.0
1.4961
1.2699
2.2880
1.5919
2.9857
1.9781
30.0
1.5202
1.2717
2.3261
1.5973
3.0372
1.9898
40.0
1.5325
1.2723
2.3455
1.5993
3.0632
1.9942
50.0
1.5400
1.2727
2.3572
1.6002
3.0788
1.9962
100.0
1.5552
1.2731
2.3809
1.6015
3.1102
1.9990

1.5708
1.2732
2.4048
1.6021
3.1416
2.0000
TABLE 11–3
The zeroth- and first-order Bessel
functions of the first kind
h
J0(h)
J1(h)
0.0
1.0000
0.0000
0.1
0.9975
0.0499
0.2
0.9900
0.0995
0.3
0.9776
0.1483
0.4
0.9604
0.1960
0.5
0.9385
0.2423
0.6
0.9120
0.2867
0.7
0.8812
0.3290
0.8
0.8463
0.3688
0.9
0.8075
0.4059
1.0
0.7652
0.4400
1.1
0.7196
0.4709
1.2
0.6711
0.4983
1.3
0.6201
0.5220
1.4
0.5669
0.5419
1.5
0.5118
0.5579
1.6
0.4554
0.5699
1.7
0.3980
0.5778
1.8
0.3400
0.5815
1.9
0.2818
0.5812
2.0
0.2239
0.5767
2.1
0.1666
0.5683
2.2
0.1104
0.5560
2.3
0.0555
0.5399
2.4
0.0025
0.5202
2.6
0.0968
0.4708
2.8
0.1850
0.4097
3.0
0.2601
0.3391
3.2
0.3202
0.2613

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
489
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
486
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(c) Heat transfer (From H. Gröber et al.)
0.1
0.2
1.2
1.4
1.6 1.8
2
3
4
5
6
8
7
9
2.5
10
12
14
90
100
80
60
45
35
25
18
70
50
40
30
20
16
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1.0
0
0.05
700
600
500
400
300
120
70
50
30
26
22
18
14
10
8
6
4
3
2
1
0
150
100
0.001
   =   t/L2
τ
α
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.1
0.007
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.01
Q
Qmax
k
hL
=
1
Bi
x
L
0
Initially
T = Ti
T
h
T
h
Bi2   = h2  t/k2
100
10
1.0
0.1
0.01
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
T0 – T
Ti – T
0 = 
θ
θ
(a) Midplane temperature (From M. P. Heisler, Temperat ure Charts for Induction and 
Constant Temperature Heating,” Trans. ASME 69, 1947, pp. 227–36. Reprinted by permission
of ASME International.)
(b) Temperature distribution (From M. P. Heisler, 
“Temperature Charts for Induction and Constant 
Temperature Heating,” Trans. ASME 69, 1947, 
pp. 227–36. Reprinted by permission of ASME 
International.)
2L
x/L = 0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.0
Plate
k
hL = 1
Bi
T – T
T0 – T
  = 
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
1
10
102
103
104
Plate
Plate
Bi = hL/k
Bi = 0.001
0.002
0.005
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
τ
α
FIGURE 11–15
Transient temperature and heat transfer charts for a plane wall of thickness 2L initially at a uniform temperature Ti
subjected to convection from both sides to an environment at temperature T with a convection coefficient of h.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
490
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
487
250
150
350
140
120
70
50
30
26
22
18
14
10
8
6
4
3
2
1
0
0.001
   =   t/ro
2
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.1
0.007
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.01
T0 – T
Ti – T
(a) Centerline temperature (From M. P. Heisler, “Temperature Charts for Induction and 
Constant Temperature Heating,” Trans. ASME 69, 1947, pp. 227–36. Reprinted by permission
of ASME International.)
0
3
2
6
7
8
9
4
5
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.6
10
12
16
18
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
60
70
80
90
100
14
1.4
1.8
2.5
0.1
100
T – T
T0 – T
(c) Heat transfer (From H. Gröber et al.)
Q
Qmax
k
hro
r
ro
0
Initially
T = Ti
T
h
T
h
(b) Temperature distribution (From M. P. Heisler, 
“Temperature Charts for Induction and Constant 
Temperature Heating,” Trans. ASME 69, 1947, 
pp. 227–36. Reprinted by permission of ASME 
International.)
 = 
0 = 
=
1
Bi
100
10
1.0
0.1
0.01
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.0
r/ro = 0.2
= 1
Bi
k
hro
Cylinder
Bi2   = h2  t/k2
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
1
10
102
103
104
Bi = hro/k
Cylinder
Cylinder
Bi = 0.001
0.002
0.005
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
τ
α
τ
α
θ
θ
FIGURE 11–16
Transient temperature and heat transfer charts for a long cylinder of radius ro initially at a uniform temperature Ti
subjected to convection from all sides to an environment at temperature T with a convection coefficient of h.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
491
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
488
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 11–17
Transient temperature and heat transfer charts for a sphere of radius ro initially at a uniform temperature Ti subjected to
convection from all sides to an environment at temperature T with a convection coefficient of h.
0
4
5
6
7
8
9
0.2
0.5
1.0
1.4
1.2
1.6
3.0
3.5
10
12
14
16
25
35
45
30
40
50
60
70
90
80
100
2.8
0.05
0.35
0.75
250
200
150
100
50
40
30
20
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2.5
2
1.5
1.0
0
0.5
1.0
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.07
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0.007
0.005
0.004
0.003
0.002
0.001
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.01
0.1
1.0
10
100
(a) Midpoint temperature (From M. P. Heisler, “Temperature Charts for Induction and 
Constant Temperature Heating,” Trans. ASME 69, 1947, pp. 227–36. Reprinted by permission
of ASME International.)
T – T
T0 – T
Q
Qmax
k
hro
=
1
Bi
r
ro
Initially
T = Ti
T
h
T
h
(b) Temperature distribution (From M. P. Heisler, 
“Temperature Charts for Induction and Constant 
Temperature Heating,” Trans. ASME 69, 1947, 
pp. 227–36. Reprinted by permission of ASME 
International.)
0
 = 
θ
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.9
1.0
r/ro = 0.2
2.6
2.2 2.0
1.8
k
hro
= 1
Bi
20
18
0.1
(c) Heat transfer (From H. Gröber et al.)
Bi2   = h2  t/k2
10–5
10–4
10–3
10–2
10–1
1
10
102
103
104
Bi = hro/k
Sphere
Bi = 0.001
0.002
0.005
0.01
0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2
0.5
1
2
5
10
20
50
Sphere
Sphere
2.4
τ
α
T0 – T
Ti – T
 0 = 
θ
   =   t/ro
2
τ
α

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
492
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
at the center of the geometry at a given time t. The second chart is to deter-
mine the temperature at other locations at the same time in terms of T0. The
third chart is to determine the total amount of heat transfer up to the time t.
These plots are valid for t  0.2.
Note that the case 1/Bi  k/hL  0 corresponds to h →, which corre-
sponds to the case of specified surface temperature T. That is, the case in
which the surfaces of the body are suddenly brought to the temperature T
at t  0 and kept at T at all times can be handled by setting h to infinity
(Fig. 11–18).
The temperature of the body changes from the initial temperature Ti to the
temperature of the surroundings T at the end of the transient heat conduction
process. Thus, the maximum amount of heat that a body can gain (or lose if
Ti  T) is simply the change in the energy content of the body. That is,
Qmax  mcp(T  Ti)  rVcp(T  Ti)
(kJ)
(11–30)
where m is the mass, V is the volume, r is the density, and cp is the specific
heat of the body. Thus, Qmax represents the amount of heat transfer for t →.
The amount of heat transfer Q at a finite time t is obviously less than this
maximum, and it can be expressed as the sum of the internal energy changes
throughout the entire geometry as
V
(11–31)
where T(x, t) is the temperature distribution in the medium at time t. Assum-
ing constant properties, the ratio of Q/Qmax becomes
(11–32)
Using the appropriate nondimensional temperature relations based on the
one-term approximation for the plane wall, cylinder, and sphere, and per-
forming the indicated integrations, we obtain the following relations for the
fraction of heat transfer in those geometries:
Plane wall:
 1  u0, wall
(11–33)
Cylinder:
 1  2u0, cyl
(11–34)
Sphere:
 1  3u0, sph
(11–35)
These Q/Qmax ratio relations based on the one-term approximation are also
plotted in Figures 11–15c, 11–16c, and 11–17c, against the variables Bi and
h2at/k2 for the large plane wall, long cylinder, and sphere, respectively. Note
that once the fraction of heat transfer Q/Qmax has been determined from
these charts or equations for the given t, the actual amount of heat transfer
by that time can be evaluated by multiplying this fraction by Qmax. A nega-
tive sign for Qmax indicates that the body is rejecting heat (Fig. 11–19).
The use of the Heisler/Gröber charts and the one-term solutions already
discussed is limited to the conditions specified at the beginning of this sec-
sin l1  l1 cos l1
l3
1
a Q
Qmaxb
sph
J1(l1)
l1
a Q
Qmaxb
cyl
sin l1
l1
a Q
Qmaxb
wall
Q
Qmax

v rcp[T 1x, t2  Ti]dV
rcp 1T  Ti2V
 1
V
V
11  u2dV
Q  
V
rcp[T(x,t)  Ti]d
Chapter 11
|
489
Ts
Ts ≠T
Ts = T
Ts
Ts
Ts
T
T
T
T
h
h
h → 
(a) Finite convection coefficient
(b) Infinite convection coefficient
h → 
FIGURE 11–18
The specified surface
temperature corresponds to the case
of convection to an environment at
T with a convection coefficient h
that is infinite.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
493
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
tion: the body is initially at a uniform temperature, the temperature of the
medium surrounding the body and the convection heat transfer coefficient
are constant and uniform, and there is no heat generation in the body.
We discussed the physical significance of the Biot number earlier and
indicated that it is a measure of the relative magnitudes of the two heat
transfer mechanisms: convection at the surface and conduction through the
solid. A small value of Bi indicates that the inner resistance of the body to
heat conduction is small relative to the resistance to convection between the
surface and the fluid. As a result, the temperature distribution within the
solid becomes fairly uniform, and lumped system analysis becomes applica-
ble. Recall that when Bi  0.1, the error in assuming the temperature within
the body to be uniform is negligible.
To understand the physical significance of the Fourier number t, we
express it as (Fig. 11–20)
t 
(11–36)
Therefore, the Fourier number is a measure of heat conducted through a
body relative to heat stored. Thus, a large value of the Fourier number indi-
cates faster propagation of heat through a body.
Perhaps you are wondering about what constitutes an infinitely large plate
or an infinitely long cylinder. After all, nothing in this world is infinite. A
plate whose thickness is small relative to the other dimensions can be mod-
eled as an infinitely large plate, except very near the outer edges. But the
edge effects on large bodies are usually negligible, and thus a large plane
wall such as the wall of a house can be modeled as an infinitely large wall
for heat transfer purposes. Similarly, a long cylinder whose diameter is
small relative to its length can be analyzed as an infinitely long cylinder.
The use of the transient temperature charts and the one-term solutions is
illustrated in Examples 11–3, 11–4, and 11–5.
at
L2  kL2 (1/L)
rcp L3/t
T
T 
The rate at which heat is conducted
across L of a body of volume L3
The rate at which heat is stored
in a body of volume L3
490
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Qstored
Qconducted
L
L
L
L2
  t
α
Fourier number:    = —– = ————
τ
·
·
Q·
Qconducted
·
Qstored
·
FIGURE 11–20
Fourier number at time t can be
viewed as the ratio of the rate of heat
conducted to the rate of heat stored
at that time.
t = 0
T =  Ti
m, cp
(a) Maximum heat transfer (t → )
T =  T
.
Qmax
t = 0
T =  Ti
m, cp
(b) Actual heat transfer for time t
(Gröber chart)
T =  T(r, t)
T
.
Q
Qmax
Q
h
T
h
Bi = . . .
 = Bi2   = . . .
τ
h2  t
α
k2
——
——
            = . . . 
FIGURE 11–19
The fraction of total heat transfer
Q/Qmax up to a specified time t is
determined using the Gröber charts.
EXAMPLE 11–3
Boiling Eggs
An ordinary egg can be approximated as a 5-cm-diameter sphere (Fig. 11–21).
The egg is initially at a uniform temperature of 5C and is dropped into boiling
water at 95C. Taking the convection heat transfer coefficient to be
h  1200 W/m2 · C, determine how long it will take for the center of the egg
to reach 70C.
Solution
An egg is cooked in boiling water. The cooking time of the egg is
to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The egg is spherical in shape with a radius of ro  2.5 cm.
2 Heat conduction in the egg is one-dimensional because of thermal symme-
try about the midpoint. 3 The thermal properties of the egg and the heat
transfer coefficient are constant. 4 The Fourier number is t  0.2 so that
the one-term approximate solutions are applicable. 5 The internal eggwhite
is a solid and admits no convection.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
494
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
491
Properties
The water content of eggs is about 74 percent, and thus the ther-
mal conductivity and diffusivity of eggs can be approximated by those of water
at the average temperature of (5  70)/2  37.5C; k  0.627 W/m · C and
a  k/rcp  0.151 
 106 m2/s (Table A–15).
Analysis
The temperature within the egg varies with radial distance as well
as time, and the temperature at a specified location at a given time can be
determined from the Heisler charts or the one-term solutions. Here we use
the latter to demonstrate their use. The Biot number for this problem is
Bi 
 47.8
which is much greater than 0.1, and thus the lumped system analysis is not
applicable. The coefficients l1 and A1 for a sphere corresponding to this Bi
are, from Table 11–2,
l1  3.0754,
A1  1.9958
Substituting these and other values into Eq. 11–28 and solving for t gives
 A1el2
1 t
⎯→
 1.9958
⎯→
t  0.209
which is greater than 0.2, and thus the one-term solution is applicable with
an error of less than 2 percent. Then the cooking time is determined from
the definition of the Fourier number to be
t 
 865 s 
 14.4 min
Therefore, it will take about 15 min for the center of the egg to be heated
from 5C to 70C.
Discussion
Note that the Biot number in lumped system analysis was
defined differently as Bi  hLc/k  h(r o/3)/k. However, either definition can
be used in determining the applicability of the lumped system analysis
unless Bi 
 0.1.
tr 2
o
a  (0.209)(0.025 m)2
0.151 
 106 m2/s
e(3.0754)2t
70  95
5  95
T0  T
Ti  T
hro
k  (1200 W/m2  C)(0.025 m)
0.627 W/m  C
EXAMPLE 11–4
Heating of Brass Plates in an Oven
In a production facility, large brass plates of 4-cm thickness that are initially
at a uniform temperature of 20C are heated by passing them through an
oven that is maintained at 500C (Fig. 11–22). The plates remain in the
oven for a period of 7 min. Taking the combined convection and radiation
heat transfer coefficient to be h  120 W/m2 · C, determine the surface
temperature of the plates when they come out of the oven.
Solution
Large brass plates are heated in an oven. The surface temperature
of the plates leaving the oven is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Heat conduction in the plate is one-dimensional since the
plate is large relative to its thickness and there is thermal symmetry about
the center plane. 2 The thermal properties of the plate and the heat transfer
coefficient are constant. 3 The Fourier number is t  0.2 so that the one-
term approximate solutions are applicable.
Egg
Ti = 5°C
h = 1200 W/m2·°C
T = 95°C
FIGURE 11–21
Schematic for Example 11–3.
2L = 4 cm
Brass
plate
h = 120 W/m2·°C
T = 500°C
Ti = 20°C
FIGURE 11–22
Schematic for Example 11–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
495
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
492
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Properties
The properties of brass at room temperature are k  110
W/m · C, r  8530 kg/m3, cp  380 J/kg · C, and a  33.9 
 106 m2/s
(Table A–24). More accurate results are obtained by using properties at aver-
age temperature.
Analysis
The temperature at a specified location at a given time can be de-
termined from the Heisler charts or one-term solutions. Here we use the
charts to demonstrate their use. Noting that the half-thickness of the plate is
L  0.02 m, from Fig. 11–15 we have
Also,
Therefore,
 0.46 
 0.99  0.455
and
T  T  0.455(Ti  T)  500  0.455(20  500)  282C
Therefore, the surface temperature of the plates will be 282C when they
leave the oven.
Discussion
We notice that the Biot number in this case is Bi  1/45.8
 0.022, which is much less than 0.1. Therefore, we expect the lumped
system analysis to be applicable. This is also evident from (T  T)/(T0 
T)  0.99, which indicates that the temperatures at the center and the sur-
face of the plate relative to the surrounding temperature are within 1 percent
of each other. Noting that the error involved in reading the Heisler charts is
typically a few percent, the lumped system analysis in this case may yield
just as accurate results with less effort.
The heat transfer surface area of the plate is 2A, where A is the face area
of the plate (the plate transfers heat through both of its surfaces), and the
volume of the plate is V  (2L)A, where L is the half-thickness of the plate.
The exponent b used in the lumped system analysis is
b 

 0.00185 s1
Then the temperature of the plate at t  7 min  420 s is determined from
 ebt
⎯→
 e(0.00185 s1)(420 s)
T (t )  500
20  500
T (t )  T
Ti  T
120 W/m2  C
(8530 kg/m3)(380 J/kg  C)(0.02 m)
hAs
rcpV 
h(2A)
rcp (2LA) 
h
rcp L
T  T
Ti  T  T  T
T0  T
T0  T
Ti  T
1
Bi  k
hL  45.8
  x
L  L
L  1
∂ T  T
T0  T  0.99
1
Bi  k
hL 
110 W/m  °C
(120 W/m2  °C)(0.02 m)  45.8
t  at
L2  (33.9 
 106 m2/s)(7 
 60 s)
(0.02 m)2
 35.6
∂ T0  T
Ti  T  0.46

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
496
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
493
It yields
T (t)  279C
which is practically identical to the result obtained above using the Heisler
charts. Therefore, we can use lumped system analysis with confidence when
the Biot number is sufficiently small.
EXAMPLE 11–5
Cooling of a Long
Stainless Steel Cylindrical Shaft
A long 20-cm-diameter cylindrical shaft made of stainless steel 304 comes
out of an oven at a uniform temperature of 600C (Fig. 11–23). The shaft is
then allowed to cool slowly in an environment chamber at 200C with an
average heat transfer coefficient of h  80 W/m2 · C. Determine the tem-
perature at the center of the shaft 45 min after the start of the cooling
process. Also, determine the heat transfer per unit length of the shaft during
this time period.
Solution
A long cylindrical shaft is allowed to cool slowly. The center tem-
perature and the heat transfer per unit length are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Heat conduction in the shaft is one-dimensional since it is
long and it has thermal symmetry about the centerline. 2 The thermal proper-
ties of the shaft and the heat transfer coefficient are constant. 3 The Fourier
number is t  0.2 so that the one-term approximate solutions are applicable.
Properties
The properties of stainless steel 304 at room temperature
are k  14.9 W/m · C, r  7900 kg/m3, cp  477 J/kg · C, and 
a  3.95 
 106 m2/s (Table A–24). More accurate results can be obtained
by using properties at average temperature.
Analysis
The temperature within the shaft may vary with the radial distance
r as well as time, and the temperature at a specified location at a given time
can be determined from the Heisler charts. Noting that the radius of the
shaft is ro  0.1 m, from Fig. 11–16 we have
and
T0  T  0.4(Ti  T)  200  0.4(600  200)  360C
Therefore, the center temperature of the shaft drops from 600C to 360C in
45 min.
To determine the actual heat transfer, we first need to calculate the
maximum heat that can be transferred from the cylinder, which is the
sensible energy of the cylinder relative to its environment. Taking L  1 m,
m  rV  rpro
2 L  (7900 kg/m3)p(0.1 m)2(1 m)  248.2 kg
Qmax  mcp(T  Ti)  (248.2 kg)(0.477 kJ/kg · C)(600  200)C
 47,350 kJ
1
Bi
 k
hro

14.9 W/m  °C
(80 W/m2  °C)(0.1 m)  1.86
t  at
r 2
o
 (3.95 
 106 m2/s)(45 
 60 s)
(0.1 m)2
 1.07
∂ 
T0  T
Ti  T
 0.40
Stainless steel
shaft
= 200°C
= 80 W/m2·°C
T
h
Ti = 600°C
D = 20 cm
FIGURE 11–23
Schematic for Example 11–5.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
497
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
494
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
The dimensionless heat transfer ratio is determined from Fig. 11–16c for a
long cylinder to be
Therefore,
Q  0.62Qmax  0.62 
 (47,350 kJ)  29,360 kJ
which is the total heat transfer from the shaft during the first 45 min of
the cooling.
Alternative solution
We could also solve this problem using the one-term
solution relation instead of the transient charts. First we find the Biot number
Bi 
 0.537
The coefficients l1 and A1 for a cylinder corresponding to this Bi are
determined from Table 11–2 to be
l1  0.970,
A1  1.122
Substituting these values into Eq. 11–27 gives
u0 
 A1el2
1 t  1.122
 0.41
and thus
T0  T  0.41(Ti  T)  200  0.41(600  200)  364C
The value of J1(l1) for l1  0.970 is determined from Table 11–3 to be
0.430. Then the fractional heat transfer is determined from Eq. 11–34 to be
 1  2u0
 1  2 
 0.41
 0.636
and thus
Q  0.636Qmax  0.636 
 (47,350 kJ)  30,120 kJ
Discussion
The slight difference between the two results is due to the
reading error of the charts.
0.430
0.970
J1(l1)
l1
Q
Qmax
e(0.970)2(1.07)
T0  T
Ti  T
hro
k  (80 W/m2  C)(0.1 m)
14.9 W/m  C
Bi 
1
1/Bi 
1
1.86  0.537
h 2at
k 2
 Bi2t  (0.537)2(1.07)  0.309
∂ Q
Qmax  0.62
11–3
■TRANSIENT HEAT CONDUCTION 
IN SEMI-INFINITE SOLIDS
A semi-infinite solid is an idealized body that has a single plane surface and
extends to infinity in all directions, as shown in Figure 11–24. This ideal-
ized body is used to indicate that the temperature change in the part of the
body in which we are interested (the region close to the surface) is due to
Plane
surface
0
x





T
h
FIGURE 11–24
Schematic of a semi-infinite body.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
498
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
495
the thermal conditions on a single surface. The earth, for example, can be
considered to be a semi-infinite medium in determining the variation of
temperature near its surface. Also, a thick wall can be modeled as a semi-
infinite medium if all we are interested in is the variation of temperature in
the region near one of the surfaces, and the other surface is too far to have
any impact on the region of interest during the time of observation. The
temperature in the core region of the wall remains unchanged in this case.
For short periods of time, most bodies can be modeled as semi-infinite
solids since heat does not have sufficient time to penetrate deep into the
body, and the thickness of the body does not enter into the heat transfer
analysis. A steel piece of any shape, for example, can be treated as a semi-
infinite solid when it is quenched rapidly to harden its surface. A body
whose surface is heated by a laser pulse can be treated the same way.
Consider a semi-infinite solid with constant thermophysical properties,
no internal heat generation, uniform thermal conditions on its exposed
surface, and initially a uniform temperature of Ti throughout. Heat transfer
in this case occurs only in the direction normal to the surface (the x direc-
tion), and thus it is one-dimensional. Differential equations are independent
of the boundary or initial conditions, and thus Eq. 11–10a for one-dimen-
sional transient conduction in Cartesian coordinates applies. The depth of
the solid is large (x →) compared to the depth that heat can penetrate, and
these phenomena can be expressed mathematically as a boundary condition
as T(x →, t)  Ti.
Heat conduction in a semi-infinite solid is governed by the thermal condi-
tions imposed on the exposed surface, and thus the solution depends
strongly on the boundary condition at x  0. Below we present a detailed
analytical solution for the case of constant temperature Ts on the surface,
and give the results for other more complicated boundary conditions. When
the surface temperature is changed to Ts at t  0 and held constant at that
value at all times, the formulation of the problem can be expressed as
Differential equation:
(11–37a)
Boundary conditions:
(11–37b)
Initial condition:
(11–37c)
The separation of variables technique does not work in this case since the
medium is infinite. But another clever approach that converts the partial dif-
ferential equation into an ordinary differential equation by combining the two
independent variables x and t into a single variable h, called the similarity
variable, works well. For transient conduction in a semi-infinite medium, it
is defined as
Similarity variable:
(11–38)
Assuming T  T(h) (to be verified) and using the chain rule, all derivatives
in the heat conduction equation can be transformed into the new variable, as
shown in Fig. 11–25. Noting that h  0 at x  0 and h → as x → (and
also at t  0) and substituting into Eqs. 11–37 give, after simplification,
 h 
x
24at
T(x, 0)  Ti
T(0, t)  Ts   and  T(x →,t)  Ti
2T
x2  1
a
T
t
2T
x2  d
dh aT
xb
h
x  1
4at
d2T
dh2
T
x  dT
dh
h
x 
1
24at
dT
dh
T
t  dT
dh
h
t 
x
2t24at
dT
dh
2T
x2  1
a
T
t  and  h 
x
24at
FIGURE 11–25
Transformation of variables in the
derivatives of the heat conduction
equation by the use of chain rule.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
499
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
(11–39a)
(11–39b)
Note that the second boundary condition and the initial condition result in
the same boundary condition. Both the transformed equation and the bound-
ary conditions depend on h only and are independent of x and t. Therefore,
transformation is successful, and h is indeed a similarity variable.
To solve the 2nd order ordinary differential equation in Eqs. 11–39, we
define a new variable w as w  dT/dh. This reduces Eq. 11–39a into a first
order differential equation than can be solved by separating variables,
where C1  ln C0. Back substituting w  dT/dh and integrating again,
(11–40)
where u is a dummy integration variable. The boundary condition at h  0
gives C2  Ts, and the one for h →∞gives
(11–41)
Substituting the C1 and C2 expressions into Eq. 11–40 and rearranging, the
variation of temperature becomes
(11–42)
where the mathematical functions
(11–43)
are called the error function and the complementary error function,
respectively, of argument h (Fig. 11–26). Despite its simple appearance, the
integral in the definition of the error function cannot be performed analyti-
cally. Therefore, the function erfc(h) is evaluated numerically for different
values of h, and the results are listed in Table 11–4.
Knowing the temperature distribution, the heat flux at the surface can be
determined from the Fourier’s law to be
(11–44)
q#
s  kT
x `
x0
 kdT
dh
h
x `
h0
 kC1eh2
1
24at
`
h0
 k(Ts  Ti)
2pat
erf(h) 
2
2p 
h
0
eu2du  and  erfc(h)  1 
2
2p
h
0
eu2du
T  Ts
Ti  Ts

2
2p
h
0
eu2du  erf(h)  1  erfc(h)
Ti  C1

0
eu2 du  C2  C1
2p
2
 Ts  → C1  2(Ti  Ts)
2p
T  C1
h
0
eu2du  C2
dw
dh  2hw → dw
w  2hdh → lnw  h2  C0 → w  C1eh2
T(0)  Ts   and  T(h →)  Ti
d 2T
dh2  2hdT
dh
496
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.5
0.0
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Error function erf (h)
h
erf(h) =
eu2 du
2
p ∫0
h
FIGURE 11–26
Error function is a standard
mathematical function, just like the
sine and cosine functions, whose value
varies between 0 and 1.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
500
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The solutions in Eqs. 11–42 and 11–44 correspond to the case when the
temperature of the exposed surface of the medium is suddenly raised (or
lowered) to Ts at t  0 and is maintained at that value at all times. The spec-
ified surface temperature case is closely approximated in practice when con-
densation or boiling takes place on the surface. Using a similar approach or
the Laplace transform technique, analytical solutions can be obtained for
other boundary conditions on the surface, with the following results.
Case 1: Specified Surface Temperature, Ts  constant (Fig. 11–27).
(11–45)
Case 2: Specified Surface Heat Flux,
 constant.
(11–46)
T(x, t)  Ti  q#
s
k CB
4at
p exp £ x2
4at≥ xerfc£
x
22at
≥S
q#
s
T(x, t)  Ti
Ts  Ti
 erfc£
x
22at
≥  and  q#
s(t)  k(Ts  Ti)
2pat
Chapter 11
|
497
TABLE 11–4
The complementary error function*
h
erfc (h)
h
erfc (h)
h
erfc (h)
h
erfc (h)
h
erfc (h)
h
erfc (h)
0.00
1.00000
0.38
0.5910
0.76
0.2825
1.14
0.1069
1.52
0.03159
1.90
0.00721
0.02
0.9774
0.40
0.5716
0.78
0.2700
1.16
0.10090
1.54
0.02941
1.92
0.00662
0.04
0.9549
0.42
0.5525
0.80
0.2579
1.18
0.09516
1.56
0.02737
1.94
0.00608
0.06
0.9324
0.44
0.5338
0.82
0.2462
1.20
0.08969
1.58
0.02545
1.96
0.00557
0.08
0.9099
0.46
0.5153
0.84
0.2349
1.22
0.08447
1.60
0.02365
1.98
0.00511
0.10
0.8875
0.48
0.4973
0.86
0.2239
1.24
0.07950
1.62
0.02196
2.00
0.00468
0.12
0.8652
0.50
0.4795
0.88
0.2133
1.26
0.07476
1.64
0.02038
2.10
0.00298
0.14
0.8431
0.52
0.4621
0.90
0.2031
1.28
0.07027
1.66
0.01890
2.20
0.00186
0.16
0.8210
0.54
0.4451
0.92
0.1932
1.30
0.06599
1.68
0.01751
2.30
0.00114
0.18
0.7991
0.56
0.4284
0.94
0.1837
1.32
0.06194
1.70
0.01612
2.40
0.00069
0.20
0.7773
0.58
0.4121
0.96
0.1746
1.34
0.05809
1.72
0.01500
2.50
0.00041
0.22
0.7557
0.60
0.3961
0.98
0.1658
1.36
0.05444
1.74
0.01387
2.60
0.00024
0.24
0.7343
0.62
0.3806
1.00
0.1573
1.38
0.05098
1.76
0.01281
2.70
0.00013
0.26
0.7131
0.64
0.3654
1.02
0.1492
1.40
0.04772
1.78
0.01183
2.80
0.00008
0.28
0.6921
0.66
0.3506
1.04
0.1413
1.42
0.04462
1.80
0.01091
2.90
0.00004
0.30
0.6714
0.68
0.3362
1.06
0.1339
1.44
0.04170
1.82
0.01006
3.00
0.00002
0.32
0.6509
0.70
0.3222
1.08
0.1267
1.46
0.03895
1.84
0.00926
3.20
0.00001
0.34
0.6306
0.72
0.3086
1.10
0.1198
1.48
0.03635
1.86
0.00853
3.40
0.00000
0.36
0.6107
0.74
0.2953
1.12
0.1132
1.50
0.03390
1.88
0.00784
3.60
0.00000
*Note: erf  1  erfc
T−Ti
Ts−Ti
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
h
x
4at
=
erfc(h)
FIGURE 11–27
Dimensionless temperature
distribution for transient conduction
in a semi-infinite solid whose
surface is maintained at a constant
temperature Ts.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
501
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Case 3: Convection on the Surface,
(t)  h[T∞ T(0, t)].
(11–47)
Case 4: Energy Pulse at Surface, es  constant.
Energy in the amount of es per unit surface area (in J/m2) is supplied to the
semi-infinite body instantaneously at time t  0 (by a laser pulse, for exam-
ple), and the entire energy is assumed to enter the body, with no heat loss
from the surface.
(11–48)
Note that Cases 1 and 3 are closely related. In Case 1, the surface x  0 is
brought to a temperature Ts at time t  0, and kept at that value at all times.
In Case 3, the surface is exposed to convection by a fluid at a constant tem-
perature T∞with a heat transfer coefficient h.
The solutions for all four cases are plotted in Fig. 11–28 for a representa-
tive case using a large cast iron block initially at 0C throughout. In Case 1,
the surface temperature remains constant at the specified value of Ts, and
temperature increases gradually within the medium as heat penetrates
deeper into the solid. Note that during initial periods only a thin slice near
the surface is affected by heat transfer. Also, the temperature gradient at the
surface and thus the rate of heat transfer into the solid decreases with time.
In Case 2, heat is continually supplied to the solid, and thus the temperature
within the solid, including the surface, increases with time. This is also the
case with convection (Case 3), except that the surrounding fluid temperature
T∞is the highest temperature that the solid body can rise to. In Case 4, the
surface is subjected to an instant burst of heat supply at time t  0, such as
heating by a laser pulse, and then the surface is covered with insulation. The
result is an instant rise in surface temperature, followed by a temperature
drop as heat is conducted deeper into the solid. Note that the temperature
profile is always normal to the surface at all times. (Why?)
The variation of temperature with position and time in a semi-infinite
solid subjected to convection heat transfer is plotted in Fig. 11–29 for the
nondimensionalized temperature against the dimensionless similarity vari-
able 
for various values of the parameter 
. Although
the graphical solution given in Fig. 11–29 is simply a plot of the exact ana-
lytical solution, it is subject to reading errors, and thus is of limited accu-
racy compared to the analytical solution. Also, the values on the vertical
axis of Fig. 11–29 correspond to x  0, and thus represent the surface tem-
perature. The curve 
corresponds to h →∞, which corresponds
to the case of specified temperature T∞at the surface at x  0. That is, the
case in which the surface of the semi-infinite body is suddenly brought to
temperature T∞at t  0 and kept at T∞at all times can be handled by setting
h to infinity. For a finite heat transfer coefficient h, the surface temperature
approaches the fluid temperature T∞as the time t approaches infinity.
h1at/k  
h2at / k
h  x/24at
T(x, t)  Ti 
es
k2pt/a
exp a x2
4atb
T(x,t)  Ti
T  Ti
 erfc£
x
22at
≥ exp £hx
k  h2at
k2 ≥erfc£
x
22at
 h2at
k
≥
q#
s
498
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
502
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Contact of Two Semi-Infinite Solids
When two large bodies A and B, initially at uniform temperatures TA,i and
TB,i are brought into contact, they instantly achieve temperature equality at
the contact surface (temperature equality is achieved over the entire surface
if the contact resistance is negligible). If the two bodies are of the same
material with constant properties, thermal symmetry requires the contact
surface temperature to be the arithmetic average, Ts  (TA,i  TB,i)/2 and to
remain constant at that value at all times.
Chapter 11
|
499
100
80
60
40
20
0.2
0.4
0.6
Distance from surface x, m
Distance from surface x, m
0.8
0
Ti = 0°C
1
Ts = 100°C
0
T,°C
0.01 h
0.1 h
0.5 h
5 h
1 h
2 h
Time, t = 10 h
100
80
60
40
20
0.2
0.4
0.6
Distance from surface x, m
0.8
0
Ti = 0°C
1
T∞ = 100°C
h = 220 W/m2 . °C
0
T,°C
0.01 h
0.1 h0.5 h
5 h
1 h
2 h
Time, t = 0.01 h
100
80
60
40
20
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
Ti = 0°C
1
qs = 7000 W/m2
0
T,°C
0.01 h
0.5 h
1 h2 h
5 h
Time, t = 10 h
100
80
60
40
20
0.2
0.4
0.6
Distance from surface x, m
0.8
0
Ti = 0°C
1
es = 1.7×107 J/m2
0
T,°C
0.1 h
10 h
0.5 h
5 h
2 h
Time, t = 0.01 h
.
.
(a) Specified surface temperature, Ts = constant.
(c) Convection at the surface 
(d) Energy pulse at the surface, es = constant
(b) Specified surface heat flux, qs = constant.
1 h
FIGURE 11–28
Variations of temperature with position and time in a large cast iron block (a  2.31 
 105 m2/s,
k  80.2 W/m · C) initially at 0 C under different thermal conditions on the surface.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
503
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
If the bodies are of different materials, they still achieve a temperature
equality, but the surface temperature Ts in this case will be different than the
arithmetic average. Noting that both bodies can be treated as semi-infinite
solids with the same specified surface temperature, the energy balance on
the contact surface gives, from Eq. 11–45,
Then Ts is determined to be (Fig. 11–30)
(11–49)
Therefore, the interface temperature of two bodies brought into contact is
dominated by the body with the larger krcp. This also explains why a metal
at room temperature feels colder than wood at the same temperature. At
room temperature, the 
value is 24 kJ/m2 · C for aluminum,
0.38 kJ/m2 · C for wood, and 1.1 kJ/m2 · C for the human flesh. Using 
Eq. 11–49, if can be shown that when a person with a skin temperature of
35C touches an aluminum block and then a wood block both at 15C, the
contact surface temperature will be 15.9C in the case of aluminum and
30C in the case of wood.
1krcp
Ts 
2(krcp)ATA,i  2(krcp)BTB,i
2(krcp)A  2(krcp)B
q#
s,A  q#
s,B →
kA(Ts  TA,i)
2paAt

kB(Ts  TB,i)
2paBt
→
TA,i  Ts
Ts  TB,i
 B
(krcp)B
(krcp)A
500
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
0.8
1.0
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
0.1 0.2
= 0.02
0.05
0.1
0.2 0.3
0.4
0.5
0.7
1
2
3 ∞
0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
1
1.1 1.2 1.3 1.4 1.5 1.6
T(x, t)
x
Ambient
T∞, h
T(x, t)Ti
T∞Ti
T(x,t)T∞
Ti T∞
or 1
h =
x
2 at
k
h at
FIGURE 11–29
Variation of temperature with position and time in a semi-infinite solid initially at temperature Ti subjected to
convection to an environment at T∞with a convection heat transfer coefficient of h (plotted using EES).
TA, i
Ts
TB, i
B
A
FIGURE 11–30
Contact of two semi-infinite solids of
different initial temperatures.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
504
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
501
EXAMPLE 11–6
Minimum Burial Depth of Water Pipes 
to Avoid Freezing
In areas where the air temperature remains below 0C for prolonged periods
of time, the freezing of water in underground pipes is a major concern. For-
tunately, the soil remains relatively warm during those periods, and it takes
weeks for the subfreezing temperatures to reach the water mains in the
ground. Thus, the soil effectively serves as an insulation to protect the water
from subfreezing temperatures in winter.
The ground at a particular location is covered with snow pack at 10C for
a continuous period of three months, and the average soil properties at that
location are k  0.4 W/m · C and a  0.15 
 106 m2/s (Fig. 11–31).
Assuming an initial uniform temperature of 15C for the ground, determine
the minimum burial depth to prevent the water pipes from freezing.
Solution
The water pipes are buried in the ground to prevent freezing. The
minimum burial depth at a particular location is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The temperature in the soil is affected by the thermal condi-
tions at one surface only, and thus the soil can be considered to be a semi-
infinite medium. 2 The thermal properties of the soil are constant.
Properties
The properties of the soil are as given in the problem statement.
Analysis
The temperature of the soil surrounding the pipes will be 0C
after three months in the case of minimum burial depth. Therefore, from 
Fig. 11–29, we have
We note that
t  (90 days)(24 h/day)(3600 s/h)  7.78 
 106 s
and thus
x  2h
 2 
 0.36
 0.78 m
Therefore, the water pipes must be buried to a depth of at least 78 cm to
avoid freezing under the specified harsh winter conditions.
ALTERNATIVE SOLUTION
The solution of this problem could also be
determined from Eq. 11–45:
 erfc
⎯→
 erfc
 0.60
The argument that corresponds to this value of the complementary error
function is determined from Table 11–4 to be h  0.37. Therefore,
x  2h
 2 
 0.37
 0.80 m
Again, the slight difference is due to the reading error of the chart.
2(0.15 
 106 m2/s)(7.78 
 106 s)
2at
a
x
22at
b
0  15
10  15
a
x
22at
b
T (x, t )  Ti
Ts  Ti
2(0.15 
 106 m2/s)(7.78 
 106 s)
2at
h2at
k
     (since h S )
T (x, t )  Ti
T  Ti

0  15
10  15  0.6
∂h   
x
22at
 0.36
Ts = –10°C
Ti = 15°C
Soil
Water pipe
x
FIGURE 11–31
Schematic for Example 11–6.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
505
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
502
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 11–7
Surface Temperature Rise of Heated Blocks
A thick black-painted wood block at 20C is subjected to constant solar heat
flux of 1250 W/m2 (Fig. 11–32). Determine the exposed surface temperature
of the block after 20 minutes. What would your answer be if the block were
made of aluminum?
Solution
A wood block is subjected to solar heat flux. The surface temper-
ature of the block is to be determined, and to be compared to the value for
an aluminum block.
Assumptions
1 All incident solar radiation is absorbed by the block. 2 Heat
loss from the block is disregarded (and thus the result obtained is the maxi-
mum temperature). 3 The block is sufficiently thick to be treated as a semi-
infinite solid, and the properties of the block are constant.
Properties
Thermal conductivity and diffusivity values at room temperature
are k  1.26 W/m · K and a  1.1 
 105 m2/s for wood, and k  237 W/m · K
and a  9.71 
 105 m2/s for aluminum.
Analysis
This is a transient conduction problem in a semi-infinite medium
subjected to constant surface heat flux, and the surface temperature can be
expressed from Eq. 11–46 as
Substituting the given values, the surface temperatures for both the wood and
aluminum blocks are determined to be
Note that thermal energy supplied to the wood accumulates near the surface
because of the low conductivity and diffusivity of wood, causing the surface
temperature to rise to high values. Metals, on the other hand, conduct the heat
they receive to inner parts of the block because of their high conductivity and
diffusivity, resulting in minimal temperature rise at the surface. In reality, both
temperatures will be lower because of heat losses.
Discussion
The temperature profiles for both the wood and aluminum blocks at
t  20 min are evaluated and plotted in Fig. 11–33 using EES. At a depth of
x  0.41 m, the temperature in both blocks is 20.6C. At a depth of 0.5 m, the
temperatures become 20.1C for wood and 20.4C for aluminum block, which
confirms that heat penetrates faster and further in metals compared to 
nonmetals.
Ts, Al  20°C 
1250 W>m2
237 W>m # °C B
4 19.71 
 105 m2>s2 120 
 60 s2
p
 22.0°C
Ts, wood  20°C 
1250 W>m2
1.26 W>m # °C B
4 11.1 
 105 m2>s2 120 
 60 s2
p
 149°C
Ts  T(0, t)  Ti  q#
s
k B
4at
p
qs  1250 W/m2
.
Wood block
Ti  20°C
FIGURE 11–32
Schematic for Example 11–7.
160
140
120
100
80
60
40
0
0.1
Aluminum
Wood
0.2
0.3
Distance from surface x, m
0.4
0.5
20
T, °C
FIGURE 11–33
Variation of temperature within 
the wood and aluminum blocks at 
t  20 min.
11–4
■TRANSIENT HEAT CONDUCTION IN
MULTIDIMENSIONAL SYSTEMS
The transient temperature charts and analytical solutions presented earlier
can be used to determine the temperature distribution and heat transfer in
one-dimensional heat conduction problems associated with a large plane

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
506
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
wall, a long cylinder, a sphere, and a semi-infinite medium. Using a super-
position approach called the product solution, these charts and solutions
can also be used to construct solutions for the two-dimensional transient
heat conduction problems encountered in geometries such as a short cylin-
der, a long rectangular bar, or a semi-infinite cylinder or plate, and even
three-dimensional problems associated with geometries such as a rectangu-
lar prism or a semi-infinite rectangular bar, provided that all surfaces of the
solid are subjected to convection to the same fluid at temperature T, with
the same heat transfer coefficient h, and the body involves no heat genera-
tion (Fig. 11–34). The solution in such multidimensional geometries can be
expressed as the product of the solutions for the one-dimensional geome-
tries whose intersection is the multidimensional geometry.
Consider a short cylinder of height a and radius ro initially at a uniform
temperature Ti. There is no heat generation in the cylinder. At time t  0,
the cylinder is subjected to convection from all surfaces to a medium at
temperature T with a heat transfer coefficient h. The temperature within the
cylinder will change with x as well as r and time t since heat transfer occurs
from the top and bottom of the cylinder as well as its side surfaces. That is,
T  T(r, x, t) and thus this is a two-dimensional transient heat conduction
problem. When the properties are assumed to be constant, it can be shown
that the solution of this two-dimensional problem can be expressed as
(11–50)
That is, the solution for the two-dimensional short cylinder of height a and
radius ro is equal to the product of the nondimensionalized solutions for the
one-dimensional plane wall of thickness a and the long cylinder of radius ro,
which are the two geometries whose intersection is the short cylinder, as
shown in Fig. 11–35. We generalize this as follows: the solution for a multi-
dimensional geometry is the product of the solutions of the one-dimensional
geometries whose intersection is the multidimensional body.
For convenience, the one-dimensional solutions are denoted by
uwall(x, t) 
ucyl(r, t) 
usemi-inf(x, t) 
(11–51)
For example, the solution for a long solid bar whose cross section is an a 
 b
rectangle is the intersection of the two infinite plane walls of thicknesses
a and b, as shown in Fig. 11–36, and thus the transient temperature distri-
bution for this rectangular bar can be expressed as
 uwall(x, t)uwall(y, t)
(11–52)
The proper forms of the product solutions for some other geometries are
given in Table 11–5. It is important to note that the x-coordinate is measured
aT(x, y, t)  T
Ti  T
b rectangular
bar
aT(x, t)  T
Ti  T
b semi-infinite
solid
aT(r, t)  T
Ti  T
b infinite
cylinder
aT(x, t)  T
Ti  T
b plane
wall
aT(r, x, t)  T
Ti  T
b short
cylinder
 aT(x, t)  T
Ti  T
b plane
wall
aT(r, t)  T
Ti  T
b infinite
cylinder
Chapter 11
|
503
T
h
T
h
T
h
Heat
transfer
Heat
transfer
(a) Long cylinder
(b) Short cylinder (two-dimensional)
T(r,t)
T(r,x,t)
FIGURE 11–34
The temperature in a short
cylinder exposed to convection from
all surfaces varies in both the radial
and axial directions, and thus heat
is transferred in both directions.
Long
cylinder
Plane wall
ro
T
h
a
FIGURE 11–35
A short cylinder of radius ro and
height a is the intersection of a long
cylinder of radius ro and a plane wall
of thickness a.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
507
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
504
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 11–5
Multidimensional solutions expressed as products of one-dimensional solutions for bodies that are initially at a
uniform temperature Ti and exposed to convection from all surfaces to a medium at T
z
x
y
  (x,y,z,t) =
  wall (x,t)   wall (y,t)   wall (z,t)
Rectangular parallelepiped
θ
θ
θ
θ
z
x
y
  (x,y,z,t) =
  wall (x,t)   wall (y,t)   semi-inf (z,t)
Semi-infinite rectangular bar
θ
θ
θ
θ
y
x
  (x,y,t) =   wall(x,t)  wall(y,t)
Infinite rectangular bar
θ
θ
θ
y
z
x
  (x,y,z, t) =
  wall (x,t)   semi-inf (y,t)   semi-inf (z,t)
       Quarter-infinite plate
θ
θ
θ
θ
y
x
  (x,y,t) =   wall (x,t)   semi-inf (y,t)
Semi-infinite plate
2L
θ
θ
θ
0
L
2L
x
  (x,t) =   wall(x,t)
Infinite plate (or plane wall)
θ
θ
y
z
x
   (x,y,z, t) =
  semi-inf (x,t)  semi-inf (y,t)   semi-inf (z,t)
 Corner region of a large medium
θ
θ
θ
θ
x
y
  (x,y,t) =   semi-inf (x,t)   semi-inf (y,t)
Quarter-infinite medium
θ
θ
θ
x
   (x,t) =   semi-inf (x,t)
Semi-infinite medium
θ
θ
x
r
  (x,r,t) =   cyl (r,t)   wall (x,t)
Short cylinder
θ
θ
θ
x
r
  (x,r,t) =   cyl (r,t)   semi-inf (x,t)
Semi-infinite cylinder
θ
θ
θ
r
0
ro
  (r,t) =  cyl(r,t)
Infinite cylinder
θ
θ

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
508
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
from the surface in a semi-infinite solid, and from the midplane in a plane
wall. The radial distance r is always measured from the centerline.
Note that the solution of a two-dimensional problem involves the pro-
duct of two one-dimensional solutions, whereas the solution of a three-
dimensional problem involves the product of three one-dimensional
solutions.
A modified form of the product solution can also be used to determine
the total transient heat transfer to or from a multidimensional geometry by
using the one-dimensional values, as shown by L. S. Langston in 1982. The
transient heat transfer for a two-dimensional geometry formed by the inter-
section of two one-dimensional geometries 1 and 2 is
(11–53)
Transient heat transfer for a three-dimensional body formed by the inter-
section of three one-dimensional bodies 1, 2, and 3 is given by
(11–54)
The use of the product solution in transient two- and three-dimensional heat
conduction problems is illustrated in the following examples.
 a Q
Qmaxb
3
c 1  a Q
Qmaxb
1
d c 1  a Q
Qmaxb
2
d
a Q
Qmaxb
total, 3D
 a Q
Qmaxb
1
 a Q
Qmaxb
2
c 1  a Q
Qmaxb
1
d
a Q
Qmaxb
total, 2D
 a Q
Qmaxb
1
 a Q
Qmaxb
2
c 1  a Q
Qmaxb
1
d
Chapter 11
|
505
b
a
Plane wall
Plane wall
T
h
FIGURE 11–36
A long solid bar of rectangular
profile a 
 b is the intersection
of two plane walls of
thicknesses a and b.
x
0
r
ro
Ti = 120°C
= 25°C
= 60 W/m2·°C
T
h
L
L
FIGURE 11–37
Schematic for Example 11–8.
EXAMPLE 11–8
Cooling of a Short Brass Cylinder
A short brass cylinder of diameter D  10 cm and height H  12 cm is ini-
tially at a uniform temperature Ti  120C. The cylinder is now placed in
atmospheric air at 25C, where heat transfer takes place by convection, with
a heat transfer coefficient of h  60 W/m2 · C. Calculate the temperature at
(a) the center of the cylinder and (b) the center of the top surface of the
cylinder 15 min after the start of the cooling.
Solution
A short cylinder is allowed to cool in atmospheric air. The tempera-
tures at the centers of the cylinder and the top surface are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Heat conduction in the short cylinder is two-dimensional,
and thus the temperature varies in both the axial x- and the radial r-direc-
tions. 2 The thermal properties of the cylinder and the heat transfer coeffi-
cient are constant. 3 The Fourier number is t  0.2 so that the one-term
approximate solutions are applicable.
Properties
The properties of brass at room temperature are k  110 W/m · C
and a  33.9 
 106 m2/s (Table A–24). More accurate results can be
obtained by using properties at average temperature.
Analysis
(a) This short cylinder can physically be formed by the intersec-
tion of a long cylinder of radius ro  5 cm and a plane wall of thickness 2L 

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
509
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
506
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
12 cm, as shown in Fig. 11–37. The dimensionless temperature at the center
of the plane wall is determined from Fig. 11–15a to be
uwall(0, t ) 
 0.8
Similarly, at the center of the cylinder, we have
ucyl(0, t ) 
 0.5
Therefore,
 uwall(0, t ) 
 ucyl(0, t )  0.8 
 0.5  0.4
and
T (0, 0, t )  T  0.4(Ti  T)  25  0.4(120  25)  63C
This is the temperature at the center of the short cylinder, which is also the
center of both the long cylinder and the plate.
(b) The center of the top surface of the cylinder is still at the center of the
long cylinder (r  0), but at the outer surface of the plane wall (x  L).
Therefore, we first need to find the surface temperature of the wall. Noting
that x  L  0.06 m,
 0.98
Then
uwall(L, t ) 

 0.98 
 0.8  0.784
Therefore,
 uwall(L, t )ucyl(0, t )  0.784 
 0.5  0.392
and
T(L, 0, t )  T  0.392(Ti  T)  25  0.392(120  25)  62.2C
which is the temperature at the center of the top surface of the cylinder.
aT (L, 0, t )  T
Ti  T
b short
cylinder
aT0  T
Ti  Tb
aT (L, t )  T
T0  T
b
T (L, t )  T
Ti  T
T (L, t )  T
T0  T
 
 x
L  0.06 m
0.06 m  1
1
Bi  k
hL 
110 W/m  °C
(60 W/m2  °C)(0.06 m)  30.6
∂
aT (0, 0, t )  T
Ti  T
b short
cylinder
T (0, t )  T
Ti  T
t  at
r 2
o
 (3.39 
 105 m2/s)(900 s)
(0.05 m)2
 12.2
1
Bi  k
hro 
110 W/m  °C
(60 W/m2  °C)(0.05 m)
 36.7
∂
T (0, t )  T
Ti  T
t  at
L2  (3.39 
 105 m2/s)(900 s)
(0.06 m)2
 8.48
1
Bi  k
hL 
110 W/m  °C
(60 W/m2  °C)(0.06 m)  30.6
∂

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
510
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
507
EXAMPLE 11–9
Heat Transfer from a Short Cylinder
Determine the total heat transfer from the short brass cylinder (r  8530
kg/m3, cp  0.380 kJ/kg · C) discussed in Example 11–8.
Solution
We first determine the maximum heat that can be transferred from
the cylinder, which is the sensible energy content of the cylinder relative to
its environment:
m  rV  rp
H  (8530 kg/m3)p(0.05 m)2(0.12 m)  8.04 kg
Qmax  mcp(Ti  T)  (8.04 kg)(0.380 kJ/kg · C)(120  25)C  290.2 kJ
Then we determine the dimensionless heat transfer ratios for both
geometries. For the plane wall, it is determined from Fig. 11–15c to be
 0.23
Similarly, for the cylinder, we have
 0.47
Then the heat transfer ratio for the short cylinder is, from Eq. 11–53,
 0.23  0.47(1  0.23)  0.592
Therefore, the total heat transfer from the cylinder during the first 15 min of
cooling is
Q  0.592Qmax  0.592 
 (290.2 kJ)  172 kJ
a Q
Qmaxb
short cyl
 a Q
Qmaxb
1
 a Q
Qmaxb
2
c1  a Q
Qmaxb
1
d
Bi 
1
1/Bi 
1
36.7  0.0272
h 2at
k 2
 Bi2t  (0.0272)2(12.2)  0.0090
∂a Q
Qmax b infinite
cylinder
Bi 
1
1/Bi 
1
30.6  0.0327
h 2at
k 2
 Bi2t  (0.0327)2(8.48)  0.0091
∂a Q
Qmax
b plane
wall
r 2
o
EXAMPLE 11–10
Cooling of a Long Cylinder by Water
A semi-infinite aluminum cylinder of diameter D  20 cm is initially at a uni-
form temperature Ti  200C. The cylinder is now placed in water at 15C
where heat transfer takes place by convection, with a heat transfer coefficient
of h  120 W/m2 · C. Determine the temperature at the center of the cylin-
der 15 cm from the end surface 5 min after the start of the cooling.
Solution
A semi-infinite aluminum cylinder is cooled by water. The tem-
perature at the center of the cylinder 15 cm from the end surface is to be
determined.
Assumptions
1
Heat conduction in the semi-infinite cylinder is two-
dimensional, and thus the temperature varies in both the axial x- and the 

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
511
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
508
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
radial r-directions. 2 The thermal properties of the cylinder and the heat
transfer coefficient are constant. 3 The Fourier number is t  0.2 so that
the one-term approximate solutions are applicable.
Properties
The properties of aluminum at room temperature are k 
237 W/m · C and a  9.71 
 106 m2/s (Table A–24). More accurate
results can be obtained by using properties at average temperature.
Analysis
This semi-infinite cylinder can physically be formed by the inter-
section of an infinite cylinder of radius ro  10 cm and a semi-infinite me-
dium, as shown in Fig. 11–38.
We solve this problem using the one-term solution relation for the cylinder
and the analytic solution for the semi-infinite medium. First we consider the
infinitely long cylinder and evaluate the Biot number:
Bi 
 0.05
The coefficients l1 and A1 for a cylinder corresponding to this Bi are
determined from Table 11–2 to be l1  0.3126 and A1  1.0124. The
Fourier number in this case is
t 
 2.91  0.2
and thus the one-term approximation is applicable. Substituting these values
into Eq. 11–27 gives
u0  ucyl(0, t )  A1el2
1 t  1.0124e(0.3126)2(2.91)  0.762
The solution for the semi-infinite solid can be determined from
1  usemi-inf(x, t )  erfc
First we determine the various quantities in parentheses:
h 
 0.44
 0.0759
 (0.086)2  0.0074
Substituting and evaluating the complementary error functions from Table
11–4,
usemi-inf(x, t )  1  erfc (0.44)  exp (0.0759  0.0074) erfc (0.44  0.086)
 1  0.5338  exp (0.0833) 
 0.457
 0.963
h2at
k2  ah2at
k
b
2
hx
k  (120 W/m2  C)(0.15 m)
237 W/m  C
h2at
k
 (120 W/m2  C)2(9.71 
 105 m2/s)(300 s)
237 W/m  C
 0.086
x
22at

0.15 m
22(9.71 
 105 m2/s)(5 
 60 s)
 exp ahx
k  h 2at
k 2 b cerfc a
x
22at
 h2at
k
bd
a
x
22at
b
at
r 2
o
 (9.71 
 105 m2/s)(5 
 60 s)
(0.1 m)2
hro
k  (120 W/m2  C)(0.1 m)
237 W/m  C
x = 15 cm
x
0 r
= 15°C
= 120 W/m2·°C
T
h
D = 20 cm
Ti = 200°C
FIGURE 11–38
Schematic for Example 11–10.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
512
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
509
Now we apply the product solution to get
 usemi-inf(x, t)ucyl(0, t)  0.963 
 0.762  0.734
and
T (x, 0, t)  T  0.734(Ti  T)  15  0.734(200  15)  151C
which is the temperature at the center of the cylinder 15 cm from the
exposed bottom surface.
aT (x, 0, t )  T
Ti  T
b semi-infinite
cylinder
EXAMPLE 11–11
Refrigerating Steaks while Avoiding Frostbite
In a meat processing plant, 1-in-thick steaks initially at 75F are to be cooled
in the racks of a large refrigerator that is maintained at 5F (Fig. 11–39). The
steaks are placed close to each other, so that heat transfer from the 1-in-
thick edges is negligible. The entire steak is to be cooled below 45F, but its
temperature is not to drop below 35F at any point during refrigeration to
avoid “frostbite.” The convection heat transfer coefficient and thus the rate of
heat transfer from the steak can be controlled by varying the speed of a circu-
lating fan inside. Determine the heat transfer coefficient h that will enable us
to meet both temperature constraints while keeping the refrigeration time to a
minimum. The steak can be treated as a homogeneous layer having the prop-
erties r  74.9 lbm/ft3, cp  0.98 Btu/lbm · F, k  0.26 Btu/h · ft · F, and
a  0.0035 ft2/h.
Solution
Steaks are to be cooled in a refrigerator maintained at 5F. The
heat transfer coefficient that allows cooling the steaks below 45F while
avoiding frostbite is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Heat conduction through the steaks is one-dimensional since
the steaks form a large layer relative to their thickness and there is thermal
symmetry about the center plane. 2 The thermal properties of the steaks and
the heat transfer coefficient are constant. 3 The Fourier number is t  0.2
so that the one-term approximate solutions are applicable.
Properties
The properties of the steaks are as given in the problem
statement.
Analysis
The lowest temperature in the steak occurs at the surfaces and
the highest temperature at the center at a given time, since the inner part is
the last place to be cooled. In the limiting case, the surface temperature at
x  L  0.5 in from the center will be 35F, while the midplane tempera-
ture is 45F in an environment at 5F. Then, from Fig. 11–15b, we obtain
 1.5
which gives
h 
 4.16 Btu/h · ft2 · F
1
1.5 k
L  0.26 Btu/h  ft  F
1.5(0.5/12 ft)
1
Bi  k
hL
x
L  0.5 in
0.5 in  1
T (L, t )  T
T0  T
 35  5
45  5  0.75
∂
Steak
1 in
35°F
5°F
FIGURE 11–39
Schematic for Example 11–11.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
513
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
In this chapter, we considered the variation of temperature
with time as well as position in one- or multidimensional
systems. We first considered the lumped systems in which
the temperature varies with time but remains uniform
throughout the system at any time. The temperature of a
lumped body of arbitrary shape of mass m, volume V, surface
area As, density r, and specific heat cp initially at a uniform
temperature Ti that is exposed to convection at time t  0 in
a medium at temperature T with a heat transfer coefficient h
is expressed as
 ebt
where
b 
is a positive quantity whose dimension is (time)1. This rela-
tion can be used to determine the temperature T(t) of a body
at time t or, alternatively, the time t required for the tempera-
ture to reach a specified value T(t). Once the temperature T(t)
at time t is available, the rate of convection heat transfer
between the body and its environment at that time can be
determined from Newton’s law of cooling as
(t)  hAs [T(t)  T]
The total amount of heat transfer between the body and the
surrounding medium over the time interval t  0 to t is sim-
ply the change in the energy content of the body,
Q  mcp[T(t)  Ti]
The maximum heat transfer between the body and its sur-
roundings is
Qmax  mcp (T  Ti)
The error involved in lumped system analysis is negligible
when
Q
hAs
rcp V 
h
rcp Lc
T(t)  T
Ti  T
510
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Bi 
 0.1
where Bi is the Biot number and Lc  V/As is the character-
istic length.
When the lumped system analysis is not applicable, the
variation of temperature with position as well as time can be
determined using the transient temperature charts given in
Figs. 11–15, 11–16, 11–17, and 11–29 for a large plane wall,
a long cylinder, a sphere, and a semi-infinite medium, respec-
tively. These charts are applicable for one-dimensional heat
transfer in those geometries. Therefore, their use is limited to
situations in which the body is initially at a uniform tempera-
ture, all surfaces are subjected to the same thermal condi-
tions, and the body does not involve any heat generation.
These charts can also be used to determine the total heat
transfer from the body up to a specified time t.
Using the one-term approximation, the solutions of one-
dimensional 
transient 
heat 
conduction 
problems 
are
expressed analytically as
Plane wall:
uwall 
 A1el2
1t cos (l1x/L)
Cylinder:
ucyl 
 A1el2
1t J0(l1r/ro)
Sphere:
usph  
 A1el2
1t
where the constants A1 and l1 are functions of the Bi number
only, and their values are listed in Table 11–2 against the Bi
number for all three geometries. The error involved in one-
term solutions is less than 2 percent when t  0.2.
Using the one-term solutions, the fractional heat transfers
in different geometries are expressed as
Plane wall:
 1  u0, wall
Cylinder:
 1  2u0, cyl
J1(l1)
l1
a Q
Qmaxb
cyl
sin l1
l1
a Q
Qmaxb
wall
sin(l1r/ro)
l1r/ro
T(r, t)  T
Ti  T
T(r, t)  T
Ti  T
T(x, t)  T
Ti  T
hLc
k
Discussion
The convection heat transfer coefficient should be kept below
this value to satisfy the constraints on the temperature of the steak during
refrigeration. We can also meet the constraints by using a lower heat transfer
coefficient, but doing so would extend the refrigeration time unnecessarily.
The restrictions that are inherent in the use of Heisler charts and the one-
term solutions (or any other analytical solutions) can be lifted by using the
numerical methods.
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
514
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
511
Sphere:
 1  3u0, sph
The solutions of transient heat conduction in a semi-infinite
solid with constant properties under various boundary condi-
tions at the surface are given as follows:
Specified Surface Temperature, Ts  constant:
Specified Surface Heat Flux,
 constant:
Convection on the Surface,
Energy Pulse at Surface, es  constant:
where erfc(h) is the complementary error function of argu-
ment h.
T(x, t)  Ti 
es
k2pta
 exp¢ x2
4at≤

 erfc¢
x
22at
 h2at
k
≤
T(x, t)  Ti
T  Ti
 erfc¢
x
22at
≤ exp¢hx
k  h2at
k2 ≤
q#
s(t)  h[T  T(0, t)]:
T(x, t)  Ti  q#
s
k cB
4at
p  exp a x2
4atb  xerfca
x
22atbd
q#
s
T(x, t)  Ti
Ts  Ti
 erfca
x
22at
b   and  q#
s(t)  k(Ts  Ti)
2pat
sin l1  l1 cos l1
l3
1
a Q
Qmaxb
sph
Using a superposition principle called the product solution
these charts can also be used to construct solutions for the two-
dimensional transient heat conduction problems encountered
in geometries such as a short cylinder, a long rectangular bar,
or
a
semi-infinite
cylinder
or
plate,
and
even
three-
dimensional problems associated with geometries such as a
rectangular prism or a semi-infinite rectangular bar, provided
that all surfaces of the solid are subjected to convection to the
same fluid at temperature T, with the same convection heat
transfer coefficient h, and the body involves no heat
generation. The solution in such multidimensional geometries
can be expressed as the product of the solutions for the
one-dimensional geometries whose intersection is the multi-
dimensional geometry.
The total heat transfer to or from a multidimensional geom-
etry can also be determined by using the one-dimensional
values. The transient heat transfer for a two-dimensional
geometry formed by the intersection of two one-dimen-
sional geometries 1 and 2 is
Transient heat transfer for a three-dimensional body formed
by the intersection of three one-dimensional bodies 1, 2, and
3 is given by
 a Q
Qmaxb
3
c 1  a Q
Qmaxb
1
d c 1  a Q
Qmaxb
2
d
a Q
Qmaxb
total, 3D
 a Q
Qmaxb
1
 a Q
Qmaxb
2
c 1  a Q
Qmaxb
1
d
a Q
Qmaxb
total, 2D
 a Q
Qmaxb
1
 a Q
Qmaxb
2
c 1  a Q
Qmaxb
1
d
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
1. ASHRAE. Handbook of Fundamentals. SI version.
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993.
2. ASHRAE. Handbook of Fundamentals. SI version.
Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating,
and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1994.
3. H. S. Carslaw and J. C. Jaeger. Conduction of Heat in
Solids. 2nd ed. London: Oxford University Press, 1959.
4. Y. A. Çengel. Heat and Mass Transfer: A Practical
Approach. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 2007.
5. H. Gröber, S. Erk, and U. Grigull. Fundamentals of Heat
Transfer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1961.
6. M. P. Heisler. “Temperature Charts for Induction and
Constant Temperature Heating.” ASME Transactions 69
(1947), pp. 227–36.
7. H. Hillman. Kitchen Science. Mount Vernon, NY:
Consumers Union, 1981.
8. S. Kakaç and Y. Yener, Heat Conduction, New York:
Hemisphere Publishing Co., 1985.
9. L. S. Langston. “Heat Transfer from Multidimensional
Objects Using One-Dimensional Solutions for Heat
Loss.” International Journal of Heat and Mass Transfer
25 (1982), pp. 149–50.
10. P. J. Schneider. Conduction Heat Transfer. Reading, MA:
Addison-Wesley, 1955.
11. L. van der Berg and C. P. Lentz. “Factors Affecting
Freezing Rate and Appearance of Eviscerated Poultry
Frozen in Air.” Food Technology 12 (1958).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
515
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Lumped System Analysis
11–1C
What is lumped system analysis? When is it
applicable?
11–2C
Consider heat transfer between two identical hot
solid bodies and the air surrounding them. The first solid is
being cooled by a fan while the second one is allowed to cool
naturally. For which solid is the lumped system analysis more
likely to be applicable? Why?
11–3C
Consider heat transfer between two identical hot
solid bodies and their environments. The first solid is dropped
in a large container filled with water, while the second one is
allowed to cool naturally in the air. For which solid is the
lumped system analysis more likely to be applicable? Why?
11–4C
Consider a hot baked potato on a plate. The temper-
ature of the potato is observed to drop by 4C during the first
minute. Will the temperature drop during the second minute
be less than, equal to, or more than 4C? Why?
11–5C
Consider a potato being baked in an oven that is
maintained at a constant temperature. The temperature of the
potato is observed to rise by 5C during the first minute. Will
the temperature rise during the second minute be less than,
equal to, or more than 5C? Why?
11–6C
What is the physical significance of the Biot num-
ber? Is the Biot number more likely to be larger for highly
conducting solids or poorly conducting ones?
11–7C
Consider two identical 4-kg pieces of roast beef.
The first piece is baked as a whole, while the second is baked
after being cut into two equal pieces in the same oven. Will
there be any difference between the cooking times of the
whole and cut roasts? Why?
11–8C
Consider a sphere and a cylinder of equal volume
made of copper. Both the sphere and the cylinder are initially
512
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
at the same temperature and are exposed to convection in the
same environment. Which do you think will cool faster, the
cylinder or the sphere? Why?
11–9C
In what medium is the lumped system analysis more
likely to be applicable: in water or in air? Why?
11–10C
For which solid is the lumped system analysis
more likely to be applicable: an actual apple or a golden
apple of the same size? Why?
11–11C
For which kind of bodies made of the same material
is the lumped system analysis more likely to be applicable:
slender ones or well-rounded ones of the same volume? Why?
11–12
Obtain relations for the characteristic lengths of a
large plane wall of thickness 2L, a very long cylinder of
radius ro, and a sphere of radius ro.
11–13
Obtain a relation for the time required for a lumped
system to reach the average temperature 
(Ti  T), where
Ti is the initial temperature and T is the temperature of the
environment.
11–14
The temperature of a gas stream is to be measured
by a thermocouple whose junction can be approximated as a
1.2-mm-diameter sphere. The properties of the junction are
k  35 W/m · C, r  8500 kg/m3, and cp  320 J/kg · C,
and the heat transfer coefficient between the junction and the
gas is h  90 W/m2 · C. Determine how long it will take for
the thermocouple to read 99 percent of the initial temperature
difference.
Answer: 27.8 s
11–15E
In a manufacturing facility, 2-in-diameter brass
balls (k  64.1 Btu/h · ft · F, r  532 lbm/ft3, and cp 
0.092 Btu/lbm · F) initially at 250F are quenched in a wa-
ter bath at 120F for a period of 2 min at a rate of 120 balls 
per minute. If the convection heat transfer coefficient is
42 Btu/h · ft2 · F, determine (a) the temperature of the balls
after quenching and (b) the rate at which heat needs to be
removed from the water in order to keep its temperature con-
stant at 120F.
1
2
PROBLEMS*
Cool
air
Hot
baked
potato
FIGURE P11–4C
Brass
balls
250°F
120°F
Water
bath
FIGURE P11–15E
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems with
the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete solutions together
with parametric studies are included on the enclosed DVD. Problems
with the 
icon are comprehensive in nature, and are intended to be
solved with a computer, preferably using the EES software that
accompanies this text.
11–16E
Repeat Prob. 11–15E for aluminum balls.
11–17
To warm up some milk for a baby, a mother pours
milk into a thin-walled glass whose diameter is 6 cm. The
height of the milk in the glass is 7 cm. She then places the

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
516
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
513
glass into a large pan filled with hot water at 60C. The milk is
stirred constantly, so that its temperature is uniform at all
times. If the heat transfer coefficient between the water and the
glass is 120 W/m2 · C, determine how long it will take for the
milk to warm up from 3C to 38C. Take the properties of the
milk to be the same as those of water. Can the milk in this case
be treated as a lumped system? Why?
Answer: 5.8 min
11–18
Repeat Prob. 11–17 for the case of water also 
being stirred, so that the heat transfer coefficient is doubled
to 240 W/m2 · C.
11–19
A long copper rod of diameter 2.0 cm is initially at a
uniform temperature of 100C. It is now exposed to an air
stream at 20C with a heat transfer coefficient of 200 W/m2 ·
K. How long would it take for the copper road to cool to an
average temperature of 25C?
11–20
Consider a sphere of diameter 5 cm, a cube of side
length
5
cm,
and
a
rectangular
prism
of
dimension
4 cm 
 5 cm 
 6 cm, all initially at 0C and all made of silver
(k  429 W/m · C, r  10,500 kg/m3, cp  0.235 kJ/kg · C).
Now all three of these geometries are exposed to ambient air at
33C on all of their surfaces with a heat transfer coefficient of
12 W/m2 · C. Determine how long it will take for the temper-
ature of each geometry to rise to 25C.
11–21E
During a picnic on a hot summer day, all the cold
drinks disappeared quickly, and the only available drinks
were those at the ambient temperature of 90F. In an effort to
cool a 12-fluid-oz drink in a can, which is 5 in high and has a
diameter of 2.5 in, a person grabs the can and starts shaking
it in the iced water of the chest at 32F. The temperature of
the drink can be assumed to be uniform at all times, and the
heat transfer coefficient between the iced water and the alu-
minum can is 30 Btu/h · ft2 · F. Using the properties of water
for the drink, estimate how long it will take for the canned
drink to cool to 40F.
11–22
Consider a 1000-W iron whose base plate is made of
0.5-cm-thick aluminum alloy 20211–T6 (r  2770 kg/m3,
cp  875 J/kg · C, a  7.3 
 105 m2/s). The base plate has a
surface area of 0.03 m2. Initially, the iron is in thermal equilib-
rium with the ambient air at 22C. Taking the heat transfer
coefficient at the surface of the base plate to be 12 W/m2 · C
and assuming 85 percent of the heat generated in the resis-
tance wires is transferred to the plate, determine how long it
will take for the plate temperature to reach 140C. Is it realistic
to assume the plate temperature to be uniform at all times?
11–23
Reconsider Prob. 11–22. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the heat
transfer coefficient and the final plate temperature on the
time it will take for the plate to reach this temperature. Let
the heat transfer coefficient vary from 5 W/m2 · C to
25 W/m2 · C and the temperature from 30C to 200C. Plot
the time as functions of the heat transfer coefficient and the
temperature, and discuss the results.
11–24
Stainless steel ball bearings (r  8085 kg/m3, k 
15.1 W/m · C, cp  0.480 kJ/kg · C, and a  3.91 
 106
m2/s) having a diameter of 1.2 cm are to be quenched in
water. The balls leave the oven at a uniform temperature of
900C and are exposed to air at 30C for a while before they
are dropped into the water. If the temperature of the balls is
not to fall below 850C prior to quenching and the heat trans-
fer coefficient in the air is 125 W/m2 · C, determine how
long they can stand in the air before being dropped into the
water.
Answer: 3.7 s
11–25
Carbon steel balls (r  7833 kg/m3, k  54 W/m ·
C, cp  0.465 kJ/kg · C, and a  1.474 
 106 m2/s) 8 mm
in diameter are annealed by heating them first to 900C in a
furnace and then allowing them to cool slowly to 100C in
ambient air at 35C. If the average heat transfer coeffi-cient is
75 W/m2 · C, determine how long the annealing process will
FIGURE P11–21E
Air
22°C
1000 W
iron
FIGURE P11–22
Air, 35°C
Furnace
100°C
900°C
Steel ball
FIGURE P11–25

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
517
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
take. If 2500 balls are to be annealed per hour, determine the
total rate of heat transfer from the balls to the ambient air.
11–26
Reconsider Prob. 11–25. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the initial
temperature of the balls on the annealing time and the total
rate of heat transfer. Let the temperature vary from 500C to
1000C. Plot the time and the total rate of heat transfer as a
function of the initial temperature, and discuss the results.
11–27
An electronic device dissipating 20 W has a mass of
20 g, a specific heat of 850 J/kg · C, and a surface area of
4 cm2. The device is lightly used, and it is on for 5 min and
then off for several hours, during which it cools to the ambi-
ent temperature of 25C. Taking the heat transfer coefficient
to be 12 W/m2 · C, determine the temperature of the device
at the end of the 5-min operating period. What would your
answer be if the device were attached to an aluminum heat
sink having a mass of 200 g and a surface area of 80 cm2?
Assume the device and the heat sink to be nearly isothermal.
Transient Heat Conduction in Large Plane Walls,
Long Cylinders, and Spheres with Spatial Effects
11–28C
What is an infinitely long cylinder? When is it
proper to treat an actual cylinder as being infinitely long, and
when is it not? For example, is it proper to use this model
when finding the temperatures near the bottom or top sur-
faces of a cylinder? Explain.
11–29C
Can the transient temperature charts in Fig. 11–15
for a plane wall exposed to convection on both sides be used
for a plane wall with one side exposed to convection while
the other side is insulated? Explain.
11–30C
Why are the transient temperature charts prepared
using nondimensionalized quantities such as the Biot and
Fourier numbers instead of the actual variables such as ther-
mal conductivity and time?
11–31C
What is the physical significance of the Fourier
number? Will the Fourier number for a specified heat transfer
problem double when the time is doubled?
11–32C
How can we use the transient temperature charts
when the surface temperature of the geometry is specified
instead of the temperature of the surrounding medium and
the convection heat transfer coefficient?
11–33C
A body at an initial temperature of Ti is brought
into a medium at a constant temperature of T. How can you
determine the maximum possible amount of heat transfer
between the body and the surrounding medium?
11–34C
The Biot number during a heat transfer process
between a sphere and its surroundings is determined to be
0.02. Would you use lumped system analysis or the transient
temperature charts when determining the midpoint tempera-
ture of the sphere? Why?
11–35
A student calculates that the total heat transfer from
a spherical copper ball of diameter 18 cm initially at 200C
514
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
and its environment at a constant temperature of 25C during
the first 20 min of cooling is 3150 kJ. Is this result reason-
able? Why?
11–36
An experiment is to be conducted to determine heat
transfer coefficient on the surfaces of tomatoes that are placed
in cold water at 7C. The tomatoes (k  0.59 W/m · C,
a  0.141 
 106 m2/s, r  999 kg/m3, cp  3.99 kJ/kg · C)
with an initial uniform temperature of 30C are spherical in
shape with a diameter of 8 cm. After a period of 2 hours, the
temperatures at the center and the surface of the tomatoes are
measured to be 10.0C and 7.1C, respectively. Using analyti-
cal one-term approximation method (not the Heisler charts),
determine the heat transfer coefficient and the amount of heat
transfer during this period if there are eight such tomatoes in
water.
11–37
An ordinary egg can be approximated as a 5.5 cm-
diameter sphere whose properties are roughly k  0.6 W/m ·
C and a  0.14 
 106 m2/s. The egg is initially at a uni-
form temperature of 8C and is dropped into boiling water at
97C. Taking the convection heat transfer coefficient to be h
 1400 W/m2 · C, determine how long it will take for the
center of the egg to reach 70C.
11–38
Reconsider Prob. 11–37. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the final cen-
ter temperature of the egg on the time it will take for the cen-
ter to reach this temperature. Let the temperature vary from
50C to 95C. Plot the time versus the temperature, and dis-
cuss the results.
11–39
In a production facility, 3-cm-thick large brass plates
(k  110 W/m · C, r  8530 kg/m3, cp  380 J/kg · C, and
Egg
Boiling
water
97°C
Ti = 8°C
FIGURE P11–37
Brass plate
25°C
3 cm
Furnace, 700°C
FIGURE P11–39

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
518
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
515
a  33.9 
 106 m2/s) that are initially at a uniform temper-
ature of 25C are heated by passing them through an oven
maintained at 700C. The plates remain in the oven for a
period of 10 min. Taking the convection heat transfer coeffi-
cient to be h  80 W/m2 · C, determine the surface tempera-
ture of the plates when they come out of the oven.
11–40
Reconsider Prob. 11–39. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the tempera-
ture of the oven and the heating time on the final surface
temperature of the plates. Let the oven temperature vary from
500C to 900C and the time from 2 min to 30 min. Plot the
surface temperature as the functions of the oven temperature
and the time, and discuss the results.
11–41
A long 35-cm-diameter cylindrical shaft made 
of stainless steel 304 (k  14.9 W/m · C, r  7900 kg/m3,
cp  477 J/kg · C, and a  3.95 
 106 m2/s) comes out of
an oven at a uniform temperature of 400C. The shaft is then
allowed to cool slowly in a chamber at 150C with an aver-
age convection heat transfer coefficient of h  60 W/m2 · C.
Determine the temperature at the center of the shaft 20 min
after the start of the cooling process. Also, determine the heat
transfer per unit length of the shaft during this time period.
Answers: 390C, 16,015 kJ/m
11–42
Reconsider Prob. 11–41. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the cooling
time on the final center temperature of the shaft and
the amount of heat transfer. Let the time vary from 5 min to
60 min. Plot the center temperature and the heat transfer as a
function of the time, and discuss the results.
11–43E
Long cylindrical AISI stainless steel rods (k 
7.74 Btu/h · ft · F and a  0.135 ft2/h) of 4-in-diameter are
heat treated by drawing them at a velocity of 7 ft/min through
a 21-ft-long oven maintained at 1700F. The heat transfer
coefficient in the oven is 20 Btu/h · ft2 · F. If the rods enter
the oven at 70F, determine their centerline temperature when
they leave.
11–44
In a meat processing plant, 2-cm-thick steaks (k 
0.45 W/m · C and a  0.91 
 107 m2/s) that are initially at
25C are to be cooled by passing them through a refrigeration
room at 11C. The heat transfer coefficient on both sides of
the steaks is 9 W/m2 · C. If both surfaces of the steaks are to
be cooled to 2C, determine how long the steaks should be
kept in the refrigeration room.
11–45
A long cylindrical wood log (k  0.17 W/m · C and
a  1.28 
 107 m2/s) is 10 cm in diameter and is initially 
at a uniform temperature of 15C. It is exposed to hot gases
at 550C in a fireplace with a heat transfer coefficient of 
13.6 W/m2 · C on the surface. If the ignition temperature of
the wood is 420C, determine how long it will be before the
log ignites.
11–46
In Betty Crocker’s Cookbook, it is stated that it takes
2 h 45 min to roast a 3.2-kg rib initially at 4.5C “rare” in an
oven maintained at 163C. It is recommended that a meat ther-
mometer be used to monitor the cooking, and the rib is consid-
ered rare done when the thermometer inserted into the center
of the thickest part of the meat registers 60C. The rib can be
treated as a homogeneous spherical object with the properties
r  1200 kg/m3, cp  4.1 kJ/kg · C, k  0.45 W/m · C, and
a  0.91 
 107 m2/s. Determine (a) the heat transfer coeffi-
cient at the surface of the rib; (b) the temperature of the outer
surface of the rib when it is done; and (c) the amount of heat
transferred to the rib. (d) Using the values obtained, predict
how long it will take to roast this rib to “medium” level, which
occurs when the innermost temperature of the rib reaches
71C. Compare your result to the listed value of 3 h 20 min.
If the roast rib is to be set on the counter for about 15 min
before it is sliced, it is recommended that the rib be taken
out of the oven when the thermometer registers about 4C
below the indicated value because the rib will continue cook-
ing even after it is taken out of the oven. Do you agree with
this recommendation?
Answers:
(a)
156.9
W/m2
·
8C,
(b)  159.58C, (c) 1629 kJ, (d) 3.0 h
11–47
Repeat Prob. 11–46 for a roast rib that is to be
“well-done” instead of “rare.” A rib is considered to be well-
done when its center temperature reaches 77C, and the roast-
ing in this case takes about 4 h 15 min.
11–48
For heat transfer purposes, an egg can be considered
to be a 5.5-cm-diameter sphere having the properties of water.
21 ft
7 ft/min
Oven
1700°F
Stainless steel
70°F
FIGURE P11–43E
Oven, 163°C
Rib
Ti = 4.5°C
FIGURE P11–46

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
519
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
An egg that is initially at 8C is dropped into the boiling water
at 100C. The heat transfer coefficient at the surface of the egg
is estimated to be 800 W/m2 · C. If the egg is considered
cooked when its center temperature reaches 60C, determine
how long the egg should be kept in the boiling water.
11–49
Repeat Prob. 11–48 for a location at 1610-m eleva-
tion such as Denver, Colorado, where the boiling temperature
of water is 94.4C.
11–50
The author and his then 6-year-old son have con-
ducted the following experiment to determine the thermal con-
ductivity of a hot dog. They first boiled water in a large pan
and measured the temperature of the boiling water to be 94C,
which is not surprising, since they live at an elevation of about
1650 m in Reno, Nevada. They then took a hot dog that is
12.5 cm long and 2.2 cm in diameter and inserted a thermo-
couple into the midpoint of the hot dog and another thermo-
couple just under the skin. They waited until both ther-
mocouples read 20C, which is the ambient temperature. They
then dropped the hot dog into boiling water and observed the
changes in both temperatures. Exactly 2 min after the hot
dog was dropped into the boiling water, they recorded the cen-
ter and the surface temperatures to be 59C and 88C, re-
spectively. The density of the hot dog can be taken to be
980 kg/m3, which is slightly less than the density of water,
since the hot dog was observed to be floating in water while
being almost completely immersed. The specific heat of a hot
dog can be taken to be 3900 J/kg · C, which is slightly less
than that of water, since a hot dog is mostly water. Using tran-
sient temperature charts, determine (a) the thermal diffusivity
of the hot dog; (b) the thermal conductivity of the hot dog; and
(c) the convection heat transfer coefficient.
Answers: (a) 2.02 
107 m2/s, (b) 0.771 W/m · C, (c) 467 W/m2 · C.
11–51
Using the data and the answers given in Prob. 11–50,
determine the center and the surface temperatures of the hot
dog 4 min after the start of the cooking. Also determine the
amount of heat transferred to the hot dog.
11–52E
In a chicken processing plant, whole chickens aver-
aging 5 lbm each and initially at 65F are to be cooled in the
racks of a large refrigerator that is maintained at 5F. The
entire chicken is to be cooled below 45F, but the temperature
516
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
of the chicken is not to drop below 35F at any point during
refrigeration. The convection heat transfer coefficient and thus
the rate of heat transfer from the chicken can be controlled by
varying the speed of a circulating fan inside. Determine the
heat transfer-coefficient that will enable us to meet both
temperature constraints while keeping the refrigeration time
to a minimum. The chicken can be treated as a homogene-
ous spherical object having the properties r  74.9 lbm/ft3,
cp  0.98 Btu/lbm · F, k  0.26 Btu/h · ft · F, and a  0.0035
ft2/h.
11–53
A person puts a few apples into the freezer at 15C
to cool them quickly for guests who are about to arrive. Ini-
tially, the apples are at a uniform temperature of 20C, and
the heat transfer coefficient on the surfaces is 8 W/m2 · C.
Treating the apples as 9-cm-diameter spheres and taking their
properties to be r  840 kg/m3, cp  3.81 kJ/kg · C, k 
0.418 W/m · C, and a  1.3 
 107 m2/s, determine the
center and surface temperatures of the apples in 1 h. Also,
determine the amount of heat transfer from each apple.
11–54
Reconsider Prob. 11–53. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the initial
temperature of the apples on the final center and surface tem-
peratures and the amount of heat transfer. Let the initial tem-
perature vary from 2C to 30C. Plot the center temperature,
the surface temperature, and the amount of heat transfer as a
function of the initial temperature, and discuss the results.
11–55
Citrus fruits are very susceptible to cold weather,
and extended exposure to subfreezing temperatures can
destroy them. Consider an 8-cm-diameter orange that is ini-
tially at 15C. A cold front moves in one night, and the ambi-
ent temperature suddenly drops to 6C, with a heat transfer
coefficient of 15 W/m2 · C. Using the properties of water for
the orange and assuming the ambient conditions to remain
constant for 4 h before the cold front moves out, determine if
any part of the orange will freeze that night.
HOT DOG
Boiling water
94°C
Tsurface
Tcenter
FIGURE P11–50
Chicken
Ti = 65°F
Refrigerator
5°F
FIGURE P11–52E

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
520
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
517
11–56
A 9-cm-diameter potato (r  1100 kg/m3, cp 
3900 J/kg · C, k  0.6 W/m · C, and a  1.4 
 107 m2/s)
that is initially at a uniform temperature of 25C is baked in an
oven at 170C until a temperature sensor inserted to the center
of the potato indicates a reading of 70C. The potato is then
taken out of the oven and wrapped in thick towels so that
almost no heat is lost from the baked potato. Assuming the
heat transfer coefficient in the oven to be 40 W/m2 · C, deter-
mine (a) how long the potato is baked in the oven and (b) the
final equilibrium temperature of the potato after it is wrapped.
11–57
White potatoes (k  0.50 W/m · C and a  0.13 
106 m2/s) that are initially at a uniform temperature of 25C
and have an average diameter of 6 cm are to be cooled by
refrigerated air at 2C flowing at a velocity of 4 m/s. The
average heat transfer coefficient between the potatoes and the
air is experimentally determined to be 19 W/m2 · C. Deter-
mine how long it will take for the center temperature of the
potatoes to drop to 6C. Also, determine if any part of the
potatoes will experience chilling injury during this process.
11–58E
Oranges of 2.5-in-diameter (k  0.26 Btu/h · ft · F
and a  1.4 
 106 ft2/s) initially at a uniform temperature of
78F are to be cooled by refrigerated air at 25F flowing at a
velocity of 1 ft/s. The average heat transfer coefficient
between the oranges and the air is experimentally determined
to be 4.6 Btu/h · ft2 · F. Determine how long it will take for the
center temperature of the oranges to drop to 40F. Also, deter-
mine if any part of the oranges will freeze during this process.
11–59
A 65-kg beef carcass (k  0.47 W/m · C and 
a  0.13 
 106 m2/s) initially at a uniform temperature of
37C is to be cooled by refrigerated air at 10C flowing at a
velocity of 1.2 m/s. The average heat transfer coefficient
between the carcass and the air is 22 W/m2 · C. Treating the
carcass as a cylinder of diameter 24 cm and height 1.4 m and
disregarding heat transfer from the base and top surfaces,
determine how long it will take for the center temperature of
the carcass to drop to 4C. Also, determine if any part of the
carcass will freeze during this process.
Answer: 12.2 h
11–60
Layers of 23-cm-thick meat slabs (k  0.47 W/m · C
and a  0.13 
 106 m2/s) initially at a uniform temperature
of 7C are to be frozen by refrigerated air at 30C flowing at
a velocity of 1.4 m/s. The average heat transfer coefficient
between the meat and the air is 20 W/m2 · C. Assuming the
size of the meat slabs to be large relative to their thickness,
determine how long it will take for the center temperature of
the slabs to drop to 18C. Also, determine the surface tem-
perature of the meat slab at that time.
11–61E
Layers of 6-in-thick meat slabs (k  0.26 Btu/
h · ft · F and a  1.4 
 106 ft2/s) initially at a uniform tem-
perature of 50F are cooled by refrigerated air at 23F to a
temperature of 36F at their center in 12 h. Estimate the aver-
age heat transfer coefficient during this cooling process.
Answer: 1.5 Btu/h · ft2 · F
11–62
Chickens with an average mass of 1.7 kg (k 
0.45 W/m · C and a  0.13 
 106 m2/s) initially at a uni-
form temperature of 15C are to be chilled in agitated brine
at 7C. The average heat transfer coefficient between the
chicken and the brine is determined experimentally to be
Orange
Ti = 15°C
Ambient air
–6°C
FIGURE P11–55
Air
2°C
4 m/s
Potato
Ti = 25°C
FIGURE P11–57
Beef
37°C
Air
–10°C
1.2 m/s
FIGURE P11–59
Chicken
1.7 kg
Brine, –7°C
FIGURE P11–62

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
521
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
440 W/m2 · C. Taking the average density of the chicken to
be 0.95 g/cm3 and treating the chicken as a spherical lump,
determine the center and the surface temperatures of the
chicken in 2 h and 45 min. Also, determine if any part of the
chicken will freeze during this process.
Transient Heat Conduction in Semi-Infinite Solids
11–63C
What is a semi-infinite medium? Give examples of
solid bodies that can be treated as semi-infinite mediums for
heat transfer purposes.
11–64C
Under what conditions can a plane wall be treated
as a semi-infinite medium?
11–65C
Consider a hot semi-infinite solid at an initial tem-
perature of Ti that is exposed to convection to a cooler medium
at a constant temperature of T, with a heat transfer coefficient
of h. Explain how you can determine the total amount of heat
transfer from the solid up to a specified time to.
11–66
In areas where the air temperature remains below
0C for prolonged periods of time, the freezing of water in
underground pipes is a major concern. Fortunately, the soil
remains relatively warm during those periods, and it takes
weeks for the subfreezing temperatures to reach the water
mains in the ground. Thus, the soil effectively serves as an
insulation to protect the water from the freezing atmospheric
temperatures in winter.
The ground at a particular location is covered with snow
pack at 8C for a continuous period of 60 days, and the
average soil properties at that location are k  0.35 W/m · C
and a  0.15 
 806 m2/s. Assuming an initial uniform tem-
perature of 8C for the ground, determine the minimum bur-
ial depth to prevent the water pipes from freezing.
11–67
The soil temperature in the upper layers of the earth
varies with the variations in the atmospheric conditions.
Before a cold front moves in, the earth at a location is initially
at a uniform temperature of 10C. Then the area is subjected to
a temperature of 10C and high winds that resulted in a con-
vection heat transfer coefficient of 40 W/m2 · C on the earth’s
surface for a period of 10 h. Taking the properties of the soil at
that location to be k  0.9 W/m · C and a  1.6 
 105 m2/s,
determine the soil temperature at distances 0, 10, 20, and
50 cm from the earth’s surface at the end of this 10-h period.
518
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
11–68
Reconsider Prob. 11–67. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the soil temperature as a function
of the distance from the earth’s surface as the distance varies
from 0 m to 1m, and discuss the results.
11–69
A thick aluminum block initially at 20C is sub-
jected to constant heat flux of 4000 W/m2 by an electric
resistance heater whose top surface is insulated. Determine
how much the surface temperature of the block will rise after
30 minutes.
11–70
A bare-footed person whose feet are at 32C steps on
a large aluminum block at 20C. Treating both the feet and the
aluminum block as semi-infinite solids, determine the contact
surface temperature. What would your answer be if the person
stepped on a wood block instead? At room temperature, the
value is 24 kJ/m2 · C for aluminum, 0.38 kJ/m2 · C
for wood, and 1.1 kJ/m2 · C for human flesh.
11–71E
The walls of a furnace are made of 1.2-ft-thick
concrete (k  0.64 Btu/h · ft · F and a  0.023 ft2/h). Ini-
tially, the furnace and the surrounding air are in thermal equi-
librium at 70F. The furnace is then fired, and the inner
surfaces of the furnace are subjected to hot gases at 1800F
with a very large heat transfer coefficient. Determine how
long it will take for the temperature of the outer surface of
the furnace walls to rise to 70.1F.
Answer: 116 min
11–72
A thick wood slab (k  0.17 W/m · C and a 
1.28 
 107 m2/s) that is initially at a uniform temperature of
25C is exposed to hot gases at 550C for a period of 5 min.
The heat transfer coefficient between the gases and the wood
slab is 35 W/m2 · C. If the ignition temperature of the wood
is 450C, determine if the wood will ignite.
11–73
A large cast iron container (k  52 W/m · C and 
a  1.70 
 105 m2/s) with 5-cm-thick walls is initially at a
uniform temperature of 0C and is filled with ice at 0C. Now
the outer surfaces of the container are exposed to hot water at
60C with a very large heat transfer coefficient. Determine
how long it will be before the ice inside the container starts
melting. Also, taking the heat transfer coefficient on the inner
surface of the container to be 250 W/m2 · C, determine the
rate of heat transfer to the ice through a 1.2-m-wide and 2-m-
high section of the wall when steady operating conditions are
reached. Assume the ice starts melting when its inner surface
temperature rises to 0.1C.
1krcp
Winds,
–10°C
Soil
10°C
FIGURE P11–67
5 cm
Ice
0°C
Hot water
60°C
Cast iron
chest
FIGURE P11–73

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
522
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
519
Transient Heat Conduction in Multidimensional Systems
11–74C
What is the product solution method? How is it
used to determine the transient temperature distribution in a
two-dimensional system?
11–75C
How is the product solution used to determine
the variation of temperature with time and position in three-
dimensional systems?
11–76C
A short cylinder initially at a uniform temperature
Ti is subjected to convection from all of its surfaces to a
medium at temperature T. Explain how you can determine
the temperature of the midpoint of the cylinder at a specified
time t.
11–77C
Consider a short cylinder whose top and bottom
surfaces are insulated. The cylinder is initially at a uniform
temperature Ti and is subjected to convection from its side
surface to a medium at temperature T with a heat transfer
coefficient of h. Is the heat transfer in this short cylinder one-
or two-dimensional? Explain.
11–78
A short brass cylinder (r  8530 kg/m3, cp 
0.389 kJ/kg · C, k  110 W/m · C, and a  3.39 
105 m2/s) of diameter D  8 cm and height H  15 cm is
initially at a uniform temperature of Ti  150C. The cylin-
der is now placed in atmospheric air at 20C, where heat
transfer takes place by convection with a heat transfer coeffi-
cient of h  40 W/m2 · C. Calculate (a) the center tempera-
ture of the cylinder; (b) the center temperature of the top
surface of the cylinder; and (c) the total heat transfer from the
cylinder 15 min after the start of the cooling.
11–79
Reconsider Prob. 11–78. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the cooling
time on the center temperature of the cylinder, the center
temperature of the top surface of the cylinder, and the total
heat transfer. Let the time vary from 5 min to 60 min. Plot
the center temperature of the cylinder, the center temperature
of the top surface, and the total heat transfer as a function of
the time, and discuss the results.
11–80
A
semi-infinite
aluminum
cylinder
(k

237
W/m · C, a  9.71 
 105 m2/s) of diameter D  15 cm is
initially at a uniform temperature of Ti  115C. The cylinder
is now placed in water at 10C, where heat transfer takes place
by convection with a heat transfer coefficient of h 
140 W/m2 · C. Determine the temperature at the center of the
cylinder 5 cm from the end surface 8 min after the start of
cooling.
11–81E
A hot dog can be considered to be a cylin-
der 5 in long and 0.8 in in diameter whose properties 
are r  61.2 lbm/ft3, cp  0.93 Btu/lbm · F, k  0.44 Btu/
h · ft · F, and a  0.0077 ft2/h. A hot dog initially at 40F is
dropped into boiling water at 212F. If the heat transfer coef-
ficient at the surface of the hot dog is estimated to be 120
Btu/h · ft2 · F, determine the center temperature of the hot
dog after 5, 10, and 15 min by treating the hot dog as (a) a
finite cylinder and (b) an infinitely long cylinder.
11–82E
Repeat Prob. 11–81E for a location at 5300-ft
elevation such as Denver, Colorado, where the boiling tem-
perature of water is 202F.
11–83
A 5-cm-high rectangular ice block (k  2.22 W/
m · C and a  0.124 
 107 m2/s) initially at 20C is
placed on a table on its square base 4 cm 
 4 cm in size in a
room at 18C. The heat transfer coefficient on the exposed
surfaces of the ice block is 12 W/m2 · C. Disregarding any
heat transfer from the base to the table, determine how long it
will be before the ice block starts melting. Where on the ice
block will the first liquid droplets appear?
11–84
Reconsider Prob. 11–83. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the initial
temperature of the ice block on the time period before the ice
block starts melting. Let the initial temperature vary from
26C to 4C. Plot the time versus the initial temperature,
and discuss the results.
11–85
A 2-cm-high cylindrical ice block (k  2.22 W/m · C
and a  0.124 
 107 m2/s) is placed on a table on its base of
diameter 2 cm in a room at 24C. The heat transfer coefficient
8 cm
Brass
cylinder
Ti = 150°C
Ambient
air
20°C
15 cm
FIGURE P11–78
Ice
block
–20°C
Room
air
18°C
FIGURE P11–83

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
523
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
on the exposed surfaces of the ice block is 13 W/m2 · C, and
heat transfer from the base of the ice block to the table is neg-
ligible. If the ice block is not to start melting at any point for at
least 3 h, determine what the initial temperature of the ice
block should be.
11–86
Consider a cubic block whose sides are 5 cm long and
a cylindrical block whose height and diameter are also 5 cm.
Both blocks are initially at 20C and are made of granite
(k  2.5 W/m · C and a  1.15 
 106 m2/s). Now both
blocks are exposed to hot gases at 500C in a furnace on all of
their surfaces with a heat transfer coefficient of 40 W/m2 · C.
Determine the center temperature of each geometry after 10,
20, and 60 min.
11–87
Repeat Prob. 11–86 with the heat transfer coefficient
at the top and the bottom surfaces of each block being dou-
bled to 80 W/m2 · C.
11–88
A 20-cm-long cylindrical aluminum block (r 
2702 kg/m3, cp  0.896 kJ/kg · C, k  236 W/m · C, and
a  9.75 
 105 m2/s), 15 cm in diameter, is initially at a
uniform temperature of 20C. The block is to be heated in a
furnace at 1200C until its center temperature rises to 300C.
If the heat transfer coefficient on all surfaces of the block is
80 W/m2 · C, determine how long the block should be kept
in the furnace. Also, determine the amount of heat transfer
from the aluminum block if it is allowed to cool in the room
until its temperature drops to 20C throughout.
11–89
Repeat Prob. 11–88 for the case where the aluminum
block is inserted into the furnace on a low-conductivity mate-
rial so that the heat transfer to or from the bottom surface of
the block is negligible.
11–90
Reconsider Prob. 11–88. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the final cen-
ter temperature of the block on the heating time and the
amount of heat transfer. Let the final center temperature vary
from 50C to 1000C. Plot the time and the heat transfer as a
function of the final center temperature, and discuss the
results.
Review Problems
11–91
Consider two 2-cm-thick large steel plates (k 
43 W/m · C and a  1.17 
 105 m2/s) that were put on top
of each other while wet and left outside during a cold winter
520
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
night at 15C. The next day, a worker needs one of the
plates, but the plates are stuck together because the freezing
of the water between the two plates has bonded them
together. In an effort to melt the ice between the plates and
separate them, the worker takes a large hair dryer and blows
hot air at 50C all over the exposed surface of the plate on
the top. The convection heat transfer coefficient at the top
surface is estimated to be 40 W/m2 · C. Determine how long
the worker must keep blowing hot air before the two plates
separate.
Answer: 482 s
11–92
Consider a curing kiln whose walls are made of
30-cm-thick concrete whose properties are k  0.9 W/m · C
and a  0.23 
 105 m2/s. Initially, the kiln and its walls are
in equilibrium with the surroundings at 6C. Then all the doors
are closed and the kiln is heated by steam so that the tempera-
ture of the inner surface of the walls is raised to 42C and is
maintained at that level for 2.5 h. The curing kiln is then
opened and exposed to the atmospheric air after the stream
flow is turned off. If the outer surfaces of the walls of the
kiln were insulated, would it save any energy that day during
the period the kiln was used for curing for 2.5 h only, or would
it make no difference? Base your answer on calculations.
11–93
The water main in the cities must be placed at suf-
ficient depth below the earth’s surface to avoid freezing dur-
ing extended periods of subfreezing temperatures. Determine
the minimum depth at which the water main must be placed
at a location where the soil is initially at 15C and the earth’s
surface temperature under the worst conditions is expected
to remain at 10C for a period of 75 days. Take the proper-
ties of soil at that location to be k  0.7 W/m · C and
a  1.4 
 105 m2/s.
Answer: 7.05 m
11–94
A hot dog can be considered to be a 12-cm-long
cylinder whose diameter is 2 cm and whose properties are
r  980 kg/m3, cp  3.9 kJ/kg · C, k  0.76 W/m · C, and
a  2 
 107 m2/s. A hot dog initially at 5C is dropped into
boiling water at 100C. The heat transfer coefficient at the sur-
face of the hot dog is estimated to be 600 W/m2 · C. If the hot
dog is considered cooked when its center temperature reaches
80C, determine how long it will take to cook it in the boiling
water.
Hot gases, 500°C
5 cm
5 cm
5 cm
5 cm
5 cm
Ti = 20°C
Ti = 20°C
FIGURE P11–86
6°C
42°C
30 cm
FIGURE P11–92

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
524
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
521
11–95
A long roll of 2-m-wide and 0.5-cm-thick 1-Mn
manganese steel plate coming off a furnace at 820C is to be
quenched in an oil bath (cp  2.0 kJ/kg · C) at 45C. The
metal sheet is moving at a steady velocity of 15 m/min, and
the oil bath is 9 m long. Taking the convection heat transfer
coefficient on both sides of the plate to be 860 W/m2 · C,
determine the temperature of the sheet metal when it leaves
the oil bath. Also, determine the required rate of heat removal
from the oil to keep its temperature constant at 45C.
11–96E
In Betty Crocker’s Cookbook, it is stated that it takes
5 h to roast a 14-lb stuffed turkey initially at 40F in an oven
maintained at 325F. It is recommended that a meat ther-
mometer be used to monitor the cooking, and the turkey is
considered done when the thermometer inserted deep into the
thickest part of the breast or thigh without touching the bone
registers 185F. The turkey can be treated as a homogeneous
spherical object with the properties r  75 lbm/ft3, cp 
0.98 Btu/lbm · F, k  0.26 Btu/h · ft · F, and a  0.0035
ft2/h. Assuming the tip of the thermometer is at one-third
radial distance from the center of the turkey, determine (a) the
average heat transfer coefficient at the surface of the turkey;
(b) the temperature of the skin of the turkey when it is done;
and (c) the total amount of heat transferred to the turkey in the
oven. Will the reading of the thermometer be more or less than
185F 5 min after the turkey is taken out of the oven?
11–97
During a fire, the trunks of some dry oak trees
(k  0.17 W/m · C and a  1.28 
 107
m2/s) that are initially at a uniform temperature of 30C are
exposed to hot gases at 520C for a period of 5 h, with a heat
transfer coefficient of 65 W/m2 · C on the surface. The igni-
tion temperature of the trees is 410C. Treating the trunks of
the trees as long cylindrical rods of diameter 20 cm, deter-
mine if these dry trees will ignite as the fire sweeps through
them.
11–98
We often cut a watermelon in half and put it into the
freezer to cool it quickly. But usually we forget to check on it
and end up having a watermelon with a frozen layer on the
top. To avoid this potential problem a person wants to set the
timer such that it will go off when the temperature of the
exposed surface of the watermelon drops to 3C.
Consider a 25-cm-diameter spherical watermelon that is
cut into two equal parts and put into a freezer at 12C. Ini-
tially, the entire watermelon is at a uniform temperature of
25C, and the heat transfer coefficient on the surfaces is 22
W/m2 · C. Assuming the watermelon to have the properties
of water, determine how long it will take for the center of the
exposed cut surfaces of the watermelon to drop to 3C.
Water, 100°C
Hot dog
FIGURE P11–94
15 m/min
Steel
plate
Oil bath, 45°C
Furnace
FIGURE P11–95
FIGURE P11–96E
20 cm
30°C
Hot
gases
520°C
FIGURE P11–97
Watermelon, 25°C
Freezer
–12°C
FIGURE P11–98
11–99
The thermal conductivity of a solid whose density
and specific heat are known can be determined from the rela-
tion k  a/rcp after evaluating the thermal diffusivity a.
Consider a 2-cm-diameter cylindrical rod made of a sam-
ple material whose density and specific heat are 3700 kg/m3

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
525
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
and 920 J/kg · C, respectively. The sample is initially at a
uniform temperature of 25C. In order to measure the temper-
atures of the sample at its surface and its center, a thermocou-
ple is inserted to the center of the sample along the
centerline, and another thermocouple is welded into a small
hole drilled on the surface. The sample is dropped into boil-
ing water at 100C. After 3 min, the surface and the center
temperatures are recorded to be 93C and 75C, respectively.
Determine the thermal diffusivity and the thermal conductiv-
ity of the material.
11–100
In desert climates, rainfall is not a common occur-
rence since the rain droplets formed in the upper layer of 
the atmosphere often evaporate before they reach the ground.
Consider a raindrop that is initially at a temperature of 5C
and has a diameter of 5 mm. Determine how long it will take
for the diameter of the raindrop to reduce to 3 mm as it falls
through ambient air at 18C with a heat transfer coefficient of
400 W/m2 · C. The water temperature can be assumed to
remain constant and uniform at 5C at all times.
11–101E
Consider a plate of thickness 1 in, a long cylinder
of diameter 1 in, and a sphere of diameter 1 in, all initially
at 400F and all made of bronze (k  15.0 Btu/h · ft · F and
a  0.333 ft2/h). Now all three of these geometries are
exposed to cool air at 75F on all of their surfaces, with a
heat transfer coefficient of 7 Btu/h · ft2 · F. Determine the
center temperature of each geometry after 5, 10, and 30 min.
Explain why the center temperature of the sphere is always
the lowest.
522
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
11–102E
Repeat Prob. 11–101E for cast iron geometries
(k  29 Btu/h · ft · F and a  0.61 ft2/h).
11–103E
Reconsider Prob. 11–101E. Using EES (or
other) software, plot the center temperature
of each geometry as a function of the cooling time as the
time varies from 5 min to 60 min, and discuss the results.
11–104
Engine valves (k  48 W/m · C, cp  440 J/kg · C,
and r  7840 kg/m3) are heated to 800C in the heat 
treatment section of a valve manufacturing facility. The
valves are then quenched in a large oil bath at an average
temperature of 50C. The heat transfer coefficient in the oil
bath is 800 W/m2 · C. The valves have a cylindrical stem
with a diameter of 8 mm and a length of 10 cm. The valve
head and the stem may be assumed to be of equal surface
area, and the volume of the valve head can be taken to be 
80 percent of the volume of steam. Determine how long it
will take for the valve temperature to drop to (a) 400C,
(b) 200C, and (c) 51C, and (d) the maximum heat transfer
from a single valve.
11–105
A watermelon initially at 35C is to be cooled by
dropping it into a lake at 15C. After 4 h and 40 min of cool-
ing, the center temperature of watermelon is measured to be
20C. Treating the watermelon as a 20-cm-diameter sphere
and using the properties k  0.618 W/m · C, a  0.15 
106 m2/s, r  995 kg/m3, and cp  4.18 kJ/kg · C, deter-
mine the average heat transfer coefficient and the surface
temperature of watermelon at the end of the cooling period.
11–106
10-cm-thick large food slabs tightly wrapped by
thin paper are to be cooled in a refrigeration room maintained
at 0C. The heat transfer coefficient on the box surfaces is
25 W/m2 · C and the boxes are to be kept in the refrigeration
room for a period of 6 h. If the initial temperature of the
boxes is 30C determine the center temperature of the boxes
if the boxes contain (a) margarine (k  0.233 W/m · C and
a  0.11 
 106 m2/s), (b) white cake (k  0.082 W/m · C
and a  0.10 
 106 m2/s), and (c) chocolate cake (k 
0.106 W/m · C and a  0.12 
 106 m2/s).
11–107
A 30-cm-diameter, 4-m-high cylindrical column of
a house made of concrete (k  0.79 W/m · C, a  5.94 
107 m2/s, r  1600 kg/m3, and cp  0.84 kJ/kg · C) cooled
to 14C during a cold night is heated again during the day by
being exposed to ambient air at an average temperature of
28C with an average heat transfer coefficient of 14 W/m2 · C.
Determine (a) how long it will take for the column surface
temperature to rise to 27C, (b) the amount of heat transfer
until the center temperature reaches to 28C, and (c) the
amount of heat transfer until the surface temperature reaches
to 27C.
11–108
Long aluminum wires of diameter 3 mm (r 
2702 kg/m3, cp  0.896 kJ/kg · C, k  236 W/m · C, and
a  9.75 
 105 m2/s) are extruded at a temperature of
350C and exposed to atmospheric air at 30C with a heat
transfer coefficient of 35 W/m2 · C. (a) Determine how long
Thermocouples
Rod
Boiling water
100°C
Tsurface
Tcenter
FIGURE P11–99
1 in
1 in
1 in
Sphere
Cylinder
Plate
FIGURE P11–101E

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
526
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 11
|
523
it will take for the wire temperature to drop to 50C. (b) If
the wire is extruded at a velocity of 10 m/min, determine how
far the wire travels after extrusion by the time its temperature
drops to 50C. What change in the cooling process would
you propose to shorten this distance? (c) Assuming the alu-
minum wire leaves the extrusion room at 50C, determine the
rate of heat transfer from the wire to the extrusion room.
Answers: (a) 144 s, (b) 24 m, (c) 856 W
engine can be considered to be a rectangular block whose
sides are 80 cm, 40 cm, and 40 cm. The engine is at a tem-
perature of 150C when it is turned off. The engine is then
exposed to atmospheric air at 17C with a heat transfer coef-
ficient of 6 W/m2 · C. Determine (a) the center temperature
of the top surface whose sides are 80 cm and 40 cm and 
(b) the corner temperature after 45 min of cooling.
11–113
A man is found dead in a room at 16C. The surface
temperature on his waist is measured to be 23C and the heat
transfer coefficient is estimated to be 9 W/m2 · C. Modeling
the body as 28-cm diameter, 1.80-m-long cylinder, estimate
how long it has been since he died. Take the properties of the
body to be k  0.62 W/m · C and a  0.15 
 106 m2/s, and
assume the initial temperature of the body to be 36C.
11–114
An exothermic process occurs uniformly through-
out 
a 
10-cm-diameter 
sphere 
(k  300
W/m · K,
cp  400 J/kg · K, r  7500 kg/m3), and it generates heat at a
constant rate of 1.2 MW/m3. The sphere initially is at a uni-
form temperature of 20C, and the exothermic process is
commenced at time t  0. To keep the sphere temperature
under control, it is submerged in a liquid bath maintained at
20C. The heat transfer coefficient at the sphere surface is
250 W/m2 · K.
Due to the high thermal conductivity of sphere, the con-
ductive resistance within the sphere can be neglected in com-
parison to the convective resistance at its surface.
Accordingly, this unsteady state heat transfer situation could
be analyzed as a lumped system.
(a) Show that the variation of sphere temperature T with
time t can be expressed as dT/dt  0.5  0.005T.
(b) Predict the steady-state temperature of the sphere.
(c) Calculate the time needed for the sphere temperature
to reach the average of its initial and final (steady)
temperatures.
11–115
Large steel plates 1.0-cm in thickness are quenched
from 600C to 100C by submerging them in an oil reservoir
held at 30C. The average heat transfer coefficient for both
faces of steel plates is 400 W/m2 · K. Average steel properties
are k  45 W/m · K, r  7800 kg/m3, and cp  470 J/kg · K.
Calculate the quench time for steel plates.
11–116
Aluminium wires, 3 mm in diameter, are produced
by extrusion. The wires leave the extruder at an average tem-
perature of 350°C and at a linear rate of 10 m/min. Before
leaving the extrusion room, the wires are cooled to an aver-
age temperature of 50°C by transferring heat to the sur-
rounding air at 25°C with a heat transfer coefficient of 
50 W/m2 · K. Calculate the necessary length of the wire cool-
ing section in the extrusion room.
Design and Essay Problems
11–117
Conduct the following experiment at home to deter-
mine the combined convection and radiation heat transfer
350°C
Tair = 30°C
Aluminum wire
10 m/min
FIGURE P11–108
11–109
Repeat Prob. 11–108 for a copper wire (r 
8950 kg/m3, cp  0.383 kJ/kg · C, k  386 W/m · C, and 
a  1.13 
 104 m2/s).
11–110
Consider a brick house (k  0.72 W/m · C and
a  0.45 
 106 m2/s) whose walls are 10 m long, 3 m high,
and 0.3 m thick. The heater of the house broke down one
night, and the entire house, including its walls, was observed
to be 5C throughout in the morning. The outdoors warmed
up as the day progressed, but no change was felt in the house,
which was tightly sealed. Assuming the outer surface temper-
ature of the house to remain constant at 15C, determine how
long it would take for the temperature of the inner surfaces of
the walls to rise to 5.1C.
5°C
15°C
FIGURE P11–110
11–111
A 40-cm-thick brick wall (k  0.72 W/m · C, and
a  1.6 
 107 m2/s) is heated to an average temperature of
18C by the heating system and the solar radiation incident
on it during the day. During the night, the outer surface of the
wall is exposed to cold air at 3C with an average heat
transfer coefficient of 20 W/m2 · C, determine the wall tem-
peratures at distances 15, 30, and 40 cm from the outer sur-
face for a period of 2 h.
11–112
Consider the engine block of a car made of cast
iron (k  52 W/m · C and a  1.7 
 105 m2/s). The

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
11. Transient Heat 
Conduction
527
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
coefficient at the surface of an apple exposed to the room air.
You will need two thermometers and a clock.
First, weigh the apple and measure its diameter. You can
measure its volume by placing it in a large measuring cup
halfway filled with water, and measuring the change in vol-
ume when it is completely immersed in the water. Refrigerate
the apple overnight so that it is at a uniform temperature in
the morning and measure the air temperature in the kitchen.
Then take the apple out and stick one of the thermometers to
its middle and the other just under the skin. Record both tem-
peratures every 5 min for an hour. Using these two tempera-
tures, calculate the heat transfer coefficient for each interval
and take their average. The result is the combined convection
and radiation heat transfer coefficient for this heat transfer
process. Using your experimental data, also calculate the
thermal conductivity and thermal diffusivity of the apple and
compare them to the values given above.
11–118
Repeat Prob. 11–117 using a banana instead of an
apple. The thermal properties of bananas are practically the
same as those of apples.
11–119
Conduct the following experiment to determine the
time constant for a can of soda and then predict the tempera-
524
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
ture of the soda at different times. Leave the soda in the
refrigerator overnight. Measure the air temperature in the
kitchen and the temperature of the soda while it is still in 
the refrigerator by taping the sensor of the thermometer to
the outer surface of the can. Then take the soda out and mea-
sure its temperature again in 5 min. Using these values, cal-
culate the exponent b. Using this b-value, predict the
temperatures of the soda in 10, 15, 20, 30, and 60 min and
compare the results with the actual temperature measure-
ments. Do you think the lumped system analysis is valid in
this case?
11–120
Citrus trees are very susceptible to cold weather,
and extended exposure to subfreezing temperatures can
destroy the crop. In order to protect the trees from occasional
cold fronts with subfreezing temperatures, tree growers in
Florida usually install water sprinklers on the trees. When the
temperature drops below a certain level, the sprinklers spray
water on the trees and their fruits to protect them against the
damage the subfreezing temperatures can cause. Explain the
basic mechanism behind this protection measure and write an
essay on how the system works in practice.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
528
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
EXTERNAL FORCED CONVECTION
|
525
S
o far, we have considered conduction, which is the
mechanism of heat transfer through a solid or a quies-
cent fluid. We now consider convection, which is the
mechanism of heat transfer through a fluid in the presence of
bulk fluid motion.
Convection is classified as natural (or free) and forced con-
vection, depending on how the fluid motion is initiated. In
forced convection, the fluid is forced to flow over a surface or
in a pipe by external means such as a pump or a fan. In nat-
ural convection, any fluid motion is caused by natural means
such as the buoyancy effect, which manifests itself as the rise
of warmer fluid and the fall of the cooler fluid. Convection is
also classified as external and internal depending on whether
the fluid is forced to flow over a surface or in a pipe.
We start this chapter with a general physical description of
the convection mechanism. We then discuss the velocity and
thermal boundary layers, and laminar and turbulent flows. We
continue with the discussion of the dimensionless Reynolds,
Prandtl, and Nusselt numbers, and their physical signifi-
cance. Next we introduce friction and pressure drag, flow
separation, and the evaluation of average drag and convec-
tion coefficients. We continue with parallel flow over flat
plates, and determine the average friction coefficient and
Nusselt number. Finally, we consider cross flow over cylinders
and spheres, and present graphs and empirical correlations
for the drag coefficients and the Nusselt numbers, and dis-
cuss their significance.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Understand the physical mechanism of convection, and its
classification,
• Visualize the development of velocity and thermal boundary
layers during flow over surfaces,
• Gain a working knowledge of the dimensionless Reynolds,
Prandtl, and Nusselt numbers,
• Distinguish between laminar and turbulent flows, and gain
an understanding of the mechanisms of momentum and
heat transfer in turbulent flow,
• Develop an intuitive understanding of friction drag and
pressure drag, and evaluate the average drag and
convection coefficients in external flow,
• Evaluate the drag and heat transfer associated with flow
over a flat plate for both laminar and turbulent flow, and
• Calculate the drag force exerted on cylinders during cross
flow, and the average heat transfer coefficient.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
529
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
12–1
■PHYSICAL MECHANISM OF CONVECTION
We mentioned in Chapter 1 that there are three basic mechanisms of heat trans-
fer: conduction, convection, and radiation. Conduction and convection are sim-
ilar in that both mechanisms require the presence of a material medium. But
they are different in that convection requires the presence of fluid motion.
Heat transfer through a solid is always by conduction, since the molecules
of a solid remain at relatively fixed positions. Heat transfer through a liquid
or gas, however, can be by conduction or convection, depending on the
presence of any bulk fluid motion. Heat transfer through a fluid is by con-
vection in the presence of bulk fluid motion and by conduction in the
absence of it. Therefore, conduction in a fluid can be viewed as the limiting
case of convection, corresponding to the case of quiescent fluid (Fig. 12–1).
Convection heat transfer is complicated by the fact that it involves fluid
motion as well as heat conduction. The fluid motion enhances heat transfer,
since it brings warmer and cooler chunks of fluid into contact, initiating
higher rates of conduction at a greater number of sites in a fluid. Therefore,
the rate of heat transfer through a fluid is much higher by convection than it
is by conduction. In fact, the higher the fluid velocity, the higher the rate of
heat transfer.
To clarify this point further, consider steady heat transfer through a fluid
contained between two parallel plates maintained at different temperatures,
as shown in Figure 12–2. The temperatures of the fluid and the plate are the
same at the points of contact because of the continuity of temperature.
Assuming no fluid motion, the energy of the hotter fluid molecules near the
hot plate is transferred to the adjacent cooler fluid molecules. This energy is
then transferred to the next layer of the cooler fluid molecules. This energy
is then transferred to the next layer of the cooler fluid, and so on, until it is
finally transferred to the other plate. This is what happens during conduc-
tion through a fluid. Now let us use a syringe to draw some fluid near the
hot plate and inject it next to the cold plate repeatedly. You can imagine that
this will speed up the heat transfer process considerably, since some energy
is carried to the other side as a result of fluid motion.
Consider the cooling of a hot block with a fan blowing air over its top
surface. We know that heat is transferred from the hot block to the sur-
rounding cooler air, and the block eventually cools. We also know that the
block cools faster if the fan is switched to a higher speed. Replacing air by
water enhances the convection heat transfer even more.
Experience shows that convection heat transfer strongly depends on the
fluid properties dynamic viscosity m, thermal conductivity k, density r, and
specific heat cp, as well as the fluid velocity V. It also depends on the geom-
etry and the roughness of the solid surface, in addition to the type of fluid
flow (such as being streamlined or turbulent). Thus, we expect the convec-
tion heat transfer relations to be rather complex because of the dependence
of convection on so many variables. This is not surprising, since convection
is the most complex mechanism of heat transfer.
Despite the complexity of convection, the rate of convection heat transfer
is observed to be proportional to the temperature difference and is conve-
niently expressed by Newton’s law of cooling as
conv  h(Ts  T)
(W/m2)
(12–1)
q#
526
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
20°C
5 m/s
AIR
AIR
AIR
50°C
(a) Forced convection
(b) Free convection
(c) Conduction
No convection
currents
Warmer air
rising
Q2
Q3
Q1
FIGURE 12–1
Heat transfer from a hot surface to the
surrounding fluid by convection and
conduction.
Hot plate
Cold plate
Fluid
Heat transfer
through the
fluid
Q
FIGURE 12–2
Heat transfer through a fluid
sandwiched between two parallel
plates.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
530
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
or
Q·
conv  hAs(Ts  T)
(W)
(12–2)
where
h  convection heat transfer coefficient, W/m2  °C
As  heat transfer surface area, m2
Ts  temperature of the surface, °C
T  temperature of the fluid sufficiently far from the surface, °C
Judging from its units, the convection heat transfer coefficient h can be
defined as the rate of heat transfer between a solid surface and a fluid per
unit surface area per unit temperature difference.
You should not be deceived by the simple appearance of this relation,
because the convection heat transfer coefficient h depends on the several of
the mentioned variables, and thus is difficult to determine.
Fluid flow is often confined by solid surfaces, and it is important to under-
stand how the presence of solid surfaces affects fluid flow. Consider the flow
of a fluid in a stationary pipe or over a solid surface that is nonporous (i.e.,
impermeable to the fluid). All experimental observations indicate that a fluid
in motion comes to a complete stop at the surface and assumes a zero velocity
relative to the surface. That is, a fluid in direct contact with a solid “sticks” to
the surface due to viscous effects, and there is no slip. This is known as the
no-slip condition.
The photo in Fig. 12–3 obtained from a video clip clearly shows the evolu-
tion of a velocity gradient as a result of the fluid sticking to the surface of a
blunt nose. The layer that sticks to the surface slows the adjacent fluid layer
because of viscous forces between the fluid layers, which slows the next
layer, and so on. Therefore, the no-slip condition is responsible for the devel-
opment of the velocity profile. The flow region adjacent to the wall in which
the viscous effects (and thus the velocity gradients) are significant is called
the boundary layer. The fluid property responsible for the no-slip condition
and the development of the boundary layer is viscosity and is discussed
briefly in Section 12–2.
A fluid layer adjacent to a moving surface has the same velocity as the
surface. A consequence of the no-slip condition is that all velocity profiles
must have zero values with respect to the surface at the points of contact
between a fluid and a solid surface (Fig. 12–4). Another consequence of the
no-slip condition is the surface drag, which is the force a fluid exerts on a
surface in the flow direction. 
An implication of the no-slip condition is that heat transfer from the solid
surface to the fluid layer adjacent to the surface is by pure conduction, since
the fluid layer is motionless, and can be expressed as
conv 
cond  kfluid
(W/m2)
(12–3)
where T represents the temperature distribution in the fluid and (T/y)y0 is
the temperature gradient at the surface. Heat is then convected away from
the surface as a result of fluid motion. Note that convection heat transfer
from a solid surface to a fluid is merely the conduction heat transfer from
T
y `
y0
q#
q#
Chapter 12
|
527
FIGURE 12–3
The development of a velocity profile
due to the no-slip condition as a fluid
flows over a blunt nose.
“Hunter Rouse: Laminar and Turbulent Flow
Film.” Copyright IIHR-Hydroscience &
Engineering, The University of Iowa. Used by
permission.
Relative
velocities
of fluid layers
Uniform
approach
velocity, V
Zero
velocity
at the 
surface
Plate
y
x
FIGURE 12–4
A fluid flowing over a stationary
surface comes to a complete stop at
the surface because of the no-slip
condition.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
531
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the solid surface to the fluid layer adjacent to the surface. Therefore, we can
equate Eqs. 12–1 and 12–3 for the heat flux to obtain
(W/m2  °C)
(12–4)
for the determination of the convection heat transfer coefficient when the
temperature distribution within the fluid is known.
The convection heat transfer coefficient, in general, varies along the flow
(or x-) direction. The average or mean convection heat transfer coefficient
for a surface in such cases is determined by properly averaging the local
convection heat transfer coefficients over the entire surface.
Nusselt Number
In convection studies, it is common practice to nondimensionalize the gov-
erning equations and combine the variables, which group together into
dimensionless numbers in order to reduce the number of total variables. It is
also common practice to nondimensionalize the heat transfer coefficient h
with the Nusselt number, defined as
(12–5)
where k is the thermal conductivity of the fluid and Lc is the characteristic
length. The Nusselt number is named after Wilhelm Nusselt, who made sig-
nificant contributions to convective heat transfer in the first half of the twen-
tieth century, and it is viewed as the dimensionless convection heat transfer
coefficient.
To understand the physical significance of the Nusselt number, consider a
fluid layer of thickness L and temperature difference T  T2  T1, as
shown in Fig. 12–5. Heat transfer through the fluid layer is by convection
when the fluid involves some motion and by conduction when the fluid
layer is motionless. Heat flux (the rate of heat transfer per unit surface area)
in either case is
conv  hT
(12–6)
and
cond  k
(12–7)
Taking their ratio gives
(12–8)
which is the Nusselt number. Therefore, the Nusselt number represents the
enhancement of heat transfer through a fluid layer as a result of convection
relative to conduction across the same fluid layer. The larger the Nusselt
number, the more effective the convection. A Nusselt number of Nu  1 for
a fluid layer represents heat transfer across the layer by pure conduction.
We use forced convection in daily life more often than you might think
(Fig. 12–6). We resort to forced convection whenever we want to increase
the rate of heat transfer from a hot object. For example, we turn on the fan
on hot summer days to help our body cool more effectively. The higher the
 hT
kTL  hL
k  Nu
q#
conv
q#
cond
T
L
q#
q#
Nu  hLc
k
h 
kfluid(T/y)y0
Ts  T
528
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Blowing
on food
FIGURE 12–6
We resort to forced convection
whenever we need to increase the
rate of heat transfer.
L
T2
T1
ΔT = T2 – T1
Fluid
layer
Q·
FIGURE 12–5
Heat transfer through a fluid layer
of thickness L and temperature
difference T.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
532
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
fan speed, the better we feel. We stir our soup and blow on a hot slice of
pizza to make them cool faster. The air on windy winter days feels much
colder than it actually is. The simplest solution to heating problems in elec-
tronics packaging is to use a large enough fan.
12–2
■CLASSIFICATION OF FLUID FLOWS
Convection heat transfer is closely tied with fluid mechanics, which is the
science that deals with the behavior of fluids at rest or in motion, and the
interaction of fluids with solids or other fluids at the boundaries. There is a
wide variety of fluid flow problems encountered in practice, and it is usu-
ally convenient to classify them on the basis of some common characteris-
tics to make it feasible to study them in groups. There are many ways to
classify fluid flow problems, and here we present some general categories.
Viscous versus Inviscid Regions of Flow
When two fluid layers move relative to each other, a friction force develops
between them and the slower layer tries to slow down the faster layer. This
internal resistance to flow is quantified by the fluid property viscosity,
which is a measure of internal stickiness of the fluid. Viscosity is caused by
cohesive forces between the molecules in liquids and by molecular colli-
sions in gases. There is no fluid with zero viscosity, and thus all fluid flows
involve viscous effects to some degree. Flows in which the frictional effects
are significant are called viscous flows. However, in many flows of practical
interest, there are regions (typically regions not close to solid surfaces)
where viscous forces are negligibly small compared to inertial or pressure
forces. Neglecting the viscous terms in such inviscid flow regions greatly
simplifies the analysis without much loss in accuracy. 
The development of viscous and inviscid regions of flow as a result of
inserting a flat plate parallel into a fluid stream of uniform velocity is
shown in Fig. 12–7. The fluid sticks to the plate on both sides because of
the no-slip condition, and the thin boundary layer in which the viscous
effects are significant near the plate surface is the viscous flow region. The
region of flow on both sides away from the plate and unaffected by the
presence of the plate is the inviscid flow region.
Internal versus External Flow
A fluid flow is classified as being internal or external, depending on
whether the fluid is forced to flow in a confined channel or over a surface.
The flow of an unbounded fluid over a surface such as a plate, a wire, or a
pipe is external flow. The flow in a pipe or duct is internal flow if the fluid
is completely bounded by solid surfaces. Water flow in a pipe, for example,
is internal flow, and airflow over a ball or over an exposed pipe during a
windy day is external flow (Fig. 12–8). The flow of liquids in a duct is
called open-channel flow if the duct is only partially filled with the liquid
and there is a free surface. The flows of water in rivers and irrigation
ditches are examples of such flows.
Internal flows are dominated by the influence of viscosity throughout the
flow field. In external flows the viscous effects are limited to boundary lay-
ers near solid surfaces and to wake regions downstream of bodies. 
Chapter 12
|
529
Inviscid flow
region
Viscous flow
region
Inviscid flow
region
FIGURE 12–7
The flow of an originally uniform
fluid stream over a flat plate, and 
the regions of viscous flow (next to 
the plate on both sides) and inviscid
flow (away from the plate).
Fundamentals of Boundary Layers,
National Committee from Fluid Mechanics Films,
© Education Development Center.
FIGURE 12–8
External flow over a tennis ball, and
the turbulent wake region behind.
Courtesy NASA and Cislunar Aerospace, Inc.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
533
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Compressible versus Incompressible Flow
A flow is classified as being compressible or incompressible, depending on
the level of variation of density during flow. Incompressibility is an approxi-
mation, and a flow is said to be incompressible if the density remains nearly
constant throughout. Therefore, the volume of every portion of fluid remains
unchanged over the course of its motion when the flow (or the fluid) is
incompressible.
The densities of liquids are essentially constant, and thus the flow of liq-
uids is typically incompressible. Therefore, liquids are usually referred to as
incompressible substances. A pressure of 210 atm, for example, causes the
density of liquid water at 1 atm to change by just 1 percent. Gases, on the
other hand, are highly compressible. A pressure change of just 0.01 atm, for
example, causes a change of 1 percent in the density of atmospheric air.
Liquid flows are incompressible to a high level of accuracy, but the level
of variation in density in gas flows and the consequent level of approxima-
tion made when modeling gas flows as incompressible depends on the
Mach number defined as Ma  V/c, where c is the speed of sound whose
value is 346 m/s in air at room temperature at sea level. Gas flows can often
be approximated as incompressible if the density changes are under about
5 percent, which is usually the case when Ma  0.3. Therefore, the com-
pressibility effects of air can be neglected at speeds under about 100 m/s.
Note that the flow of a gas is not necessarily a compressible flow.
Small density changes of liquids corresponding to large pressure changes
can still have important consequences. The irritating “water hammer” in a
water pipe, for example, is caused by the vibrations of the pipe generated by
the reflection of pressure waves following the sudden closing of the valves.
Laminar versus Turbulent Flow
Some flows are smooth and orderly while others are rather chaotic. The
highly ordered fluid motion characterized by smooth layers of fluid is called
laminar. The word laminar comes from the movement of adjacent fluid
particles together in “laminates.” The flow of high-viscosity fluids such as
oils at low velocities is typically laminar. The highly disordered fluid
motion that typically occurs at high velocities and is characterized by veloc-
ity fluctuations is called turbulent (Fig. 12–9). The flow of low-viscosity
fluids such as air at high velocities is typically turbulent. The flow regime
greatly influences the required power for pumping. A flow that alternates
between being laminar and turbulent is called transitional.
Natural (or Unforced) versus Forced Flow
A fluid flow is said to be natural or forced, depending on how the fluid
motion is initiated. In forced flow, a fluid is forced to flow over a surface or
in a pipe by external means such as a pump or a fan. In natural flows, any
fluid motion is due to natural means such as the buoyancy effect, which
manifests itself as the rise of the warmer (and thus lighter) fluid and the fall
of cooler (and thus denser) fluid (Fig. 12–10). In solar hot-water systems,
for example, the thermosiphoning effect is commonly used to replace
pumps by placing the water tank sufficiently above the solar collectors.
530
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Laminar
Transitional
Turbulent
FIGURE 12–9
Laminar, transitional, and turbulent
flows.
Courtesy ONERA, photograph by Werlé.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
534
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Steady versus Unsteady Flow
The terms steady and uniform are used frequently in engineering, and thus it
is important to have a clear understanding of their meanings. The term
steady implies no change at a point with time. The opposite of steady is
unsteady. The term uniform implies no change with location over a speci-
fied region. These meanings are consistent with their everyday use (steady
girlfriend, uniform distribution, etc.).
The terms unsteady and transient are often used interchangeably, but
these terms are not synonyms. In fluid mechanics, unsteady is the most gen-
eral term that applies to any flow that is not steady, but transient is typi-
cally used for developing flows. When a rocket engine is fired up, for
example, there are transient effects (the pressure builds up inside the rocket
engine, the flow accelerates, etc.) until the engine settles down and operates
steadily. The term periodic refers to the kind of unsteady flow in which the
flow oscillates about a steady mean.
Many devices such as turbines, compressors, boilers, condensers, and heat
exchangers operate for long periods of time under the same conditions, and
they are classified as steady-flow devices. (Note that the flow field near the
rotating blades of a turbomachine is of course unsteady, but we consider the
overall flow field rather than the details at some localities when we classify
devices.) During steady flow, the fluid properties can change from point to
point within a device, but at any fixed point they remain constant. There-
fore, the volume, the mass, and the total energy content of a steady-flow
device or flow section remain constant in steady operation.
Steady-flow conditions can be closely approximated by devices that are
intended for continuous operation such as turbines, pumps, boilers, con-
densers, and heat exchangers of power plants or refrigeration systems. Some
cyclic devices, such as reciprocating engines or compressors, do not satisfy
the steady-flow conditions since the flow at the inlets and the exits is pulsat-
ing and not steady. However, the fluid properties vary with time in a peri-
odic manner, and the flow through these devices can still be analyzed as a
steady-flow process by using time-averaged values for the properties.
One-, Two-, and Three-Dimensional Flows
A flow field is best characterized by the velocity distribution, and thus a
flow is said to be one-, two-, or three-dimensional if the flow velocity varies
in one, two, or three primary dimensions, respectively. A typical fluid flow
involves a three-dimensional geometry, and the velocity may vary in all
three dimensions, rendering the flow three-dimensional [V
→(x, y, z) in rec-
tangular or V
→(r, u, z) in cylindrical coordinates]. However, the variation of
velocity in certain directions can be small relative to the variation in other
directions and can be ignored with negligible error. In such cases, the flow
can be modeled conveniently as being one- or two-dimensional, which is
easier to analyze. 
Consider steady flow of a fluid through a circular pipe attached to a large
tank. The fluid velocity everywhere on the pipe surface is zero because of
the no-slip condition, and the flow is two-dimensional in the entrance region
of the pipe since the velocity changes in both the r- and z-directions. The
velocity profile develops fully and remains unchanged after some distance
Chapter 12
|
531
V0  0.2 m/s
L  0.2 m
Re  3  103
FIGURE 12–10
In this schlieren image of a girl, the
rise of lighter, warmer air adjacent to
her body indicates that humans and
warm-blooded animals are surrounded
by thermal plumes of rising warm air.
G. S. Settles, Gas Dynamics Lab, Penn State
University. Used by permission.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
535
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
from the inlet (about 10 pipe diameters in turbulent flow, and less in laminar
pipe flow, as in Fig. 12–11), and the flow in this region is said to be fully
developed. The fully developed flow in a circular pipe is one-dimensional
since the velocity varies in the radial r-direction but not in the angular u- or
axial z-directions, as shown in Fig. 12–11. That is, the velocity profile is the
same at any axial z-location, and it is symmetric about the axis of the pipe.
Note that the dimensionality of the flow also depends on the choice of
coordinate system and its orientation. The pipe flow discussed, for example,
is one-dimensional in cylindrical coordinates, but two-dimensional in Carte-
sian coordinates—illustrating the importance of choosing the most appropri-
ate coordinate system. Also note that even in this simple flow, the velocity
cannot be uniform across the cross section of the pipe because of the no-slip
condition. However, at a well-rounded entrance to the pipe, the velocity pro-
file may be approximated as being nearly uniform across the pipe, since the
velocity is nearly constant at all radii except very close to the pipe wall.
12–3
VELOCITY BOUNDARY LAYER
Consider the parallel flow of a fluid over a flat plate, as shown in Fig. 12–12.
Surfaces that are slightly contoured such as turbine blades can also be
approximated as flat plates with reasonable accuracy. The x-coordinate is
measured along the plate surface from the leading edge of the plate in the
direction of the flow, and y is measured from the surface in the normal direc-
tion. The fluid approaches the plate in the x-direction with a uniform velocity
V, which is practically identical to the free-stream velocity over the plate
away from the surface (this would not be the case for cross flow over blunt
bodies such as a cylinder).
■
532
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
z
r
Developing velocity
profile, V(r, z)
Fully developed
velocity profile, V(r)
FIGURE 12–11
The development of the velocity
profile in a circular pipe. V  V(r, z)
and thus the flow is two-dimensional
in the entrance region, and becomes
one-dimensional downstream when
the velocity profile fully develops and
remains unchanged in the flow
direction, V  V(r).
Laminar boundary
layer
Transition
region
Turbulent boundary
layer
y
x
0
xcr
Turbulent
layer
Overlap layer
Buffer layer
Viscous sublayer
V
V
V
Boundary layer thickness, d
FIGURE 12–12
The development of the boundary layer for flow over a flat plate, and the different flow regimes.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
536
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
For the sake of discussion, we can consider the fluid to consist of adjacent
layers piled on top of each other. The velocity of the particles in the first
fluid layer adjacent to the plate becomes zero because of the no-slip condi-
tion. This motionless layer slows down the particles of the neighboring fluid
layer as a result of friction between the particles of these two adjoining fluid
layers at different velocities. This fluid layer then slows down the molecules
of the next layer, and so on. Thus, the presence of the plate is felt up to
some normal distance d from the plate beyond which the free-stream veloc-
ity remains essentially unchanged. As a result, the x-component of the fluid
velocity, u, varies from 0 at y  0 to nearly V at y  d (Fig. 12–13).
The region of the flow above the plate bounded by d in which the effects
of the viscous shearing forces caused by fluid viscosity are felt is called the
velocity boundary layer. The boundary layer thickness, d, is typically
defined as the distance y from the surface at which u  0.99V.
The hypothetical line of u  0.99V divides the flow over a plate into two
regions: the boundary layer region, in which the viscous effects and the
velocity changes are significant, and the irrotational flow region, in which
the frictional effects are negligible and the velocity remains essentially 
constant.
Surface Shear Stress
Consider the flow of a fluid over the surface of a plate. The fluid layer in
contact with the surface tries to drag the plate along via friction, exerting a
friction force on it. Likewise, a faster fluid layer tries to drag the adjacent
slower layer and exert a friction force because of the friction between the
two layers. Friction force per unit area is called shear stress, and is denoted
by t. Experimental studies indicate that the shear stress for most fluids is
proportional to the velocity gradient, and the shear stress at the wall surface
is expressed as
(N/m2)
(12–9)
where the constant of proportionality m is the dynamic viscosity of the fluid,
whose unit is kg/m  s (or equivalently, N  s/m2, or Pa  s, or poise  0.1 Pa  s).
The fluids that that obey the linear relationship above are called Newton-
ian fluids, after Sir Isaac Newton who expressed it first in 1687. Most com-
mon fluids such as water, air, gasoline, and oils are Newtonian fluids. Blood
and liquid plastics are examples of non-Newtonian fluids. In this text we
consider Newtonian fluids only.
In fluid flow and heat transfer studies, the ratio of dynamic viscosity to
density appears frequently. For convenience, this ratio is given the name
kinematic viscosity v and is expressed as v  m/r. Two common units of
kinematic viscosity are m2/s and stoke (1 stoke  1 cm2/s  0.0001 m2/s).
The viscosity of a fluid is a measure of its resistance to deformation, and it
is a strong function of temperature. The viscosities of liquids decrease with
temperature, whereas the viscosities of gases increase with temperature (Fig.
12–14). The viscosities of some fluids at 20°C are listed in Table 12–1. Note
that the viscosities of different fluids differ by several orders of magnitude.
ts  m u
y `
y0
Chapter 12
|
533
V
Relative
velocities
of fluid layers
V
0.99V
d
Zero
velocity
at the
surface
FIGURE 12–13
The development of a boundary layer
on a surface is due to the no-slip
condition and friction.
Liquids
Gases
Temperature
Viscosity
FIGURE 12–14
The viscosity of liquids decreases and
the viscosity of gases increases with
temperature.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
537
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The determination of the surface shear stress ts from Eq. 12–9 is not practi-
cal since it requires a knowledge of the flow velocity profile. A more practical
approach in external flow is to relate ts to the upstream velocity V as
(12–10)
where Cf is the dimensionless friction coefficient, whose value in most
cases is determined experimentally, and r is the density of the fluid. Note
that the friction coefficient, in general, varies with location along the sur-
face. Once the average friction coefficient over a given surface is available,
the friction force over the entire surface is determined from
(12–11)
where As is the surface area.
The friction coefficient is an important parameter in heat transfer studies
since it is directly related to the heat transfer coefficient and the power
requirements of the pump or fan.
12–4
THERMAL BOUNDARY LAYER
We have seen that a velocity boundary layer develops when a fluid flows
over a surface as a result of the fluid layer adjacent to the surface assuming
the surface velocity (i.e., zero velocity relative to the surface). Also, we
defined the velocity boundary layer as the region in which the fluid velocity
varies from zero to 0.99V. Likewise, a thermal boundary layer develops
when a fluid at a specified temperature flows over a surface that is at a dif-
ferent temperature, as shown in Fig. 12–15.
Consider the flow of a fluid at a uniform temperature of T over an
isothermal flat plate at temperature Ts. The fluid particles in the layer adja-
cent to the surface reach thermal equilibrium with the plate and assume the
surface temperature Ts. These fluid particles then exchange energy with the
particles in the adjoining-fluid layer, and so on. As a result, a temperature
profile develops in the flow field that ranges from Ts at the surface to T
sufficiently far from the surface. The flow region over the surface in which
the temperature variation in the direction normal to the surface is significant
is the thermal boundary layer. The thickness of the thermal boundary
layer dt at any location along the surface is defined as the distance from the
surface at which the temperature difference T  Ts equals 0.99(T  Ts).
Note that for the special case of Ts  0, we have T  0.99T at the outer
edge of the thermal boundary layer, which is analogous to u  0.99V for the
velocity boundary layer.
The thickness of the thermal boundary layer increases in the flow direc-
tion, since the effects of heat transfer are felt at greater distances from the
surface further down stream.
The convection heat transfer rate anywhere along the surface is directly
related to the temperature gradient at that location. Therefore, the shape of the
temperature profile in the thermal boundary layer dictates the convection heat
transfer between a solid surface and the fluid flowing over it. In flow over a
heated (or cooled) surface, both velocity and thermal boundary layers develop
simultaneously. Noting that the fluid velocity has a strong influence on the tem-
■
Ff  Cf As
rV2
2     (N)
ts  Cf
rV 2
2     (Nm2)
534
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
T
T
T
Ts
Ts + 0.99(T – Ts)
dt
Free-stream
Thermal
boundary
layer
x
FIGURE 12–15
Thermal boundary layer on a flat plate
(the fluid is hotter than the
plate surface).
TABLE 12–1
Dynamic viscosities of some fluids
at 1 atm and 20°C (unless
otherwise stated)
Dynamic Viscosity 
Fluid
m, kg/m  s
Glycerin:
20°C
134.0
0°C
10.5
20°C
1.52
40°C
0.31
Engine oil:
SAE 10W
0.10
SAE 10W30
0.17
SAE 30
0.29
SAE 50
0.86
Mercury
0.0015
Ethyl alcohol
0.0012
Water:
0°C
0.0018
20°C
0.0010
100°C (liquid)
0.00028
100°C (vapor)
0.000012
Blood, 37C
0.00040
Gasoline
0.00029
Ammonia
0.00015
Air
0.000018
Hydrogen, 0°C
0.0000088

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
538
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
perature profile, the development of the velocity boundary layer relative to the
thermal boundary layer will have a strong effect on the convection heat transfer.
Prandtl Number
The relative thickness of the velocity and the thermal boundary layers is
best described by the dimensionless parameter Prandtl number, defined as
(12–12)
It is named after Ludwig Prandtl, who introduced the concept of boundary
layer in 1904 and made significant contributions to boundary layer theory.
The Prandtl numbers of fluids range from less than 0.01 for liquid metals to
more than 100,000 for heavy oils (Table 12–2). Note that the Prandtl num-
ber is in the order of 10 for water.
The Prandtl numbers of gases are about 1, which indicates that both
momentum and heat dissipate through the fluid at about the same rate. Heat
diffuses very quickly in liquid metals (Pr  1) and very slowly in oils (Pr  1)
relative to momentum. Consequently the thermal boundary layer is much
thicker for liquid metals and much thinner for oils relative to the velocity
boundary layer.
12–5
LAMINAR AND TURBULENT FLOWS
If you have been around smokers, you probably noticed that the cigarette
smoke rises in a smooth plume for the first few centimeters and then starts
fluctuating randomly in all directions as it continues its rise. Other plumes
behave similarly (Fig. 12–16). Likewise, a careful inspection of flow in a pipe
reveals that the fluid flow is streamlined at low velocities but turns chaotic as
the velocity is increased above a critical value, as shown in Figure 12–17. The
flow regime in the first case is said to be laminar, characterized by smooth
streamlines and highly-ordered motion, and turbulent in the second case,
where it is characterized by velocity fluctuations and highly-disordered
motion. The transition from laminar to turbulent flow does not occur sud-
denly; rather, it occurs over some region in which the flow fluctuates between
laminar and turbulent flows before it becomes fully turbulent. Most flows
encountered in practice are turbulent. Laminar flow is encountered when
highly viscous fluids such as oils flow in small pipes or narrow passages.
We can verify the existence of these laminar, transitional, and turbulent
flow regimes by injecting some dye streak into the flow in a glass tube, as the
British scientist Osborn Reynolds (1842–1912) did over a century ago. We
observe that the dye streak forms a straight and smooth line at low velocities
when the flow is laminar (we may see some blurring because of molecular
diffusion), has bursts of fluctuations in the transitional regime, and zigzags
rapidly and randomly when the flow becomes fully turbulent. These zigzags
and the dispersion of the dye are indicative of the fluctuations in the main
flow and the rapid mixing of fluid particles from adjacent layers.
Typical average velocity profiles in laminar and turbulent flow are also
given in Fig. 12–12. Note that the velocity profile in turbulent flow is much
fuller than that in laminar flow, with a sharp drop near the surface. The 
■
Pr  Molecular diffusivity of momentum
Molecular diffusivity of heat
 v
a 
mcp
k
Chapter 12
|
535
TABLE 12–2
Typical ranges of Prandtl numbers
for common fluids
Fluid
Pr
Liquid metals
0.004–0.030
Gases
0.12–1.0
Water
1.12–13.7
Light organic fluids
5–50
Oils
50–100,000
Glycerin
2000–100,000
Laminar
flow
Turbulent
flow
Laminar
flow
Turbulent
flow
FIGURE 12–16
Laminar and turbulent flow regimes 
of candle smoke.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
539
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
turbulent boundary layer can be considered to consist of four regions, charac-
terized by the distance from the wall. The very thin layer next to the wall
where viscous effects are dominant is the viscous sublayer. The velocity pro-
file in this layer is very nearly linear, and the flow is streamlined. Next to the
viscous sublayer is the buffer layer, in which turbulent effects are becoming
significant, but the flow is still dominated by viscous effects. Above the buffer
layer is the overlap layer, in which the turbulent effects are much more sig-
nificant, but still not dominant. Above that is the turbulent layer in which
turbulent effects dominate over viscous effects.
The intense mixing of the fluid in turbulent flow as a result of rapid fluc-
tuations enhances heat and momentum transfer between fluid particles,
which increases the friction force on the surface and the convection heat
transfer rate. It also causes the boundary layer to enlarge. Both the friction
and heat transfer coefficients reach maximum values when the flow
becomes fully turbulent. So it will come as no surprise that a special effort
is made in the design of heat transfer coefficients associated with turbulent
flow. The enhancement in heat transfer in turbulent flow does not come for
free, however. It may be necessary to use a larger pump to overcome the
larger friction forces accompanying the higher heat transfer rate.
Reynolds Number
The transition from laminar to turbulent flow depends on the surface geome-
try, surface roughness, flow velocity, surface temperature, and type of fluid,
among other things. After exhaustive experiments in the 1880s, Osborn
Reynolds discovered that the flow regime depends mainly on the ratio of the
inertia forces to viscous forces in the fluid. This ratio is called the Reynolds
number, which is a dimensionless quantity, and is expressed for external
flow as (Fig. 12–18)
(12–13)
where V is the upstream velocity (equivalent to the free-stream velocity for
a flat plate), Lc is the characteristic length of the geometry, and v  m/r is
the kinematic viscosity of the fluid. For a flat plate, the characteristic length
is the distance x from the leading edge. Note that kinematic viscosity has
the unit m2/s, which is identical to the unit of thermal diffusivity, and can be
viewed as viscous diffusivity or diffusivity for momentum.
At large Reynolds numbers, the inertia forces, which are proportional to
the density and the velocity of the fluid, are large relative to the viscous
forces, and thus the viscous forces cannot prevent the random and rapid fluc-
tuations of the fluid. At small or moderate Reynolds numbers, however, the
viscous forces are large enough to suppress these fluctuations and to keep the
fluid “in line.” Thus the flow is turbulent in the first case and laminar in the
second.
The Reynolds number at which the flow becomes turbulent is called the crit-
ical Reynolds number. The value of the critical Reynolds number is different
for different geometries and flow conditions. For flow over a flat plate, the gen-
erally accepted value of the critical Reynolds number is Recr  Vxcr/v 
5 
 105, where xcr is the distance from the leading edge of the plate at which
transition from laminar to turbulent flow occurs. The value of Recr may change
substantially, however, depending on the level of turbulence in the free stream.
Re  Inertia forces
Viscous
 VLc
v  rVLc
m
536
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(a) Laminar flow
Dye trace
Dye injection
(b) Turbulent flow
Dye trace
Dye injection
Vavg
Vavg
FIGURE 12–17
The behavior of colored fluid injected
into the flow in laminar and turbulent
flows in a pipe.
m
Vavg L
r
Inertia forces
Viscous forces
Re
=
=
=
= Vavg L
n
rVavg L 2
mVavg L
2
L
Vavg
FIGURE 12–18
The Reynolds number can be viewed
as the ratio of inertial forces to viscous
forces acting on a fluid element.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
540
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Most flows encountered in engineering practice are turbulent, and thus it
is important to understand how turbulence affects wall shear stress and heat
transfer. However, turbulent flow is a complex mechanism dominated by
fluctuations, and despite tremendous amounts of work done in this area by
researchers, the theory of turbulent flow remains largely undeveloped.
Therefore, we must rely on experiments and the empirical or semi-empirical
correlations developed for various situations.
Turbulent flow is characterized by random and rapid fluctuations of
swirling regions of fluid, called eddies, throughout the flow. These fluctua-
tions provide an additional mechanism for momentum and energy transfer.
In laminar flow, fluid particles flow in an orderly manner along pathlines,
and momentum and energy are transferred across streamlines by molecular
diffusion. In turbulent flow, the swirling eddies transport mass, momentum,
and energy to other regions of flow much more rapidly than molecular dif-
fusion, greatly enhancing mass, momentum, and heat transfer. As a result,
turbulent flow is associated with much higher values of friction, heat trans-
fer, and mass transfer coefficients (Fig. 12–19).
12–6
DRAG AND HEAT TRANSFER
IN EXTERNAL FLOW
Fluid flow over solid bodies frequently occurs in practice, and it is responsi-
ble for numerous physical phenomena such as the drag force acting on the
automobiles, power lines, trees, and underwater pipelines; the lift developed
by airplane wings; upward draft of rain, snow, hail, and dust particles in
high winds; and the cooling of metal or plastic sheets, steam and hot water
pipes, and extruded wires (Fig. 12–20). Therefore, developing a good under-
standing of external flow and external forced convection is important in the
mechanical and thermal design of many engineering systems such as air-
craft, automobiles, buildings, electronic components, and turbine blades.
The flow fields and geometries for most external flow problems are too
complicated to be solved analytically, and thus we have to rely on correlations
based on experimental data. The availability of high-speed computers has
made it possible to conduct series of “numerical experimentations” quickly by
solving the governing equations numerically, and to resort to the expensive
and time-consuming testing and experimentation only in the final stages of
design. In this chapter we mostly rely on relations developed experimentally.
The velocity of the fluid relative to an immersed solid body sufficiently far
from the body (outside the boundary layer) is called the free-stream veloc-
ity. It is usually taken to be equal to the upstream velocity V, also called the
approach velocity, which is the velocity of the approaching fluid far ahead
of the body. This idealization is nearly exact for very thin bodies, such as a
flat plate parallel to flow, but approximate for blunt bodies such as a large
cylinder. The fluid velocity ranges from zero at the surface (the no-slip condi-
tion) to the free-stream value away from the surface, and the subscript “infin-
ity” serves as a reminder that this is the value at a distance where the presence
of the body is not felt. The upstream velocity, in general, may vary with loca-
tion and time (e.g., the wind blowing past a building). But in the design and
analysis, the upstream velocity is usually assumed to be uniform and steady
for convenience, and this is what we will do in this chapter.
■
Chapter 12
|
537
FIGURE 12–20
Flow over bodies is commonly
encountered in practice.
(a) Before
      turbulence
2
2
2
2
2
5
5
7
12
7
12
7
12
7
12
7
12
5
5
5
(b) After
      turbulence
12 2
5
7
5
12
2
7
2
7
5
12
2
12
7
5
12
5
7
2
FIGURE 12–19
The intense mixing in turbulent flow
brings fluid particles at different
temperatures into close contact, and
thus enhances heat transfer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
541
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Friction and Pressure Drag
It is common experience that a body meets some resistance when it is forced
to move through a fluid, especially a liquid. You may have seen high winds
knocking down trees, power lines, and even trailers, and have felt the strong
“push” the wind exerts on your body. You experience the same feeling when
you extend your arm out of the window of a moving car. The force a flowing
fluid exerts on a body in the flow direction is called drag (Fig. 12–21).
A stationary fluid exerts only normal pressure forces on the surface of a
body immersed in it. A moving fluid, however, also exerts tangential shear
forces on the surface because of the no-slip condition caused by viscous
effects. Both of these forces, in general, have components in the direction
of flow, and thus the drag force is due to the combined effects of pressure
and wall shear forces in the flow direction. The components of the pressure
and wall shear forces in the normal direction to flow tend to move the body
in that direction, and their sum is called lift.
In general, both the skin friction (wall shear) and pressure contribute to
the drag and the lift. In the special case of a thin flat plate aligned parallel
to the flow direction, the drag force depends on the wall shear only and is
independent of pressure. When the flat plate is placed normal to the flow
direction, however, the drag force depends on the pressure only and is inde-
pendent of the wall shear since the shear stress in this case acts in the direc-
tion normal to flow (Fig. 12–22). For slender bodies such as wings, the
shear force acts nearly parallel to the flow direction. The drag force for such
slender bodies is mostly due to shear forces (the skin friction). 
The drag force FD depends on the density r of the fluid, the upstream
velocity V, and the size, shape, and orientation of the body, among other
things. The drag characteristics of a body is represented by the dimension-
less drag coefficient CD defined as
Drag coefficient:
(12–14)
where A is the frontal area (the area projected on a plane normal to the
direction of flow) for blunt bodies—bodies that tends to block the flow. The
frontal area of a cylinder of diameter D and length L, for example, is A 
LD. For parallel flow over flat plates or thin airfoils, A is the surface area.
The drag coefficient is primarily a function of the shape of the body, but it
may also depend on the Reynolds number and the surface roughness.
The drag force is the net force exerted by a fluid on a body in the direc-
tion of flow due to the combined effects of wall shear and pressure forces.
The part of drag that is due directly to wall shear stress tw is called the skin
friction drag (or just friction drag) since it is caused by frictional effects,
and the part that is due directly to pressure P is called the pressure drag
(also called the form drag because of its strong dependence on the form or
shape of the body). When the friction and pressure drag coefficients are
available, the total drag coefficient is determined by simply adding them,
CD  CD, friction  CD, pressure
(12–15)
The friction drag is the component of the wall shear force in the direction
of flow, and thus it depends on the orientation of the body as well as the
CD 
FD
1
2rV2A
538
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Wind tunnel
60 mph
FD
FIGURE 12–21
Schematic for measuring the drag
force acting on a car in a wind tunnel.
High pressure
Low pressure
Wall shear
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
+
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
–
FIGURE 12–22
Drag force acting on a flat plate normal
to the flow depends on the pressure
only and is independent of the wall
shear, which acts normal to the free-
stream flow.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
542
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
magnitude of the wall shear stress tw. The friction drag is zero for a surface
normal to flow, and maximum for a surface parallel to flow since the friction
drag in this case equals the total shear force on the surface. Therefore, for
parallel flow over a flat plate, the drag coefficient is equal to the friction
drag coefficient, or simply the friction coefficient (Fig. 12–23). That is,
Flat plate:
CD  CD, friction  Cf
(12–16)
Once the average friction coefficient Cf is available, the drag (or friction)
force over the surface can be determined from Eq. 12–14. In this case A is the
surface area of the plate exposed to fluid flow. When both sides of a thin plate
are subjected to flow, A becomes the total area of the top and bottom surfaces.
Note that the friction coefficient, in general, varies with location along the
surface.
Friction drag is a strong function of viscosity, and an “idealized” fluid with
zero viscosity would produce zero friction drag since the wall shear stress
would be zero. The pressure drag would also be zero in this case during
steady flow regardless of the shape of the body since there are no pressure
losses. For flow in the horizontal direction, for example, the pressure along a
horizontal line is constant (just like stationary fluids) since the upstream
velocity is constant, and thus there is no net pressure force acting on the body
in the horizontal direction. Therefore, the total drag is zero for the case of
ideal inviscid fluid flow.
At low Reynolds numbers, most drag is due to friction drag. This is espe-
cially the case for highly streamlined bodies such as airfoils. The friction
drag is also proportional to the surface area. Therefore, bodies with a larger
surface area experience a larger friction drag. Large commercial airplanes,
for example, reduce their total surface area and thus drag by retracting their
wing extensions when they reach the cruising altitudes to save fuel. The
friction drag coefficient is independent of surface roughness in laminar
flow, but is a strong function of surface roughness in turbulent flow due to
surface roughness elements protruding further into the boundary layer.
The pressure drag is proportional to the frontal area and to the difference
between the pressures acting on the front and back of the immersed body.
Therefore, the pressure drag is usually dominant for blunt bodies, negligible
for streamlined bodies such as airfoils, and zero for thin flat plates parallel
to the flow.
When a fluid separates from a body, it forms a separated region between
the body and the fluid stream. This low-pressure region behind the body
where recirculating and backflows occur is called the separated region.
The larger the separated region, the larger the pressure drag. The effects of
flow separation are felt far downstream in the form of reduced velocity (rel-
ative to the upstream velocity). The region of flow trailing the body where
the effects of the body on velocity are felt is called the wake (Fig. 12–24).
The separated region comes to an end when the two flow streams reattach.
Therefore, the separated region is an enclosed volume, whereas the wake
keeps growing behind the body until the fluid in the wake region regains its
velocity and the velocity profile becomes nearly flat again. Viscous and
rotational effects are the most significant in the boundary layer, the sepa-
rated region, and the wake.
Chapter 12
|
539
CD, pressure = 0
CD = CD, friction = Cf
FD, pressure = 0
FD = FD, friction = Ff = CfA rV2
2
FIGURE 12–23
For parallel flow over a flat plate,
the pressure drag is zero, and thus the
drag coefficient is equal to the friction
coefficient and the drag force is
equal to the friction force.
Wake
region
FIGURE 12–24
Separation during flow over a tennis
ball and the wake region.
Courtesy of NASA and Cislunar Aerospace, Inc.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
543
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Heat Transfer
The phenomena that affect drag force also affect heat transfer, and this
effect appears in the Nusselt number. The experimental data for heat trans-
fer is often represented conveniently with reasonable accuracy by a simple
power-law relation of the form
Nu  C Rem
L Pr n
(12–17)
where m and n are constant exponents, and the value of the constant C
depends on geometry and flow.
The fluid temperature in the thermal boundary layer varies from Ts at the
surface to about T at the outer edge of the boundary. The fluid properties
also vary with temperature, and thus with position across the boundary
layer. In order to account for the variation of the properties with tempera-
ture, the fluid properties are usually evaluated at the so-called film temper-
ature, defined as
(12–18)
which is the arithmetic average of the surface and the free-stream tempera-
tures. The fluid properties are then assumed to remain constant at those val-
ues during the entire flow. An alternative way of accounting for the
variation of properties with temperature is to evaluate all properties at the
free stream temperature and to multiply the Nusselt number relation in Eq.
12–17 by (Pr/Prs)r or (m/ms)r where r is an experimentally determined
constant.
The local drag and convection coefficients vary along the surface as a
result of the changes in the velocity boundary layers in the flow direction.
We are usually interested in the drag force and the heat transfer rate for the
entire surface, which can be determined using the average drag and convec-
tion coefficient. Therefore, we present correlations for both local (identified
with the subscript x) and average drag and convection coefficients. When
relations for local drag and convection coefficients are available, the aver-
age drag and convection coefficients for the entire surface can be deter-
mined by integration from
(12–19)
and
(12–20)
When the average drag and convection coefficients are available, the drag
force can be determined from Eq. 12–14 and the rate of heat transfer to or
from an isothermal surface can be determined from
(12–21)
where As is the surface area.
12–7
PARALLEL FLOW OVER FLAT PLATES
Consider the parallel flow of a fluid over a flat plate of length L in the flow
direction, as shown in Fig. 12–25. The x-coordinate is measured along the
■
˙Q  hAs(Ts  T)
h  1
L
L
0 hxdx
CD  1
L
L
0 CD, x dx
Tf  Ts  T
2
540
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
L
Ts
xcr
x
y
Laminar
Turbulent
T
V
FIGURE 12–25
Laminar and turbulent regions
of the boundary layer during
flow over a flat plate.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
544
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
plate surface from the leading edge in the direction of the flow. The fluid
approaches the plate in the x-direction with a uniform velocity V and temper-
ature T. The flow in the velocity boundary layers starts out as laminar, but if
the plate is sufficiently long, the flow becomes turbulent at a distance xcr from
the leading edge where the Reynolds number reaches its critical value for
transition.
The transition from laminar to turbulent flow depends on the surface
geometry, surface roughness, upstream velocity, surface temperature, and
the type of fluid, among other things, and is best characterized by the
Reynolds number. The Reynolds number at a distance x from the leading
edge of a flat plate is expressed as
(12–22)
Note that the value of the Reynolds number varies for a flat plate along the
flow, reaching ReL  VL /v at the end of the plate.
For flow over a flat plate, transition from laminar to turbulent begins at
about Re  1 
 105, but does not become fully turbulent before the
Reynolds number reaches much higher values, typically around 3 
 106. In
engineering analysis, a generally accepted value for the critical Reynold
number is
(12–23)
The actual value of the engineering critical Reynolds number for a flat plate
may vary somewhat from 105 to 3 
 106, depending on the surface rough-
ness, the turbulence level, and the variation of pressure along the surface.
Friction Coefficient
Based on analysis, the boundary layer thickness and the local friction coeffi-
cient at location x for laminar flow over a flat plate were determined in
Chapter 6 to be
Laminar:
(12–24)
The corresponding relations for turbulent flow are
Turbulent:
(12–25)
where x is the distance from the leading edge of the plate and Rex  Vx/v is
the Reynolds number at location x. Note that Cf, x is proportional to 
and thus to x1/2 for laminar flow. Therefore, Cf, x is supposedly infinite at
the leading edge (x  0) and decreases by a factor of x1/2 in the flow direc-
tion. The local friction coefficients are higher in turbulent flow than they are
in laminar flow because of the intense mixing that occurs in the turbulent
boundary layer. Note that Cf, x reaches its highest values when the flow
becomes fully turbulent, and then decreases by a factor of x1/5 in the flow
direction.
Re1/2
x
dv, x  0.38x
Re1/5
x
  and  Cf, x  0.059
Re1/5
x
,  5 
 10 5  Rex  107
dv, x  4.91x
Re1/2
x
    and    Cf, x  0.664
Re x
1/2 ,    Rex  5 
 105
Recr  rVxcr
m
 5 
 105
Rex  rVx
m  Vx
v
Chapter 12
|
541

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
545
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The average friction coefficient over the entire plate is determined by
substituting the relations above into Eq. 12–19 and performing the integra-
tions (Fig. 12–26). We get
Laminar:
(12–26)
Turbulent:
(12–27)
The first relation gives the average friction coefficient for the entire plate
when the flow is laminar over the entire plate. The second relation gives the
average friction coefficient for the entire plate only when the flow is turbu-
lent over the entire plate, or when the laminar flow region of the plate is too
small relative to the turbulent flow region (that is, xcr  L).
In some cases, a flat plate is sufficiently long for the flow to become tur-
bulent, but not long enough to disregard the laminar flow region. In such
cases, the average friction coefficient over the entire plate is determined by
performing the integration in Eq. 12–19 over two parts: the laminar region
0  x  xcr and the turbulent region xcr  x  L as
(12–28)
Note that we included the transition region with the turbulent region. Again
taking the critical Reynolds number to be Recr  5 
 105 and performing
the integrations of Eq. 12–28 after substituting the indicated expressions,
the average friction coefficient over the entire plate is determined to be
(12–29)
The constants in this relation will be different for different critical Reynolds
numbers. Also, the surfaces are assumed to be smooth, and the free stream
to be turbulent free. For laminar flow, the friction coefficient depends on
only the Reynolds number, and the surface roughness has no effect. For tur-
bulent flow, however, surface roughness causes the friction coefficient to
increase severalfold, to the point that in fully turbulent regime the friction
coefficient is a function of surface roughness alone, and independent of the
Reynolds number (Fig. 12–27). This is also the case in pipe flow.
A curve fit of experimental data for the average friction coefficient in this
regime is given by Schlichting as 
Rough surface, turbulent:
(12–30)
were  is the surface roughness, and L is the length of the plate in the flow
direction. In the absence of a better relation, the relation above can be used
for turbulent flow on rough surfaces for Re  l06, especially when
eL  104.
Heat Transfer Coefficient
The local Nusselt number at a location x for laminar flow over a flat plate was
determined in previously by solving the differential energy equation to be
Cf 1.89  1.62 log 
L
2.5
Cf  0.074
ReL
1/5  1742
ReL     5 
 10 5  ReL  107
Cf  1
L
xcr
0 Cf, x laminar dx 
L
xcr
Cf, x, turbulent dx
Cf  0.074
ReL
1/5    5 
 10 5  ReL  107
Cf  1.33
Re1/2
L
    ReL  5 
 10 5
542
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(        )
1––L
0
L
Cf =
Cf, x dx
1––L
x
1/2
=
                                            dx
0.664
–––––
Re
L
1/2
=    1.33
–––––
Re
=
                                                                   dx
0.664
–––––
L
(         )
–1/2
= 2× 0.664
–––––––
L
–1/2
0
L
= 0.664
–––––
L
(        ) 
–1/2 x1/2
––––
1––2
0
L
0
L
Vx
––––
n
VL
n
––––
n
V
FIGURE 12–26
The average friction coefficient over
a surface is determined by integrating
the local friction coefficient over the
entire surface.
Relative
Friction 
roughness,
coefficient 
eL
Cf
0.0*
0.0029
1 
 105
0.0032
1 
 104
0.0049
1 
 103
0.0084
*Smooth surface for Re = 107. Others
calculated from Eq. 12–30.
FIGURE 12–27
For turbulent flow, surface roughness
may cause the friction coefficient
to increase severalfold. 

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
546
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Laminar:
(12–31)
The corresponding relation for turbulent flow is 
Turbulent:
(12–32)
Note that hx is proportional to 
and thus to x0.5 for laminar flow.
Therefore, hx is infinite at the leading edge (x  0) and decreases by a factor
of x0.5 in the flow direction. The variation of the boundary layer thickness
d and the friction and heat transfer coefficients along an isothermal flat plate
are shown in Fig. 12–28. The local friction and heat transfer coefficients are
higher in turbulent flow than they are in laminar flow. Also, hx reaches its
highest values when the flow becomes fully turbulent, and then decreases
by a factor of x0.2 in the flow direction, as shown in the figure.
The average Nusselt number over the entire plate is determined by substi-
tuting the relations above into Eq. 12–20 and performing the integrations. We
get
Laminar:
(12–33)
Turbulent:
(12–34)
The first relation gives the average heat transfer coefficient for the entire
plate when the flow is laminar over the entire plate. The second relation
gives the average heat transfer coefficient for the entire plate only when the
flow is turbulent over the entire plate, or when the laminar flow region of
the plate is too small relative to the turbulent flow region.
In some cases, a flat plate is sufficiently long for the flow to become tur-
bulent, but not long enough to disregard the laminar flow region. In such
cases, the average heat transfer coefficient over the entire plate is deter-
mined by performing the integration in Eq. 12–20 over two parts as
(12–35)
Again taking the critical Reynolds number to be Recr  5 
 105 and per-
forming the integrations in Eq. 12–35 after substituting the indicated expres-
sions, the average Nusselt number over the entire plate is determined to be
(Fig. 12–29)
(12–36)
The constants in this relation will be different for different critical Reynolds
numbers.
Liquid metals such as mercury have high thermal conductivities, and are
commonly used in applications that require high heat transfer rates. How-
ever, they have very small Prandtl numbers, and thus the thermal boundary
layer develops much faster than the velocity boundary layer. Then we can
Nu  hL
k  (0.037 Re0.8
L  871)Pr1/3    0.6  Pr  60
5 
 10 5  ReL  107
h  1
L a
xcr
0 hx, laminar dx  
L
xcr
hx, turbulent dxb
Nu  hL
k  0.037 Re0.8
L  Pr1/3    0.6  Pr  60
5 
 10 5  ReL  10 7
Nu  hL
k  0.664 Re 0.5
L  Pr 1/3    ReL  5 
 105
Re0.5
x
Nu x  hxx
k  0.0296 Re0.8
x  Pr1/3    0.6  Pr  60
5 
 105  Rex  107
Nux  hxx
k  0.332 Re0.5
x  Pr1/3    Pr  0.6
Chapter 12
|
543
Laminar
Transition
Turbulent
x
hx
Cf, x
hx or Cf, x
T
d
V
FIGURE 12–28
The variation of the local friction
and heat transfer coefficients for
flow over a flat plate.
x
xcr
hx, laminar
hx,turbulent
havg
L
h
0
Laminar
Turbulent
FIGURE 12–29
Graphical representation of the
average heat transfer coefficient for a
flat plate with combined laminar and
turbulent flow.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
547
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
assume the velocity in the thermal boundary layer to be constant at the free
stream value and solve the energy equation. It gives
(12–37)
It is desirable to have a single correlation that applies to all fluids, includ-
ing liquid metals. By curve-fitting existing data, Churchill and Ozoe (1973)
proposed the following relation which is applicable for all Prandtl numbers
and is claimed to be accurate to 	1%,
(12–38)
These relations have been obtained for the case of isothermal surfaces
but could also be used approximately for the case of nonisothermal surfaces
by assuming the surface temperature to be constant at some average value.
Also, the surfaces are assumed to be smooth, and the free stream to be tur-
bulent free. The effect of variable properties can be accounted for by evalu-
ating all properties at the film temperature.
Flat Plate with Unheated Starting Length
So far we have limited our consideration to situations for which the entire
plate is heated from the leading edge. But many practical applications
involve surfaces with an unheated starting section of length j, shown in Fig.
12–30, and thus there is no heat transfer for 0  x  j. In such cases, the
velocity boundary layer starts to develop at the leading edge (x  0), but the
thermal boundary layer starts to develop where heating starts (x  j).
Consider a flat plate whose heated section is maintained at a constant
temperature (T  Ts constant for x  j). Using integral solution methods
(see Kays and Crawford, 1994), the local Nusselt numbers for both laminar
and turbulent flows are determined to be
Laminar:
(12–39)
Turbulent:
(12–40)
for x  j. Note that for j  0, these Nux relations reduce to Nux (for j  0),
which is the Nusselt number relation for a flat plate without an unheated
starting length. Therefore, the terms in brackets in the denominator serve as
correction factors for plates with unheated starting lengths.
The determination of the average Nusselt number for the heated section of
a plate requires the integration of the local Nusselt number relations above,
which cannot be done analytically. Therefore, integrations must be done
numerically. The results of numerical integrations have been correlated for
the average convection coefficients [Thomas, (1977)] as
Laminar:
(12–41)
Turbulent:
(12–42)
The first relation gives the average convection coefficient for the entire
heated section of the plate when the flow is laminar over the entire plate.
h  5[1  (j/x)9/10]
4(1  j/L)
hxL
h  2[1  (j/x)3/4]
1  j/L
hxL
Nux 
Nux (for j0)
[1  (j/x)9/10]1/9  0.0296 Re0.8
x  Pr1/3
[1  (j/x)9/10]1/9
Nux 
Nux (for j0)
[1  (j/x)3/4]1/3  0.332 Rex
0.5 Pr1/3
[1  (j/x)3/4]1/3
Nu x  hxx
k 
0.3387 Pr1/3 Re1/2
x
[1  (0.0468/Pr)2/3]1/4
Nux  0.565(Rex Pr)1/2    Pr  0.05
544
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
T
x
Thermal boundary layer
Velocity boundary layer
Ts
j
V
FIGURE 12–30
Flow over a flat plate with an
unheated starting length.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
548
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Note that for j  0 it reduces to hL  2hx  L, as expected. The second rela-
tion gives the average convection coefficient for the case of turbulent flow
over the entire plate or when the laminar flow region is small relative to the
turbulent region.
Uniform Heat Flux
When a flat plate is subjected to uniform heat flux instead of uniform tem-
perature, the local Nusselt number is given by
Laminar:
(12–43)
Turbulent:
(12–44)
These relations give values that are 36 percent higher for laminar flow and
4 percent higher for turbulent flow relative to the isothermal plate case. When
the plate involves an unheated starting length, the relations developed for the
uniform surface temperature case can still be used provided that Eqs. 12–43
and 12–44 are used for Nux(for j  0) in Eqs. 12–39 and 12–40, respectively.
When heat flux q·
s is prescribed, the rate of heat transfer to or from the
plate and the surface temperature at a distance x are determined from 
(12–45)
and
(12–46)
where As is the heat transfer surface area.
˙qs  hx[Ts(x)  T]    →    Ts(x)  T 
˙qs
hx
˙Q  ˙qs As
Nux  0.0308 Re 0.8
x  Pr1/3
Nu x  0.453 Re0.5
x  Pr1/3
Chapter 12
|
545
EXAMPLE 12–1
Flow of Hot Oil over a Flat Plate
Engine oil at 60°C flows over the upper surface of a 5-m-long flat plate
whose temperature is 20°C with a velocity of 2 m/s (Fig. 12–31). Determine
the total drag force and the rate of heat transfer per unit width of the entire
plate.
Solution
Engine oil flows over a flat plate. The total drag force and the rate
of heat transfer per unit width of the plate are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The flow is steady and incompressible. 2 The critical
Reynolds number is Recr  5 
 105.
Properties
The properties of engine oil at the film temperature of Tf  (Ts  T)/
2  (20  60)/2  40°C are (Table A–19)
r  876 kg/m3
Pr  2962
k  0.1444 W/m  °C
v  2.485 
 104 m2/s
Analysis
Noting that L  5 m, the Reynolds number at the end of the plate is
ReL 
 4.024 
 104
VL
n 
(2 m/s)(5 m)
2.485 
 104 m2/s
L = 5 m
Ts = 20°C
Oil
As
.
Q
T  = 60°C
V = 2 m/s
FIGURE 12–31
Schematic for Example 12–1.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
549
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
546
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
which is less than the critical Reynolds number. Thus we have laminar flow
over the entire plate, and the average friction coefficient is
Cf  1.338 ReL
0.5  1.338 
 (4.024 
 104)0.5  0.00663
Noting that the pressure drag is zero and thus CD  Cf for parallel flow over
a flat plate, the drag force acting on the plate per unit width becomes
FD Cf A
 0.00663(5 
 1 m2)
 58.1 N
The total drag force acting on the entire plate can be determined by multi-
plying the value obtained above by the width of the plate.
This force per unit width corresponds to the weight of a mass of about 
6 kg. Therefore, a person who applies an equal and opposite force to the
plate to keep it from moving will feel like he or she is using as much force
as is necessary to hold a 6-kg mass from dropping.
Similarly, the Nusselt number is determined using the laminar flow rela-
tions for a flat plate,
Nu 
 0.664 ReL
0.5 Pr1/3  0.664 
 (4.024 
 104)0.5 
 29621/3  1913
Then,
h 
Nu 
(1913)  55.25 W/m2 · °C
and
Q·  hAs(T  Ts)  (55.25 W/m2 · °C)(5 
 1 m2)(60  20)°C  11,050 W
Discussion
Note that heat transfer is always from the higher-temperature
medium to the lower-temperature one. In this case, it is from the oil to the
plate. The heat transfer rate is per m width of the plate. The heat transfer
for the entire plate can be obtained by multiplying the value obtained by the
actual width of the plate.
0.1444 W/m  °C
5 m
k
L
hL
k
(876 kg/m3)(2 m/s)2
2

1 N
1 kg · m/s2
rV2
2
EXAMPLE 12–2
Cooling of a Hot Block by Forced Air at High
Elevation
The local atmospheric pressure in Denver, Colorado (elevation 1610 m), is
83.4 kPa. Air at this pressure and 20°C flows with a velocity of 8 m/s over a
1.5 m 
 6 m flat plate whose temperature is 140°C (Fig. 12–32). Deter-
mine the rate of heat transfer from the plate if the air flows parallel to the
(a) 6-m-long side and (b) the 1.5-m side.
Solution
The top surface of a hot block is to be cooled by forced air. The
rate of heat transfer is to be determined for two cases.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The critical Reynolds
number is Recr  5 
 105. 3 Radiation effects are negligible. 4 Air is an
ideal gas.
Properties
The properties k, m, cp, and Pr of ideal gases are independent of
pressure, while the properties n and a are inversely proportional to density and
FIGURE 12–32
Schematic for Example 12–2.
Patm = 83.4 kPa
Air
6 m
1.5 m
Ts = 140°C
T  = 20°C
V = 8 m/s
Q·

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
550
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
547
thus pressure. The properties of air at the film temperature of Tf  (Ts  T)/2 
(140  20)/2  80°C and 1 atm pressure are (Table A–22)
k  0.02953 W/m · °C
Pr  0.7154
n @ 1 atm  2.097 
 105 m2/s
The atmospheric pressure in Denver is P  (83.4 kPa)/(101.325 kPa/atm) 
0.823 atm. Then the kinematic viscosity of air in Denver becomes
n  n @ 1 atm /P  (2.097 
 105 m2/s)/0.823  2.548 
 105 m2/s
Analysis
(a) When air flow is parallel to the long side, we have L  6 m,
and the Reynolds number at the end of the plate becomes
ReL 
 1.884 
 106
which is greater than the critical Reynolds number. Thus, we have combined
laminar and turbulent flow, and the average Nusselt number for the entire
plate is determined to be
Nu 
 (0.037 ReL
0.8  871)Pr1/3
 [0.037(1.884 
 106)0.8  871]0.71541/3
 2687
Then
h 
Nu 
(2687)  13.2 W/m2 · °C
As  wL  (1.5 m)(6 m)  9 m2
and
Q·  hAs(Ts  T)  (13.2 W/m2 · °C)(9 m2)(140  20)°C  1.43  104 W
Note that if we disregarded the laminar region and assumed turbulent flow
over the entire plate, we would get Nu  3466 from Eq. 12–34, which is 29
percent higher than the value calculated above.
(b) When air flow is along the short side, we have L  1.5 m, and the
Reynolds number at the end of the plate becomes
ReL 
which is less than the critical Reynolds number. Thus we have laminar flow
over the entire plate, and the average Nusselt number is
Nu 
 0.664 ReL
0.5 Pr1/3  0.664 
 (4.71 
 105)0.5 
 0.71541/3  408
Then
h 
Nu 
(408)  8.03 W/m2 · °C
and
Q·  hAs(Ts  T)  (8.03 W/m2 · °C)(9 m2)(140  20)°C  8670 W
which is considerably less than the heat transfer rate determined in case (a).
0.02953 W/m  °C
1.5 m
k
L
hL
k
VL
n 
(8 m/s)(1.5 m)
2.548 
 105 m2/s  4.71 
 10 5
0.02953 W/m · °C
6 m
k
L
hL
k
VL
n 
(8 m/s)(6 m)
2.548 
 105 m2/s

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
551
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
548
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Discussion
Note that the direction of fluid flow can have a significant effect
on convection heat transfer to or from a surface (Fig. 12–33). In this case,
we can increase the heat transfer rate by 65 percent by simply blowing the
air along the long side of the rectangular plate instead of the short side.
EXAMPLE 12–3
Cooling of Plastic Sheets by Forced Air
The forming section of a plastics plant puts out a continuous sheet of plastic
that is 4 ft wide and 0.04 in thick at a velocity of 30 ft/min. The temperature
of the plastic sheet is 200°F when it is exposed to the surrounding air, and a
2-ft-long section of the plastic sheet is subjected to air flow at 80°F at a
velocity of 10 ft/s on both sides along its surfaces normal to the direction of
motion of the sheet, as shown in Fig. 12–34. Determine (a) the rate of heat
transfer from the plastic sheet to air by forced convection and radiation and
(b) the tem-perature of the plastic sheet at the end of the cooling section.
Take the density, specific heat, and emissivity of the plastic sheet to be r 
75 lbm/ft3, cp  0.4 Btu/lbm · °F, and   0.9.
Solution
Plastic sheets are cooled as they leave the forming section of
a plastics plant. The rate of heat loss from the plastic sheet by convection and
radiation and the exit temperature of the plastic sheet are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The critical Reynolds
number is Recr  5 
 105. 3 Air is an ideal gas. 4 The local atmospheric
pressure is 1 atm. 5 The surrounding surfaces are at the temperature of the
room air.
Properties
The properties of the plastic sheet are given in the problem state-
ment. The properties of air at the film temperature of Tf  (Ts  T)/2 
(200  80)/2  140°F and 1 atm pressure are (Table A–22E)
k  0.01623 Btu/h · ft · °F
Pr  0.7202
n  0.7344 ft2/h  0.204 
 103 ft2/s
Analysis
(a) We expect the temperature of the plastic sheet to drop some-
what as it flows through the 2-ft-long cooling section, but at this point we do
not know the magnitude of that drop. Therefore, we assume the plastic sheet
to be isothermal at 200°F to get started. We will repeat the calculations if
necessary to account for the temperature drop of the plastic sheet.
Noting that L  4 ft, the Reynolds number at the end of the air flow
across the plastic sheet is
ReL 
 1.961 
 105
which is less than the critical Reynolds number. Thus, we have laminar flow
over the entire sheet, and the Nusselt number is determined from the lami-
nar flow relations for a flat plate to be
Nu 
 0.664 ReL
0.5 Pr1/3  0.664 
 (1.961 
 105)0.5 
 (0.7202)1/3  263.6
Then,
h 
Nu 
(263.6)  1.07 Btu/h · ft2 · °F
As  (2 ft)(4 ft)(2 sides)  16 ft2
0.01623 Btu/h  ft  °F
4 ft
k
L
hL
k
VL
n 
(10 ft /s)(4 ft)
0.204 
 103 ft2/s
140°C
140°C
Air
20°C
8 m/s
20°C
8 m/s
1.5 m
1.5 m
6 m
6 m
(b) Flow along the short side
(a) Flow along the long side
Air
Qconv =14.3 kW
·
Qconv =8.67 kW
·
FIGURE 12–33
The direction of fluid flow can
have a significant effect on
convection heat transfer.
FIGURE 12–34
Schematic for Example 12–3.
Air
80°F, 10 ft/s
30 ft/min
0.04 in
4 ft
2 ft
Plastic sheet
200°F

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
552
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
549
and
Q·
conv  hAs(Ts  T )
 (1.07 Btu/h · ft2 · °F)(16 ft2)(200  80)°F
 2054 Btu/h
Q·
rad  esAs(Ts
4  T 4
surr)
 (0.9)(0.1714 
 108 Btu/h · ft2 · R4)(16 ft2)[(660 R)4  (540 R)4]
 2585 Btu/h
Therefore, the rate of cooling of the plastic sheet by combined convection
and radiation is
Q·
total  Q·
conv  Q·
rad  2054  2585  4639 Btu/h
(b) To find the temperature of the plastic sheet at the end of the cooling
section, we need to know the mass of the plastic rolling out per unit time (or
the mass flow rate), which is determined from
m·  rAcVplastic  (75 lbm/ft3)
 0.5 lbm/s
Then, an energy balance on the cooled section of the plastic sheet yields
Q·  m· cp(T2  T1)
→
T2  T1 
Noting that Q· is a negative quantity (heat loss) for the plastic sheet and sub-
stituting, the temperature of the plastic sheet as it leaves the cooling section
is determined to be
T2  200°F 
 193.6°F
Discussion
The average temperature of the plastic sheet drops by about
6.4°F as it passes through the cooling section. The calculations now can be
repeated by taking the average temperature of the plastic sheet to be
196.8°F instead of 200°F for better accuracy, but the change in the results
will be insignificant because of the small change in temperature.
	 4639 Btu/h
(0.5 lbm/s)(0.4 Btu/lbm  °F) a 1 h
3600 sb
Q
#
m# cp
a4 
 0.04
12
 ft2b a30
60 ft /sb
12–8
FLOW ACROSS CYLINDERS AND SPHERES
Flow across cylinders and spheres is frequently encountered in practice. For
example, the tubes in a shell-and-tube heat exchanger involve both internal
flow through the tubes and external flow over the tubes, and both flows must
be considered in the analysis of the heat exchanger. Also, many sports such
as soccer, tennis, and golf involve flow over spherical balls.
The characteristic length for a circular cylinder or sphere is taken to be the
external diameter D. Thus, the Reynolds number is defined as Re  VD/n
where V is the uniform velocity of the fluid as it approaches the cylinder or
sphere. The critical Reynolds number for flow across a circular cylinder or
sphere is about Recr  2 
 105. That is, the boundary layer remains laminar
for about Re  2 
 105 and becomes turbulent for Re  2 
 105.
■

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
553
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Cross-flow over a cylinder exhibits complex flow patterns, as shown in
Fig. 12–35. The fluid approaching the cylinder branches out and encircles
the cylinder, forming a boundary layer that wraps around the cylinder.
The fluid particles on the midplane strike the cylinder at the stagnation
point, bringing the fluid to a complete stop and thus raising the pressure at
that point. The pressure decreases in the flow direction while the fluid veloc-
ity increases.
At very low upstream velocities (Re  1), the fluid completely wraps
around the cylinder and the two arms of the fluid meet on the rear side of
the cylinder in an orderly manner. Thus, the fluid follows the curvature of
the cylinder. At higher velocities, the fluid still hugs the cylinder on the
frontal side, but it is too fast to remain attached to the surface as it approaches
the top (or bottom) of the cylinder. As a result, the boundary layer detaches
from the surface, forming a separation region behind the cylinder. Flow in
the wake region is characterized by periodic vortex formation and pressures
much lower than the stagnation point pressure.
The nature of the flow across a cylinder or sphere strongly affects the total
drag coefficient CD. Both the friction drag and the pressure drag can be
significant. The high pressure in the vicinity of the stagnation point and the
low pressure on the opposite side in the wake produce a net force on the
body in the direction of flow. The drag force is primarily due to friction drag
at low Reynolds numbers (Re  10) and to pressure drag at high Reynolds
numbers (Re  5000). Both effects are significant at intermediate Reynolds
numbers.
The average drag coefficients CD for cross-flow over a smooth single cir-
cular cylinder and a sphere are given in Fig. 12–36. The curves exhibit dif-
ferent behaviors in different ranges of Reynolds numbers:
• For Re  1, we have creeping flow, and the drag coefficient decreases
with increasing Reynolds number. For a sphere, it is CD  24/Re. There is
no flow separation in this regime.
• At about Re  10, separation starts occurring on the rear of the body with
vortex shedding starting at about Re  90. The region of separation
increases with increasing Reynolds number up to about Re  103. At this
point, the drag is mostly (about 95 percent) due to pressure drag. The drag
coefficient continues to decrease with increasing Reynolds number in this
range of 10  Re  103. (A decrease in the drag coefficient does not
necessarily indicate a decrease in drag. The drag force is proportional to
550
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 12–35
Laminar boundary layer separation
with a turbulent wake; flow over a
circular cylinder at Re  2000.
Courtesy ONERA, photograph by Werlé.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
554
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the square of the velocity, and the increase in velocity at higher Reynolds
numbers usually more than offsets the decrease in the drag coefficient.)
• In the moderate range of 103  Re  105, the drag coefficient remains
relatively constant. This behavior is characteristic of blunt bodies. The
flow in the boundary layer is laminar in this range, but the flow in the
separated region past the cylinder or sphere is highly turbulent with a
wide turbulent wake.
• There is a sudden drop in the drag coefficient somewhere in the range of
105  Re  106 (usually, at about 2 
 105). This large reduction in CD is
due to the flow in the boundary layer becoming turbulent, which moves the
separation point further on the rear of the body, reducing the size of the
wake and thus the magnitude of the pressure drag. This is in contrast to
streamlined bodies, which experience an increase in the drag coefficient
(mostly due to friction drag) when the boundary layer becomes turbulent.
Flow separation occurs at about u  80° (measured from the front stagna-
tion point of a cylinder) when the boundary layer is laminar and at about u 
140° when it is turbulent (Fig. 12–37). The delay of separation in turbulent
flow is caused by the rapid fluctuations of the fluid in the transverse direc-
tion, which enables the turbulent boundary layer to travel farther along the
surface before separation occurs, resulting in a narrower wake and a smaller
pressure drag. Keep in mind that turbulent flow has a fuller velocity profile as
compared to the laminar case, and thus it requires a stronger adverse pressure
gradient to overcome the additional momentum close to the wall. In the range
of Reynolds numbers where the flow changes from laminar to turbulent, even
the drag force FD decreases as the velocity (and thus the Reynolds number)
increases. This results in a sudden decrease in drag of a flying body (some-
times called the drag crisis) and instabilities in flight.
Effect of Surface Roughness
We mentioned earlier that surface roughness, in general, increases the drag
coefficient in turbulent flow. This is especially the case for streamlined
Chapter 12
|
551
400
200
100
60
40
20
10
6
4
2
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.06
CD
10–1
100
101
102
103
104
Re
105
106
Sphere
Smooth cylinder
FIGURE 12–36
Average drag coefficient for cross-
flow over a smooth circular cylinder
and a smooth sphere.
From H. Schlichting, Boundary Layer Theory 7e.
Copyright © 1979 The McGraw-Hill Companies,
Inc. Used by permission.
FIGURE 12–37
Flow visualization of flow over 
(a) a smooth sphere at Re  15,000,
and (b) a sphere at Re  30,000 with 
a trip wire. The delay of boundary
layer separation is clearly seen by
comparing the two photographs.
Courtesy ONERA, photograph by Werlé.
(a)
(b)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
555
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
bodies. For blunt bodies such as a circular cylinder or sphere, however, an
increase in the surface roughness may actually decrease the drag coefficient,
as shown in Fig. 12–38 for a sphere. This is done by tripping the boundary
layer into turbulence at a lower Reynolds number, and thus causing the fluid
to close in behind the body, narrowing the wake and reducing pressure drag
considerably. This results in a much smaller drag coefficient and thus drag
force for a rough-surfaced cylinder or sphere in a certain range of Reynolds
number compared to a smooth one of identical size at the same velocity. At
Re  2 
 105, for example, CD  0.1 for a rough sphere with e/D  0.0015,
whereas CD  0.5 for a smooth one. Therefore, the drag coefficient in this
case is reduced by a factor of 5 by simply roughening the surface. Note, how-
ever, that at Re  106, CD  0.4 for a very rough sphere while CD  0.1 for
the smooth one. Obviously, roughening the sphere in this case will increase
the drag by a factor of 4 (Fig. 12–39).
The preceding discussion shows that roughening the surface can be used to
great advantage in reducing drag, but it can also backfire on us if we are not
careful—specifically, if we do not operate in the right range of the Reynolds
number. With this consideration, golf balls are intentionally roughened to
induce turbulence at a lower Reynolds number to take advantage of the sharp
drop in the drag coefficient at the onset of turbulence in the boundary layer
(the typical velocity range of golf balls is 15 to 150 m/s, and the Reynolds
number is less than 4 
 105). The critical Reynolds number of dimpled golf
balls is about 4 
 104. The occurrence of turbulent flow at this Reynolds
number reduces the drag coefficient of a golf ball by about half, as shown in
Fig. 12–38. For a given hit, this means a longer distance for the ball. Experi-
enced golfers also give the ball a spin during the hit, which helps the rough
ball develop a lift and thus travel higher and farther. A similar argument can
be given for a tennis ball. For a table tennis ball, however, the distances are
very short, and the balls never reach the speeds in the turbulent range. There-
fore, the surfaces of table tennis balls are made smooth.
Once the drag coefficient is available, the drag force acting on a body
in cross-flow can be determined from Eq. 12–14 where A is the frontal area
552
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
VD
n
Re =
4
 104
4
 105
4
 106
105
2
 105
6
D
e = relative roughness
D
e = 0 (smooth)
D
e = 1.5 
 10–3
D
e = 5 
 10–3
D
e = 1.25 
 10–2
Golf
ball
FD
2
1
2
D2
4
p
CD =
rV
FIGURE 12–38
The effect of surface roughness on the
drag coefficient of a sphere.
From Blevins (1984).
CD
Smooth
Rough Surface,
Re
Surface
e/D  0.0015
2 
 105
0.5
0.1
106
0.1
0.4
FIGURE 12–39
Surface roughness may increase or
decrease the drag coefficient of a
spherical object, depending on the
value of the Reynolds number.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
556
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
(A  LD for a cylinder of length L and A  pD2/4 for a sphere). It should
be kept in mind that free-stream turbulence and disturbances by other bod-
ies in the flow (such as flow over tube bundles) may affect the drag coeffi-
cients significantly.
Chapter 12
|
553
EXAMPLE 12–4
Drag Force Acting on a Pipe in a River
A 2.2-cm-outer-diameter pipe is to span across a river at a 30-m-wide sec-
tion while being completely immersed in water (Fig. 12–40). The average
flow velocity of water is 4 m/s and the water temperature is 15°C. Determine
the drag force exerted on the pipe by the river.
Solution
A pipe is submerged in a river. The drag force that acts on the
pipe is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The outer surface of the pipe is smooth so that Fig. 12–36
can be used to determine the drag coefficient. 2 Water flow in the river is
steady. 3 The direction of water flow is normal to the pipe. 4 Turbulence in
river flow is not considered.
Properties
The density and dynamic viscosity of water at 15°C are r 
999.1 kg/m3 and m  1.138 
 103 kg/m · s. (Table A–15)
Analysis
Noting that D  0.022 m, the Reynolds number is
The drag coefficient corresponding to this value is, from Fig. 12–36, CD 
1.0. Also, the frontal area for flow past a cylinder is A  LD. Then the drag
force acting on the pipe becomes
Discussion
Note that this force is equivalent to the weight of a mass over
500 kg. Therefore, the drag force the river exerts on the pipe is equivalent to
hanging a total of over 500 kg in mass on the pipe supported at its ends
30 m apart. The necessary precautions should be taken if the pipe cannot
support this force. If the river were to flow at a faster speed or if turbulent
fluctuations in the river were more significant, the drag force would be even
larger. Unsteady forces on the pipe might then be significant.
 5275 N  5.30 kN
FD  CD ArV2
2  1.0(30 
 0.022 m2)(999.1 kg/m3)(4 m/s)2
2
a
1 N
1 kg  m/s2b
Re  VD
n  rVD
m
 (999.1 kg/m3)(4 m/s)(0.022 m)
1.138 
 10 3 kg/m  s
 7.73 
 104
Heat Transfer Coefficient
Flows across cylinders and spheres, in general, involve flow separation, which
is difficult to handle analytically. Therefore, such flows must be studied exper-
imentally or numerically. Indeed, flow across cylinders and spheres has been
studied experimentally by numerous investigators, and several empirical cor-
relations have been developed for the heat transfer coefficient.
The complicated flow pattern across a cylinder greatly influences heat
transfer. The variation of the local Nusselt number Nuu around the periphery
River
30 m
Pipe
FIGURE 12–40
Schematic for Example 12–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
557
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
of a cylinder subjected to cross flow of air is given in Fig. 12–41. Note that,
for all cases, the value of Nuu starts out relatively high at the stagnation
point (u  0°) but decreases with increasing u as a result of the thickening
of the laminar boundary layer. On the two curves at the bottom correspond-
ing to Re  70,800 and 101,300, Nuu reaches a minimum at u 
 80°, which
is the separation point in laminar flow. Then Nuu increases with increasing u
as a result of the intense mixing in the separated flow region (the wake).
The curves at the top corresponding to Re  140,000 to 219,000 differ from
the first two curves in that they have two minima for Nuu. The sharp
increase in Nuu at about u 
 90° is due to the transition from laminar to tur-
bulent flow. The later decrease in Nuu is again due to the thickening of the
boundary layer. Nuu reaches its second minimum at about u 
 140°, which
is the flow separation point in turbulent flow, and increases with u as a
result of the intense mixing in the turbulent wake region.
The discussions above on the local heat transfer coefficients are insight-
ful; however, they are of limited value in heat transfer calculations since the
calculation of heat transfer requires the average heat transfer coefficient
over the entire surface. Of the several such relations available in the litera-
ture for the average Nusselt number for cross flow over a cylinder, we pre-
sent the one proposed by Churchill and Bernstein:
Nucyl 
 0.3 
(12–47)
This relation is quite comprehensive in that it correlates available data well
for RePr  0.2. The fluid properties are evaluated at the film temperature
Tf 
(T  Ts), which is the average of the free-stream and surface
temperatures.
For flow over a sphere, Whitaker recommends the following comprehen-
sive correlation:
Nusph 
 2  [0.4 Re1/2  0.06 Re2/3] Pr0.4
(12–48)
which is valid for 3.5  Re  80,000 and 0.7  Pr  380. The fluid prop-
erties in this case are evaluated at the free-stream temperature T, except for
ms, which is evaluated at the surface temperature Ts. Although the two rela-
tions above are considered to be quite accurate, the results obtained from
them can be off by as much as 30 percent.
The average Nusselt number for flow across cylinders can be expressed
compactly as
Nucyl 
 C Rem Prn
(12–49)
where n 
and the experimentally determined constants C and m are given
in Table 12–3 for circular as well as various noncircular cylinders. The char-
acteristic length D for use in the calculation of the Reynolds and the Nusselt
numbers for different geometries is as indicated on the figure. All fluid
properties are evaluated at the film temperature.
The relations for cylinders above are for single cylinders or cylinders ori-
ented such that the flow over them is not affected by the presence of others.
1
3
hD
k
am
msb
1/4
hD
k
1
2
0.62 Re1/2 Pr1/3
[1  (0.4/Pr)2/3]1/41 
Re
282,000
5/8

4/5
hD
k
554
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 12–41
Variation of the local
heat transfer coefficient along the
circumference of a circular cylinder in
cross flow of air (from Giedt, 1949).
D
θ
Nuu
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
0°
40°
80°
u from stagnation point
120°
160°
10
1,
3
0
0
70
,8
0
0
Re
=
2
1
9
,
0
0
0
18
6,
00
0
1
7
0
,
0
0
0
1
4
0
,
0
0
0

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
558
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Also, they are applicable to smooth surfaces. Surface roughness and the
free-stream turbulence may affect the drag and heat transfer coefficients sig-
nificantly. Eq. 12–49 provides a simpler alternative to Eq. 12–47 for flow
over cylinders. However, Eq. 12–47 is more accurate, and thus should be
preferred in calculations whenever possible.
Chapter 12
|
555
TABLE 12–3
Empirical correlations for the average Nusselt number for forced convection
over circular and noncircular cylinders in cross flow (from Zukauskas, 1972 and
Jakob, 1949)
Cross-section
of the cylinder
Fluid
Range of Re
Nusselt number
Circle
0.4–4
Nu  0.989Re0.330 Pr1/3
Gas or
4–40
Nu  0.911Re0.385 Pr1/3
liquid
40–4000
Nu  0.683Re0.466 Pr1/3
4000–40,000
Nu  0.193Re0.618 Pr1/3
40,000–400,000
Nu  0.027Re0.805 Pr1/3
Square
Gas
5000–100,000
Nu  0.102Re0.675 Pr1/3
Square
Gas
5000–100,000
Nu  0.246Re0.588 Pr1/3
(tilted
45°)
Hexagon
Gas
5000–100,000
Nu  0.153Re0.638 Pr1/3
Hexagon
Gas
5000–19,500
Nu  0.160Re0.638 Pr1/3
(tilted
19,500–100,000
Nu  0.0385Re0.782 Pr1/3
45°)
Vertical
Gas
4000–15,000
Nu  0.228Re0.731 Pr1/3
plate
Ellipse
Gas
2500–15,000
Nu  0.248Re0.612 Pr1/3
D
D
D
D
D
D
D

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
559
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
556
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 12–5
Heat Loss from a Steam Pipe in Windy Air
A long 10-cm-diameter steam pipe whose external surface temperature is
110°C passes through some open area that is not protected against the
winds (Fig. 12–42). Determine the rate of heat loss from the pipe per unit of
its length when the air is at 1 atm pressure and 10°C and the wind is blow-
ing across the pipe at a velocity of 8 m/s.
Solution
A steam pipe is exposed to windy air. The rate of heat loss from
the steam is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Radiation effects are
negligible. 3 Air is an ideal gas.
Properties
The properties of air at the average film temperature of Tf 
(Ts  T)/2  (110  10)/2  60°C and 1 atm pressure are (Table A–22)
k  0.02808 W/m · °C
Pr  0.7202
n  1.896 
 105 m2/s
Analysis
The Reynolds number is
Re 
 4.219 
 104
The Nusselt number can be determined from
Nu 
 0.3 
 0.3 
 124
and
h 
Nu 
(124)  34.8 W/m2 · °C
Then the rate of heat transfer from the pipe per unit of its length becomes
As  pL  pDL  p(0.1 m)(1 m)  0.314 m2
Q·  hAs(Ts  T)  (34.8 W/m2 · C)(0.314 m2)(110  10)°C  1093 W
The rate of heat loss from the entire pipe can be obtained by multiplying the
value above by the length of the pipe in m.
Discussion
The simpler Nusselt number relation in Table 12–1 in this case
would give Nu  128, which is 3 percent higher than the value obtained
above using Eq. 12–47.
0.02808 W/m · °C
0.1 m
k
D
0.62(4.219 
  104)1/2 (0.7202)1/3
[1  (0.4/0.7202)2/3]1/4
1 
4.219 
 10 4
282,000 
5/8
4/5
0.62 Re1/2 Pr1/3
[1  (0.4/Pr)2/3]1/41 
Re
282,000
5/8
4/5
hD
k
VD
n 
(8 m/s)(0.1 m)
1.896 
 105 m2/s
EXAMPLE 12–6
Cooling of a Steel Ball by Forced Air
A 25-cm-diameter stainless steel ball (r  8055 kg/m3, cp  480 J/kg · °C)
is removed from the oven at a uniform temperature of 300°C (Fig. 12–43).
The ball is then subjected to the flow of air at 1 atm pressure and 25°C with
a velocity of 3 m/s. The surface temperature of the ball eventually drops to
FIGURE 12–43
Schematic for Example 12–6.
T  = 25°C
V = 3 m/s
Air
Steel
ball
300°C
FIGURE 12–42
Schematic for Example 12–5.
 V = 8 m/s
T  = 10°C
Ts = 110°C
D = 0.1 m
Wind

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
560
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
557
200°C. Determine the average convection heat transfer coefficient during
this cooling process and estimate how long the process will take.
Solution
A hot stainless steel ball is cooled by forced air. The average con-
vection heat transfer coefficient and the cooling time are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Radiation effects are
negligible. 3 Air is an ideal gas. 4 The outer surface temperature of the ball
is uniform at all times. 5 The surface temperature of the ball during cooling
is changing. Therefore, the convection heat transfer coefficient between the
ball and the air will also change. To avoid this complexity, we take the sur-
face temperature of the ball to be constant at the average temperature of
(300  200)/2  250°C in the evaluation of the heat transfer coefficient
and use the value obtained for the entire cooling process.
Properties
The dynamic viscosity of air at the average surface temperature
is ms  m @ 250°C  2.76 
 105 kg/m · s. The properties of air at the free-
stream temperature of 25°C and 1 atm are (Table A–15)
k  0.02551 W/m · °C
n  1.562 
 105 m2/s
m  1.849 
 105 kg/m · s
Pr  0.7296
Analysis
The Reynolds number is determined from
Re 
 4.802 
 104
The Nusselt number is
Nu 
 2  [0.4 Re1/2  0.06 Re2/3] Pr0.4
 2  [0.4(4.802 
 104)1/2  0.06(4.802 
 104)2/3](0.7296)0.4

 135
Then the average convection heat transfer coefficient becomes
h 
Nu 
(135)  13.8 W/m2  °C
In order to estimate the time of cooling of the ball from 300°C to 200°C, we
determine the average rate of heat transfer from Newton’s law of cooling by
using the average surface temperature. That is,
As  pD2  p(0.25 m)2  0.1963 m2
Q·
avg  hAs(Ts, avg  T)  (13.8 W/m2 · °C)(0.1963 m2)(250  25)°C  610 W
Next we determine the total heat transferred from the ball, which is simply
the change in the energy of the ball as it cools from 300°C to 200°C:
m  rV  r pD 3  (8055 kg/m3) p(0.25 m)3  65.9 kg
Qtotal  mcp(T2  T1)  (65.9 kg)(480 J/kg · °C)(300  200)°C  3,163,000 J
In this calculation, we assumed that the entire ball is at 200°C, which is not
necessarily true. The inner region of the ball will probably be at a higher
temperature than its surface. With this assumption, the time of cooling is
determined to be
t 
 5185 s  1 h 26 min
Q
Q
#
avg  3,163,000 J
610 J/s
1
6
1
6
0.02551 W/m · °C
0.25 m
k
D

1.849 
 105
2.76 
 105
1/4
am
msb
1/4
hD
k
VD
n 
(3 m/s)(0.25 m)
1.562 
 10	5 m2/s

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
561
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
558
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Discussion
The time of cooling could also be determined more accurately
using the transient temperature charts or relations introduced in Chapter ???.
But the simplifying assumptions we made above can be justified if all we
need is a ballpark value. It will be naive to expect the time of cooling to be
exactly 1 h 26 min, but, using our engineering judgment, it is realistic to
expect the time of cooling to be somewhere between one and two hours.
Convection heat transfer is expressed by Newton’s law of
cooling as
Q·
conv  hAs(Ts  T)
where h is the convection heat transfer coefficient, Ts is the
surface temperature, and T is the free-stream temperature.
The convection coefficient is also expressed as
The Nusselt number, which is the dimensionless heat transfer
coefficient, is defined as
where k is the thermal conductivity of the fluid and Lc is the
characteristic length.
The highly ordered fluid motion characterized by smooth
streamlines is called laminar. The highly disordered fluid
motion that typically occurs at high velocities is character-
ized by velocity fluctuations is called turbulent. The random
and rapid fluctuations of groups of fluid particles, called
eddies, provide an additional mechanism for momentum and
heat transfer.
The region of the flow above the plate bounded by d in
which the effects of the viscous shearing forces caused by
fluid viscosity are felt is called the velocity boundary layer.
The boundary layer thickness, d, is defined as the distance
from the surface at which u  0.99V. The hypothetical line
of u  0.99V divides the flow over a plate into the boundary
layer region in which the viscous effects and the velocity
changes are significant, and the irrotational flow region, in
which the frictional effects are negligible.
The friction force per unit area is called shear stress, and
the shear stress at the wall surface is expressed as
where m is the dynamic viscosity, V is the upstream velocity,
and Cf is the dimensionless friction coefficient. The property
v  m/r is the kinematic viscosity. The friction force over the
entire surface is determined from
ts  m u
y `
y0
    or    ts  Cf
rV 2
2
Nu  hLc
k
h 
kfluid(T/y)y0
Ts  T
The flow region over the surface in which the temperature
variation in the direction normal to the surface is significant
is the thermal boundary layer. The thickness of the thermal
boundary layer dt at any location along the surface is the dis-
tance from the surface at which the temperature difference
T  Ts equals 0.99(T  Ts). The relative thickness of the
velocity and the thermal boundary layers is best described by
the dimensionless Prandtl number, defined as
For external flow, the dimensionless Reynolds number is
expressed as
For a flat plate, the characteristic length is the distance x from
the leading edge. The Reynolds number at which the flow
becomes turbulent is called the critical Reynolds number. For
flow over a flat plate, its value is taken to be Recr  Vxcr/v 
5 
 105.
The force a flowing fluid exerts on a body in the flow
direction is called drag. The part of drag that is due directly
to wall shear stress tw is called the skin friction drag since it
is caused by frictional effects, and the part that is due directly
to pressure is called the pressure drag or form drag because
of its strong dependence on the form or shape of the body.
The drag coefficient CD is a dimensionless number that
represents the drag characteristics of a body, and is defined as
where A is the frontal area for blunt bodies, and surface area
for parallel flow over flat plates or thin airfoils. For flow over
a flat plate, the Reynolds number is
Rex  rVx
m  Vx
n
CD 
FD
1
2rV2A
Re  Inertia forces
Viscous forces  VLc
v  rVLc
m
Pr  Molecular diffusivity of momentum
Molecular diffusivity of heat
 v
a 
mcp
k
Ff  Cf As
rV2
2
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
562
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
559
Transition from laminar to turbulent occurs at the critical
Reynolds number of
For parallel flow over a flat plate, the local friction and con-
vection coefficients are
Laminar:
Turbulent:
The average friction coefficient relations for flow over a flat
plate are:
Laminar:
Turbulent:
Combined:
Rough surface, turbulent:
The average Nusselt number relations for flow over a flat
plate are:
Laminar:
Turbulent:
Nu  hL
k  0.037 Re0.8
L  Pr1/3,  0.6  Pr  60
5 
 105  ReL  107
Nu  hL
k  0.664 Re0.5
L  Pr1/3,    ReL  5 
 105
Cf  a1.89  1.62 log e
Lb
2.5
Cf  0.074
Re1/5
L
 1742
ReL
,    5 
 10 5  ReL  107
Cf  0.074
Re1/5
L
,    5 
 10 5  ReL  107
Cf  1.33
ReL
1/2 ,    ReL  5 
 10 5
Nux  hxx
k  0.0296 Re0.8
x  Pr1/3,  0.6  Pr  60
5 
 105  Rex  107
Cf, x  0.059
Re1/5
x
,    5 
 105  Rex  10 7
Nu x  hxx
k  0.332 Re0.5
x  Pr1/3,    Pr  0.6
Cf, x  0.664
Re1/2
x
,    Rex  5 
 10 5
Rex, cr  rVxcr
m
 5 
 105
Combined:
For isothermal surfaces with an unheated starting section of
length j, the local Nusselt number and the average convec-
tion coefficient relations are
Laminar:
Turbulent:
Laminar:
Turbulent:
These relations are for the case of isothermal surfaces. When
a flat plate is subjected to uniform heat flux, the local Nusselt
number is given by
Laminar:
Nux  0.453
Turbulent:
Nux  0.0308
The average Nusselt numbers for cross flow over a cylinder
and sphere are
which is valid for Re Pr  0.2, and
which is valid for 3.5  Re  80,000 and 0.7  Pr  380.
The fluid properties are evaluated at the film temperature
Tf  (T  Ts)/2 in the case of a cylinder, and at the free-
stream temperature T (except for ms, which is evaluated at
the surface temperature Ts) in the case of a sphere.
Nusph  hD
k  2  [0.4 Re1/2  0.06 Re2/3]Pr 0.4am
msb
1/4
Nucyl  hD
k  0.3 
0.62 Re1/2 Pr1/3
[1  (0.4/Pr)2/3]1/41 
Re
282,000
5/8
4/5
Re 0.8
x  Pr1/3
Re 0.5
x  Pr1/3
h  5[1  (j /x)9/10
(1  j/L)
hxL
h  2[1  (j /x)3/4]
1  j/L
hxL
Nu x 
Nux (for j0)
[1  (j/x)9/10]1/ 9  0.0296 Re0.8
x  Pr1/3
[1  (j/x)9/10]1/9
Nux 
Nux (for j0)
[1  (j/x)3/4]1/3  0.332 Re0.5
x  Pr1/3
[1  (j/x)3/4]1/3
Nu  hL
k  (0.037 Re0.8
L  871) Pr1/3,  0.6  Pr  60
5 
 105  ReL  107
1. O. Reynolds. “On the Experimental Investigation of the
Circumstances Which Determine Whether the Motion of
Water Shall Be Direct or Sinuous, and the Law of
Resistance in Parallel Channels.” Philosophical
Transactions of the Royal Society of London 174 (1883),
pp. 935–82.
2. G. G. Stokes. “On the Effect of the Internal Friction of
Fluids on the Motion of Pendulums.” Cambridge
Philosophical Transactions, IX, 8, 1851.
3. S. W. Churchill and M. Bernstein. “A Correlating
Equation for Forced Convection from Gases and Liquids
to a Circular Cylinder in Cross Flow.” Journal of Heat
Transfer 99 (1977), pp. 300–306.
4. S. W. Churchill and H. Ozoe. “Correlations for Laminar
Forced Convection in Flow over an Isothermal Flat Plate
and in Developing and Fully Developed Flow in an
Isothermal Tube.” Journal of Heat Transfer 95 (Feb.
1973), pp. 78–84.
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
563
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
560
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Mechanism and Types of Convection
12–1C
What is forced convection? How does it differ from
natural convection? Is convection caused by winds forced or
natural convection?
12–2C
What is external forced convection? How does it
differ from internal forced convection? Can a heat transfer
system involve both internal and external convection at the
same time? Give an example.
12–3C
In which mode of heat transfer is the convection
heat transfer coefficient usually higher, natural convection or
forced convection? Why?
12–4C
Consider a hot baked potato. Will the potato cool
faster or slower when we blow the warm air coming from our
lungs on it instead of letting it cool naturally in the cooler air
in the room? Explain.
12–5C
What is the physical significance of the Nusselt
number? How is it defined?
12–6C
When is heat transfer through a fluid conduction
and when is it convection? For what case is the rate of heat
transfer higher? How does the convection heat transfer coeffi-
cient differ from the thermal conductivity of a fluid?
12–7C
Define incompressible flow and incompressible
fluid. Must the flow of a compressible fluid necessarily be
treated as compressible?
12–8
During air cooling of potatoes, the heat transfer coef-
ficient for combined convection, radiation, and evaporation is
determined experimentally to be as shown:
Heat Transfer Coefficient, 
Air Velocity, m/s
W/m2  °C
0.66
14.0
1.00
19.1
1.36
20.2
1.73
24.4
Consider an 8-cm-diameter potato initially at 20°C with a
thermal conductivity of 0.49 W/m  °C. Potatoes are cooled
by refrigerated air at 5°C at a velocity of 1 m/s. Determine
the initial rate of heat transfer from a potato, and the initial
value of the temperature gradient in the potato at the surface.
Answers: 5.8 W, 585°C/m
12–9
An average man has a body surface area of 1.8 m2
and a skin temperature of 33°C. The convection heat transfer
coefficient for a clothed person walking in still air is
expressed as h  8.6V 0.53 for 0.5  V  2 m/s, where V is
the walking velocity in m/s. Assuming the average surface
temperature of the clothed person to be 30°C, determine the
rate of heat loss from an average man walking in still air at
10°C by convection at a walking velocity of (a) 0.5 m/s,
(b) 1.0 m/s, (c) 1.5 m/s, and (d) 2.0 m/s.
12–10
The convection heat transfer coefficient for a clothed
person standing in moving air is expressed as h  14.8V 0.69
for 0.15  V  1.5 m/s, where V is the air velocity. For a
person with a body surface area of 1.7 m2 and an average sur-
face temperature of 29°C, determine the rate of heat loss
from the person in windy air at 10°C by convection for air
velocities of (a) 0.5 m/s, (b) 1.0 m/s, and (c) 1.5 m/s.
12–11
During air cooling of oranges, grapefruit, and tange-
los, the heat transfer coefficient for combined convection,
radiation, and evaporation for air velocities of 0.11  V 
0.33 m/s is determined experimentally and is expressed as h 
PROBLEMS*
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and students
are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated by an “E”
are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them. Problems
with the icon 
are solved using EES, and complete solutions
together with parametric studies are included on the enclosed CD.
Problems with the icon 
are comprehensive in nature, and are
intended to be solved with a computer, preferably using the EES
software that accompanies this text.
Air
5°C
1 atm
Orange
FIGURE P12–11
5. W. H. Giedt. “Investigation of Variation of Point Unit-Heat
Transfer Coefficient around a Cylinder Normal to an Air
Stream.” Transactions of the ASME 71 (1949), pp. 375–381.
6. M. Jakob. Heat Transfer. Vol. l. New York: John Wiley &
Sons, 1949.
7. W. M. Kays and M. E. Crawford. Convective Heat and
Mass Transfer. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993.
8. H. Schlichting. Boundary Layer Theory, 7th ed. New
York, McGraw-Hill, 1979.
9. W. C. Thomas. “Note on the Heat Transfer Equation for
Forced Convection Flow over a Flat Plate with an
Unheated Starting Length.” Mechanical Engineering
News, 9, no.1 (1977), p. 361.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
564
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
561
5.05 kairRe1/3/D, where the diameter D is the characteristic
length. Oranges are cooled by refrigerated air at 5°C and 1 atm
at a velocity of 0.3 m/s. Determine (a) the initial rate of heat
transfer from a 7-cm-diameter orange initially at 15°C with a
thermal conductivity of 0.50 W/m  °C, (b) the value of the ini-
tial temperature gradient inside the orange at the surface, and
(c) the value of the Nusselt number.
Velocity and Thermal Boundary Layers
12–12C
What is viscosity? What causes viscosity in liquids
and in gases? Is dynamic viscosity typically higher for a liq-
uid or for a gas?
12–13C
What is Newtonian fluid? Is water a Newtonian 
fluid?
12–14C
What is the no-slip condition? What causes it?
12–15C
Consider two identical small glass balls dropped
into two identical containers, one filled with water and the
other with oil. Which ball will reach the bottom of the con-
tainer first? Why?
12–16C
How does the dynamic viscosity of (a) liquids and
(b) gases vary with temperature?
12–17C
What fluid property is responsible for the develop-
ment of the velocity boundary layer? For what kind of fluids
will there be no velocity boundary layer on a flat plate?
12–18C
What is the physical significance of the Prandtl
number? Does the value of the Prandtl number depend on the
type of flow or the flow geometry? Does the Prandtl number
of air change with pressure? Does it change with temperature?
12–19C
Will a thermal boundary layer develop in flow over
a surface even if both the fluid and the surface are at the
same temperature?
Laminar and Turbulent Flows
12–20C
How does turbulent flow differ from laminar flow?
For which flow is the heat transfer coefficient higher?
12–21C
What is the physical significance of the Reynolds
number? How is it defined for external flow over a plate of
length L?
12–22C
What does the friction coefficient represent in flow
over a flat plate? How is it related to the drag force acting on
the plate?
12–23C
What is the physical mechanism that causes the
friction factor to be higher in turbulent flow?
12–24C
What is turbulent viscosity? What is it caused by?
12–25C
What is turbulent thermal conductivity? What is it
caused by?
Drag Force and Heat Transfer in External Flow
12–26C
What is the difference between the upstream veloc-
ity and the free-stream velocity? For what types of flow are
these two velocities equal to each other?
12–27C
What is the difference between streamlined and
blunt bodies? Is a tennis ball a streamlined or blunt body?
12–28C
What is drag? What causes it? Why do we usually
try to minimize it?
12–29C
What is lift? What causes it? Does wall shear con-
tribute to the lift?
12–30C
During flow over a given body, the drag force, the
upstream velocity, and the fluid density are measured. Ex-
plain how you would determine the drag coefficient. What
area would you use in calculations?
12–31C
Define frontal area of a body subjected to external
flow. When is it appropriate to use the frontal area in drag
and lift calculations?
12–32C
What is the difference between skin friction drag
and pressure drag? Which is usually more significant for
slender bodies such as airfoils?
12–33C
What is the effect of surface roughness on the fric-
tion drag coefficient in laminar and turbulent flows?
12–34C
What is the effect of streamlining on (a) friction
drag and (b) pressure drag? Does the total drag acting on a
body necessarily decrease as a result of streamlining? Explain.
12–35C
What is flow separation? What causes it? What is
the effect of flow separation on the drag coefficient?
Flow over Flat Plates
12–36C
What does the friction coefficient represent in flow
over a flat plate? How is it related to the drag force acting on
the plate?
12–37C
Consider laminar flow over a flat plate. Will the
friction coefficient change with distance from the leading
edge? How about the heat transfer coefficient?
12–38C
How are the average friction and heat transfer
coefficients determined in flow over a flat plate?
12–39
Engine oil at 80°C flows over a 10-m-long flat plate
whose temperature is 30°C with a velocity of 2.5 m/s. Deter-
mine the total drag force and the rate of heat transfer over the
entire plate per unit width.
12–40
The local atmospheric pressure in Denver, Colorado
(elevation 1610 m), is 83.4 kPa. Air at this pressure and
at 30°C flows with a velocity of 6 m/s over a 2.5-m 
 8-m
flat plate whose temperature is 120°C. Determine the rate of
heat transfer from the plate if the air flows parallel to the
(a) 8-m-long side and (b) the 2.5-m side.
12–41
During a cold winter day, wind at 55 km/h is blow-
ing parallel to a 4-m-high and 10-m-long wall of a house. If
the air outside is at 5°C and the surface temperature of the
wall is 12°C, determine the rate of heat loss from that wall by

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
565
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
convection. What would your answer be if the wind velocity
was doubled?
Answers: 9081 W, 16,200 W
12–42
Reconsider Prob. 12–41. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of wind veloc-
ity and outside air temperature on the rate of heat loss from the
wall by convection. Let the wind velocity vary from 10 km/h
to 80 km/h and the outside air temperature from 0°C to 10°C.
Plot the rate of heat loss as a function of the wind velocity and
of the outside temperature, and discuss the results.
12–43E
Air at 60°F flows over a 10-ft-long flat plate at 7
ft/s. Determine the local friction and heat transfer coefficients
at intervals of 1 ft, and plot the results against the distance
from the leading edge.
12–44E
Reconsider Prob. 12–43E. Using EES (or
other) software, evaluate the local friction and
heat transfer coefficients along the plate at intervals of 0.1 ft,
and plot them against the distance from the leading edge.
12–45
A thin, square flat plate has 0.5 m on each side. Air
at 10°C flows over the top and bottom surfaces of the plate in
a direction parallel to one edge, with a velocity of 60 m/s.
The surface of the plate is maintained at a constant tempera-
ture of 54°C. The plate is mounted on a scale that measures a
drag force of 1.5 N.
(a) Determine the flow regime (laminar or turbulent).
(b) Determine the total heat transfer rate from the plate to
the air.
(c) Assuming a uniform distribution of heat transfer and
drag parameters over the plate, estimate the average
gradients of the velocity and temperature at the sur-
face,
and 
.
12–46
Water at 43.3°C flows over a large plate at a velocity
of 30.0 cm/s. The plate is 1.0 m long (in the flow direction),
and its surface is maintained at a uniform temperature of
10.0°C. Calculate the steady rate of heat transfer per unit
width of the plate.
12–47
Mercury at 25°C flows over a 3-m-long and 2-m-
wide flat plate maintained at 75°C with a velocity of 0.8 m/s.
Determine the rate of heat transfer from the entire plate.
(T/y)y0
(u/y)y0
562
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
12–48
Parallel plates form a solar collector that covers a
roof, as shown in the figure. The plates are maintained at
15°C, while ambient air at 10°C flows over the roof with V 
2 m/s. Determine the rate of convective heat loss from (a) the
first plate and (b) the third plate.
12–49
Consider a hot automotive engine, which can be
approximated as a 0.5-m-high, 0.40-m-wide, and 0.8-m-long
rectangular block. The bottom surface of the block is at a tem-
perature of 100°C and has an emissivity of 0.95. The ambient
air is at 20°C, and the road surface is at 25°C. Determine the
rate of heat transfer from the bottom surface of the engine
block by convection and radiation as the car travels at a veloc-
ity of 80 km/h. Assume the flow to be turbulent over the entire
surface because of the constant agitation of the engine block.
12–50
The forming section of a plastics plant puts out a
continuous sheet of plastic that is 1.2 m wide and 2 mm thick
Mercury
V∞= 0.8 m/s
T∞= 25°C
Ts= 25°C
L
FIGURE P12–47
1 m
V, T∞
4 m
FIGURE P12–48
Air
30°C, 3 m/s
15 m/min
Plastic
sheet
90°C
FIGURE P12–50
10 m
4 m
12°C
Attic
space
Air
5°C
55 km/h
FIGURE P12–41

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
566
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
563
at a rate of 15 m/min. The temperature of the plastic sheet is
90°C when it is exposed to the surrounding air, and the sheet
is subjected to air flow at 30°C at a velocity of 3 m/s on both
sides along its surfaces normal to the direction of motion of
the sheet. The width of the air cooling section is such that a
fixed point on the plastic sheet passes through that section in
2 s. Determine the rate of heat transfer from the plastic sheet
to the air.
12–51
The top surface of the passenger car of a train moving
at a velocity of 70 km/h is 2.8 m wide and 8 m long. The top
surface is absorbing solar radiation at a rate of 200 W/m2, and
the temperature of the ambient air is 30°C. Assuming the roof
of the car to be perfectly insulated and the radiation heat
exchange with the surroundings to be small relative to convec-
tion, determine the equilibrium temperature of the top surface
of the car.
Answer: 35.1°C
12–55E
Consider a refrigeration truck traveling at 55 mph
at a location where the air temperature is 80°F. The refriger-
ated compartment of the truck can be considered to be a
9-ft-wide, 8-ft-high, and 20-ft-long rectangular box. The
refrigeration system of the truck can provide 3 tons of refrig-
eration (i.e., it can remove heat at a rate of 600 Btu/min). The
outer surface of the truck is coated with a low-emissivity
material, and thus radiation heat transfer is very small. Deter-
mine the average temperature of the outer surface of the
refrigeration compartment of the truck if the refrigeration sys-
tem is observed to be operating at half the capacity. Assume
the air flow over the entire outer surface to be turbulent and
the heat transfer coefficient at the front and rear surfaces to be
equal to that on side surfaces.
20 ft
Air, 80°F
V = 55 mph
Refrigeration
truck
8 ft
FIGURE P12–55E
12–52
Reconsider Prob. 12–51. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the train
velocity and the rate of absorption of solar radiation on the
equilibrium temperature of the top surface of the car. Let the
train velocity vary from 10 km/h to 120 km/h and the rate of
solar absorption from 100 W/m2 to 500 W/m2. Plot the equi-
librium temperature as functions of train velocity and solar
radiation absorption rate, and discuss the results.
12–53
A 15-cm 
 15-cm circuit board dissipating 20 W of
power uniformly is cooled by air, which approaches the cir-
cuit board at 20°C with a velocity of 6 m/s. Disregarding any
heat transfer from the back surface of the board, determine
the surface temperature of the electronic components (a) at
the leading edge and (b) at the end of the board. Assume the
flow to be turbulent since the electronic components are
expected to act as turbulators.
12–54
Consider laminar flow of a fluid over a flat plate
maintained at a constant temperature. Now the free-stream
velocity of the fluid is doubled. Determine the change in the
drag force on the plate and rate of heat transfer between the
fluid and the plate. Assume the flow to remain laminar.
Air
25°C
35°C
Solar
collector
Solar
radiation
Tsky = –40°C
FIGURE P12–56
12–56
Solar radiation is incident on the glass cover of a
solar collector at a rate of 700 W/m2. The glass transmits 
88 percent of the incident radiation and has an emissivity of
0.90. The entire hot water needs of a family in summer can
be met by two collectors 1.2 m high and 1 m wide. The two
collectors are attached to each other on one side so that they
appear like a single collector 1.2 m 
 2 m in size. The tem-
perature of the glass cover is measured to be 35°C on a day
when the surrounding air temperature is 25°C and the wind is
blowing at 30 km/h. The effective sky temperature for radia-
Air
30°C
70 km/h
200 W/m2
FIGURE P12–51

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
567
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
tion exchange between the glass cover and the open sky is
40°C. Water enters the tubes attached to the absorber plate
at a rate of 1 kg/min. Assuming the back surface of the
absorber plate to be heavily insulated and the only heat loss
to occur through the glass cover, determine (a) the total rate
of heat loss from the collector, (b) the collector efficiency,
which is the ratio of the amount of heat transferred to the
water to the solar energy incident on the collector, and (c) the
temperature rise of water as it flows through the collector.
12–57
A transformer that is 10 cm long, 6.2 cm wide, and
5 cm high is to be cooled by attaching a 10-cm 
 6.2-cm
wide polished aluminum heat sink (emissivity  0.03) to its
top surface. The heat sink has seven fins, which are 5 mm
high, 2 mm thick, and 10 cm long. A fan blows air at 25°C
parallel to the passages between the fins. The heat sink is to
dissipate 12 W of heat and the base temperature of the heat
sink is not to exceed 60°C. Assuming the fins and the base
plate to be nearly isothermal and the radiation heat transfer to
be negligible, determine the minimum free-stream velocity
the fan needs to supply to avoid overheating.
564
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
35°C
Air
4 m/s
Aluminum
plate
Power
transistor, 6 W
25 cm
25 cm
65°C
FIGURE P12–59
Air
25°C, 10 m/s
Plate
40 cm
40 cm
FIGURE P12–63
12–60
Repeat Prob. 12–59 for a location at an elevation of
1610 m where the atmospheric pressure is 83.4 kPa.
Answer: 4
12–61
Air at 25°C and 1 atm is flowing over a long flat
plate with a velocity of 8 m/s. Determine the distance from
the leading edge of the plate where the flow becomes turbu-
lent, and the thickness of the boundary layer at that location.
12–62
Repeat Prob. 12–61 for water.
12–63
The weight of a thin flat plate 40 cm 
 40 cm in
size is balanced by a counterweight that has a mass of 2 kg,
as shown in the figure. Now a fan is turned on, and air at 
1 atm and 25°C flows downward over both surfaces of the
plate with a free-stream velocity of 10 m/s. Determine the
mass of the counterweight that needs to be added in order to
balance the plate in this case.
Flow across Cylinders and Spheres
12–64C
Consider laminar flow of air across a hot circular
cylinder. At what point on the cylinder will the heat transfer
be highest? What would your answer be if the flow were 
turbulent?
12–65C
In flow over cylinders, why does the drag coeffi-
cient suddenly drop when the flow becomes turbulent? Isn’t
Air
25°C
0.5 cm
5 cm
Fins
60°C
6.2 cm
10 cm
Transformer
12 W
FIGURE P12–57
12–58
Repeat Prob. 12–57 assuming the heat sink to be
black-anodized and thus to have an effective emissivity of
0.90. Note that in radiation calculations the base area (10 cm

 6.2 cm) is to be used, not the total surface area.
12–59
An array of power transistors, dissipating 6 W of
power each, are to be cooled by mounting them on a 25-cm 
25-cm square aluminum plate and blowing air at 35°C over the
plate with a fan at a velocity of 4 m/s. The average temperature
of the plate is not to exceed 65°C. Assuming the heat transfer
from the back side of the plate to be negligible and disregard-
ing radiation, determine the number of transistors that can be
placed on this plate.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
568
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
565
turbulence supposed to increase the drag coefficient instead
of decreasing it?
12–66C
In flow over blunt bodies such as a cylinder, how
does the pressure drag differ from the friction drag?
12–67C
Why is flow separation in flow over cylinders
delayed in turbulent flow?
12–68
A long 8-cm-diameter steam pipe whose external
surface temperature is 90°C passes through some open area
that is not protected against the winds. Determine the rate of
heat loss from the pipe per unit of its length when the air is at
1 atm pressure and 7°C and the wind is blowing across the
pipe at a velocity of 50 km/h.
12–69
In a geothermal power plant, the used geothermal
water at 80°C enters a 15-cm-diameter and 400-m-long unin-
sulated pipe at a rate of 8.5 kg/s and leaves at 70°C before
being reinjected back to the ground. Windy air at 15°C flows
normal to the pipe. Disregarding radiation, determine the
average wind velocity in km/h.
Wind
V
T∞= 15°C
Water
FIGURE P12–69
Air
54°F, 20 mph
86°F
FIGURE P12–72E
10°C
Wind, 40 km/h
Transmission
lines
FIGURE P12–76
12–70
A stainless steel ball (r  8055 kg/m3, cp  480 J/kg ·
°C) of diameter D  15 cm is removed from the oven at a uni-
form temperature of 350°C. The ball is then subjected to the
flow of air at 1 atm pressure and 30°C with a velocity of 6 m/s.
The surface temperature of the ball eventually drops to 250°C.
Determine the average convection heat transfer coefficient dur-
ing this cooling process and estimate how long this process has
taken.
12–71
Reconsider Prob. 12–70. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of air velocity
on the average convection heat transfer coefficient and the
cooling time. Let the air velocity vary from 1 m/s to 10 m/s.
Plot the heat transfer coefficient and the cooling time as a
function of air velocity, and discuss the results.
12–72E
A person extends his uncovered arms into the
windy air outside at 54°F and 20 mph in order to feel nature
closely. Initially, the skin temperature of the arm is 86°F.
Treating the arm as a 2-ft-long and 3-in-diameter cylinder,
determine the rate of heat loss from the arm.
12–73E
Reconsider Prob. 12–72E. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effects of air
temperature and wind velocity on the rate of heat loss from
the arm. Let the air temperature vary from 20°F to 80°F and
the wind velocity from 10 mph to 40 mph. Plot the rate of
heat loss as a function of air temperature and of wind veloc-
ity, and discuss the results.
12–74
An average person generates heat at a rate of 84 W
while resting. Assuming one-quarter of this heat is lost from
the head and disregarding radiation, determine the average
surface temperature of the head when it is not covered and
is subjected to winds at 10°C and 25 km/h. The head can be
approximated as a 30-cm-diameter sphere.
Answer: 13.2°C
12–75
Consider the flow of a fluid across a cylinder main-
tained at a constant temperature. Now the free-stream veloc-
ity of the fluid is doubled. Determine the change in the drag
force on the cylinder and the rate of heat transfer between the
fluid and the cylinder.
12–76
A 6-mm-diameter electrical transmission line carries
an electric current of 50 A and has a resistance of 0.002
ohm per meter length. Determine the surface temperature of
the wire during a windy day when the air temperature is 10°C
and the wind is blowing across the transmission line at
40 km/h.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
569
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
12–77
Reconsider Prob. 12–76. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the wind ve-
locity on the surface temperature of the wire. Let the wind
velocity vary from 10 km/h to 80 km/h. Plot the surface
temperature as a function of wind velocity, and discuss the
results.
12–78
A heating system is to be designed to keep the wings
of an aircraft cruising at a velocity of 900 km/h above freez-
ing temperatures during flight at 12,200-m altitude where the
standard atmospheric conditions are 55.4°C and 18.8 kPa.
Approximating the wing as a cylinder of elliptical cross sec-
tion whose minor axis is 50 cm and disregarding radiation,
determine the average convection heat transfer coefficient on
the wing surface and the average rate of heat transfer per unit
surface area.
12–79
A long aluminum wire of diameter 3 mm is
extruded at a temperature of 370°C. The wire
is subjected to cross air flow at 30°C at a velocity of 6 m/s.
Determine the rate of heat transfer from the wire to the air
per meter length when it is first exposed to the air.
566
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
of 18 ft2. Disregard any heat transfer by radiation. What would
your answer be if the air velocity were doubled?
Answers:
95.1°F, 91.6°F
12–81
An incandescent lightbulb is an inexpensive but
highly inefficient device that converts electrical energy into
light. It converts about 10 percent of the electrical energy it
consumes into light while converting the remaining 90 per-
cent into heat. (A fluorescent lightbulb will give the same
amount of light while consuming only one-fourth of the elec-
trical energy, and it will last 10 times longer than an incan-
descent lightbulb.) The glass bulb of the lamp heats up very
quickly as a result of absorbing all that heat and dissipating it
to the surroundings by convection and radiation.
Consider a 10-cm-diameter 100-W lightbulb cooled by a
fan that blows air at 30°C to the bulb at a velocity of 2 m/s.
The surrounding surfaces are also at 30°C, and the emissivity
of the glass is 0.9. Assuming 10 percent of the energy passes
through the glass bulb as light with negligible absorption and
the rest of the energy is absorbed and dissipated by the bulb
itself, determine the equilibrium temperature of the glass bulb.
12–82
During a plant visit, it was noticed that a 12-m-long
section of a 10-cm-diameter steam pipe is completely
exposed to the ambient air. The temperature measurements
indicate that the average temperature of the outer surface of
the steam pipe is 75°C when the ambient temperature is 5°C.
There are also light winds in the area at 10 km/h. The emis-
sivity of the outer surface of the pipe is 0.8, and the average
temperature of the surfaces surrounding the pipe, including
Air
30°C
2 m/s
e = 0.9
Light, 10 W
100 W
FIGURE P12–81
12–80E
Consider a person who is trying to keep cool on a
hot summer day by turning a fan on and exposing his entire
body to air flow. The air temperature is 85°F and the fan is
blowing air at a velocity of 6 ft/s. If the person is doing light
work and generating sensible heat at a rate of 300 Btu/h, deter-
mine the average temperature of the outer surface (skin or
clothing) of the person. The average human body can be
treated as a 1-ft-diameter cylinder with an exposed surface area
Tsurr = 0°C
5°C
10 km/h
10 cm
Steam pipe
e = 0.8
75°C
FIGURE P12–82
30°C
6 m/s
370°C
3 mm
Aluminum
wire
FIGURE P12–79
85°F
6 ft/s
300 Btu/h
FIGURE P12–80E

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
570
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
567
the sky, is estimated to be 0°C. Determine the amount of heat
lost from the steam during a 10-h-long work day.
Steam is supplied by a gas-fired steam generator that has
an efficiency of 80 percent, and the plant pays $1.05/therm
of natural gas. If the pipe is insulated and 90 percent of the
heat loss is saved, determine the amount of money this facil-
ity will save a year as a result of insulating the steam pipes.
Assume the plant operates every day of the year for 10 h.
State your assumptions.
12–83
Reconsider Prob. 12–82. There seems to be some
uncertainty about the average temperature of the surfaces sur-
rounding the pipe used in radiation calculations, and you are
asked to determine if it makes any significant difference in
overall heat transfer. Repeat the calculations for average sur-
rounding and surface temperatures of 20°C and 25°C,
respectively, and determine the change in the values obtained.
12–84E
A 12-ft-long, 1.5-kW electrical resistance wire is
made of 0.1-in-diameter stainless steel (k  8.7 Btu/h · ft ·
°F). The resistance wire operates in an environment at 85°F.
Determine the surface temperature of the wire if it is cooled
by a fan blowing air at a velocity of 20 ft/s.
12–85
The components of an electronic system are located
in a 1.5-m-long horizontal duct whose cross section is 
20 cm 
 20 cm. The components in the duct are not allowed
to come into direct contact with cooling air, and thus are
cooled by air at 30°C flowing over the duct with a velocity of
200 m/min. If the surface temperature of the duct is not to
exceed 65°C, determine the total power rating of the elec-
tronic devices that can be mounted into the duct.
Answer:
640 W
12–86
Repeat Prob. 12–85 for a location at 4000-m altitude
where the atmospheric pressure is 61.66 kPa.
12–87
A 0.4-W cylindrical electronic component with
diameter 0.3 cm and length 1.8 cm and mounted on a circuit
board is cooled by air flowing across it at a velocity of 240
m/min. If the air temperature is 35°C, determine the surface
temperature of the component.
12–88
Consider a 50-cm-diameter and 95-cm-long hot
water tank. The tank is placed on the roof of a house. The
water inside the tank is heated to 80°C by a flat-plate solar
collector during the day. The tank is then exposed to windy
air at 18°C with an average velocity of 40 km/h during the
night. Estimate the temperature of the tank after a 45-min
period. Assume the tank surface to be at the same tempera-
ture as the water inside, and the heat transfer coefficient on
the top and bottom surfaces to be the same as that on the side
surface.
12–89
Reconsider Prob. 12–88. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the temperature of the tank as a
function of the cooling time as the time varies from 30 min to
5 h, and discuss the results.
12–90
A 1.8-m-diameter spherical tank of negligible thick-
ness contains iced water at 0°C. Air at 25°C flows over the
tank with a velocity of 7 m/s. Determine the rate of heat
transfer to the tank and the rate at which ice melts. The heat
of fusion of water at 0°C is 333.7 kJ/kg.
12–91
A 10-cm-diameter, 30-cm-high cylindrical bottle
contains cold water at 3°C. The bottle is placed in windy air
at 27°C. The water temperature is measured to be 11°C after
45 min of cooling. Disregarding radiation effects and heat
transfer from the top and bottom surfaces, estimate the aver-
age wind velocity.
Review Problems
12–92
Consider a house that is maintained at 22°C at all
times. The walls of the house have R-3.38 insulation in SI
units (i.e., an L/k value or a thermal resistance of 3.38 m2 ·
°C/W). During a cold winter night, the outside air temperature
is 6°C and wind at 50 km/h is blowing parallel to a 4-m-high
and 8-m-long wall of the house. If the heat transfer coefficient
on the interior surface of the wall is 8 W/m2 · °C, determine
the rate of heat loss from that wall of the house. Draw the
thermal resistance network and disregard radiation heat
transfer.
Answer: 145 W
12–93
An automotive engine can be approximated as a 0.4-
m-high, 0.60-m-wide, and 0.7-m-long rectangular block. The
bottom surface of the block is at a temperature of 75°C and
has an emissivity of 0.92. The ambient air is at 5°C, and the
road surface is at 10°C. Determine the rate of heat transfer
85°F
20 ft/s
1.5 kW
resistance
heater
FIGURE P12–84E
Air
30°C
200 m/min
20 cm
1.5 m
65°C
Electronic
components
inside
FIGURE P12–85

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
571
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
from the bottom surface of the engine block by convection
and radiation as the car travels at a velocity of 60 km/h.
Assume the flow to be turbulent over the entire surface
because of the constant agitation of the engine block. How
will the heat transfer be affected when a 2-mm-thick gunk
(k  3 W/m · °C) has formed at the bottom surface as a result
of the dirt and oil collected at that surface over time? Assume
the metal temperature under the gunk still to be 75°C.
12–94E
The passenger compartment of a minivan traveling at
60 mph can be modeled as a 3.2-ft-high, 6-ft-wide, and 11-ft-
long rectangular box whose walls have an insulating value
of R-3 (i.e., a wall thickness-to-thermal conductivity ratio of
3 h · ft2 · °F/Btu). The interior of a minivan is maintained at
an average temperature of 70°F during a trip at night while
the outside air temperature is 90°F.
The average heat transfer coefficient on the interior surfaces of
the van is 1.2 Btu/h · ft2 · °F. The air flow over the exterior
surfaces can be assumed to be turbulent because of the intense
vibrations involved, and the heat transfer coefficient on the front
and back surfaces can be taken to be equal to that on the top
surface. Disregarding any heat gain or loss by radiation,
determine the rate of heat transfer from the ambient air to the van.
568
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Road
10°C
e = 0.92
2 mm
75°C
Air
60 km/h
5°C
Engine
block
Gunk
FIGURE P12–98
2°C, determine the rate of heat loss through the windows of
this wall. Assume radiation heat transfer to be negligible.
12–96
Consider a person who is trying to keep cool on a hot
summer day by turning a fan on and exposing his body to air
flow. The air temperature is 32°C, and the fan is blowing air
at a velocity of 5 m/s. The surrounding surfaces are at 40°C,
and the emissivity of the person can be taken to be 0.9. If the
person is doing light work and generating sensible heat at a
rate of 90 W, determine the average temperature of the outer
surface (skin or clothing) of the person. The average human
body can be treated as a 30-cm-diameter cylinder with an
exposed surface area of 1.7 m2.
Answer: 36.2°C
12–97
Four power transistors, each dissipating 12 W, are
mounted on a thin vertical aluminum plate (k  237 W/m · °C)
22 cm 
 22 cm in size. The heat generated by the transistors is
to be dissipated by both surfaces of the plate to the surrounding
air at 20°C, which is blown over the plate by a fan at a velocity
of 250 m/min. The entire plate can be assumed to be nearly
isothermal, and the exposed surface area of the transistor can
be taken to be equal to its base area. Determine the temperature
of the aluminum plate.
12–98
A 3-m-internal-diameter spherical tank made of
1-cm-thick stainless steel (k  15 W/m · °C) is used to store
iced water at 0°C. The tank is located outdoors at 30°C and is
subjected to winds at 25 km/h. Assuming the entire steel tank
to be at 0°C and thus its thermal resistance to be negligible,
determine (a) the rate of heat transfer to the iced water in the
tank and (b) the amount of ice at 0°C that melts during a 24-h
period. The heat of fusion of water at atmospheric pressure is
hif  333.7 kJ/kg. Disregard any heat transfer by radiation.
12–99
Repeat Prob. 12–98, assuming the inner surface of
the tank to be at 0°C but by taking the thermal resistance of
the tank and heat transfer by radiation into consideration.
Assume the average surrounding surface temperature for
radiation exchange to be 25°C and the outer surface of the
tank to have an emissivity of 0.75.
Answers: (a) 10,530 W, 
(b) 2727 kg
Road
10°C
e = 0.92
2 mm
75°C
Air
60 km/h
5°C
Engine
block
Gunk
FIGURE P12–93
Air
60 mph
90°F
FIGURE P12–94E
12–95
Consider a house that is maintained at a constant
temperature of 22°C. One of the walls of the house has three
single-pane glass windows that are 1.5 m high and 1.8 m
long. The glass (k  0.78 W/m · °C) is 0.5 cm thick, and the
heat transfer coefficient on the inner surface of the glass is
8 W/m2 · C. Now winds at 35 km/h start to blow parallel to
the surface of this wall. If the air temperature outside is

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
572
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 12
|
569
12–100E
A transistor with a height of 0.25 in and a
diameter of 0.22 in is mounted on a circuit board. The
transistor is cooled by air flowing over it at a velocity of 500
ft/min. If the air temperature is 120°F and the transistor case
temperature is not to exceed 180°F, determine the amount of
power this transistor can dissipate safely.
4.6 cm, respectively. The pipe is covered with 3.5-cm-thick
glass wool insulation (k  0.038 W/m · °C) whose outer
surface has an emissivity of 0.3. Heat is lost to the
surrounding air and surfaces at 3°C by convection and
radiation. Taking the heat transfer coefficient inside the pipe
to be 80 W/m2 · °C, determine the rate of heat loss from the
steam per unit length of the pipe when air is flowing across
the pipe at 4 m/s.
12–103
The boiling temperature of nitrogen at atmospheric
pressure at sea level (1 atm pressure) is 196°C. Therefore,
nitrogen is commonly used in low-temperature scientific
studies, since the temperature of liquid nitrogen in a tank
open to the atmosphere will remain constant at 196°C until
it is depleted. Any heat transfer to the tank will result in the
evaporation of some liquid nitrogen, which has a heat of
vaporization of 198 kJ/kg and a density of 810 kg/m3 at 1 atm.
Consider a 4-m-diameter spherical tank that is initially
filled with liquid nitrogen at 1 atm and 196°C. The tank is
exposed to 20°C ambient air and 40 km/h winds. The temper-
ature of the thin-shelled spherical tank is observed to be
almost the same as the temperature of the nitrogen inside.
Disregarding any radiation heat exchange, determine the rate
of evaporation of the liquid nitrogen in the tank as a result of
heat transfer from the ambient air if the tank is (a) not insu-
lated, (b) insulated with 5-cm-thick fiberglass insulation
(k  0.035 W/m · °C), and (c) insulated with 2-cm-thick
superinsulation that has an effective thermal conductivity of
0.00005 W/m · °C.
12–104
Repeat Prob. 12–103 for liquid oxygen, which has a
boiling temperature of 183°C, a heat of vaporization of
213 kJ/kg, and a density of 1140 kg/m3 at 1 atm pressure.
12–105
A 0.5-cm-thick, 12-cm-high, and 18-cm-long circuit
board houses 80 closely spaced logic chips on one side, each
Power
transistor
Ts  ≤ 180°F
Air, 500 ft/min
120°F
0.25 in
0.22 in
FIGURE P12–100E
Concrete
roof
20 m
15 cm
15 m
Tin = 20°C
Tsky = 100 K
Tair = 10°C
60 km/h
e = 0.9
FIGURE P12–101
Tair = 20°C
40 km/h
N2 vapor
Insulation
1 atm
Liquid N2
–196°C
Q·
FIGURE P12–103
12–101
The roof of a house consists of a 15-cm-thick
concrete slab (k  2 W/m · °C) that is 15 m wide and 20 m
long. The convection heat transfer coefficient on the inner
surface of the roof is 5 W/m2 · °C. On a clear winter night, the
ambient air is reported to be at 10°C, while the night sky
temperature is 100 K. The house and the interior surfaces of
the wall are maintained at a constant temperature of 20°C.
The emissivity of both surfaces of the concrete roof is 0.9.
Considering both radiation and convection heat transfer,
determine the rate of heat transfer through the roof when wind
at 60 km/h is blowing over the roof.
If the house is heated by a furnace burning natural gas with
an efficiency of 85 percent, and the price of natural gas is
$1.20/therm, determine the money lost through the roof that
night during a 14-h period.
Answers: 28 kW, $18.9
12–102
Steam at 250°C flows in a stainless steel pipe (k 
15 W/m · °C) whose inner and outer diameters are 4 cm and 

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
12. External Forced 
Convection
573
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
dissipating 0.06 W. The board is impregnated with copper
fillings and has an effective thermal conductivity of 16 W/m · °C.
All the heat generated in the chips is conducted across the circuit
board and is dissipated from the back side of the board to the
ambient air at 30°C, which is forced to flow over the surface by a
fan at a free-stream velocity of 300 m/min. Determine the
temperatures on the two sides of the circuit board.
Design and Essay Problems
12–106
Design an experiment to measure the viscosity of
liquids using a vertical funnel with a cylindrical reservoir of
height h and a narrow flow section of diameter D and length
L. Making appropriate assumptions, obtain a relation for vis-
cosity in terms of easily measurable quantities such as density
and volume flow rate.
12–107
Conduct this experiment to determine the heat loss
coefficient of your house or apartment in W/°C or Btu/h  °F.
570
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
First make sure that the conditions in the house are steady
and the house is at the set temperature of the thermostat. Use
an outdoor thermometer to monitor outdoor temperature. One
evening, using a watch or timer, determine how long the
heater was on during a 3-h period and the average outdoor
temperature during that period. Then using the heat output
rating of your heater, determine the amount of heat supplied.
Also, estimate the amount of heat generation in the house
during that period by noting the number of people, the total
wattage of lights that were on, and the heat generated by the
appliances and equipment. Using that information, calculate
the average rate of heat loss from the house and the heat loss
coefficient.
12–108
Write an article on forced convection cooling with
air, helium, water, and a dielectric liquid. Discuss the advan-
tages and disadvantages of each fluid in heat transfer. Explain
the circumstances under which a certain fluid will be most
suitable for the cooling job.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
574
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 13
INTERNAL FORCED CONVECTION
|
571
L
iquid or gas flow through pipes or ducts is commonly
used in heating and cooling applications. The fluid in
such applications is forced to flow by a fan or pump
through a flow section that is sufficiently long to accomplish
the desired heat transfer. In this chapter we pay particular
attention to the determination of the friction factor and con-
vection coefficient since they are directly related to the pres-
sure drop and heat transfer rate,
respectively. These
quantities are then used to determine the pumping power
requirement and the required tube length.
There is a fundamental difference between external and
internal flows. In external flow, considered in Chapter 12, the
fluid has a free surface, and thus the boundary layer over the
surface is free to grow indefinitely. In internal flow, however,
the fluid is completely confined by the inner surfaces of the
tube, and thus there is a limit on how much the boundary
layer can grow.
We start this chapter with a general physical description of
internal flow, and the average velocity and average tempera-
ture. We continue with the discussion of the hydrodynamic
and
thermal
entry
lengths,
developing
flow,
and
fully
developed flow. We then obtain the velocity and temperature
profiles for fully developed laminar flow, and develop relations
for the friction factor and Nusselt number. Finally we present
empirical relations for developing and fully developed turbu-
lent flows, and demonstrate their use.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
■Obtain average velocity from a knowledge of velocity profile,
and average temperature from a knowledge of temperature
profile in internal flow,
■Have a visual understanding of different flow regions in
internal flow, such as the entry and the fully developed flow
regions, and calculate hydrodynamic and thermal entry
lengths,
■Analyze heating and cooling of a fluid flowing in a tube
under constant surface temperature and constant surface
heat flux conditions, and work with the logarithmic mean
temperature difference,
■Obtain analytic relations for the velocity profile, pressure
drop, friction factor, and Nusselt number in fully developed
laminar flow, and
■Determine the friction factor and Nusselt number in fully
developed turbulent flow using empirical relations, and
calculate the pressure drop and heat transfer rate.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
575
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
13–1
 INTRODUCTION
The terms pipe, duct, and conduit are usually used interchangeably for flow
sections. In general, flow sections of circular cross section are referred to as
pipes (especially when the fluid is a liquid), and flow sections of noncircu-
lar cross section as ducts (especially when the fluid is a gas). Small-diame-
ter pipes are usually referred to as tubes. Given this uncertainty, we will use
more descriptive phrases (such as a circular pipe or a rectangular duct)
whenever necessary to avoid any misunderstandings.
You have probably noticed that most fluids, especially liquids, are trans-
ported in circular pipes. This is because pipes with a circular cross section
can withstand large pressure differences between the inside and the outside
without undergoing significant distortion. Noncircular pipes are usually
used in applications such as the heating and cooling systems of buildings
where the pressure difference is relatively small, the manufacturing and
installation costs are lower, and the available space is limited for ductwork
(Fig. 13–1). For a fixed surface area, the circular tube gives the most heat
transfer for the least pressure drop, which explains the overwhelming popu-
larity of circular tubes in heat transfer equipment.
Although the theory of fluid flow is reasonably well understood, theoreti-
cal solutions are obtained only for a few simple cases such as fully devel-
oped laminar flow in a circular pipe. Therefore, we must rely on
experimental results and empirical relations for most fluid flow problems
rather than closed-form analytical solutions. Noting that the experimental
results are obtained under carefully controlled laboratory conditions and that
no two systems are exactly alike, we must not be so naive as to view the
results obtained as “exact.” An error of 10 percent (or more) in friction fac-
tors calculated using the relations in this chapter is the “norm” rather than
the “exception.”
The fluid velocity in a pipe changes from zero at the surface because of
the no-slip condition to a maximum at the pipe center. In fluid flow, it is
convenient to work with an average velocity Vavg, which remains constant in
incompressible flow when the cross-sectional area of the pipe is constant
(Fig. 13–2). The average velocity in heating and cooling applications may
change somewhat because of changes in density with temperature. But, in
practice, we evaluate the fluid properties at some average temperature and
treat them as constants. The convenience of working with constant proper-
ties usually more than justifies the slight loss in accuracy.
Also, the friction between the fluid particles in a pipe does cause a
slight rise in fluid temperature as a result of the mechanical energy being
converted to sensible thermal energy. But this temperature rise due to fric-
tional heating is usually too small to warrant any consideration in calcula-
tions and thus is disregarded. For example, in the absence of any heat
transfer, no noticeable difference can be detected between the inlet and
outlet temperatures of water flowing in a pipe. The primary consequence of
friction in fluid flow is pressure drop, and thus any significant temperature
change in the fluid is due to heat transfer. But frictional heating must be
considered for flows that involve highly viscous fluids with large velocity
gradients.
572
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Circular pipe
Rectangular
duct
Water
50 atm
Air
1.2 atm
FIGURE 13–1
Circular pipes can withstand large
pressure differences between the
inside and the outside without
undergoing any significant distortion,
but noncircular pipes cannot.
Vavg
FIGURE 13–2
Average velocity Vavg is defined as the
average speed through a cross section.
For fully developed laminar pipe flow,
Vavg is half of maximum velocity.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
576
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
13–2
 AVERAGE VELOCITY AND TEMPERATURE
In external flow, the free-stream velocity served as a convenient reference
velocity for use in the evaluation of the Reynolds number and the friction
coefficient. In internal flow, there is no free stream and thus we need an
alternative. The fluid velocity in a tube changes from zero at the surface
because of the no-slip condition, to a maximum at the tube center. Therefore,
it is convenient to work with an average or mean velocity Vavg, which
remains constant for incompressible flow when the cross sectional area of
the tube is constant.
The value of the average velocity Vavg at some streamwise cross-section is
determined from the requirement that the conservation of mass principle be
satisfied (Fig. 13–2). That is,
(13–1)
where m. is the mass flow rate, r is the density, Ac is the cross-sectional area,
and u(r) is the velocity profile. Then the average velocity for incompressible
flow in a circular pipe of radius R can be expressed as
(13–2)
Therefore, when we know the flow rate or the velocity profile, the average
velocity can be determined easily.
When a fluid is heated or cooled as it flows through a tube, the temperature
of the fluid at any cross section changes from Ts at the surface of the wall to
some maximum (or minimum in the case of heating) at the tube center. In fluid
flow it is convenient to work with an average or mean temperature Tm, which
remains constant at a cross section. Unlike the mean velocity, the mean temper-
ature Tm changes in the flow direction whenever the fluid is heated or cooled.
The value of the mean temperature Tm is determined from the requirement
that the conservation of energy principle be satisfied. That is, the energy trans-
ported by the fluid through a cross section in actual flow must be equal to the
energy that would be transported through the same cross section if the fluid
were at a constant temperature Tm. This can be expressed mathematically as
(Fig. 13–3)
E·
fluid  m· cpTm 
cpT(r)dm· 
rcpT(r)u(r)VdAc
(13–3)
where cp is the specific heat of the fluid. Note that the product m·cpTm at any
cross section along the tube represents the energy flow with the fluid at that
cross section. Then the mean temperature of a fluid with constant density
and specific heat flowing in a circular pipe of radius R can be expressed as
Tm 


T(r)u(r) rdr
(13–4)
Note that the mean temperature Tm of a fluid changes during heating or
cooling. Also, the fluid properties in internal flow are usually evaluated at
2
VavgR2 
R
0

R
0 cpT(r)ru(r)2prdr
rVavg(pR2)cp
m# cpT(r)dm#
m# cp

Ac

m·
Vavg  
Ac
ru(r) dAc
rAc
 
R
0
ru(r)2pr dr
rpR2
 2
R2 
R
0
u(r)r dr
m#  rVavgAc  
Ac
ru(r) dAc
Chapter 13
|
573
Tmin
Ts
Tm
(a) Actual
(b) Idealized
FIGURE 13–3
Actual and idealized temperature
profiles for flow in a tube (the rate at
which energy is transported with the
fluid is the same for both cases).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
577
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the bulk mean fluid temperature, which is the arithmetic average of the
mean temperatures at the inlet and the exit. That is, Tb  (Tm, i  Tm, e)/2.
Laminar and Turbulent Flow in Tubes
Flow in a tube can be laminar or turbulent, depending on the flow condi-
tions. Fluid flow is streamlined and thus laminar at low velocities, but turns
turbulent as the velocity is increased beyond a critical value. Transition
from laminar to turbulent flow does not occur suddenly; rather, it occurs
over some range of velocity where the flow fluctuates between laminar and
turbulent flows before it becomes fully turbulent. Most pipe flows encoun-
tered in practice are turbulent. Laminar flow is encountered when highly
viscous fluids such as oils flow in small diameter tubes or narrow passages.
For flow in a circular tube, the Reynolds number is defined as
Re 

(13–5)
where Vavg is the average flow velocity, D is the diameter of the tube, and 
n  m/r is the kinematic viscosity of the fluid.
For flow through noncircular tubes, the Reynolds number as well as the
Nusselt number, and the friction factor are based on the hydraulic dia-
meter Dh defined as (Fig. 13–4)
Dh 
(13–6)
where Ac is the cross sectional area of the tube and p is its perimeter. The
hydraulic diameter is defined such that it reduces to ordinary diameter D for
circular tubes since
Circular tubes:
Dh 

 D
It certainly is desirable to have precise values of Reynolds numbers for
laminar, transitional, and turbulent flows, but this is not the case in practice.
This is because the transition from laminar to turbulent flow also depends
on the degree of disturbance of the flow by surface roughness, pipe vibra-
tions, and the fluctuations in the flow. Under most practical conditions, the
flow in a tube is laminar for Re  2300, fully turbulent for Re  10,000,
and transitional in between. But it should be kept in mind that in many
cases the flow becomes fully turbulent for Re  4000, as discussed in the
Topic of Special Interest later in this chapter. When designing piping net-
works and determining pumping power, a conservative approach is taken
and flows with Re  4000 are assumed to be turbulent.
In transitional flow, the flow switches between laminar and turbulent
randomly (Fig. 13–5). It should be kept in mind that laminar flow can be
maintained at much higher Reynolds numbers in very smooth pipes by
avoiding flow disturbances and tube vibrations. In such carefully controlled
experiments, laminar flow has been maintained at Reynolds numbers of up
to 100,000.
4pD2/4
pD
4Ac
p
4Ac
p
Vavg D

rVavgD
m
574
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Dh =
= D
4(pD2/4)
pD
Dh =
= a
4a2
4a
Dh =
=
4ab
2(a + b)
2ab
a + b
Circular tube:
Rectangular duct:
Square duct:
a
b
D
a
a
FIGURE 13–4
The hydraulic diameter Dh  4Ac/p
is defined such that it reduces to
ordinary diameter for circular tubes.
Laminar
Turbulent
Vavg
Dye trace
Dye injection
FIGURE 13–5
In the transitional flow region of the
flow switches between laminar
and turbulent randomly.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
578
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
13–3
 THE ENTRANCE REGION
Consider a fluid entering a circular pipe at a uniform velocity. Because of
the no-slip condition, the fluid particles in the layer in contact with the sur-
face of the pipe come to a complete stop. This layer also causes the fluid
particles in the adjacent layers to slow down gradually as a result of friction.
To make up for this velocity reduction, the velocity of the fluid at the mid-
section of the pipe has to increase to keep the mass flow rate through the
pipe constant. As a result, a velocity gradient develops along the pipe.
The region of the flow in which the effects of the viscous shearing forces
caused by fluid viscosity are felt is called the velocity boundary layer or
just the boundary layer. The hypothetical boundary surface divides the
flow in a pipe into two regions: the boundary layer region, in which the
viscous effects and the velocity changes are significant, and the irrotational
(core) flow region, in which the frictional effects are negligible and the
velocity remains essentially constant in the radial direction.
The thickness of this boundary layer increases in the flow direction until
the boundary layer reaches the pipe center and thus fills the entire pipe, as
shown in Fig. 13–6. The region from the pipe inlet to the point at which the
boundary layer merges at the centerline is called the hydrodynamic
entrance region, and the length of this region is called the hydrodynamic
entry length Lh. Flow in the entrance region is called hydrodynamically
developing flow since this is the region where the velocity profile develops.
The region beyond the entrance region in which the velocity profile is fully
developed and remains unchanged is called the hydrodynamically fully
developed region. The velocity profile in the fully developed region is par-
abolic in laminar flow and somewhat flatter or fuller in turbulent flow due
to eddy motion and more vigorous mixing in radial direction.
Now consider a fluid at a uniform temperature entering a circular tube
whose surface is maintained at a different temperature. This time, the fluid
particles in the layer in contact with the surface of the tube assume the sur-
face temperature. This initiates convection heat transfer in the tube and the
development of a thermal boundary layer along the tube. The thickness of
this boundary layer also increases in the flow direction until the boundary
layer reaches the tube center and thus fills the entire tube, as shown in
Fig. 13–7.
The region of flow over which the thermal boundary layer develops and
reaches the tube center is called the thermal entrance region, and the length
Chapter 13
|
575
x
r
Hydrodynamic entrance region
Hydrodynamically fully developed region
Velocity boundary
layer
Developing velocity
profile
Fully developed
velocity profile
Irrotational (core)
flow region
Vavg
Vavg
Vavg
Vavg
Vavg
FIGURE 13–6
The development of the velocity
boundary layer in a tube. (The
developed average velocity profile is
parabolic in laminar flow, as shown,
but somewhat flatter or fuller in
turbulent flow.)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
579
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
of this region is called the thermal entry length Lt. Flow in the thermal
entrance region is called thermally developing flow since this is the region
where the temperature profile develops. The region beyond the thermal
entrance region in which the dimensionless temperature profile expressed as
(Ts  T)/(Ts  Tm) remains unchanged is called the thermally fully devel-
oped region. The region in which the flow is both hydrodynamically and
thermally developed and thus both the velocity and dimensionless tempera-
ture profiles remain unchanged is called fully developed flow. That is,
Hydrodynamically fully developed:
 0
⎯→
u u(r)
(13–7)
Thermally fully developed:
 0
(13–8)
The shear stress at the tube wall tw is related to the slope of the velocity
profile at the surface. Noting that the velocity profile remains unchanged in
the hydrodynamically fully developed region, the wall shear stress also
remains constant in that region. A similar argument can be given for the
heat transfer coefficient in the thermally fully developed region.
In a thermally fully developed region, the derivative of (Ts  T)/(Ts  Tm)
with respect to x is zero by definition, and thus (Ts  T)/(Ts  Tm) is inde-
pendent of x. Then the derivative of (Ts  T)/(Ts  Tm) with respect r must
also be independent of x. That is,

 f(x)
(13–9)
Surface heat flux can be expressed as
q·
s  hx(Ts  Tm)  k
⎯→
hx 
(13–10)
which, from Eq. 13–9, is independent of x. Thus we conclude that in the
thermally fully developed region of a tube, the local convection coefficient is
constant (does not vary with x). Therefore, both the friction (which is
related to wall shear stress) and convection coefficients remain constant in
the fully developed region of a tube.
Note that the temperature profile in the thermally fully developed region
may vary with x in the flow direction. That is, unlike the velocity profile, the
temperature profile can be different at different cross sections of the tube in
the developed region, and it usually is. However, the dimensionless tempera-
k(T/r)rR
Ts  Tm
T
rrR
(T/r)rR
Ts  Tm

r
Ts  T
Ts  TmrR

x cTs(x)  T(r, x)
Ts(x)  Tm(x) d
u(r, x)
x
576
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 13–7
The development of the
thermal boundary layer in a tube.
(The fluid in the tube is being cooled.)
Temperature profile
Thermally
fully developed region
Thermal
boundary layer
Thermal
 entrance region
x
Ti
Ts

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
580
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
ture profile defined previously remains unchanged in the thermally devel-
oped region when the temperature or heat flux at the tube surface remains
constant.
During laminar flow in a tube, the magnitude of the dimensionless Prandtl
number Pr is a measure of the relative growth of the velocity and thermal
boundary layers. For fluids with Pr 
 1, such as gases, the two boundary
layers essentially coincide with each other. For fluids with Pr  1, such as
oils, the velocity boundary layer outgrows the thermal boundary layer. As a
result, the hydrodynamic entry length is smaller than the thermal entry
length. The opposite is true for fluids with Pr  1 such as liquid metals.
Consider a fluid that is being heated (or cooled) in a tube as it flows
through it. The wall shear stress and the heat transfer coefficient are highest
at the tube inlet where the thickness of the boundary layers is smallest, and
decrease gradually to the fully developed values, as shown in Fig. 13–8.
Therefore, the pressure drop and heat flux are higher in the entrance regions
of a tube, and the effect of the entrance region is always to increase the
average friction factor and heat transfer coefficient for the entire tube. This
enhancement can be significant for short tubes but negligible for long ones.
Entry Lengths
The hydrodynamic entry length is usually taken to be the distance from the
tube entrance where the wall shear stress (and thus the friction factor)
reaches within about 2 percent of the fully developed value. In laminar
flow, the hydrodynamic and thermal entry lengths are given approximately
as [see Kays and Crawford (1993) and Shah and Bhatti (1987)]
Lh, laminar  0.05 Re D
(13–11)
Lt, laminar  0.05 Re Pr D  Pr Lh, laminar
(13–12)
For Re  20, the hydrodynamic entry length is about the size of the diame-
ter, but increases linearly with velocity. In the limiting case of Re  2300,
the hydrodynamic entry length is 115D.
In turbulent flow, the intense mixing during random fluctuations usually
overshadows the effects of molecular diffusion, and therefore the hydrody-
namic and thermal entry lengths are of about the same size and independent
of the Prandtl number. The hydrodynamic entry length for turbulent flow
can be determined from [see Bhatti and Shah (1987) and Zhi-qing (1982)]
Lh, turbulent  1.359D Re1/4
(13–13)
The entry length is much shorter in turbulent flow, as expected, and its
dependence on the Reynolds number is weaker. In many tube flows of prac-
tical interest, the entrance effects become insignificant beyond a tube length
of 10 diameters, and the hydrodynamic and thermal entry lengths are
approximately taken to be
Lh, turbulent  Lt, turbulent  10D
(13–14)
The variation of local Nusselt number along a tube in turbulent flow for
both uniform surface temperature and uniform surface heat flux is given in
Chapter 13
|
577
Thermal boundary layer
Fully
developed
region
Velocity boundary layer
Lh
x
hx
h
or
f
fx
Lt
Entrance
region
Fully developed
flow
FIGURE 13–8
Variation of the friction
factor and the convection
heat transfer coefficient in the flow
direction for flow in a tube (Pr . 1).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
581
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Fig. 13–9 for the range of Reynolds numbers encountered in heat transfer
equipment. We make these important observations from this figure:
• The Nusselt numbers and thus the convection heat transfer coefficients
are much higher in the entrance region.
• The Nusselt number reaches a constant value at a distance of less than
10 diameters, and thus the flow can be assumed to be fully developed for
x  10D.
• The Nusselt numbers for the uniform surface temperature and uniform
surface heat flux conditions are identical in the fully developed regions,
and nearly identical in the entrance regions. Therefore, Nusselt number
is insensitive to the type of thermal boundary condition, and the turbulent
flow correlations can be used for either type of boundary condition.
Precise correlations for the friction and heat transfer coefficients for the
entrance regions are available in the literature. However, the tubes used in
practice in forced convection are usually several times the length of either
entrance region, and thus the flow through the tubes is often assumed to be
fully developed for the entire length of the tube. This simplistic approach
gives reasonable results for the rate of heat transfer for long tubes and con-
servative results for short ones.
13–4
 GENERAL THERMAL ANALYSIS
In the absence of any work interactions (such as electric resistance heating),
the conservation of energy equation for the steady flow of a fluid in a tube
can be expressed as (Fig. 13–10)
Q·  m· cp(Te  Ti)
(W)
(13–15)
where Ti and Te are the mean fluid temperatures at the inlet and exit of the
tube, respectively, and Q· is the rate of heat transfer to or from the fluid.
578
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 13–9
Variation of local Nusselt number
along a tube in turbulent flow for both
uniform surface temperature and
uniform surface heat flux
[Deissler (1953)].
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
2
x/D
4
6
8
10
12
14
16
18
20
D
Nux, T (Ts = constant)
Nux, H ( s = constant)
Nux, T Nux, H
Re = 2 
 105
6 
 104
3 
 104
105
q·
104
Te
Ti
.
Q
cp(Te – Ti)
m
Energy balance:
=
mcpTe
·
mcpTi
·
Q·
·
FIGURE 13–10
The heat transfer to a fluid flowing in
a tube is equal to the increase in
the energy of the fluid.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
582
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Note that the temperature of a fluid flowing in a tube remains constant in
the absence of any energy interactions through the wall of the tube.
The thermal conditions at the surface can usually be approximated with
reasonable accuracy to be constant surface temperature (Ts  constant) or
constant surface heat flux (q·
s  constant). For example, the constant surface
temperature condition is realized when a phase change process such as boil-
ing or condensation occurs at the outer surface of a tube. The constant sur-
face heat flux condition is realized when the tube is subjected to radiation or
electric resistance heating uniformly from all directions.
Surface heat flux is expressed as
q·
s  hx (Ts  Tm)
(W/m2)
(13–16)
where hx is the local heat transfer coefficient and Ts and Tm are the surface
and the mean fluid temperatures at that location. Note that the mean fluid
temperature Tm of a fluid flowing in a tube must change during heating or
cooling. Therefore, when hx  h  constant, the surface temperature Ts
must change when q·
s  constant, and the surface heat flux q·
s must change
when Ts  constant. Thus we may have either Ts  constant or q·
s  con-
stant at the surface of a tube, but not both. Next we consider convection heat
transfer for these two common cases.
Constant Surface Heat Flux (q·
s  constant)
In the case of q·
s  constant, the rate of heat transfer can also be expressed as
Q·  q·
s As  m· cp(Te  Ti)
(W)
(13–17)
Then the mean fluid temperature at the tube exit becomes
Te  Ti 
(13–18)
Note that the mean fluid temperature increases linearly in the flow direction
in the case of constant surface heat flux, since the surface area increases lin-
early in the flow direction (As is equal to the perimeter, which is constant,
times the tube length).
The surface temperature in the case of constant surface heat flux q·
s can be
determined from
q·
s  h(Ts  Tm)
⎯→
Ts  Tm 
(13–19)
In the fully developed region, the surface temperature Ts will also increase
linearly in the flow direction since h is constant and thus Ts  Tm  con-
stant (Fig. 13–11). Of course this is true when the fluid properties remain
constant during flow.
The slope of the mean fluid temperature Tm on a T-x diagram can be
determined by applying the steady-flow energy balance to a tube slice of
thickness dx shown in Fig. 13–12. It gives
m· cp dTm  q·
s(pdx)
⎯→

 constant
(13–20)
where p is the perimeter of the tube.
q#
s p
m# cp
dTm
dx
q#
s
h
q#
s As
m# cp
Chapter 13
|
579
ΔT = Ts – Tm =
Te
Ti
L
x
T Entrance
region
Fully developed
region
Ti
0
Ts 
Te
Tm
––h
qs = constant
·
qs·
FIGURE 13–11
Variation of the tube surface
and the mean fluid temperatures
along the tube for the case of
constant surface heat flux.
cp(Tm + dTm)
cpTm
.m
= h(Ts – Tm)dA
d
dx
Tm
Tm + dTm
Ts
m·
Q·
FIGURE 13–12
Energy interactions for a differential
control volume in a tube.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
583
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Noting that both q·
s and h are constants, the differentiation of Eq. 13–19
with respect to x gives

(13–21)
Also, the requirement that the dimensionless temperature profile remains
unchanged in the fully developed region gives
 0
⎯→
 0
⎯→
(13–22)
since Ts  Tm  constant. Combining Eqs. 13–20, 13–21, and 13–22 gives

 constant
(13–23)
Then we conclude that in fully developed flow in a tube subjected to constant
surface heat flux, the temperature gradient is independent of x and thus the
shape of the temperature profile does not change along the tube (Fig. 13–13).
For a circular tube, p  2pR and m·  rVavg Ac  rVavg(pR2), and Eq.
13–23 becomes
Circular tube:

 constant
(13–24)
where Vavg is the mean velocity of the fluid.
Constant Surface Temperature (Ts  constant)
From Newton’s law of cooling, the rate of heat transfer to or from a fluid
flowing in a tube can be expressed as
Q·  hAsTavg  hAs(Ts  Tm)avg
(W)
(13–25)
where h is the average convection heat transfer coefficient, As is the heat
transfer surface area (it is equal to pDL for a circular pipe of length L), and
Tavg is some appropriate average temperature difference between the fluid
and the surface. Below we discuss two suitable ways of expressing Tavg.
In the constant surface temperature (Ts  constant) case, Tavg can be
expressed approximately by the arithmetic mean temperature difference
Tam as
Tavg  Tam 

 Ts 
 Ts  Tb
(13–26)
where Tb  (Ti  Te)/2 is the bulk mean fluid temperature, which is the arith-
metic average of the mean fluid temperatures at the inlet and the exit of
the tube.
Note that the arithmetic mean temperature difference Tam is simply the
average of the temperature differences between the surface and the fluid at
the inlet and the exit of the tube. Inherent in this definition is the assump-
tion that the mean fluid temperature varies linearly along the tube, which is
hardly ever the case when Ts  constant. This simple approximation often
Ti  Te
2
(Ts  Ti)  (Ts  Te)
2
Ti  Te
2
2q#
s
rVavgcp R
T
x  dTs
dx  dTm
dx
q#
s p
m# cp
T
x  dTs
dx  dTm
dx
T
x  dTs
dx
1
Ts  Tm
Ts
x  T
x

x
Ts  T
Ts  Tm
dTs
dx
dTm
dx
580
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
T(r)
T(r)
Ts1
Ts2
x1
x
x2
qs·
FIGURE 13–13
The shape of the temperature
profile remains unchanged in the
fully developed region of a tube
subjected to constant surface heat flux.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
584
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
gives acceptable results, but not always. Therefore, we need a better way to
evaluate Tavg.
Consider the heating of a fluid in a tube of constant cross section whose
inner surface is maintained at a constant temperature of Ts. We know that
the mean temperature of the fluid Tm increases in the flow direction as a
result of heat transfer. The energy balance on a differential control volume
shown in Fig. 13–12 gives
m· cp dTm  h(Ts  Tm)dAs
(13–27)
That is, the increase in the energy of the fluid (represented by an increase in
its mean temperature by dTm) is equal to the heat transferred to the fluid from
the tube surface by convection. Noting that the differential surface area is
dAs  pdx, where p is the perimeter of the tube, and that dTm  d(Ts  Tm),
since Ts is constant, the relation above can be rearranged as
 
dx
(13–28)
Integrating from x  0 (tube inlet where Tm  Ti) to x  L (tube exit where
Tm  Te) gives
ln
 
(13–29)
where As  pL is the surface area of the tube and h is the constant average
convection heat transfer coefficient. Taking the exponential of both sides
and solving for Te gives the following relation which is very useful for the
determination of the mean fluid temperature at the tube exit:
Te  Ts  (Ts  Ti) exp(hAs /m· cp)
(13–30)
This relation can also be used to determine the mean fluid temperature
Tm(x) at any x by replacing As  pL by px.
Note that the temperature difference between the fluid and the surface 
decays exponentially in the flow direction, and the rate of decay depends on
the magnitude of the exponent hAs/m· cp, as shown in Fig. 13–14. This di-
mensionless parameter is called the number of transfer units, denoted by
NTU, and is a measure of the effectiveness of the heat transfer systems. For
NTU  5, the exit temperature of the fluid becomes almost equal to the sur-
face temperature, Te  Ts (Fig. 13–15). Noting that the fluid temperature
can approach the surface temperature but cannot cross it, an NTU of about 
5 indicates that the limit is reached for heat transfer, and the heat transfer
does not increase no matter how much we extend the length of the tube. A
small value of NTU, on the other hand, indicates more opportunities for
heat transfer, and the heat transfer continues to increase as the tube length is
increased. A large NTU and thus a large heat transfer surface area (which
means a large tube) may be desirable from a heat transfer point of view, but
it may be unacceptable from an economic point of view. The selection of
heat transfer equipment usually reflects a compromise between heat transfer
performance and cost.
hAs
m# cp
Ts  Te
Ts  Ti
hp
m# cp
d(Ts  Tm)
Ts  Tm
Chapter 13
|
581
L
x
Ts = constant
Ts = constant
Ti
Ts
T
(Tm approaches Ts asymptotically)
0
ΔTi
ΔTe
ΔT = Ts – Tm
Tm
Te
Ti
FIGURE 13–14
The variation of the mean fluid
temperature along the tube for the
case of constant temperature.
Te
As,h
Ts  = 100°C
,cp
NTU = hAs /
cp
Te , °C
0.01
0.05
0.10
0.50
1.00
5.00
10.00
20.8
23.9
27.6
51.5
70.6
99.5
100.0
Ti =
20°C
m·
m·
FIGURE 13–15
An NTU greater than 5 indicates that
the fluid flowing in a tube will reach
the surface temperature at the exit
regardless of the inlet temperature.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
585
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Solving Eq. 13–29 for m·cp gives
m· cp  
(13–31)
Substituting this into Eq. 13–15, we obtain
Q·  hAsTln
(13–32)
where
Tln 

(13–33)
is the logarithmic mean temperature difference. Note that Ti  Ts  Ti
and Te  Ts  Te are the temperature differences between the surface and
the fluid at the inlet and the exit of the tube, respectively. This Tln relation
appears to be prone to misuse, but it is practically fail-safe, since using Ti in
place of Te and vice versa in the numerator and/or the denominator will, at
most, affect the sign, not the magnitude. Also, it can be used for both heat-
ing (Ts  Ti and Te) and cooling (Ts  Ti and Te) of a fluid in a tube.
The logarithmic mean temperature difference Tln is obtained by tracing
the actual temperature profile of the fluid along the tube, and is an exact
representation of the average temperature difference between the fluid and
the surface. It truly reflects the exponential decay of the local temperature
difference. When Te differs from Ti by no more than 40 percent, the error
in using the arithmetic mean temperature difference is less than 1 percent.
But the error increases to undesirable levels when Te differs from Ti by
greater amounts. Therefore, we should always use the logarithmic mean
temperature difference when determining the convection heat transfer in a
tube whose surface is maintained at a constant temperature Ts.
Te  Ti
ln(Te /Ti)
Ti  Te
ln[(Ts  Te)/(Ts  Ti)]
hAs
ln[(Ts  Te)/(Ts  Ti)]
582
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 13–1
Heating of Water in a Tube by Steam
Water enters a 2.5-cm-internal-diameter thin copper tube of a heat
exchanger at 15°C at a rate of 0.3 kg/s, and is heated by steam condensing
outside at 120°C. If the average heat transfer coefficient is 800 W/m2  °C,
determine the length of the tube required in order to heat the water to
115°C (Fig. 13–16).
Solution
Water is heated by steam in a circular tube. The tube length
required to heat the water to a specified temperature is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Fluid properties are con-
stant. 3 The convection heat transfer coefficient is constant. 4 The conduc-
tion resistance of copper tube is negligible so that the inner surface
temperature of the tube is equal to the condensation temperature of steam.
Properties
The specific heat of water at the bulk mean temperature of
(15  115)/2  65°C is 4187 J/kg  °C. The heat of condensation of steam
at 120°C is 2203 kJ/kg (Table A–15).
Analysis
Knowing the inlet and exit temperatures of water, the rate of heat
transfer is determined to be
Q·  m· cp(Te  Ti)  (0.3 kg/s)(4.187 kJ/kg  °C)(115°C  15°C)
 125.6 kW
115°C
Water
15°C
0.3 kg/s
Steam
Ts  = 120°C
D = 2.5 cm
FIGURE 13–16
Schematic for Example 13–1.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
586
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
13–5
 LAMINAR FLOW IN TUBES
We mentioned in Section 13–2 that flow in tubes is laminar for Re  2300,
and that the flow is fully developed if the tube is sufficiently long (relative
to the entry length) so that the entrance effects are negligible. In this section
we consider the steady laminar flow of an incompressible fluid with con-
stant properties in the fully developed region of a straight circular tube. We
obtain the momentum equation by applying a force balance to a differential
volume element, and obtain the velocity profile by solving it. Then we use it
to obtain a relation for the friction factor. An important aspect of the analy-
sis here is that it is one of the few available for viscous flow.
In fully developed laminar flow, each fluid particle moves at a constant
axial velocity along a streamline and the velocity profile u(r) remains
unchanged in the flow direction. There is no motion in the radial direction,
and thus the velocity component in the direction normal to flow is every-
where zero. There is no acceleration since the flow is steady and fully
developed.
Now consider a ring-shaped differential volume element of radius r, thick-
ness dr, and length dx oriented coaxially with the tube, as shown in Fig.
13–17. The volume element involves only pressure and viscous effects and
thus the pressure and shear forces must balance each other. The pressure
force acting on a submerged plane surface is the product of the pressure at
the centroid of the surface and the surface area. A force balance on the vol-
ume element in the flow direction gives
(13–34)
(2pr dr P)x  (2pr dr P)xdx  (2pr dx t)r  (2pr dx t)rdr  0
Chapter 13
|
583
The logarithmic mean temperature difference is
Te  Ts  Te  120°C  115°C  5°C
Ti  Ts  Ti  120°C  15°C  105°C
Tln 

 32.85°C
The heat transfer surface area is
Q·  hAsTln
⎯→
As 

 4.78 m2
Then the required tube length becomes
As  pDL
⎯→
L 

 61 m
Discussion
The bulk mean temperature of water during this heating process
is 65°C, and thus the arithmetic mean temperature difference is Tam 
120  65  55°C. Using Tam instead of Tln would give L  36 m, which
is grossly in error. This shows the importance of using the logarithmic mean
temperature in calculations.
4.78 m2
p(0.025 m)
As
pD
125.6 kW
(0.8 kW/m2 · °C)(32.85°C)
Q·
hTln
5  105
ln(5/105)
Te  Ti
ln(Te /Ti)
u(r)
umax
x
dx
dr
r
R
Px
Px + dx
tr
tr+ dr
FIGURE 13–17
Free-body diagram of a ring-shaped
differential fluid element of radius r,
thickness dr, and length dx oriented
coaxially with a horizontal tube in
fully developed laminar flow.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
587
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
which indicates that in fully developed flow in a horizontal tube, the 
viscous and pressure forces balance each other. Dividing by 2pdrdx and
rearranging,
(13–35)
Taking the limit as dr, dx →0 gives
(13–36)
Substituting t  m(du/dr) and taking m  constant gives the desired
equation,
(13–37)
The quantity du/dr is negative in pipe flow, and the negative sign is included
to obtain positive values for t. (Or, du/dr  du/dy since y  R  r.) The
left side of Eq. 13–37 is a function of r, and the right side is a function of x.
The equality must hold for any value of r and x, and an equality of the form
f(r)  g(x) can be satisfied only if both f(r) and g(x) are equal to the same
constant. Thus we conclude that dP/dx  constant. This can be verified by
writing a force balance on a volume element of radius R and thickness dx (a
slice of the tube), which gives (Fig. 13–18)
Here tw is constant since the viscosity and the velocity profile are constants
in the fully developed region. Therefore, dP/dx  constant.
Equation 13–37 can be solved by rearranging and integrating it twice to
give
(13–38)
The velocity profile u(r) is obtained by applying the boundary conditions
u/r  0 at r  0 (because of symmetry about the centerline) and u  0 at
r  R (the no-slip condition at the tube surface). We get
(13–39)
Therefore, the velocity profile in fully developed laminar flow in a tube is
parabolic with a maximum at the centerline and minimum (zero) at the tube
wall. Also, the axial velocity u is positive for any r, and thus the axial pres-
sure gradient dP/dx must be negative (i.e., pressure must decrease in the
flow direction because of viscous effects).
The average velocity is determined from its definition by substituting Eq.
13–39 into Eq. 13–2, and performing the integration. It gives
(13–40)
Vavg  2
R2 
R
0
u(r)r dr   2
R2 
R
0
R2
4m adP
dxb a1  r 2
R2br dr   R2
8m adP
dxb
u(r)   R2
4m adP
dxb a1  r 2
R2b
u(r)  1
4m adP
dxb  C1 ln r  C2
dP
dx  2tw
R
m
r
d
dr ar du
drb  dP
dx
r dP
dx  d(rt)
dr
 0
r Pxdx  Px
dx
 (rt)rdr  (rt)r
dr
 0
584
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
tw
R2P – pR2(P  dP) – 2pR dx tw = 0
–
=
dP
dx
R
r
x
2pR dx tw
pR2(P  dP)
p
2
pR2P
R
Force balance:
Simplifying:
dx
FIGURE 13–18
Free-body diagram of a fluid disk
element of radius R and length dx in
fully developed laminar flow in a
horizontal tube.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
588
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Combining the last two equations, the velocity profile is rewritten as
(13–41)
This is a convenient form for the velocity profile since Vavg can be deter-
mined easily from the flow rate information.
The maximum velocity occurs at the centerline and is determined from
Eq. 13–41 by substituting r  0,
(13–42)
Therefore, the average velocity in fully developed laminar pipe flow is one-
half of the maximum velocity.
Pressure Drop
A quantity of interest in the analysis of pipe flow is the pressure drop P
since it is directly related to the power requirements of the fan or pump to
maintain flow. We note that dP/dx  constant, and integrating from x  x1
where the pressure is P1 to x  x1  L where the pressure is P2 gives
(13–43)
Substituting Eq. 13–43 into the Vavg expression in Eq. 13–40, the pressure
drop can be expressed as
Laminar flow:
(13–44)
The symbol  is typically used to indicate the difference between the final
and initial values, like y  y2  y1. But in fluid flow, P is used to desig-
nate pressure drop, and thus it is P1  P2. A pressure drop due to viscous
effects represents an irreversible pressure loss, and it is called pressure loss
PL to emphasize that it is a loss (just like the head loss hL, which is propor-
tional to it).
Note from Eq. 13–44 that the pressure drop is proportional to the viscosity
m of the fluid, and P would be zero if there were no friction. Therefore,
the drop of pressure from P1 to P2 in this case is due entirely to viscous
effects, and Eq. 13–44 represents the pressure loss PL when a fluid of
viscosity m flows through a pipe of constant diameter D and length L at
average velocity Vavg.
In practice, it is found convenient to express the pressure loss for all types
of fully developed internal flows (laminar or turbulent flows, circular or non-
circular pipes, smooth or rough surfaces, horizontal or inclined pipes) as
(Fig. 13–19)
Pressure loss:
(13–45)
where rV 2
avg/2 is the dynamic pressure and f is the Darcy friction factor,
f  8tw
rV 2
avg
PL  f L
D
rV 2
avg
2
P  P1  P2 
8mLVavg
R2

32mLVavg
D2
dP
dx  P2  P1
L
umax  2Vavg
u(r)  2Vavga1  r 2
R2b
Chapter 13
|
585
Pressure loss:  ΔPL = f L
Vavg
D
2
2
1
2g
Head loss: hL
 =
 
 
=          f L
 ΔPL
D
rg
D
L
 ΔPL
Vavg
rVavg
2
2
FIGURE 13–19
The relation for pressure loss (and
head loss) is one of the most general
relations in fluid mechanics, and it is
valid for laminar or turbulent flows,
circular or noncircular tubes, and
pipes with smooth or rough surfaces.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
589
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
It is also called the Darcy–Weisbach friction factor, named after the
Frenchman Henry Darcy (1803–1858) and the German Julius Weisbach
(1806–1871), the two engineers who provided the greatest contribution in
its development. It should not be confused with the friction coefficient Cf
[also called the Fanning friction factor, named after the American engineer
John Fanning (1837–1911)], which is defined as Cf  2tw/(rV 2
avg)  f/4.
Setting Eqs. 13–44 and 13–45 equal to each other and solving for f gives
the friction factor for fully developed laminar flow in a circular tube,
Circular tube, laminar:
(13–46)
This equation shows that in laminar flow, the friction factor is a function of
the Reynolds number only and is independent of the roughness of the pipe
surface.
In the analysis of piping systems, pressure losses are commonly expressed
in terms of the equivalent fluid column height, called the head loss hL. Not-
ing from fluid statics that P  rgh and thus a pressure difference of P
corresponds to a fluid height of h  P/rg, the pipe head loss is obtained
by dividing PL by rg to give
The head loss hL represents the additional height that the fluid needs to be
raised by a pump in order to overcome the frictional losses in the pipe. The
head loss is caused by viscosity, and it is directly related to the wall shear
stress. Equation 13–45 is valid for both laminar and turbulent flows in both
circular and noncircular tubes, but Eq. 13–46 is valid only for fully devel-
oped laminar flow in circular pipes.
Once the pressure loss (or head loss) is known, the required pumping
power to overcome the pressure loss is determined from
(13–47)
where V
.
is the volume flow rate and m. is the mass flow rate.
The average velocity for laminar flow in a horizontal tube is, from Eq.
13–44,
Horizontal tube:
Then the volume flow rate for laminar flow through a horizontal tube of
diameter D and length L becomes
(13–48)
This equation is known as Poiseuille’s law, and this flow is called Hagen–
Poiseuille flow in honor of the works of G. Hagen (1797–1884) and J.
Poiseuille (1799–1869) on the subject. Note from Eq. 13–48 that for a speci-
fied flow rate, the pressure drop and thus the required pumping power is pro-
portional to the length of the pipe and the viscosity of the fluid, but it is
inversely proportional to the fourth power of the radius (or diameter) of the
pipe. Therefore, the pumping power requirement for a piping system can be
reduced by a factor of 16 by doubling the tube diameter (Fig. 13–20). Of
V
#
 Vavg Ac  (P1  P2)R2
8mL
pR2  (P1  P2)pD4
128mL
 P pD4
128mL
Vavg  (P1  P2)R2
8mL
 (P1  P2)D2
32mL
 P D2
32mL
W
#
pump, L  V# PL  V# rghL  m# ghL
hL  PL
rg  f L
D
V 2
avg
2g
f  64m
rDVavg
 64
Re
586
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
2D
Wpump = 16 hp
 
Wpump = 1 hp
/4
 
D
Vavg
Vavg
.
.
FIGURE 13–20
The pumping power requirement for 
a laminar flow piping system can be
reduced by a factor of 16 by doubling
the tube diameter.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
590
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
course the benefits of the reduction in the energy costs must be weighed
against the increased cost of construction due to using a larger-diameter tube.
The pressure drop P equals the pressure loss PL in the case of a hor-
izontal tube, but this is not the case for inclined pipes or pipes with vari-
able cross-sectional area because of the changes in elevation and velocity.
Temperature Profile and the Nusselt Number
In the previous analysis, we have obtained the velocity profile for fully
developed flow in a circular tube from a force balance applied on a volume
element, and determined the friction factor and the pressure drop. Below we
obtain the energy equation by applying the energy balance on a differential
volume element, and solve it to obtain the temperature profile for the con-
stant surface temperature and the constant surface heat flux cases.
Reconsider steady laminar flow of a fluid in a circular tube of radius R.
The fluid properties r, k, and cp are constant, and the work done by viscous
forces is negligible. The fluid flows along the x-axis with velocity u. The
flow is fully developed so that u is independent of x and thus u  u(r). Not-
ing that energy is transferred by mass in the x-direction, and by conduction
in the r-direction (heat conduction in the x-direction is assumed to be negli-
gible), the steady-flow energy balance for a cylindrical shell element of
thickness dr and length dx can be expressed as (Fig. 13–21)
m· cpTx  m· cpTx  dx  Q·
r  Q·
r  dr  0
(13–49)
where m·  ruAc  ru(2prdr). Substituting and dividing by 2prdrdx gives,
after rearranging,
rcpu
 
(13–50)
or
u
 
(13–51)
But

k2prdx
 2pkdx
(13–52)
Substituting and using a  k/rcp gives
u

(13–53)
which states that the rate of net energy transfer to the control volume by
mass flow is equal to the net rate of heat conduction in the radial direction.
Constant Surface Heat Flux
For fully developed flow in a circular tube subjected to constant surface
heat flux, we have, from Eq. 13–24,

 constant
(13–54)
2q#
s
rVavgcpR
T
x  dTs
dx  dTm
dx
a
r

dr ar T
r b
T
x

rr T
r
T
r

r
Q·
r
Q·
r
1
2rcpprdx
T
x
Q
#
rdr  Q
#
r
dr
1
2prdx
Txdx  Tx
dx
Chapter 13
|
587
dx
dr
r
mcpTx  dx
Qr  dr
Qr
mcpTx
.
.
.
.
FIGURE 13–21
The differential volume element
used in the derivation of
energy balance relation.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
591
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
If heat conduction in the x-direction were considered in the derivation of
Eq. 13–53, it would give an additional term a2T/x2, which would be equal
to zero since T/x  constant and thus T  T(r). Therefore, the assump-
tion that there is no axial heat conduction is satisfied exactly in this case.
Substituting Eq. 13–54 and the relation for velocity profile (Eq. 13–41)
into Eq. 13–53 gives
(13–55)
which is a second-order ordinary differential equation. Its general solution is
obtained by separating the variables and integrating twice to be
T 
 C1r  C2
(13–56)
The desired solution to the problem is obtained by applying the boundary
conditions T/x  0 at r  0 (because of symmetry) and T  Ts at r  R.
We get
T  Ts 
(13–57)
The bulk mean temperature Tm is determined by substituting the velocity
and temperature profile relations (Eqs. 13–41 and 13–57) into Eq. 13–4 and
performing the integration. It gives
Tm  Ts 
(13–58)
Combining this relation with q·
s  h(Ts  Tm) gives
h 
(13–59)
or
Circular tube, laminar (q·
s  constant):
Nu 
 4.36
(13–60)
Therefore, for fully developed laminar flow in a circular tube subjected to
constant surface heat flux, the Nusselt number is a constant. There is no
dependence on the Reynolds or the Prandtl numbers.
Constant Surface Temperature
A similar analysis can be performed for fully developed laminar flow in a
circular tube for the case of constant surface temperature Ts. The solution
procedure in this case is more complex as it requires iterations, but the Nus-
selt number relation obtained is equally simple (Fig. 13–22):
Circular tube, laminar (Ts  constant):
Nu 
 3.66
(13–61)
hD
k
hD
k
24
11
k
R  48
11
k
D  4.36 k
D
11
24
q#
s R
k
q·s R
k 
3
4  r 2
R2  r 4
4R4
q#
s
kR ar 2  r4
4R2b
4q·s
kR 1  r 2
R2  1
r
d
drr dT
dr
588
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Ts = constant
f = 64
–––
Re
D
Nu = 3.66
u (r)
Fully developed
laminar flow
FIGURE 13–22
In laminar flow in a tube with
constant surface temperature,
both the friction factor and
the heat transfer coefficient
remain constant in the fully
developed region.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
592
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
b
a
The thermal conductivity k for use in the Nu relations above should be eval-
uated at the bulk mean fluid temperature, which is the arithmetic average of
the mean fluid temperatures at the inlet and the exit of the tube. For laminar
flow, the effect of surface roughness on the friction factor and the heat
transfer coefficient is negligible.
Laminar Flow in Noncircular Tubes
The friction factor f and the Nusselt number relations are given in Table 13–1
for fully developed laminar flow in tubes of various cross sections. The
Reynolds and Nusselt numbers for flow in these tubes are based on the
hydraulic diameter Dh  4Ac /p, where Ac is the cross sectional area of the
tube and p is its perimeter. Once the Nusselt number is available, the convec-
tion heat transfer coefficient is determined from h  kNu/Dh.
Chapter 13
|
589
D
b
a
u
TABLE 13–1
Nusselt number and friction factor for fully developed laminar flow in tubes of
various cross sections (Dh  4Ac /p, Re  VavgDh/n, and Nu  hDh/k)
Nusselt Number
a/b
Friction Factor 
Tube Geometry
or u°
Ts  Const.
q·
s  Const.
f
Circle
—
3.66
4.36
64.00/Re
Rectangle
a/b
1
2.98
3.61
56.92/Re
2
3.39
4.12
62.20/Re
3
3.96
4.79
68.36/Re
4
4.44
5.33
72.92/Re
6
5.14
6.05
78.80/Re
8
5.60
6.49
82.32/Re

7.54
8.24
96.00/Re
Ellipse
a/b
1
3.66
4.36
64.00/Re
2
3.74
4.56
67.28/Re
4
3.79
4.88
72.96/Re
8
3.72
5.09
76.60/Re
16
3.65
5.18
78.16/Re
Isosceles Triangle
u
10°
1.61
2.45
50.80/Re
30°
2.26
2.91
52.28/Re
60°
2.47
3.11
53.32/Re
90°
2.34
2.98
52.60/Re
120°
2.00
2.68
50.96/Re

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
593
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Developing Laminar Flow in the Entrance Region
For a circular tube of length L subjected to constant surface temperature, the
average Nusselt number for the thermal entrance region can be determined
from (Edwards et al., 1979)
Entry region, laminar:
Nu  3.66 
(13–62)
Note that the average Nusselt number is larger at the entrance region, as
expected, and it approaches asymptotically to the fully developed value of
3.66 as L →. This relation assumes that the flow is hydrodynamically
developed when the fluid enters the heating section, but it can also be used
approximately for flow developing hydrodynamically.
When the difference between the surface and the fluid temperatures is
large, it may be necessary to account for the variation of viscosity with tem-
perature.
The average Nusselt number for developing laminar flow in a circular
tube in that case can be determined from [Sieder and Tate (1936)]
Nu  1.86
(13–63)
All properties are evaluated at the bulk mean fluid temperature, except for
ms, which is evaluated at the surface temperature.
The average Nusselt number for the thermal entrance region of flow
between isothermal parallel plates of length L is expressed as (Edwards
et al., 1979)
Entry region, laminar:
Nu  7.54 
(13–64)
where Dh is the hydraulic diameter, which is twice the spacing of the plates.
This relation can be used for Re  2800.
0.03 (Dh /L) Re Pr
1  0.016[(Dh /L) Re Pr]2/3
aRe Pr D
L
b
1/3
amb
msb
0.14
0.065 (D/L) Re Pr
1  0.04[(D/L) Re Pr]2/3
590
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 13–2
Pressure Drop in a Tube
Water at 40°F (r  62.42 lbm/ft3 and m  1.038 
 103 lbm/ft  s) is flow-
ing in a 0.12-in-diameter 30-ft-long horizontal tube steadily at an average
velocity of 3 ft/s (Fig. 13–23). Determine the pressure drop and the pump-
ing power requirement to overcome this pressure drop.
Solution
The average flow velocity in a tube is given. The pressure drop
and the required pumping power are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The flow is steady and incompressible. 2 The entrance
effects are negligible, and thus the flow is fully developed. 3 The tube
involves no components such as bends, valves, and connectors.
Properties
The density and dynamic viscosity of water are given to be r 
62.42 lbm/ft3 and m  1.038 
 103 lbm/ft  s.
Analysis
First we need to determine the flow regime. The Reynolds number
is
Re 

 1803
(62.42 lbm/ft3)(3 ft/s)(0.12/12 ft)
1.038 
 103 lbm/ft  s
rVavg D
m
3 ft/s
30 ft
0.12 in
FIGURE 13–23
Schematic for Example 13–2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
594
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 13
|
591
which is less than 2300. Therefore, the flow is laminar. Then the friction
factor and the pressure drop become
f 
 0.0355
P  f
 0.0355
 930 lbf/ft2  6.46 psi
The volume flow rate and the pumping power requirements are
V·  Vavg Ac  Vavg (pD2/4)  (3 ft/s)[p(0.01 ft)2/4]  0.000236 ft3/s
W·
pump  V·P  (0.000236 ft3/s)(930 lbf/ft2)
 0.30 W
Therefore, mechanical power input in the amount of 0.30 W is needed to
overcome the frictional losses in the flow due to viscosity.
a
1 W
0.73756 lbf  ft/sb

1 lbf
32.174 lbm · ft/s2
(62.42 lbm/ft3)(3 ft/s)2
2
30 ft
0.01 ft
L
D
rV 2
avg
2
64
Re  64
1803
EXAMPLE 13–3
Flow of Oil in a Pipeline through a Lake
Consider the flow of oil at 20°C in a 30-cm-diameter pipeline at an average
velocity of 2 m/s (Fig. 13–24). A 200-m-long section of the horizontal
pipeline passes through icy waters of a lake at 0°C. Measurements indicate
that the surface temperature of the pipe is very nearly 0°C. Disregarding the
thermal resistance of the pipe material, determine (a) the temperature of the
oil when the pipe leaves the lake, (b) the rate of heat transfer from the oil,
and (c) the pumping power required to overcome the pressure losses and to
maintain the flow of the oil in the pipe.
Solution
Oil flows in a pipeline that passes through icy waters of a lake at
0°C. The exit temperature of the oil, the rate of heat loss, and the pumping
power needed to overcome pressure losses are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The surface temperature
of the pipe is very nearly 0°C. 3 The thermal resistance of the pipe is negli-
gible. 4 The inner surfaces of the pipeline are smooth. 5 The flow is hydro-
dynamically developed when the pipeline reaches the lake.
Properties
We do not know the exit temperature of the oil, and thus we can-
not determine the bulk mean temperature, which is the temperature at which
the properties of oil are to be evaluated. The mean temperature of the oil at
the inlet is 20°C, and we expect this temperature to drop somewhat as a
result of heat loss to the icy waters of the lake. We evaluate the properties of
the oil at the inlet temperature, but we will repeat the calculations, if neces-
sary, using properties at the evaluated bulk mean temperature. At 20°C we
read (Table A–19)
r  888.1 kg/m3
n  9.429 
 104 m2/s
k  0.145 W/m  °C
cp  1880 J/kg  °C
Pr  10,863
Te
200 m
20°C
Oil
2 m/s
D = 0.3 m
Icy lake, 0°C
0°C
FIGURE 13–24
Schematic for Example 13–3.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
595
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
592
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
(a) The Reynolds number is
Re 
 636
which is less than the critical Reynolds number of 2300. Therefore, the flow
is laminar, and the thermal entry length in this case is roughly
Lt  0.05 Re Pr D  0.05 
 636 
 10,863 
 (0.3 m)  103,600 m
which is much greater than the total length of the pipe. This is typical of
fluids with high Prandtl numbers. Therefore, we assume thermally develop-
ing flow and determine the Nusselt number from
Nu 
 3.66 
 3.66 
 33.7
Note that this Nusselt number is considerably higher than the fully devel-
oped value of 3.66. Then,
h 
Nu 
(33.7)  16.3 W/m2  °C
Also,
As  pDL  p(0.3 m)(200 m)  188.5 m2
m·  rAcVavg  (888.1 kg/m3)[ p(0.3 m)2](2 m/s)  125.6 kg/s
Next we determine the exit temperature of oil,
Te  Ts  (Ts  Ti) exp (hAs /m· cp)
 0°C  [(0  20)°C] exp 
 19.74°C
Thus, the mean temperature of oil drops by a mere 0.26°C as it crosses the
lake. This makes the bulk mean oil temperature 19.87°C, which is practi-
cally identical to the inlet temperature of 20°C. Therefore, we do not need
to re-evaluate the properties.
(b) The logarithmic mean temperature difference and the rate of heat loss
from the oil are
Tln 

 19.87°C
Q·  hAs Tln  (16.3 W/m2  °C)(188.5 m2)(19.87°C)  6.11  104 W
20  19.74
ln 0  19.74
0  20
Ti  Te
ln Ts  Te
Ts  Ti
c (16.3 W/m2   °C)(188.5 m2)
(125.6 kg/s)(1881 J/kg   °C)d
1
4
0.145 W/m  C
0.3 m
k
D
0.065(0.3/200) 
 636 
 10,863
1  0.04[(0.3/200) 
 636 
 10,863]2/3
0.065 (D/L) Re Pr
1  0.04 [(D/L) Re Pr]2/3
hD
k
Vavg D
n

(2 m/s)(0.3 m)
9.429 
 104 m2/s

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
596
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
13–6
 TURBULENT FLOW IN TUBES
We mentioned earlier that flow in smooth tubes is usually fully turbulent for
Re  10,000. Turbulent flow is commonly utilized in practice because of the
higher heat transfer coefficients associated with it. Most correlations for the
friction and heat transfer coefficients in turbulent flow are based on experi-
mental studies because of the difficulty in dealing with turbulent flow theo-
retically.
For smooth tubes, the friction factor in turbulent flow can be determined
from the explicit first Petukhov equation [Petukhov (1970)] given as
Smooth tubes:
f  (0.790 ln Re  1.64)2
3000  Re  5 
 106
(13–65)
The Nusselt number in turbulent flow is related to the friction factor
through the Chilton–Colburn analogy expressed as
Nu  0.125 f RePr1/3
(13–66)
Once the friction factor is available, this equation can be used conveniently
to evaluate the Nusselt number for both smooth and rough tubes.
For fully developed turbulent flow in smooth tubes, a simple relation for
the Nusselt number can be obtained by substituting the simple power law
relation f  0.184 Re0.2 for the friction factor into Eq. 13–66. It gives
Nu  0.023 Re0.8 Pr1/3
(13–67)
which is known as the Colburn equation. The accuracy of this equation can
be improved by modifying it as
Nu  0.023 Re0.8 Pr n
(13–68)

0.7  Pr  160
Re  10,000 
Chapter 13
|
593
Therefore, the oil will lose heat at a rate of 61.1 kW as it flows through the
pipe in the icy waters of the lake. Note that Tln is identical to the arith-
metic mean temperature in this case, since Ti  Te.
(c) The laminar flow of oil is hydrodynamically developed. Therefore, the fric-
tion factor can be determined from
f 
 0.1006
Then the pressure drop in the pipe and the required pumping power become
P  f
 0.1006
 1.19 
 105 N/m2
W·
pump 

 16.8 kW
Discussion
We need a 16.8-kW pump just to overcome the friction in the
pipe as the oil flows in the 200-m-long pipe through the lake.
(125.6 kg/s)(1.19 
 105 N/m2)
888.1 kg/m3
m# P
r
200 m
0.3 m
(888.1 kg/m3)(2 m/s)2
2
L
D
rV 2
avg
2
64
Re  64
636

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
597
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where n  0.4 for heating and 0.3 for cooling of the fluid flowing through
the tube. This equation is known as the Dittus–Boelter equation [Dittus and
Boelter (1930)] and it is preferred to the Colburn equation.
The proceeding equations can be used when the temperature difference
between the fluid and wall surface is not large by evaluating all fluid prop-
erties at the bulk mean fluid temperature Tb  (Ti  Te)/2. When the varia-
tion in properties is large due to a large temperature difference, the
following equation due to Sieder and Tate (1936) can be used:
(13–69)
Here all properties are evaluated at Tb except ms, which is evaluated at Ts.
The Nusselt number relations above are fairly simple, but they may give
errors as large as 25 percent. This error can be reduced considerably to less
than 10 percent by using more complex but accurate relations such as the
second Petukhov equation expressed as
Nu 
(13–70)
The accuracy of this relation at lower Reynolds numbers is improved by
modifying it as [Gnielinski (1976)]
Nu 
(13–71)
where the friction factor f can be determined from an appropriate relation
such as the first Petukhov equation. Gnielinski’s equation should be pre-
ferred in calculations. Again properties should be evaluated at the bulk mean
fluid temperature.
The relations above are not very sensitive to the thermal conditions at the
tube surfaces and can be used for both Ts  constant and q·
s  constant
cases. Despite their simplicity, the correlations already presented give suffi-
ciently accurate results for most engineering purposes. They can also be
used to obtain rough estimates of the friction factor and the heat transfer
coefficients in the transition region.
The relations given so far do not apply to liquid metals because of
their very low Prandtl numbers. For liquid metals (0.004  Pr  0.01), the
following relations are recommended by Sleicher and Rouse (1975) for
104  Re  106:
Liquid metals, Ts  constant:
Nu  4.8  0.0156 Re0.85 Pr
(13–72)
Liquid metals, q·
s  constant:
Nu  6.3  0.0167 Re0.85 Pr
(13–73)
0.93
s
0.93
s

0.5  Pr  2000
3 
 103  Re  5 
 106
( f/8)(Re  1000) Pr
1  12.7( f/8)0.5 (Pr2/3  1)

0.5  Pr  2000
104  Re  5 
 106
( f/8) Re Pr
1.07  12.7( f/8)0.5 (Pr2/3  1)
a0.7  Pr  17,600
Re  10,000
b
Nu  0.027 Re0.8Pr1/3am
msb
0.14
594
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
598
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
where the subscript s indicates that the Prandtl number is to be evaluated at
the surface temperature.
Rough Surfaces
Any irregularity or roughness on the surface disturbs the laminar sublayer,
and affects the flow. Therefore, unlike laminar flow, the friction factor and
the convection coefficient in turbulent flow are strong functions of surface
roughness.
The friction factor in fully developed turbulent pipe flow depends on the
Reynolds number and the relative roughness e/D, which is the ratio of the
mean height of roughness of the pipe to the pipe diameter. The functional
form of this dependence cannot be obtained from a theoretical analysis, and
all available results are obtained from painstaking experiments using artifi-
cially roughened surfaces (usually by gluing sand grains of a known size on
the inner surfaces of the pipes). Most such experiments were conducted by
Prandtl’s student J. Nikuradse in 1933, followed by the works of others. The
friction factor was calculated from the measurements of the flow rate and
the pressure drop.
The experimental results obtained are presented in tabular, graphical, and
functional forms obtained by curve-fitting experimental data. In 1939, Cyril
F. Colebrook (1910–1997) combined the available data for transition and
turbulent flow in smooth as well as rough pipes into the following implicit
relation known as the Colebrook equation:
(13–74)
We note that the logarithm in Eq. 13–74 is a base 10 rather than a natural
logarithm. In 1942, the American engineer Hunter Rouse (1906–1996) veri-
fied Colebrook’s equation and produced a graphical plot of f as a function
of Re and the product 
. He also presented the laminar flow relation
and a table of commercial pipe roughness. Two years later, Lewis F. Moody
(1880–1953) redrew Rouse’s diagram into the form commonly used today.
The now famous Moody chart is given in the appendix as Fig. A–27. It
presents the Darcy friction factor for pipe flow as a function of the
Reynolds number and e/D over a wide range. It is probably one of the most
widely accepted and used charts in engineering. Although it is developed for
circular pipes, it can also be used for noncircular pipes by replacing the
diameter by the hydraulic diameter.
For smooth pipes, the agreement between the Petukhov and Colebrook
equations is very good. The friction factor is minimum for a smooth pipe
(but still not zero because of the no-slip condition), and increases with
roughness (Fig. 13–25).
Commercially available pipes differ from those used in the experiments in
that the roughness of pipes in the market is not uniform and it is difficult to
give a precise description of it. Equivalent roughness values for some com-
mercial pipes are given in Table 13–3 as well as on the Moody chart. But it
should be kept in mind that these values are for new pipes, and the relative
roughness of pipes may increase with use as a result of corrosion, scale
Re1f
1
2f
 2.0 logae/D
3.7  2.51
Re2f
b  (turbulent flow)
Chapter 13
|
595
Relative
Friction
Roughness,
Factor,
/D
f
0.0*
0.0119
0.00001
0.0119
0.0001
0.0134
0.0005
0.0172
0.001
0.0199
0.005
0.0305
0.01
0.0380
0.05
0.0716
*Smooth surface. All values are for Re  106,
and are calculated from Eq. 13–74.
FIGURE 13–25
The friction factor is
minimum for a smooth pipe
and increases with roughness.
TABLE 13–2
Standard sizes for Schedule 40
steel pipes
Nominal 
Actual Inside 
Size, in
Diameter, in
1⁄8
0.269
1⁄4
0.364
3⁄8
0.493
1⁄2
0.622
3⁄4
0.824
1
1.049
11⁄2
1.610
2
2.067
21⁄2
2.469
3
3.068
5
5.047
10
10.02

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
599
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
buildup, and precipitation. As a result, the friction factor may increase by a
factor of 5 to 10. Actual operating conditions must be considered in the
design of piping systems. Also, the Moody chart and its equivalent Cole-
brook equation involve several uncertainties (the roughness size, experimen-
tal error, curve fitting of data, etc.), and thus the results obtained should not
be treated as “exact.” It is usually considered to be accurate to 	15 percent
over the entire range in the figure.
The Colebrook equation is implicit in f, and thus the determination of the
friction factor requires some iteration unless an equation solver such as EES
is used. An approximate explicit relation for f was given by S. E. Haaland in
1983 as
(13–75)
The results obtained from this relation are within 2 percent of those obtained
from the Colebrook equation. If more accurate results are desired, Eq. 13–75
can be used as a good first guess in a Newton iteration when using a program-
mable calculator or a spreadsheet to solve for f with Eq. 13–74.
In turbulent flow, wall roughness increases the heat transfer coefficient h
by a factor of 2 or more [Dipprey and Sabersky (1963)]. The convection
heat transfer coefficient for rough tubes can be calculated approximately
from the Nusselt number relations such as Eq. 13–71 by using the friction
factor determined from the Moody chart or the Colebrook equation. How-
ever, this approach is not very accurate since there is no further increase in
h with f for f  4fsmooth [Norris (1970)] and correlations developed specifi-
cally for rough tubes should be used when more accuracy is desired.
Developing Turbulent Flow in the Entrance Region
The entry lengths for turbulent flow are typically short, often just 10 tube
diameters long, and thus the Nusselt number determined for fully developed
turbulent flow can be used approximately for the entire tube. This simple
approach gives reasonable results for pressure drop and heat transfer for
long tubes and conservative results for short ones. Correlations for the fric-
tion and heat transfer coefficients for the entrance regions are available in
the literature for better accuracy.
Turbulent Flow in Noncircular Tubes
The velocity and temperature profiles in turbulent flow are nearly straight
lines in the core region, and any significant velocity and temperature gradi-
ents occur in the viscous sublayer (Fig. 13–26). Despite the small thickness
of viscous sublayer (usually much less than 1 percent of the pipe diameter),
the characteristics of the flow in this layer are very important since they set
the stage for flow in the rest of the pipe. Therefore, pressure drop and heat
transfer characteristics of turbulent flow in tubes are dominated by the very
thin viscous sublayer next to the wall surface, and the shape of the core
region is not of much significance. Consequently, the turbulent flow rela-
tions given above for circular tubes can also be used for noncircular tubes
with reasonable accuracy by replacing the diameter D in the evaluation of
the Reynolds number by the hydraulic diameter Dh  4Ac /p.
1
2f
 1.8 logc6.9
Re  ae/D
3.7b
1.11
d
596
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 13–3
Equivalent roughness values for
new commercial pipes*
Roughness, e
Material
ft
mm
Glass, plastic
0 (smooth)
Concrete
0.003–0.03 0.9–9
Wood stave
0.0016
0.5
Rubber, 
smoothed
0.000033
0.01
Copper or 
brass tubing 0.000005
0.0015
Cast iron
0.00085
0.26
Galvanized
iron
0.0005
0.15
Wrought iron
0.00015
0.046
Stainless steel 0.000007
0.002
Commercial
steel
0.00015
0.045
*The uncertainty in these values can be as much
as 	60 percent.
u (r)
r
Core region
Viscous sublayer
0
FIGURE 13–26
In turbulent flow, the velocity
profile is nearly a straight line in the
core region, and any significant
velocity gradients occur in the
viscous sublayer.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
600
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Flow through Tube Annulus
Some simple heat transfer equipments consist of two concentric tubes, and
are properly called double-tube heat exchangers (Fig. 13–27). In such
devices, one fluid flows through the tube while the other flows through the
annular space. The governing differential equations for both flows are iden-
tical. Therefore, steady laminar flow through an annulus can be studied ana-
lytically by using suitable boundary conditions.
Consider a concentric annulus of inner diameter Di and outer diameter Do.
The hydraulic diameter of annulus is
Dh 

 Do  Di
Annular flow is associated with two Nusselt numbers—Nui on the inner
tube surface and Nuo on the outer tube surface—since it may involve heat
transfer on both surfaces. The Nusselt numbers for fully developed laminar
flow with one surface isothermal and the other adiabatic are given in
Table 13–4. When Nusselt numbers are known, the convection coefficients
for the inner and the outer surfaces are determined from
Nui 
and
Nuo 
(13–76)
For fully developed turbulent flow, the inner and outer convection coeffi-
cients are approximately equal to each other, and the tube annulus can be
treated as a noncircular duct with a hydraulic diameter of Dh  Do  Di. The
Nusselt number in this case can be determined from a suitable turbulent flow
relation such as the Gnielinski equation. To improve the accuracy of Nusselt
numbers obtained from these relations for annular flow, Petukhov and Roizen
(1964) recommend multiplying them by the following correction factors when
one of the tube walls is adiabatic and heat transfer is through the other wall:
Fi  0.86 
(outer wall adiabatic)
(13–77)
Fo  0.86 
(inner wall adiabatic)
(13–78)
Heat Transfer Enhancement
Tubes with rough surfaces have much higher heat transfer coefficients than
tubes with smooth surfaces. Therefore, tube surfaces are often intention-
ally roughened, corrugated, or finned in order to enhance the convection
heat transfer coefficient and thus the convection heat transfer rate (Fig.
13–28). Heat transfer in turbulent flow in a tube has been increased by as
much as 400 percent by roughening the surface. Roughening the surface, of
course, also increases the friction factor and thus the power requirement for
the pump or the fan.
The convection heat transfer coefficient can also be increased by inducing
pulsating flow by pulse generators, by inducing swirl by inserting a twisted
tape into the tube, or by inducing secondary flows by coiling the tube.

Di
Do
0.16

Di
Do
0.16
ho Dh
k
hi Dh
k
4p(D2
o  D2
i)/4
p(Do  Di)
4Ac
p
Chapter 13
|
597
Do
Di
FIGURE 13–27
A double-tube heat exchanger that
consists of two concentric tubes.
(a) Finned surface
(b) Roughened surface
Fin
Roughness
FIGURE 13–28
Tube surfaces are often roughened,
corrugated, or finned in order to
enhance convection heat transfer.
TABLE 13–4
Nusselt number for fully developed
laminar flow in an annulus with
one surface isothermal and the
other adiabatic (Kays and Perkins,
1972)
Di/Do
Nui
Nuo
0
—
3.66
0.05
17.46
4.06
0.10
11.56
4.11
0.25
7.37
4.23
0.50
5.74
4.43
1.00
4.86
4.86

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
601
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
598
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 13–4
Pressure Drop in a Water Tube
Water at 60°F (r  62.36 lbm/ft3 and m  7.536 
 104 lbm/ft  s) is
flowing steadily in a 2-in-internal-diameter horizontal tube made of stainless
steel at a rate of 0.2 ft3/s (Fig. 13–29). Determine the pressure drop and the
required pumping power input for flow through a 200-ft-long section of the
tube.
Solution
The flow rate through a specified water tube is given. The pres-
sure drop and the pumping power requirements are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The flow is steady and incompressible. 2 The entrance
effects are negligible, and thus the flow is fully developed. 3 The tube
involves no components such as bends, valves, and connectors. 4 The piping
section involves no work devices such as a pump or a turbine.
Properties
The density and dynamic viscosity of water are given to be r 
62.36 lbm/ft3 and m  7.536 
 104 lbm/ft  s. For stainless steel, e 
0.000007 ft (Table A–19).
Analysis
First we calculate the mean velocity and the Reynolds number to
determine the flow regime:
V 

 9.17 ft/s
Re 

 126,400
which is greater than 10,000. Therefore, the flow is turbulent. The relative
roughness of the tube is
e/D 
 0.000042
The friction factor corresponding to this relative roughness and the Reynolds
number can simply be determined from the Moody chart. To avoid the read-
ing error, we determine it from the Colebrook equation:
 2.0 log
→
 2.0 log
Using an equation solver or an iterative scheme, the friction factor is deter-
mined to be f  0.0174. Then the pressure drop and the required power
input become
P  f
 0.0174
 1700 lbf/ft2  11.8 psi
W·
pump  V·P  (0.2 ft3/s)(1700 lbf/ft2)
 461 W
Therefore, power input in the amount of 461 W is needed to overcome the
frictional losses in the tube.
Discussion
The friction factor could also be determined easily from the
explicit Haaland relation. It would give f  0.0172, which is sufficiently
close to 0.0174. Also, the friction factor corresponding to e  0 in this case
is 0.0170, which indicates that stainless steel tubes can be assumed to be
smooth with negligible error.
a
1 W
0.73756 lbf   ft/sb
a
1 lbf
32.174 lbm   ft/s2b
(62.36 lbm/ft3)(9.17 ft/s)2
2
200 ft
2/12 ft
L
D
rV2
2
a0.000042
3.7

2.51
126,4002f
b
1
f
a/D
3.7  2.51
Re2f
b
1
f
0.000007 ft
2/12 ft
(62.36 lbm/ft3)(9.17 ft/s)(2/12 ft)
7.536 
 104 lbm/ft   s
rVD
m
0.2 ft3/s
p(2/12 ft)2/4
V
#
Ac 
V
#
pD2/4
200 ft
2 in
0.2 ft3/s
water
FIGURE 13–29
Schematic for Example 13–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
602
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 13
|
599
EXAMPLE 13–5
Heating of Water by Resistance Heaters in a Tube
Water is to be heated from 15°C to 65°C as it flows through a 3-cm-internal-
diameter 5-m-long tube (Fig. 13–30). The tube is equipped with an electric
resistance heater that provides uniform heating throughout the surface of the
tube. The outer surface of the heater is well insulated, so that in steady
operation all the heat generated in the heater is transferred to the water in
the tube. If the system is to provide hot water at a rate of 10 L/min, deter-
mine the power rating of the resistance heater. Also, estimate the inner sur-
face temperature of the tube at the exit.
Solution
Water is to be heated in a tube equipped with an electric resis-
tance heater on its surface. The power rating of the heater and the inner sur-
face temperature at the exit are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady flow conditions exist. 2 The surface heat flux is uni-
form. 3 The inner surfaces of the tube are smooth.
Properties
The properties of water at the bulk mean temperature of Tb 
(Ti  Te)/2  (15  65)/2  40°C are (Table A–15)
r  992.1 kg/m3
cp  4179 J/kg  °C
k  0.631 W/m  °C
Pr  4.32
n  m/r  0.658 
 106 m2/s
Analysis
The cross sectional and heat transfer surface areas are
Ac  pD2  p(0.03 m)2  7.069 
 104 m2
As  pDL  p(0.03 m)(5 m)  0.471 m2
The volume flow rate of water is given as V·  10 L/min  0.01 m3/min.
Then the mass flow rate becomes
m·  rV·  (992.1 kg/m3)(0.01 m3/min)  9.921 kg/min  0.1654 kg/s
To heat the water at this mass flow rate from 15°C to 65°C, heat must be
supplied to the water at a rate of
Q·  m· cp(Te  Ti)
 (0.1654 kg/s)(4.179 kJ/kg  °C)(65  15)°C
 34.6 kJ/s  34.6 kW
All of this energy must come from the resistance heater. Therefore, the
power rating of the heater must be 34.6 kW.
The surface temperature Ts of the tube at any location can be determined
from
q·
s  h(Ts  Tm)
→
Ts  Tm 
where h is the heat transfer coefficient and Tm is the mean temperature of
the fluid at that location. The surface heat flux is constant in this case, and
its value can be determined from
q#
s
h
1
4
1
4
5 m
Water
D = 3 cm
65°C
15°C
qs = constant
·
FIGURE 13–30
Schematic for Example 13–5.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
603
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
600
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
q·
s 

 73.46 kW/m2
To determine the heat transfer coefficient, we first need to find the mean
velocity of water and the Reynolds number:
Vavg 

 14.15 m/min  0.236 m/s
Re 

 10,760
which is greater than 10,000. Therefore, the flow is turbulent and the entry
length is roughly
Lh  Lt  10D  10 
 0.03  0.3 m
which is much shorter than the total length of the tube. Therefore, we can
assume fully developed turbulent flow in the entire tube and determine the
Nusselt number from
Nu 
 0.023 Re0.8 Pr0.4  0.023(10,760)0.8 (4.32)0.4  69.4
Then,
h 
Nu 
(69.4)  1460 W/m2  °C
and the surface temperature of the pipe at the exit becomes
Ts  Tm 
 65°C 
 115°C
Discussion
Note that the inner surface temperature of the tube will be 50°C
higher than the mean water temperature at the tube exit. This temperature
difference of 50°C between the water and the surface will remain constant
throughout the fully developed flow region.
73,460 W/m2
1460 W/m2   °C
q·s
h
0.631 W/m · °C
0.03 m
k
D
hD
k
(0.236 m/s)(0.03 m)
0.658 
 106 m2/s
Vavg D

0.010 m3/min
7.069 
 104 m2
V
#
Ac
34.6 kW
0.471 m2
Q
#
As
EXAMPLE 13–6
Heat Loss from the Ducts of a Heating System
Hot air at atmospheric pressure and 80°C enters an 8-m-long uninsulated
square duct of cross section 0.2 m 
 0.2 m that passes through the attic of
a house at a rate of 0.15 m3/s (Fig. 13–31). The duct is observed to be
nearly isothermal at 60°C. Determine the exit temperature of the air and the
rate of heat loss from the duct to the attic space.
Solution
Heat loss from uninsulated square ducts of a heating system in
the attic is considered. The exit temperature and the rate of heat loss are to
be determined.
Ts = 60°C
Te
0.2 m
Air
1 atm
80°C
0.2 m
8 m
FIGURE 13–31
Schematic for Example 13–6.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
604
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 13
|
601
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The inner surfaces of
the duct are smooth. 3 Air is an ideal gas.
Properties
We do not know the exit temperature of the air in the duct, and
thus we cannot determine the bulk mean temperature of air, which is the
temperature at which the properties are to be determined. The temperature
of air at the inlet is 80°C and we expect this temperature to drop somewhat
as a result of heat loss through the duct whose surface is at 60°C. At 80°C
and 1 atm we read (Table A–22)
r  0.9994 kg/m3
cp  1008 J/kg  °C
k  0.02953 W/m  °C
Pr  0.7154
n  2.097 
 105 m2/s
Analysis
The characteristic length (which is the hydraulic diameter), the
mean velocity, and the Reynolds number in this case are
Dh 

 a  0.2 m
Vavg 

 3.75 m/s
Re 

 35,765
which is greater than 10,000. Therefore, the flow is turbulent and the entry
lengths in this case are roughly
Lh  Lt  10D  10 
 0.2 m  2 m
which is much shorter than the total length of the duct. Therefore, we can
assume fully developed turbulent flow in the entire duct and determine the
Nusselt number from
Nu 
 0.023 Re0.8 Pr0.3  0.023(35,765)0.8 (0.7154)0.3  91.4
Then,
h 
Nu 
(91.4)  13.5 W/m2  °C
As  4aL  4 
 (0.2 m)(8 m)  6.4 m2
m·  rV·  (0.9994 kg/m3)(0.15 m3/s)  0.150 kg/s
Next, we determine the exit temperature of air from
Te  Ts  (Ts  Ti) exp (hAs /m· cp)
 60°C  [(60  80)°C] exp 
 71.3°C
c
(13.5 W/m2   °C)(6.4 m2)
(0.150 kg/s)(1008 J/kg   °C)d
0.02953 W/m  °C
0.2 m
k
Dh
hDh
k
(3.75 m/s)(0.2 m)
2.097 
 105 m2/s
Vavg Dh

0.15 m3/s
(0.2 m)2
V
#
Ac
4a2
4a
4Ac
p

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
605
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
602
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Internal flow is characterized by the fluid being completely
confined by the inner surfaces of the tube. The mean or aver-
age velocity and temperature for a circular tube of radius R
are expressed as
Vavg 
u(r)rdr
and
Tm 
u(r)T(r)rdr
The Reynolds number for internal flow and the hydraulic
diameter are defined as
Re 

and
Dh 
The flow in a tube is laminar for Re  2300, turbulent for
about Re  10,000, and transitional in between.
The length of the region from the tube inlet to the point at
which the boundary layer merges at the centerline is the hydro-
dynamic entry length Lh. The region beyond the entrance region
in which the velocity profile is fully developed is the hydrody-
namically fully developed region. The length of the region of
flow over which the thermal boundary layer develops and
reaches the tube center is the thermal entry length Lt. The
region in which the flow is both hydrodynamically and ther-
mally developed is the fully developed flow region. The entry
lengths are given by
Lh, laminar  0.05 Re D
Lt, laminar  0.05 Re Pr D  Pr Lh, laminar
Lh, turbulent  Lt, turbulent  10D
For q·
s  constant, the rate of heat transfer is expressed as
Q·  q·
s As  m· cp(Te  Ti)
For Ts  constant, we have
4Ac
p
Vavg D

rVavg D
m
2
Vavg R2 
R
0
2
R2
R
0
Q·  hAs Tln  m· cp(Te  Ti)
Te  Ts  (Ts  Ti)exp(hAs /m· cp)
Tln 

The irreversible pressure loss due to frictional effects and the
required pumping power to overcome this loss for a volume
flow rate of V· are
PL  f
and
W·
pump  V·PL
For fully developed laminar flow in a circular pipe, we have:
u(r)  2Vavg
 umax
f 
V·  Vavg Ac 
pR2 

Circular tube, laminar (q·
s  constant):
Nu 
 4.36
Circular tube, laminar (Ts  constant):
Nu 
 3.66
For developing laminar flow in the entrance region with con-
stant surface temperature, we have
Circular tube:
Nu  3.66 
0.065(D/L) Re Pr
1  0.04[(D/L) Re Pr]2/3
hD
k
hD
k
pR4 P
128mL
pR4 P
8mL
PR2
8mL
64m
rDVavg  64
Re
1  r 2
R2
1  r 2
R2
L
D
rV2
avg
2
Te  Ti
ln(Te /Ti)
Ti  Te
ln[(Ts  Te)/(Ts  Ti)]
SUMMARY
Then the logarithmic mean temperature difference and the rate of heat loss
from the air become
Tln 

 15.2°C
Q·  hAs Tln  (13.5 W/m2  °C)(6.4 m2)(15.2°C)  1313 W
Therefore, air will lose heat at a rate of 1313 W as it flows through the duct
in the attic.
Discussion
The average fluid temperature is (80  71.3)/2  75.7°C,
which is sufficiently close to 80°C at which we evaluated the properties of
air. Therefore, it is not necessary to re-evaluate the properties at this tem-
perature and to repeat the calculations.
80  71.3
ln 60  71.3
60  80
Ti  Te
ln Ts  Te
Ts  Ti

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
606
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 13
|
603
Circular tube:
Nu  1.86
Parallel plates:
Nu  7.54 
For fully developed turbulent flow with smooth surfaces,
we have
f  (0.790 ln Re  1.64)2
104  Re  106
Nu  0.125f Re Pr1/3
Nu  0.023 Re0.8 Pr1/3
Nu  0.023 Re0.8 Prn with n  0.4 for heating and 0.3 for
cooling of fluid
Nu 

0.5  Pr  2000
3 
 103  Re  5 
 106
( f/8)(Re  1000) Pr
1  12.7( f/8)0.5 (Pr2/3  1)

0.7  Pr  160
Re  10,000 
0.03(Dh /L) Re Pr
1  0.016[(Dh /L) Re Pr]2/3
amb
msb
0.14

Re Pr D
L 
1/3
The fluid properties are evaluated at the bulk mean fluid
temperature Tb  (Ti  Te)/2. For liquid metal flow in the
range of 104  Re  106 we have:
Ts  constant:
Nu  4.8  0.0156 Re0.85 Pr
q·
s  constant:
Nu  6.3  0.0167 Re0.85 Pr
For fully developed turbulent flow with rough surfaces, the
friction factor f is determined from the Moody chart or
 2.0 log 
 1.8 log 
For a concentric annulus, the hydraulic diameter is Dh 
Do  Di, and the Nusselt numbers are expressed as
Nui 
and
Nuo 
where the values for the Nusselt numbers are given in
Table 13–4.
ho Dh
k
hi Dh
k
6.9
Re 
/D
3.7
1.11

/D
3.7  2.51
Ref
1
f
0.93
s
0.93
s
1. M. S. Bhatti and R. K. Shah. “Turbulent and Transition
Flow Convective Heat Transfer in Ducts.” In Handbook of
Single-Phase Convective Heat Transfer, ed. S. Kakaç, R. K.
Shah, and W. Aung. New York: Wiley Interscience, 1987.
2. Y.A.CengelandJ.M.Cimbala.FluidMechanics:
FundamentalsandApplications.NewYork:McGraw-Hill,
2005.
3. A. P. Colburn. Transactions of the AIChE 26 (1933), p. 174.
4. C. F. Colebrook. “Turbulent flow in Pipes, with Particular
Reference to the Transition between the Smooth and
Rough Pipe Laws.” Journal of the Institute of Civil
Engineers London. 11 (1939), pp. 133–156.
5. R. G. Deissler. “Analysis of Turbulent Heat Transfer and
Flow in the Entrance Regions of Smooth Passages.” 1953.
Referred to in Handbook of Single-Phase Convective Heat
Transfer, ed. S. Kakaç, R. K. Shah, and W. Aung. New
York: Wiley Interscience, 1987.
6. D. F. Dipprey and D. H. Sabersky. “Heat and Momentum
Transfer in Smooth and Rough Tubes at Various Prandtl
Numbers.” International Journal of Heat Mass Transfer
6 (1963), pp. 329–353.
7. F. W. Dittus and L. M. K. Boelter. University of
California Publications on Engineering 2 (1930), p. 433.
8. D. K. Edwards, V. E. Denny, and A. F. Mills. Transfer
Processes. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Hemisphere, 1979.
9. V. Gnielinski. “New Equations for Heat and Mass Transfer
in Turbulent Pipe and Channel Flow.” International
Chemical Engineering 16 (1976), pp. 359–368.
10. S. E. Haaland. “Simple and Explicit Formulas for the
Friction Factor in Turbulent Pipe Flow.” Journal of Fluids
Engineering (March 1983), pp. 89–90.
11. S. Kakaç, R. K. Shah, and W. Aung, eds. Handbook of
Single-Phase Convective Heat Transfer. New York:
Wiley Interscience, 1987.
12. W. M. Kays and M. E. Crawford. Convective Heat and
Mass Transfer. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1993.
13. W. M. Kays and H. C. Perkins. Chapter 7. In Handbook of
Heat Transfer, ed. W. M. Rohsenow and J. P. Hartnett.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1972.
14. L. F. Moody. “Friction Factors for Pipe Flows.”
Transactions of the ASME 66 (1944), pp. 671–684.
15. M. Molki and E. M. Sparrow. “An Empirical Correlation
for the Average Heat Transfer Coefficient in Circular
Tubes.” Journal of Heat Transfer 108 (1986), pp. 482–484.
16. R. H. Norris. “Some Simple Approximate Heat Transfer
Correlations for Turbulent Flow in Ducts with Rough
Surfaces.” In Augmentation of Convective Heat Transfer,
ed. A. E. Bergles and R. L. Webb. New York: ASME, 1970.
17. B. S. Petukhov. “Heat Transfer and Friction in Turbulent
Pipe Flow with Variable Physical Properties.” In Advances
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
607
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
in Heat Transfer, ed. T. F. Irvine and J. P. Hartnett, Vol. 6.
New York: Academic Press, 1970.
18. B. S. Petukhov and L. I. Roizen. “Generalized
Relationships for Heat Transfer in a Turbulent Flow of
a Gas in Tubes of Annular Section.” High Temperature
(USSR) 2 (1964), pp. 65–68.
19. O. Reynolds. “On the Experimental Investigation of the
Circumstances Which Determine Whether the Motion
of Water Shall Be Direct or Sinuous, and the Law of
Resistance in Parallel Channels.” Philosophical Transactions
of the Royal Society of London 174 (1883), pp. 935–982.
20. H. Schlichting. Boundary Layer Theory. 7th ed.
New York: McGraw-Hill, 1979.
21. R. K. Shah and M. S. Bhatti. “Laminar Convective
Heat Transfer in Ducts.” In Handbook of Single-Phase
Convective Heat Transfer, ed. S. Kakaç, R. K. Shah, and
W. Aung. New York: Wiley Interscience, 1987.
604
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
22. E. N. Sieder and G. E. Tate. “Heat Transfer and Pressure
Drop of Liquids in Tubes.” Industrial Engineering
Chemistry 28 (1936), pp. 1429–1435.
23. C. A. Sleicher and M. W. Rouse. “A Convenient
Correlation for Heat Transfer to Constant and Variable
Property Fluids in Turbulent Pipe Flow.” International
Journal of Heat Mass Transfer 18 (1975), pp. 1429–1435.
24. S. Whitaker. “Forced Convection Heat Transfer
Correlations for Flow in Pipes, Past Flat Plates, Single
Cylinders, and for Flow in Packed Beds and Tube
Bundles.” AIChE Journal 18 (1972), pp. 361–371.
25. W. Zhi-qing. “Study on Correction Coefficients of Laminar
and Turbulent Entrance Region Effects in Round Pipes.”
Applied Mathematical Mechanics 3 (1982), p. 433.
General Flow Analysis
13–1C
Why are liquids usually transported in circular
pipes?
13–2C
Show that the Reynolds number for flow in a circu-
lar tube of diameter D can be expressed as Re  4m· /(pDm).
13–3C
Which fluid at room temperature requires a larger
pump to move at a specified velocity in a given tube: water
or engine oil? Why?
13–4C
What is the generally accepted value of the
Reynolds number above which the flow in smooth pipes is
turbulent?
13–5C
What is hydraulic diameter? How is it defined?
What is it equal to for a circular tube of diameter D?
13–6C
How is the hydrodynamic entry length defined for
flow in a tube? Is the entry length longer in laminar or turbu-
lent flow?
13–7C
Consider laminar flow in a circular tube. Will the
friction factor be higher near the inlet of the tube or near the
exit? Why? What would your response be if the flow were
turbulent?
13–8C
How does surface roughness affect the pressure
drop in a tube if the flow is turbulent? What would your
response be if the flow were laminar?
13–9C
How does the friction factor f vary along the flow
direction in the fully developed region in (a) laminar flow
and (b) turbulent flow?
13–10C
What fluid property is responsible for the develop-
ment of the velocity boundary layer? For what kinds of fluids
will there be no velocity boundary layer in a pipe?
13–11C
What is the physical significance of the number of
transfer units NTU  hAs/m· cp? What do small and large
NTU values tell about a heat transfer system?
13–12C
What does the logarithmic mean temperature dif-
ference represent for flow in a tube whose surface tempera-
ture is constant? Why do we use the logarithmic mean
temperature instead of the arithmetic mean temperature?
13–13C
How is the thermal entry length defined for flow in
a tube? In what region is the flow in a tube fully developed?
13–14C
Consider laminar forced convection in a circular
tube. Will the heat flux be higher near the inlet of the tube or
near the exit? Why?
13–15C
Consider turbulent forced convection in a circular
tube. Will the heat flux be higher near the inlet of the tube or
near the exit? Why?
13–16C
In the fully developed region of flow in a circular
tube, will the velocity profile change in the flow direction?
How about the temperature profile?
PROBLEMS*
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and
students are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated
by an “E” are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them.
Problems with the icon 
are solved using EES, and complete
solutions together with parametric studies are included on the
enclosed CD. Problems with the icon 
are comprehensive in
nature, and are intended to be solved  with a computer, preferably
using the EES software that accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
608
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 13
|
605
13–17C
Consider the flow of oil in a tube. How will the
hydrodynamic and thermal entry lengths compare if the flow
is laminar? How would they compare if the flow were 
turbulent?
13–18C
Consider the flow of mercury (a liquid metal) in a
tube. How will the hydrodynamic and thermal entry lengths
compare if the flow is laminar? How would they compare if
the flow were turbulent?
13–19C
What do the average velocity Vavg and the mean
temperature Tm represent in flow through circular tubes of
constant diameter?
13–20C
Consider fluid flow in a tube whose surface tem-
perature remains constant. What is the appropriate tempera-
ture difference for use in Newton’s law of cooling with an
average heat transfer coefficient?
13–21
Air enters a 25-cm-diameter 12-m-long underwater
duct at 50°C and 1 atm at a mean velocity of 7 m/s, and is
cooled by the water outside. If the average heat transfer coef-
ficient is 85 W/m2  °C and the tube temperature is nearly
equal to the water temperature of 10°C, determine the exit
temperature of air and the rate of heat transfer.
13–22
Cooling water available at 10°C is used to condense
steam at 30°C in the condenser of a power plant at a rate of
0.15 kg/s by circulating the cooling water through a bank of
5-m-long 1.2-cm-internal-diameter thin copper tubes. Water
enters the tubes at a mean velocity of 4 m/s, and leaves at a
temperature of 24°C. The tubes are nearly isothermal at 30°C.
Determine the average heat transfer coefficient between the
water and the tubes, and the number of tubes needed to
achieve the indicated heat transfer rate in the condenser.
13–23
Repeat Prob. 13–22 for steam condensing at a rate of
0.60 kg/s.
13–24
Combustion gases passing through a 3-cm-internal-
diameter circular tube are used to vaporize waste water at
atmospheric pressure. Hot gases enter the tube at 115 kPa
and 250°C at a mean velocity of 5 m/s, and leave at 150°C. If
the average heat transfer coefficient is 120 W/m2  °C and the
inner surface temperature of the tube is 110°C, determine 
(a) the tube length and (b) the rate of evaporation of water.
13–25
Repeat Prob. 13–24 for a heat transfer coefficient of
40 W/m2  °C.
Laminar and Turbulent Flow in Tubes
13–26C
How is the friction factor for flow in a tube related
to the pressure drop? How is the pressure drop related to the
pumping power requirement for a given mass flow rate?
13–27C
Someone claims that the shear stress at the center
of a circular pipe during fully developed laminar flow is zero.
Do you agree with this claim? Explain.
13–28C
Someone claims that in fully developed turbulent
flow in a tube, the shear stress is a maximum at the tube sur-
face. Do you agree with this claim? Explain.
13–29C
Consider fully developed flow in a circular pipe
with negligible entrance effects. If the length of the pipe is
doubled, the pressure drop will (a) double, (b) more than
double, (c) less than double, (d) reduce by half, or (e) remain
constant.
13–30C
Someone claims that the volume flow rate in a cir-
cular pipe with laminar flow can be determined by measuring
the velocity at the centerline in the fully developed region,
multiplying it by the cross sectional area, and dividing the
result by 2. Do you agree? Explain.
13–31C
Someone claims that the average velocity in a cir-
cular pipe in fully developed laminar flow can be determined
by simply measuring the velocity at R/2 (midway between
the wall surface and the centerline). Do you agree? Explain.
13–32C
Consider fully developed laminar flow in a circular
pipe. If the diameter of the pipe is reduced by half while the
flow rate and the pipe length are held constant, the pressure
drop will (a) double, (b) triple, (c) quadruple, (d) increase by
a factor of 8, or (e) increase by a factor of 16.
13–33C
Consider fully developed laminar flow in a circular
pipe. If the viscosity of the fluid is reduced by half by heat-
ing while the flow rate is held constant, how will the pressure
drop change?
13–34C
How does surface roughness affect the heat trans-
fer in a tube if the fluid flow is turbulent? What would your
response be if the flow in the tube were laminar?
13–35
Water at 15°C (r  999.1 kg/m3 and m  1.138 
103 kg/m  s) is flowing in a 4-cm-diameter and 30-m long
horizontal pipe made of stainless steel steadily at a rate of 
5 L/s. Determine (a) the pressure drop and (b) the pumping
power requirement to overcome this pressure drop.
30 m
4 cm
5 L/s
FIGURE P13–35
R = 10 cm
u (r) = 4 1 – r2
––
R2
(           )
FIGURE P13–37
13–36
In fully developed laminar flow in a circular pipe,
the velocity at R/2 (midway between the wall surface and the
centerline) is measured to be 6 m/s. Determine the velocity at
the center of the pipe.
Answer: 8 m/s
13–37
The velocity profile in fully developed laminar flow
in a circular pipe of inner radius R  10 cm, in m/s, is given

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
609
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
by u(r)  4(1  r2/R2). Determine the mean and maximum
velocities in the pipe, and the volume flow rate.
13–38
Repeat Prob. 13–37 for a pipe of inner radius 5 cm.
13–39
Determine the convection heat transfer coefficient for
the flow of (a) air and (b) water at a velocity of 2 m/s in an
8-cm-diameter and 7-m-long tube when the tube is subjected to
uniform heat flux from all surfaces. Use fluid properties at
25C.
606
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
is equipped with an electric resistance heater, which provides
uniform heating throughout the surface of the tube. The outer
surface of the heater is well insulated, so that in steady op-
eration all the heat generated in the heater is transferred to
the water in the tube. If the system is to provide hot water at
a rate of 5 L/min, determine the power rating of the resis-
tance heater. Also, estimate the inner surface temperature of
the pipe at the exit.
13–45
Hot air at atmospheric pressure and 85°C enters a
10-m-long uninsulated square duct of cross section 0.15 m 
0.15 m that passes through the attic of a house at a rate of
0.10 m3/s. The duct is observed to be nearly isothermal at
70°C. Determine the exit temperature of the air and the rate
of heat loss from the duct to the air space in the attic.
Answers: 75.7°C, 941 W
13–46
Reconsider Prob. 13–45. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the volume
flow rate of air on the exit temperature of air and the rate of
heat loss. Let the flow rate vary from 0.05 m3/s to 0.15 m3/s.
Plot the exit temperature and the rate of heat loss as a func-
tion of flow rate, and discuss the results.
13–47
Consider an air solar collector that is 1 m wide and 
5 m long and has a constant spacing of 3 cm between the
glass cover and the collector plate. Air enters the collector at
30°C at a rate of 0.15 m3/s through the 1-m-wide edge and
flows along the 5-m-long passage way. If the average temper-
Water
or Air
2 m/s
L= 7m
D= 8cm
FIGURE P13–39
Air
85°C
0.1 m3/s
70°C
Attic
space
FIGURE P13–45
5 m
Air
30°C
0.15 m3/s
Glass
cover
20°C
Collector
plate, 60°C
Insulation
FIGURE P13–47
13–40
Air at 10C enters a 12-cm-diameter and 5-m-long
pipe at a rate of 0.065 kg/s. The inner surface of the pipe
has a roughness of 0.22 mm and the pipe is nearly isother-
mal at 50C. Determine the rate of heat transfer to air using
the Nusselt number relation given by (a) Eq. 13–66 and
(b) Eq. 13–71.
13–41
An 8-m long, uninsulated square duct of cross sec-
tion 0.2 m 
 0.2 m and relative roughness 108 passes
through the attic space of a house. Hot air enters the duct at 
1 atm and 80C at a volume flow rate of 0.15 m3/s. The duct
surface is nearly isothermal at 60C. Determine the rate of
heat loss from the duct to the attic space and the pressure dif-
ference between the inlet and outlet sections of the duct.
13–42
A 10-m long and 10-mm inner-diameter pipe made
of commercial steel is used to heat a liquid in an industrial
process. The liquid enters the pipe with Ti  25C,
V  0.8 m/s. A uniform heat flux is maintained by an electric
resistance heater wrapped around the outer surface of the
pipe, so that the fluid exits at 75C. Assuming fully devel-
oped flow and taking the average fluid properties to be
r  1000 kg/m3, cp  4000 J/kg  K, m  2 
 103 kg/m  s,
k  0.48 W/m  K, and Pr  10, determine:
(a) The required surface heat flux
, produced by the
heater
(b) The surface temperature at the exit, Ts
(c) The pressure loss through the pipe and the minimum
power required to overcome the resistance to flow.
13–43
Water at 10°C (r  999.7 kg/m3 and m  1.307 
103 kg/m  s) is flowing in a 0.20-cm-diameter 15-m-long
pipe steadily at an average velocity of 1.2 m/s. Determine
(a) the pressure drop and (b) the pumping power requirement
to overcome this pressure drop.
Answers: (a) 188 kPa, (b) 0.71 W
13–44
Water is to be heated from 10°C to 80°C as it flows
through a 2-cm-internal-diameter, 13-m-long tube. The tube
q#
s

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
610
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 13
|
607
atures of the glass cover and the collector plate are 20°C and
60°C, respectively, determine (a) the net rate of heat transfer
to the air in the collector and (b) the temperature rise of air as
it flows through the collector.
13–48
Consider the flow of oil at 10°C in a 40-cm-diameter
pipeline at an average velocity of 0.5 m/s. A 1500-m-long
section of the pipeline passes through icy waters of a lake at
0°C. Measurements indicate that the surface temperature of
the pipe is very nearly 0°C. Disregarding the thermal resis-
tance of the pipe material, determine (a) the temperature of
the oil when the pipe leaves the lake, (b) the rate of heat
transfer from the oil, and (c) the pumping power required to
overcome the pressure losses and to maintain the flow oil in
the pipe.
13–49
Consider laminar flow of a fluid through a square
channel maintained at a constant temperature. Now the mean
velocity of the fluid is doubled. Determine the change in the
pressure drop and the change in the rate of heat transfer
between the fluid and the walls of the channel. Assume the
flow regime remains unchanged. Assume fully developed
flow and disregard any changes in Tln.
13–50
Repeat Prob. 13–49 for turbulent flow.
13–51E
The hot water needs of a household are to be met
by heating water at 55°F to 200°F by a parabolic solar collec-
tor at a rate of 4 lbm/s. Water flows through a 1.25-in-diame-
ter thin aluminum tube whose outer surface is blackanodized
in order to maximize its solar absorption ability. The center-
line of the tube coincides with the focal line of the collector,
and a glass sleeve is placed outside the tube to minimize the
heat losses. If solar energy is transferred to water at a net rate
of 350 Btu/h per ft length of the tube, determine the required
length of the parabolic collector to meet the hot water require-
ments of this house. Also, determine the surface temperature
of the tube at the exit.
13–52
A 15-cm 
 20-cm printed circuit board whose compo-
nents are not allowed to come into direct contact with air for relia-
bility reasons is to be cooled by passing cool air through a
20-cm-long channel of rectangular cross section 0.2 cm 
 14 cm
drilled into the board. The heat generated by the electronic com-
ponents is conducted across the thin layer of the board to the
channel, where it is removed by air that enters the channel at
15°C. The heat flux at the top surface of the channel can be con-
sidered to be uniform, and heat transfer through other surfaces is
negligible. If the velocity of the air at the inlet of the channel is
not to exceed 4 m/s and the surface temperature of the channel is
to remain under 50°C, determine the maximum total power of the
electronic components that can safely be mounted on this circuit
board.
13–53
Repeat Prob. 13–52 by replacing air with helium,
which has six times the thermal conductivity of air.
13–54
Reconsider Prob. 13–52. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of air velocity
at the inlet of the channel and the maximum surface tempera-
ture on the maximum total power dissipation of electronic
components. Let the air velocity vary from 1 m/s to 10 m/s
and the surface temperature from 30°C to 90°C. Plot the
power dissipation as functions of air velocity and surface
temperature, and discuss the results.
13–55
Air enters a 7-m-long section of a rectangular duct
of cross section 15 cm 
 20 cm at 50°C at an average veloc-
ity of 7 m/s. If the walls of the duct are maintained at 10°C,
determine (a) the outlet temperature of the air, (b) the rate of
heat transfer from the air, and (c) the fan power needed to
overcome the pressure losses in this section of the duct.
Answers: (a) 32.8°C, (b) 3674 W, (c) 4.2 W
13–56
Reconsider Prob. 13–55. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of air velocity
on the exit temperature of air, the rate of heat transfer, and
the fan power. Let the air velocity vary from 1 m/s to 10 m/s.
Plot the exit temperature, the rate of heat transfer, and the fan
power as a function of the air velocity, and discuss the
results.
13–57
Hot air at 60°C leaving the furnace of a house enters
a 12-m-long section of a sheet metal duct of rectangular cross
section 20 cm 
 20 cm at an average velocity of 4 m/s. The
thermal resistance of the duct is negligible, and the outer sur-
face of the duct, whose emissivity is 0.3, is exposed to the
cold air at 10°C in the basement, with a convection heat
transfer coefficient of 10 W/m2  °C. Taking the walls of the
basement to be at 10°C also, determine (a) the temperature at
which the hot air will leave the basement and (b) the rate of
heat loss from the hot air in the duct to the basement.
Parabolic
solar collector
Water
200°F
4 lbm/s
Glass tube
Water tube
FIGURE P13–51E
Air
15°C
Air channel
0.2 cm × 14 cm
Electronic
components
FIGURE P13–52

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
611
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
13–58
Reconsider Prob. 13–57. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of air velocity
and the surface emissivity on the exit temperature of air and
the rate of heat loss. Let the air velocity vary from 1 m/s to
10 m/s and the emissivity from 0.1 to 1.0. Plot the exit tem-
perature and the rate of heat loss as functions of air velocity
and emissivity, and discuss the results.
13–59
The components of an electronic system dissipating
180 W are located in a 1-m-long horizontal duct whose cross
section is 16 cm 
 16 cm. The components in the duct are
cooled by forced air, which enters at 27°C at a rate of
0.65 m3/min. Assuming 85 percent of the heat generated
inside is transferred to air flowing through the duct and the
remaining 15 percent is lost through the outer surfaces of the
duct, determine (a) the exit temperature of air and (b) the
highest component surface temperature in the duct.
13–60
Repeat Prob. 13–59 for a circular horizontal duct of 
15-cm diameter.
13–61
Consider a hollow-core printed circuit board 12 cm
high and 18 cm long, dissipating a total of 20 W. The width
of the air gap in the middle of the PCB is 0.25 cm. The cool-
ing air enters the 12-cm-wide core at 32°C at a rate of 0.8
L/s. Assuming the heat generated to be uniformly distributed
over the two side surfaces of the PCB, determine (a) the tem-
perature at which the air leaves the hollow core and (b) the
highest temperature on the inner surface of the core.
Answers: (a) 54.0°C, (b) 72.8°C
13–62
Repeat Prob. 13–61 for a hollow-core PCB dissipat-
ing 35 W.
13–63E
Water at 60°F is heated by passing it through 0.75-
in-internal-diameter thin-walled copper tubes. Heat is sup-
plied to the water by steam that condenses outside the copper
tubes at 250°F. If water is to be heated to 140°F at a rate of
0.4 lbm/s, determine (a) the length of the copper tube that
needs to be used and (b) the pumping power required to over-
come pressure losses. Assume the entire copper tube to be at
the steam temperature of 250°F.
608
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
13–64
A computer cooled by a fan contains eight PCBs, each
dissipating 10 W of power. The height of the PCBs is 12 cm
and the length is 18 cm. The clearance between the tips of the
components on the PCB and the back surface of the adjacent
PCB is 0.3 cm. The cooling air is supplied by a 10-W fan
mounted at the inlet. If the temperature rise of air as it flows
through the case of the computer is not to exceed 10°C, deter-
mine (a) the flow rate of the air that the fan needs to deliver,
(b) the fraction of the temperature rise of air that is due to the
heat generated by the fan and its motor, and (c) the highest
allowable inlet air temperature if the surface temperature of the
components is not to exceed 70°C anywhere in the system. Use
air properties at 25°C.
Review Problems
13–65
A silicon chip is cooled by passing water through
microchannel etched in the back of the chip, as shown in
Fig. P13–65. The channels are covered with a silicon cap.
Consider a 10-mm 
 10-mm square chip in which N  50
rectangular microchannels, each of width W  50 mm and
Air duct
20 cm × 20 cm
e = 0.3
Hot air
60°C
4 m/s
10°C
ho = 10 W/m2·°C
12 m
FIGURE P13–57
18 cm
0.3 cm
Air
outlet
PCB, 10 W
Air
inlet
FIGURE P13–64
H
Circuits generating
power W·
e
W
10 mm
10 mm
Chip, Ts
Cap, Ts
Te
Ti
FIGURE P13–65

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
612
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 13
|
609
height H  200 mm have been etched. Water enters the
microchannels at a temperature Ti  290 K, and a total flow
rate of 0.005 kg/s. The chip and cap are maintained at a uni-
form temperature of 350 K. Assuming that the flow in the
channels is fully developed, all the heat generated by the cir-
cuits on the top surface of the chip is transferred to the water,
and using circular tube correlations, determine:
(a) The water outlet temperature, Te
(b) The chip power dissipation,
13–66
Water is heated at a rate of 10 kg/s from a tempera-
ture of 15C to 35C by passing it through five identical
tubes, each 5.0 cm in diameter, whose surface temperature is
60.0C. Estimate (a) the steady rate of heat transfer and 
(b) the length of tubes necessary to accomplish this task.
13–67
Repeat Prob. 13–66 for a flow rate of 20 kg/s.
13–68
Water at 1500 kg/h and 10C enters a 10-mm diame-
ter smooth tube whose wall temperature is maintained at 49C.
Calculate (a) the tube length necessary to heat the water to
40C, and (b) the water outlet temperature if the tube length is
doubled. Assume average water properties to be the same as
in (a).
13–69
A geothermal district heating system involves the
transport of geothermal water at 110°C from a geothermal
well to a city at about the same elevation for a distance of 12
km at a rate of 1.5 m3/s in 60-cm-diameter stainless steel
pipes. The fluid pressures at the wellhead and the arrival
point in the city are to be the same. The minor losses are neg-
ligible because of the large length-to-diameter ratio and the
relatively small number of components that cause minor
losses. (a) Assuming the pump-motor efficiency to be 65 per-
cent, determine the electric power consumption of the system
for pumping. (b) Determine the daily cost of power consump-
tion of the system if the unit cost of electricity is $0.06/kWh.
(c) The temperature of geothermal water is estimated to drop
0.5°C during this long flow. Determine if the frictional heat-
ing during flow can make up for this drop in temperature.
13–70
Repeat Prob. 13–69 for cast iron pipes of the same
diameter.
13–71
The velocity profile in fully developed laminar flow
in a circular pipe, in m/s, is given by u(r)  6(1  100r2)
where r is the radial distance from the centerline of the pipe in
m. Determine (a) the radius of the pipe, (b) the mean velocity
through the pipe, and (c) the maximum velocity in the pipe.
13–72E
The velocity profile in fully developed laminar
flow of water at 40°F in a 140-ft-long horizontal circular
pipe, in ft/s, is given by u(r)  0.8(1  625r2) where r is the
radial distance from the centerline of the pipe in ft. Deter-
mine (a) the volume flow rate of water through the pipe,
(b) the pressure drop across the pipe, and (c) the useful
pumping power required to overcome this pressure drop.
13–73
The compressed air requirements of a manufacturing
facility are met by a 150-hp compressor located in a room that
W#
e
is maintained at 20°C. In order to minimize the compressor
work, the intake port of the compressor is connected to the
outside through an 11-m-long, 20-cm-diameter duct made of
thin aluminum sheet. The compressor takes in air at a rate
of 0.27 m3/s at the outdoor conditions of 10°C and 95 kPa.
Disregarding the thermal resistance of the duct and taking the
heat transfer coefficient on the outer surface of the duct to be
10 W/m2  °C, determine (a) the power used by the compres-
sor to overcome the pressure drop in this duct, (b) the rate of
heat transfer to the incoming cooler air, and (c) the tempera-
ture rise of air as it flows through the duct.
13–74
A house built on a riverside is to be cooled in summer
by utilizing the cool water of the river, which flows at an aver-
age temperature of 15°C. A 15-m-long section of a circular
duct of 20-cm diameter passes through the water. Air enters the
underwater section of the duct at 25°C at a velocity of 3 m/s.
Assuming the surface of the duct to be at the temperature of
the water, determine the outlet temperature of air as it leaves
the underwater portion of the duct. Also, for an overall fan effi-
ciency of 55 percent, determine the fan power input needed to
overcome the flow resistance in this section of the duct.
Air, 0.27 m3/s
10°C, 95 kPa
11 m
20
cm
Air
Compressor
150 hp
FIGURE P13–73
Air
25°C, 3 m/s
Air
15°C
River, 15°C
FIGURE P13–74

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
13. Internal Forced 
Convection
613
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
13–75
Repeat Prob. 13–74 assuming that a 0.25-mm-thick
layer of mineral deposit (k  3 W/m  °C) formed on the
inner surface of the pipe.
13–76E
The exhaust gases of an automotive engine
leave the combustion chamber and enter a
8-ft-long and 3.5-in-diameter thin-walled steel exhaust pipe at
800°F and 15.5 psia at a rate of 0.2 lbm/s. The surrounding
ambient air is at a temperature of 80°F, and the heat transfer
coefficient on the outer surface of the exhaust pipe is
3 Btu/h  ft2  °F. Assuming the exhaust gases to have the prop-
erties of air, determine (a) the velocity of the exhaust gases at
the inlet of the exhaust pipe and (b) the temperature at which
the exhaust gases will leave the pipe and enter the air.
13–77
Hot water at 90°C enters a 15-m section of a cast
iron pipe (k  52 W/m  °C) whose inner and outer diameters
are 4 and 4.6 cm, respectively, at an average velocity of 1.2
m/s. The outer surface of the pipe, whose emissivity is 0.7, is
exposed to the cold air at 10°C in a basement, with a convec-
tion heat transfer coefficient of l2 W/m2  °C. Taking the
610
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
walls of the basement to be at 10°C also, determine (a) the
rate of heat loss from the water and (b) the temperature at
which the water leaves the basement.
13–78
Repeat Prob. 13–77 for a pipe made of copper (k 
386 W/m  °C) instead of cast iron.
Design and Essay Problems
13–79
Electronic boxes such as computers are commonly
cooled by a fan. Write an essay on forced air cooling of elec-
tronic boxes and on the selection of the fan for electronic
devices.
13–80
Design a heat exchanger to pasteurize milk by steam
in a dairy plant. Milk is to flow through a bank of 1.2-cm
internal diameter tubes while steam condenses outside the
tubes at 1 atm. Milk is to enter the tubes at 4C, and it is to
be heated to 72C at a rate of 15 L/s. Making reasonable
assumptions, you are to specify the tube length and the num-
ber of tubes, and the pump for the heat exchanger.
13–81
A desktop computer is to be cooled by a fan. The
electronic components of the computer consume 80 W of
power under full-load conditions. The computer is to operate
in environments at temperatures up to 50C and at elevations
up to 3000 m where the atmospheric pressure is 70.12 kPa.
The exit temperature of air is not to exceed 60C to meet the
reliability requirements. Also, the average velocity of air is
not to exceed 120 m/min at the exit of the computer case,
where the fan is installed to keep the noise level down. Spec-
ify the flow rate of the fan that needs to be installed and the
diameter of the casing of the fan.
Hot
water
90°C
1.2 m/s
Tambient = 10°C
15 m
e = 0.7
FIGURE P13–77

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
614
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
NATURAL CONVECTION
|
611
I
n Chapter 13, we considered heat transfer by forced con-
vection, where a fluid was forced to move over a surface
or in a tube by external means such as a pump or a fan.
In this chapter, we consider natural convection, where any
fluid motion occurs by natural means such as buoyancy. The
fluid motion in forced convection is quite noticeable, since a
fan or a pump can transfer enough momentum to the fluid to
move it in a certain direction. The fluid motion in natural con-
vection, however, is often not noticeable because of the low
velocities involved.
The convection heat transfer coefficient is a strong function
of velocity: the higher the velocity, the higher the convection
heat transfer coefficient. The fluid velocities associated with
natural convection are low, typically less than 1 m/s. There-
fore, the heat transfer coefficients encountered in natural con-
vection are usually much lower than those encountered in
forced convection. Yet several types of heat transfer equip-
ment are designed to operate under natural convection condi-
tions instead of forced convection, because natural convection
does not require the use of a fluid mover.
We start this chapter with a discussion of the physical
mechanism of natural convection and the Grashof number.
We then present the correlations to evaluate heat transfer by
natural convection for various geometries, including finned
surfaces and enclosures.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Understand the physical mechanism of natural convection,
• Derive the governing equations of natural convection, and
obtain the dimensionless Grashof number by
nondimensionalizing them,
• Evaluate the Nusselt number for natural convection
associated with vertical, horizontal, and inclined plates as
well as cylinders and spheres,
• Examine natural convection from finned surfaces, and
determine the optimum fin spacing,
• Analyze natural convection inside enclosures such as
double-pane windows.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
615
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
14–1
■PHYSICAL MECHANISM OF NATURAL
CONVECTION
Many familiar heat transfer applications involve natural convection as the pri-
mary mechanism of heat transfer. Some examples are cooling of electronic
equipment such as power transistors, TVs, and DVDs; heat transfer from elec-
tric baseboard heaters or steam radiators; heat transfer from the refrigeration
coils and power transmission lines; and heat transfer from the bodies of ani-
mals and human beings. Natural convection in gases is usually accompanied
by radiation of comparable magnitude except for low-emissivity surfaces.
We know that a hot boiled egg (or a hot baked potato) on a plate eventually
cools to the surrounding air temperature (Fig. 14–1). The egg is cooled by
transferring heat by convection to the air and by radiation to the surrounding
surfaces. Disregarding heat transfer by radiation, the physical mechanism of
cooling a hot egg (or any hot object) in a cooler environment can be explained
as follows:
As soon as the hot egg is exposed to cooler air, the temperature of the outer
surface of the egg shell drops somewhat, and the temperature of the air adja-
cent to the shell rises as a result of heat conduction from the shell to the air.
Consequently, the egg is surrounded by a thin layer of warmer air, and heat is
then transferred from this warmer layer to the outer layers of air. The cooling
process in this case is rather slow since the egg would always be blanketed by
warm air, and it has no direct contact with the cooler air farther away. We
may not notice any air motion in the vicinity of the egg, but careful measure-
ments would indicate otherwise.
The temperature of the air adjacent to the egg is higher and thus its
density is lower, since at constant pressure the density of a gas is inversely
proportional to its temperature. Thus, we have a situation in which some low-
density or “light” gas is surrounded by a high-density or “heavy” gas, and the
natural laws dictate that the light gas rise. This is no different than the oil in a
vinegar-and-oil salad dressing rising to the top (since roil  rvinegar). This
phenomenon is characterized incorrectly by the phrase “heat rises,” which is
understood to mean heated air rises. The space vacated by the warmer air in
the vicinity of the egg is replaced by the cooler air nearby, and the presence
of cooler air in the vicinity of the egg speeds up the cooling process. The rise
of warmer air and the flow of cooler air into its place continues until the egg
is cooled to the temperature of the surrounding air. The motion that results
from the continual replacement of the heated air in the vicinity of the egg by
the cooler air nearby is called a natural convection current, and the heat
transfer that is enhanced as a result of this natural convection current is called
natural convection heat transfer. Note that in the absence of natural con-
vection currents, heat transfer from the egg to the air surrounding it would be
by conduction only, and the rate of heat transfer from the egg would be much
lower.
Natural convection is just as effective in the heating of cold surfaces in a
warmer environment as it is in the cooling of hot surfaces in a cooler envi-
ronment, as shown in Fig. 14–2. Note that the direction of fluid motion is
reversed in this case.
In a gravitational field, there is a net force that pushes upward a light fluid
placed in a heavier fluid. The upward force exerted by a fluid on a body
612
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
HOT
EGG
Heat
transfer
Warm
air
Cool
air
Heat
transfer
COLD
SODA
Warm
air
Cool
air
FIGURE 14–1
The cooling of a boiled egg in a cooler
environment by natural convection.
FIGURE 14–2
The warming up of a cold drink
in a warmer environment by
natural convection.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
616
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
completely or partially immersed in it is called the buoyancy force. The
magnitude of the buoyancy force is equal to the weight of the fluid displaced
by the body. That is,
Fbuoyancy  rfluid gVbody
(14–1)
where rfluid is the average density of the fluid (not the body), g is the gravita-
tional acceleration, and Vbody is the volume of the portion of the body
immersed in the fluid (for bodies completely immersed in the fluid, it is the
total volume of the body). In the absence of other forces, the net vertical force
acting on a body is the difference between the weight of the body and the
buoyancy force. That is,
Fnet  W  Fbuoyancy
 rbody gVbody  rfluid gVbody
(14–2)
 (rbody  rfluid) gVbody
Note that this force is proportional to the difference in the densities of the
fluid and the body immersed in it. Thus, a body immersed in a fluid will
experience a “weight loss” in an amount equal to the weight of the fluid it
displaces. This is known as Archimedes’ principle.
To have a better understanding of the buoyancy effect, consider an egg
dropped into water. If the average density of the egg is greater than the density
of water (a sign of freshness), the egg settles at the bottom of the container.
Otherwise, it rises to the top. When the density of the egg equals the density of
water, the egg settles somewhere in the water while remaining completely
immersed, acting like a “weightless object” in space. This occurs when the
upward buoyancy force acting on the egg equals the weight of the egg, which
acts downward.
The buoyancy effect has far-reaching implications in life. For one thing,
without buoyancy, heat transfer between a hot (or cold) surface and the fluid
surrounding it would be by conduction instead of by natural convection. The
natural convection currents encountered in the oceans, lakes, and the atmo-
sphere owe their existence to buoyancy. Also, light boats as well as heavy
warships made of steel float on water because of buoyancy (Fig. 14–3). Ships
are designed on the basis of the principle that the entire weight of a ship and
its contents is equal to the weight of the water that the submerged volume of
the ship can contain. The “chimney effect” that induces the upward flow of
hot combustion gases through a chimney is also due to the buoyancy effect,
and the upward force acting on the gases in the chimney is proportional to the
difference between the densities of the hot gases in the chimney and the
cooler air outside. Note that there is no noticable gravity in space, and thus
there can be no natural convection heat transfer in a spacecraft, even if the
spacecraft is filled with atmospheric air.
In heat transfer studies, the primary variable is temperature, and it is desir-
able to express the net buoyancy force (Eq. 14–2) in terms of temperature dif-
ferences. But this requires expressing the density difference in terms of a
temperature difference, which requires a knowledge of a property that repre-
sents the variation of the density of a fluid with temperature at constant pres-
sure. The property that provides that information is the volume expansion
coefficient b, defined as (Fig. 14–4)
Chapter 14
|
613
FIGURE 14–4
The coefficient of volume expansion is
a measure of the change in volume of
a substance with temperature
at constant pressure.
20°C
100 kPa
1 kg
21°C
100 kPa
1 kg
20°C
100 kPa
1 kg
21°C
100 kPa
1 kg
  V
–––
T
(       )P
  V
–––
T
(       )P
(a) A substance with a large
(b) A substance with a small
β
β
FIGURE 14–3
It is the buoyancy force that 
keeps the ships afloat in water 
(W  Fbuoyancy for floating objects).
W
Fbuoyancy
Vsubmerged

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
617
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
b 
(1/K)
(14–3)
In natural convection studies, the condition of the fluid sufficiently far from
the hot or cold surface is indicated by the subscript “infinity” to serve as a
reminder that this is the value at a distance where the presence of the surface
is not felt. In such cases, the volume expansion coefficient can be expressed
approximately by replacing differential quantities by differences as
(14–4)
or
r  r  rb(T  T)
(at constant P)
(14–5)
where r is the density and T is the temperature of the quiescent fluid
away from the surface.
We can show easily that the volume expansion coefficient b of an ideal gas
(P  rRT) at a temperature T is equivalent to the inverse of the temperature:
bideal gas 
(1/K)
(14–6)
where T is the thermodynamic temperature. Note that a large value of b for a
fluid means a large change in density with temperature, and that the product
bT represents the fraction of volume change of a fluid that corresponds to a
temperature change T at constant pressure. Also note that the buoyancy
force is proportional to the density difference, which is proportional to the
temperature difference at constant pressure. Therefore, the larger the temper-
ature difference between the fluid adjacent to a hot (or cold) surface and the
fluid away from it, the larger the buoyancy force and the stronger the natural
convection currents, and thus the higher the heat transfer rate.
The magnitude of the natural convection heat transfer between a surface
and a fluid is directly related to the flow rate of the fluid. The higher the
flow rate, the higher the heat transfer rate. In fact, it is the very high flow
rates that increase the heat transfer coefficient by orders of magnitude when
forced convection is used. In natural convection, no blowers are used, and
therefore the flow rate cannot be controlled externally. The flow rate in this
case is established by the dynamic balance of buoyancy and friction.
As we have discussed earlier, the buoyancy force is caused by the density
difference between the heated (or cooled) fluid adjacent to the surface and the
fluid surrounding it, and is proportional to this density difference and the vol-
ume occupied by the warmer fluid. It is also well known that whenever two
bodies in contact (solid–solid, solid–fluid, or fluid–fluid) move relative to
each other, a friction force develops at the contact surface in the direction
opposite to that of the motion. This opposing force slows down the fluid and
thus reduces the flow rate of the fluid. Under steady conditions, the airflow
rate driven by buoyancy is established at the point where these two effects
balance each other. The friction force increases as more and more solid sur-
faces are introduced, seriously disrupting the fluid flow and heat transfer. For
that reason, heat sinks with closely spaced fins are not suitable for natural
convection cooling.
Most heat transfer correlations in natural convection are based on ex-
perimental measurements. The instrument often used in natural convection
1
T
b 
 1
r
r
T  1
r
r  r
T  T    (at constant P)
1
v av
Tb
P
 1
rar
Tb
P
614
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
618
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
experiments is the Mach–Zehnder interferometer, which gives a plot
of isotherms in the fluid in the vicinity of a surface. The operation principle
of interferometers is based on the fact that at low pressure, the lines of con-
stant temperature for a gas correspond to the lines of constant density, and
that the index of refraction of a gas is a function of its density. Therefore, the
degree of refraction of light at some point in a gas is a measure of the temper-
ature gradient at that point. An interferometer produces a map of interference
fringes, which can be interpreted as lines of constant temperature as shown
in Fig. 14–5. The smooth and parallel lines in (a) indicate that the flow is
laminar, whereas the eddies and irregularities in (b) indicate that the flow is
turbulent. Note that the lines are closest near the surface, indicating a higher
temperature gradient.
14–2
■EQUATION OF MOTION AND THE 
GRASHOF NUMBER
In this section we derive the equation of motion that governs the natural
convection flow in laminar boundary layer. The conservation of mass and
energy equations derived for forced convection are also applicable for nat-
ural convection, but the momentum equation needs to be modified to incor-
porate buoyancy.
Consider a vertical hot flat plate immersed in a quiescent fluid body. We
assume the natural convection flow to be steady, laminar, and two-dimen-
sional, and the fluid to be Newtonian with constant properties, including den-
sity, with one exception: the density difference r  r is to be considered
since it is this density difference between the inside and the outside of the
boundary layer that gives rise to buoyancy force and sustains flow. (This is
known as the Boussinesq approximation.) We take the upward direction along
the plate to be x, and the direction normal to surface to be y, as shown in
Fig. 14–6. Therefore, gravity acts in the x-direction. Noting that the flow is
steady and two-dimensional, the x- and y-components of velocity within
boundary layer are u  u(x, y) and v  v(x, y), respectively.
The velocity and temperature profiles for natural convection over a vertical
hot plate are also shown in Fig. 14–6. Note that as in forced convection, the
thickness of the boundary layer increases in the flow direction. Unlike forced
convection, however, the fluid velocity is zero at the outer edge of the veloc-
ity boundary layer as well as at the surface of the plate. This is expected since
the fluid beyond the boundary layer is motionless. Thus, the fluid velocity
increases with distance from the surface, reaches a maximum, and gradually
decreases to zero at a distance sufficiently far from the surface. At the sur-
face, the fluid temperature is equal to the plate temperature, and gradually
decreases to the temperature of the surrounding fluid at a distance sufficiently
far from the surface, as shown in the figure. In the case of cold surfaces, the
shape of the velocity and temperature profiles remains the same but their
direction is reversed.
Consider a differential volume element of height dx, length dy, and unit
depth in the z-direction (normal to the paper) for analysis. The forces acting
on this volume element are shown in Fig. 14–7. Newton’s second law of
Chapter 14
|
615
FIGURE 14–5
Isotherms in natural convection over
a hot plate in air.
(a) Laminar flow
(b) Turbulent flow
T
u = 0
u = 0
y
x
Ts 
Temperature
profile
Velocity
profile
Boundary
layer
Stationary
fluid
at T
Ts
FIGURE 14–6
Typical velocity and temperature
profiles for natural convection flow
over a hot vertical plate at temperature
Ts inserted in a fluid at temperature T.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
619
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
motion for this volume element can be expressed as
dm  ax  Fx
(14–7)
where dm  r(dx  dy  1) is the mass of the fluid within the volume element.
The acceleration in the x-direction is obtained by taking the total differential
of u(x, y), which is du  (u/x)dx  (u/y)dy, and dividing it by dt. We get
(14–8)
The forces acting on the differential volume element in the vertical direc-
tion are the pressure forces acting on the top and bottom surfaces, the shear
stresses acting on the side surfaces (the normal stresses acting on the top
and bottom surfaces are small and are disregarded), and the force of grav-
ity acting on the entire volume element. Then the net force acting in the
x-direction becomes
(14–9)
since t  m(u/y). Substituting Eqs. 14–8 and 14–9 into Eq. 14–7 and
dividing by r  dx  dy  1 gives Newton’s second-law of motion in the 
x-direction (the x-momentum equation) as
 rg
(14–10)
The x-momentum equation in the quiescent fluid outside the boundary layer
can be obtained from the relation above as a special case by setting u  0.
It gives
(14–11)
which is simply the relation for the variation of hydrostatic pressure in a
quiescent fluid with height, as expected. Also, noting that v  u in the bound-
ary layer and thus v/x 
 v/y 
 0, and that there are no body forces
(including gravity) in the y-direction, the force balance in that direction gives
P/y  0. That is, the variation of pressure in the direction normal to the
surface is negligible, and for a given x the pressure in the boundary layer is
equal to the pressure in the quiescent fluid. Therefore, P  P(x)  P(x) and
P/x  P/x  rg. Substituting into Eq. 14–10,
(14–12)
The last term represents the net upward force per unit volume of the fluid
(the difference between the buoyant force and the fluid weight). This is the
force that initiates and sustains convection currents.
From Eq. 14–5, we have r  r  rb(T  T). Substituting it into the
last equation and dividing both sides by r gives the desired form of the
x-momentum equation,
(14–13)
u u
x  v u
y  v 2u
y2  gb(T  T)
r au u
x  v u
yb  m 2u
y2  (r  r)g
P
x  rg
r au u
x  v u
yb  m 2u
y2  P
x
 am 2u
y2  P
x  rgb (dx  dy  1)
Fx  at
y dyb (dx  1)  aP
x dxb (dy  1)  rg(dx  dy  1)
ax  du
dt  u
x
dx
dt  u
y
dy
dt  u u
x  v u
y
616
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
∂P
∂x
P
P
dx
τ

∂τ
∂y
dy
τ 
dx
dy
W
FIGURE 14–7
Forces acting on a differential volume
element in the natural convection
boundary layer over a vertical flat
plate.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
620
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
This is the equation that governs the fluid motion in the boundary layer due
to the effect of buoyancy. Note that the momentum equation involves the
temperature, and thus the momentum and energy equations must be solved
simultaneously.
The Grashof Number
The governing equations of natural convection and the boundary conditions
can be nondimensionalized by dividing all dependent and independent vari-
ables by suitable constant quantities: all lengths by a characteristic length Lc ,
all velocities by an arbitrary reference velocity V (which, from the definition
of Reynolds number, is taken to be V  ReL /Lc), and temperature by a
suitable temperature difference (which is taken to be Ts  T) as
where asterisks are used to denote nondimensional variables. Substituting
them into the momentum equation and simplifying give
(14–14)
The dimensionless parameter in the brackets represents the natural convec-
tion effects, and is called the Grashof number GrL,
(14–15)
where
g  gravitational acceleration, m/s2
b  coefficient of volume expansion, 1/K (b  1/T for ideal gases)
Ts  temperature of the surface, C
T  temperature of the fluid sufficiently far from the surface, C
Lc  characteristic length of the geometry, m
n  kinematic viscosity of the fluid, m2/s
We mentioned in the preceding chapters that the flow regime in forced con-
vection is governed by the dimensionless Reynolds number, which repre-
sents the ratio of inertial forces to viscous forces acting on the fluid. The
flow regime in natural convection is governed by the dimensionless Grashof
number, which represents the ratio of the buoyancy force to the viscous
force acting on the fluid (Fig. 14–8).
The role played by the Reynolds number in forced convection is played
by the Grashof number in natural convection. As such, the Grashof number
provides the main criterion in determining whether the fluid flow is laminar
or turbulent in natural convection. For vertical plates, for example, the criti-
cal Grashof number is observed to be about 109. Therefore, the flow regime
on a vertical plate becomes turbulent at Grashof numbers greater than 109.
When a surface is subjected to external flow, the problem involves both
natural and forced convection. The relative importance of each mode of heat
GrL  gb(Ts  T)L3
c
n2
u* u*
x*  v* u*
y*  cgb(Ts  T)L3
c
n 2
d T*
Re2
L
 1
ReL
2u*
y*2
x*  x
Lc    y*  y
Lc    u*  u
V    v*  v
V    and    T*  T  T
Ts  T
Chapter 14
|
617
Hot
surface
Friction
force
Buoyancy
force
Cold
fluid
Warm
fluid
FIGURE 14–8
The Grashof number Gr is a measure
of the relative magnitudes of the
buoyancy force and the opposing
viscous force acting on the fluid.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
621
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
transfer is determined by the value of the coefficient GrL/ReL
2: Natural con-
vection effects are negligible if GrL/ReL
2  1, free convection dominates and
the forced convection effects are negligible if GrL/ReL
2  1, and both effects
are significant and must be considered if GrL /ReL
2 
 1.
14–3
■NATURAL CONVECTION OVER SURFACES
Natural convection heat transfer on a surface depends on the geometry of the
surface as well as its orientation. It also depends on the variation of tempera-
ture on the surface and the thermophysical properties of the fluid involved.
Although we understand the mechanism of natural convection well, the
complexities of fluid motion make it very difficult to obtain simple analytical
relations for heat transfer by solving the governing equations of motion and
energy. Some analytical solutions exist for natural convection, but such solu-
tions lack generality since they are obtained for simple geometries under
some simplifying assumptions. Therefore, with the exception of some simple
cases, heat transfer relations in natural convection are based on experimental
studies. Of the numerous such correlations of varying complexity and
claimed accuracy available in the literature for any given geometry, we pre-
sent here the ones that are best known and widely used.
The simple empirical correlations for the average Nusselt number Nu in
natural convection are of the form (Fig. 14–9)
(14–16)
where RaL is the Rayleigh number, which is the product of the Grashof
and Prandtl numbers:
(14–17)
The values of the constants C and n depend on the geometry of the surface
and the flow regime, which is characterized by the range of the Rayleigh
number. The value of n is usually for laminar flow and for turbulent flow.
The value of the constant C is normally less than 1.
Simple relations for the average Nusselt number for various geometries
are given in Table 14–1, together with sketches of the geometries. Also
given in this table are the characteristic lengths of the geometries and the
ranges of Rayleigh number in which the relation is applicable. All fluid
properties are to be evaluated at the film temperature Tf  (Ts  T).
When the average Nusselt number and thus the average convection coef-
ficient is known, the rate of heat transfer by natural convection from a solid
surface at a uniform temperature Ts to the surrounding fluid is expressed by
Newton’s law of cooling as
(14–18)
where As is the heat transfer surface area and h is the average heat transfer
coefficient on the surface.
Qconv  hAs(Ts  T)    (W)
1
2
1
3
1
4
Ra L  GrL Pr  gb(Ts  T)L3
c
n 2
Pr
Nu  hLc
k  C(GrL Pr)n  C Ran
L
618
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Nu = C Ran
L
Nusselt
number
Rayleigh
number
Constant
coefficient
Constant
exponent
FIGURE 14–9
Natural convection heat transfer
correlations are usually expressed in
terms of the Rayleigh number raised
to a constant n multiplied by another
constant C, both of which are
determined experimentally.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
622
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
619
TABLE 14–1
Empirical correlations for the average Nusselt number for natural convection over surfaces
Characteristic
Geometry
length Lc
Range of Ra
Nu
104–109
Nu  0.59Ra1/4
L
(14–19)
109–1013
Nu  0.1Ra1/3
L
(14–20)
L
Entire range
Nu 
(14–21)
(complex but more accurate)
Use vertical plate equations for the upper
surface of a cold plate and the lower 
surface of a hot plate
L
Replace g by g cosu
for
Ra  109
104–107
Nu  0.54Ra1/4
L
(14–22)
107–1011
Nu  0.15Ra1/3
L
(14–23)
As /p
105–1011
Nu  0.27Ra1/4
L
(14–24)
A vertical cylinder can be treated as a
vertical plate when
L
D 
D
RaD  1012
Nu 
(14–25)
RaD  1011
Nu  2 
(14–26)
D
(Pr  0.7)
0.589RaD
1/4
[1  (0.469/Pr)9/16]4/9
D
b 0.6 
0.387Ra D
1/6
[1  (0.559/Pr)9/16]8/27r
2
Ts 
D
35L
Gr1/4
L
Ts 
L
Horizontal plate
(Surface area A and perimeter p)
(a) Upper surface of a hot plate
(or lower surface of a cold plate)
(b) Lower surface of a hot plate
(or upper surface of a cold plate)
θ
L
Ts
L
b 0.825 
0.387Ra1/ 6
L
[1  (0.492/Pr)9/16]8/27r
2
Horizontal cylinder
Vertical plate
Inclined plate
Ts 
Hot surface
Ts 
Hot surface
Vertical cylinder
Sphere

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
623
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Vertical Plates (Ts  constant)
For a vertical flat plate, the characteristic length is the plate height L. In Table
14–1 we give three relations for the average Nusselt number for an isothermal
vertical plate. The first two relations are very simple. Despite its complexity,
we suggest using the third one (Eq. 14–21) recommended by Churchill and
Chu (1975) since it is applicable over the entire range of Rayleigh number.
This relation is most accurate in the range of 101  RaL  109.
Vertical Plates (˙qs  constant)
In the case of constant surface heat flux, the rate of heat transfer is known (it
is simply

s As ), but the surface temperature Ts is not. In fact, Ts
increases with height along the plate. It turns out that the Nusselt number
relations for the constant surface temperature and constant surface heat flux
cases are nearly identical (Churchill and Chu, 1975). Therefore, the relations
for isothermal plates can also be used for plates subjected to uniform heat
flux, provided that the plate midpoint temperature TL/2 is used for Ts in the
evaluation of the film temperature, Rayleigh number, and the Nusselt num-
ber. Noting that h 
s /(TL/2  T), the average Nusselt number in this case
can be expressed as
(14–27)
The midpoint temperature TL/2 is determined by iteration so that the Nusselt
numbers determined from Eqs. 14–21 and 14–27 match.
Vertical Cylinders
An outer surface of a vertical cylinder can be treated as a vertical plate
when the diameter of the cylinder is sufficiently large so that the curvature
effects are negligible. This condition is satisfied if
(14–28)
When this criteria is met, the relations for vertical plates can also be used
for vertical cylinders. Nusselt number relations for slender cylinders that do
not meet this criteria are available in the literature (e.g., Cebeci, 1974).
Inclined Plates
Consider an inclined hot plate that makes an angle u from the vertical, as
shown in Fig. 14–10, in a cooler environment. The net force F  g(r  r)
(the difference between the buoyancy and gravity) acting on a unit volume of
the fluid in the boundary layer is always in the vertical direction. In the case of
inclined plate, this force can be resolved into two components: Fy  F cos u
parallel to the plate that drives the flow along the plate, and Fy  F sin u normal
to the plate. Noting that the force that drives the motion is reduced, we expect
D  35L
GrL
1/4
Nu  hL
k 
qsL
k(TL / 2  T)
q
q
Q
620
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Hot
plate
Boundary
layer flow
y
x
Fy
F
Fx
g
θ
θ
FIGURE 14–10
Natural convection flows on the
upper and lower surfaces of
an inclined hot plate.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
624
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the convection currents to be weaker, and the rate of heat transfer to be lower
relative to the vertical plate case.
The experiments confirm what we suspect for the lower surface of a hot
plate, but the opposite is observed on the upper surface. The reason for this
curious behavior for the upper surface is that the force component Fy initiates
upward motion in addition to the parallel motion along the plate, and thus the
boundary layer breaks up and forms plumes, as shown in the figure. As a
result, the thickness of the boundary layer and thus the resistance to heat
transfer decreases, and the rate of heat transfer increases relative to the verti-
cal orientation.
In the case of a cold plate in a warmer environment, the opposite occurs as
expected: The boundary layer on the upper surface remains intact with weaker
boundary layer flow and thus lower rate of heat transfer, and the boundary
layer on the lower surface breaks apart (the colder fluid falls down) and thus
enhances heat transfer.
When the boundary layer remains intact (the lower surface of a hot plate
or the upper surface of a cold plate), the Nusselt number can be determined
from the vertical plate relations provided that g in the Rayleigh number
relation is replaced by g cosu for u  60. Nusselt number relations for the
other two surfaces (the upper surface of a hot plate or the lower surface of a
cold plate) are available in the literature (e.g., Fuji and Imura, 1972).
Horizontal Plates
The rate of heat transfer to or from a horizontal surface depends on whether
the surface is facing upward or downward. For a hot surface in a cooler envi-
ronment, the net force acts upward, forcing the heated fluid to rise. If the hot
surface is facing upward, the heated fluid rises freely, inducing strong natural
convection currents and thus effective heat transfer, as shown in Fig. 14–11.
But if the hot surface is facing downward, the plate blocks the heated fluid
that tends to rise (except near the edges), impeding heat transfer. The oppo-
site is true for a cold plate in a warmer environment since the net force
(weight minus buoyancy force) in this case acts downward, and the cooled
fluid near the plate tends to descend.
The average Nusselt number for horizontal surfaces can be determined
from the simple power-law relations given in Table 14–1. The characteristic
length for horizontal surfaces is calculated from
(14–29)
where As is the surface area and p is the perimeter. Note that Lc  a/4 for a
horizontal square surface of length a, and D/4 for a horizontal circular sur-
face of diameter D.
Horizontal Cylinders and Spheres
The boundary layer over a hot horizontal cylinder starts to develop at the bot-
tom, increasing in thickness along the circumference, and forming a rising
plume at the top, as shown in Fig. 14–12. Therefore, the local Nusselt number
L c  As
p
Chapter 14
|
621
Natural
convection
currents
Natural
convection
currents
Hot
plate
FIGURE 14–11
Natural convection flows on the
upper and lower surfaces of
a horizontal hot plate.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
625
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
is highest at the bottom, and lowest at the top of the cylinder when the bound-
ary layer flow remains laminar. The opposite is true in the case of a cold hor-
izontal cylinder in a warmer medium, and the boundary layer in this case
starts to develop at the top of the cylinder and ending with a descending
plume at the bottom.
The average Nusselt number over the entire surface can be determined
from Eq. 14–25 (Churchill and Chu, 1975) for an isothermal horizontal
cylinder, and from Eq. 14–26 for an isothermal sphere (Churchill, 1983)
both given in Table 14–1.
622
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Boundary
layer flow
Hot
cylinder
FIGURE 14–12
Natural convection flow over a
horizontal hot cylinder.
T = 20°C
D = 8 cm
70°C
6 m
FIGURE 14–13
Schematic for Example 14–1.
EXAMPLE 14–1
Heat Loss from Hot-Water Pipes
A 6-m-long section of an 8-cm-diameter horizontal hot-water pipe shown in
Fig. 14–13 passes through a large room whose temperature is 20°C. If the
outer surface temperature of the pipe is 70°C, determine the rate of heat
loss from the pipe by natural convection.
Solution
A horizontal hot-water pipe passes through a large room. The rate
of heat loss from the pipe by natural convection is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Air is an ideal gas. 
3 The local atmospheric pressure is 1 atm.
Properties
The properties of air at the film temperature of Tf  (Ts  T)/2 
(70  20)/2  45C and 1 atm are (Table A–22)
k  0.02699 W/m  C
Pr  0.7241
n  1.750 
 105 m2/s
b 

Analysis
The characteristic length in this case is the outer diameter of the
pipe, Lc  D  0.08 m. Then the Rayleigh number becomes
The natural convection Nusselt number in this case can be determined from
Eq. 14–25 to be
Then,
h 
Nu 
(17.39)  5.867 W/m  C
As  pDL  p(0.08 m)(6 m)  1.508 m2
and
 hAs(Ts  T)  (5.867 W/m2  C)(1.508 m2)(70  20)C  442 W
Q
0.02699 W/m  C
0.08 m
k
D
 17.39
Nu  e0.6 
0.387Ra1/6
D
[1  (0.559/Pr)9/16]8/27f
2
 e0.6 
0.387(1.867 
 106)1/6
[1  (0.559/0.7241)9/16]8/27f
2
 (9.81 m/s2)[1/(318 K)](70  20 K)(0.08 m)3
(1.750 
 105 m2/s)2
(0.7241)  1.867 
 106
RaD  gb(Ts  T)D3
n 2
Pr
1
318 K
1
Tf

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
626
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
623
.
Q
.
Q
T = 20°C
Ts = 70°C
nat conv
rad, max = 553 W
= 442 W
FIGURE 14–14
Radiation heat transfer is usually
comparable to natural convection in
magnitude and should be considered in
heat transfer analysis.
T = 30°C
90°C
(a) Vertical
(b) Hot surface facing up
(c) Hot surface facing down
L = 0.6 m
FIGURE 14–15
Schematic for Example 14–2.
Therefore, the pipe loses heat to the air in the room at a rate of 442 W by
natural convection.
Discussion
The pipe loses heat to the surroundings by radiation as well as by
natural convection. Assuming the outer surface of the pipe to be black (emis-
sivity e  1) and the inner surfaces of the walls of the room to be at room
temperature, the radiation heat transfer is determined to be (Fig. 14–14)
rad  eAss(T s
4  Tsurr
4 )
 (1)(1.508 m2)(5.67 
 108 W/m2  K4)[(70  273 K)4  (20  273 K)4]
 553 W
which is larger than natural convection. The emissivity of a real surface is less
than 1, and thus the radiation heat transfer for a real surface will be less. But
radiation will still be significant for most systems cooled by natural convec-
tion. Therefore, a radiation analysis should normally accompany a natural con-
vection analysis unless the emissivity of the surface is low.
Q
EXAMPLE 14–2
Cooling of a Plate in Different Orientations
Consider a 0.6-m 
 0.6-m thin square plate in a room at 30C. One side of
the plate is maintained at a temperature of 90C, while the other side is
insulated, as shown in Fig. 14–15. Determine the rate of heat transfer from
the plate by natural convection if the plate is (a) vertical, (b) horizontal with
hot surface facing up, and (c) horizontal with hot surface facing down.
Solution
A hot plate with an insulated back is considered. The rate of heat
loss by natural convection is to be determined for different orientations.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Air is an ideal gas. 
3 The local atmospheric pressure is 1 atm.
Properties
The properties of air at the film temperature of Tf  (Ts 
T)/2  (90  30)/2  60C and 1 atm are (Table A–22)
k  0.02808 W/m  C
Pr  0.7202
n 1.896 
 105 m2/s
b 

Analysis
(a) Vertical. The characteristic length in this case is the height of
the plate, which is L  0.6 m. The Rayleigh number is

(0.7202)  7.649 
 108
Then the natural convection Nusselt number can be determined from 
Eq. 14–21 to be
Nu 

 113.3
e0.825 
0.387(7.649 
 108)1/6
[1  (0.492/0.7202)9/16]8/27f
2
b0.825 
0.387Ra1/6
L
[1  (0.492/Pr)9/16]8/27r
2
(9.81 m/s2)[1/(333 K)](90  30 K)(0.6 m)3
(1.896 
 105 m2/s)2
RaL  gb(Ts  T)L3
n 2
Pr
1
333 K
1
Tf

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
627
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
624
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Note that the simpler relation Eq. 14–19 would give Nu  0.59 RaL
1/4 
98.12, which is 13 percent lower. Then,
h 
Nu 
(113.3)  5.302 W/m2  C
As  L2  (0.6 m)2  0.36 m2
and
 hAs(Ts  T)  (5.302 W/m2  C)(0.36 m2)(90  30)C  115 W
(b) Horizontal with hot surface facing up. The characteristic length and the
Rayleigh number in this case are
Lc 
 0.15 m

(0.7202)  1.195 
 107
The natural convection Nusselt number can be determined from Eq. 14–22
to be
Nu  0.54RaL
1/4  0.54(1.195 
 107)1/4  31.75
Then,
h 
Nu 
(31.75)  5.944 W/m2  C
and
 hAs(Ts  T)  (5.944 W/m2  C)(0.36 m2)(90  30)C  128 W
(c) Horizontal with hot surface facing down. The characteristic length and the
Rayleigh number in this case are the same as those determined in (b). But the
natural convection Nusselt number is to be determined from Eq. 14–24,
Nu  0.27Ra L
1/4  0.27(1.195 
 107)1/4  15.87
Then,
h 
Nu 
(15.87)  2.971 W/m2  C
and
 hAs(Ts  T)  (2.971 W/m2  C)(0.36 m2)(90  30)C  64.2 W
Note that the natural convection heat transfer is the lowest in the case of
the hot surface facing down. This is not surprising, since the hot air is
“trapped” under the plate in this case and cannot get away from the plate
easily. As a result, the cooler air in the vicinity of the plate will have diffi-
culty reaching the plate, which results in a reduced rate of heat transfer.
Discussion
The plate will lose heat to the surroundings by radiation as well
as by natural convection. Assuming the surface of the plate to be black 
Q
0.02808 W/m  ºC
0.15 m
k
Lc
Q
0.02808 W/m  ºC
0.15 m
k
Lc
(9.81 m/s2)[1/(333 K)](90  30 K)(0.15 m)3
(1.896 
 105 m2/s)2
RaL  gb(Ts  T)Lc
3
n 2
Pr
As
p  L2
4L  L
4  0.6 m
4
Q
0.02808 W/m  C
0.6 m
k
L

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
628
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
14–4
■NATURAL CONVECTION FROM FINNED
SURFACES AND PCBs
Natural convection flow through a channel formed by two parallel plates as
shown in Fig. 14–16 is commonly encountered in practice. When the plates
are hot (Ts  T), the ambient fluid at T enters the channel from the lower
end, rises as it is heated under the effect of buoyancy, and the heated fluid
leaves the channel from the upper end. The plates could be the fins of a finned
heat sink, or the PCBs (printed circuit boards) of an electronic device. The
plates can be approximated as being isothermal (Ts  constant) in the first
case, and isoflux (
s  constant) in the second case.
Boundary layers start to develop at the lower ends of opposing surfaces,
and eventually merge at the midplane if the plates are vertical and sufficiently
long. In this case, we will have fully developed channel flow after the merger
of the boundary layers, and the natural convection flow is analyzed as chan-
nel flow. But when the plates are short or the spacing is large, the boundary
layers of opposing surfaces never reach each other, and the natural convection
flow on a surface is not affected by the presence of the opposing surface. In
that case, the problem should be analyzed as natural convection from two
independent plates in a quiescent medium, using the relations given for sur-
faces, rather than natural convection flow through a channel.
Natural Convection Cooling of Finned Surfaces
(Ts  constant)
Finned surfaces of various shapes, called heat sinks, are frequently used in
the cooling of electronic devices. Energy dissipated by these devices is trans-
ferred to the heat sinks by conduction and from the heat sinks to the ambient
air by natural or forced convection, depending on the power dissipation
requirements. Natural convection is the preferred mode of heat transfer since
it involves no moving parts, like the electronic components themselves. How-
ever, in the natural convection mode, the components are more likely to run at
a higher temperature and thus undermine reliability. A properly selected heat
sink may considerably lower the operation temperature of the components
and thus reduce the risk of failure.
Natural convection from vertical finned surfaces of rectangular shape has
been the subject of numerous studies, mostly experimental. Bar-Cohen and
q
Chapter 14
|
625
(emissivity e  1) and the inner surfaces of the walls of the room to be at
room temperature, the radiation heat transfer in this case is determined to be
rad  eAss(

)
 (1)(0.36 m2)(5.67 
 108 W/m2  K4)[(90  273 K)4  (30  273 K)4]
 182 W
which is larger than that for natural convection heat transfer for each case.
Therefore, radiation can be significant and needs to be considered in sur-
faces cooled by natural convection.
Note the characteristic length is different for the vertical and horizontal
plates, which is important because Gr and Ra vary as L3.
T 4
surr
T 4
s
Q
Ambient
fluid
T
L
S
Isothermal
plate at Ts
Fully
developed
flow
Boundary
layer
FIGURE 14–16
Natural convection flow through a
channel between two isothermal
vertical plates.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
629
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Rohsenow (1984) have compiled the available data under various boundary
conditions, and developed correlations for the Nusselt number and optimum
spacing. The characteristic length for vertical parallel plates used as fins is
usually taken to be the spacing between adjacent fins S, although the fin
height L could also be used. The Rayleigh number is expressed as
RaS 
Pr
and
RaL 
Pr  RaS
(14–30)
The recommended relation for the average Nusselt number for vertical
isothermal parallel plates is
Ts  constant:
Nu 
(14–31)
A question that often arises in the selection of a heat sink is whether to
select one with closely packed fins or widely spaced fins for a given base
area (Fig. 14–17). A heat sink with closely packed fins will have greater
surface area for heat transfer but a smaller heat transfer coefficient because
of the extra resistance the additional fins introduce to fluid flow through the
interfin passages. A heat sink with widely spaced fins, on the other hand,
will have a higher heat transfer coefficient but a smaller surface area. There-
fore, there must be an optimum spacing that maximizes the natural convec-
tion heat transfer from the heat sink for a given base area WL, where W and
L are the width and height of the base of the heat sink, respectively, as
shown in Fig. 14–18. When the fins are essentially isothermal and the fin
thickness t is small relative to the fin spacing S, the optimum fin spacing for
a vertical heat sink is determined by Bar-Cohen and Rohsenow to be
Ts  constant:
Sopt  2.714
 2.714
(14–32)
It can be shown by combining the three equations above that when S  Sopt,
the Nusselt number is a constant and its value is 1.307,
S  Sopt:
Nu 
 1.307
(14–33)
The rate of heat transfer by natural convection from the fins can be deter-
mined from
 h(2nLH)(Ts  T)
(14–34)
where n  W/(S  t) 
 W/S is the number of fins on the heat sink and Ts is
the surface temperature of the fins. All fluid properties are to be evaluated at
the average temperature Tavg  (Ts  T)/2.
Natural Convection Cooling of Vertical PCBs 
(
s  constant)
Arrays of printed circuit boards used in electronic systems can often be mod-
eled as parallel plates subjected to uniform heat flux
s (Fig. 14–19). The
plate temperature in this case increases with height, reaching a maximum at
q
q
Q
hSopt
k
L
Ra0.25
L
aS 3L
RaSb
0.25
hS
k  c
576
(RaSS/L)2 
2.873
(RaSS/L)0.5 d
0.5
L 3
S 3
gb(Ts  T)L3
n2
gb(Ts  T)S3
n2
626
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 14–17
Heat sinks with (a) widely spaced and
(b) closely packed fins.
Courtesy of Yunus Çengel
W
H
Ts 
L
g
t
S
Quiescent
air, T
FIGURE 14–18
Various dimensions of a finned surface
oriented vertically.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
630
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the upper edge of the board. The modified Rayleigh number for uniform heat
flux on both plates is expressed as
(14–35)
The Nusselt number at the upper edge of the plate where maximum temper-
ature occurs is determined from (Bar-Cohen and Rohsenow, 1984)
(14–36)
The optimum fin spacing for the case of uniform heat flux on both plates is
given as
s  constant:
Sopt  2.12
(14–37)
The total rate of heat transfer from the plates is

s As 
s(2nLH)
(14–38)
where n  W/(S  t) 
 W/S is the number of plates. The critical surface
temperature TL occurs at the upper edge of the plates, and it can be deter-
mined from
s  hL(TL  T)
(14–39)
All fluid properties are to be evaluated at the average temperature Tavg 
(TL  T)/2.
Mass Flow Rate through the Space between Plates
As we mentioned earlier, the magnitude of the natural convection heat trans-
fer is directly related to the mass flow rate of the fluid, which is established
by the dynamic balance of two opposing effects: buoyancy and friction.
The fins of a heat sink introduce both effects: inducing extra buoyancy as a
result of the elevated temperature of the fin surfaces and slowing down the
fluid by acting as an added obstacle on the flow path. As a result, increasing
the number of fins on a heat sink can either enhance or reduce natural convec-
tion, depending on which effect is dominant. The buoyancy-driven fluid flow
rate is established at the point where these two effects balance each other. The
friction force increases as more and more solid surfaces are introduced, seri-
ously disrupting fluid flow and heat transfer. Under some conditions, the
increase in friction may more than offset the increase in buoyancy. This in
turn will tend to reduce the flow rate and thus the heat transfer. For that rea-
son, heat sinks with closely spaced fins are not suitable for natural convection
cooling.
When the heat sink involves closely spaced fins, the narrow channels
formed tend to block or “suffocate” the fluid, especially when the heat sink is
long. As a result, the blocking action produced overwhelms the extra buoy-
ancy and downgrades the heat transfer characteristics of the heat sink. Then,
at a fixed power setting, the heat sink runs at a higher temperature relative to
the no-shroud case. When the heat sink involves widely spaced fins, the
q
q
q
Q
aS 4L
Ra*Sb
0.2
q
NuL  hLS
k  c
48
Ra*S S/L 
2.51
(Ra*LS/L)0.4 d
0.5
Ra*S  gb qsS 4
kυ2
 Pr
Chapter 14
|
627
W
S
H
L
T
qs·
FIGURE 14–19
Arrays of vertical printed circuit
boards (PCBs) cooled by natural
convection.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
631
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
shroud does not introduce a significant increase in resistance to flow, and the
buoyancy effects dominate. As a result, heat transfer by natural convection
may improve, and at a fixed power level the heat sink may run at a lower
temperature.
When extended surfaces such as fins are used to enhance natural convec-
tion heat transfer between a solid and a fluid, the flow rate of the fluid in the
vicinity of the solid adjusts itself to incorporate the changes in buoyancy and
friction. It is obvious that this enhancement technique will work to advantage
only when the increase in buoyancy is greater than the additional friction
introduced. One does not need to be concerned with pressure drop or pump-
ing power when studying natural convection since no pumps or blowers are
used in this case. Therefore, an enhancement technique in natural convection
is evaluated on heat transfer performance alone.
The failure rate of an electronic component increases almost exponen-
tially with operating temperature. The cooler the electronic device operates,
the more reliable it is. A rule of thumb is that the semiconductor failure rate
is halved for each 10C reduction in junction operating temperature. The
desire to lower the operating temperature without having to resort to forced
convection has motivated researchers to investigate enhancement tech-
niques for natural convection. Sparrow and Prakash (1987) have demon-
strated that, under certain conditions, the use of discrete plates in lieu of
continuous plates of the same surface area increases heat transfer consider-
ably. In other experimental work, using transistors as the heat source,
Çengel and Zing (1987) have demonstrated that temperature recorded on
the transistor case dropped by as much as 30C when a shroud was used, as
opposed to the corresponding no-shroud case.
628
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
W = 0.12 m
t = 1 mm
S
H = 2.4 cm
L = 0.18 m
Ts = 80°C
FIGURE 14–20
Schematic for Example 14–3.
EXAMPLE 14–3
Optimum Fin Spacing of a Heat Sink
A 12-cm-wide and 18-cm-high vertical hot surface in 30C air is to be cooled
by a heat sink with equally spaced fins of rectangular profile (Fig. 14–20). The
fins are 0.1 cm thick and 18 cm long in the vertical direction and have a
height of 2.4 cm from the base. Determine the optimum fin spacing and the
rate of heat transfer by natural convection from the heat sink if the base tem-
perature is 80C.
Solution
A heat sink with equally spaced rectangular fins is to be used to
cool a hot surface. The optimum fin spacing and the rate of heat transfer are
to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Air is an ideal gas. 3 The
atmospheric pressure at that location is 1 atm. 4 The thickness t of the fins is
very small relative to the fin spacing S so that Eq. 14–32 for optimum fin
spacing is applicable. 5 All fin surfaces are isothermal at base temperature.
Properties
The properties of air at the film temperature of Tf  (Ts  T)/2 
(80  30)/2  55C and 1 atm pressure are (Table A–22)
k  0.02772 W/m  C
Pr  0.7215
n  1.847 
 105 m2/s
b  1/Tf  1/328 K
Analysis
We take the characteristic length to be the length of the fins in the
vertical direction (since we do not know the fin spacing). Then the Rayleigh
number becomes

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
632
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
14–5
■NATURAL CONVECTION INSIDE ENCLOSURES
A considerable portion of heat loss from a typical residence occurs through
the windows. We certainly would insulate the windows, if we could, in order
to conserve energy. The problem is finding an insulating material that is
transparent. An examination of the thermal conductivities of the insulating
materials reveals that air is a better insulator than most common insulating
materials. Besides, it is transparent. Therefore, it makes sense to insulate the
windows with a layer of air. Of course, we need to use another sheet of glass
to trap the air. The result is an enclosure, which is known as a double-pane
window in this case. Other examples of enclosures include wall cavities, solar
collectors, and cryogenic chambers involving concentric cylinders or spheres.
Enclosures are frequently encountered in practice, and heat transfer
through them is of practical interest. Heat transfer in enclosed spaces is
complicated by the fact that the fluid in the enclosure, in general, does not
remain stationary. In a vertical enclosure, the fluid adjacent to the hotter
surface rises and the fluid adjacent to the cooler one falls, setting off a rota-
tionary motion within the enclosure that enhances heat transfer through the
enclosure. Typical flow patterns in vertical and horizontal rectangular enclo-
sures are shown in Figs. 14–2l and 14–22.
Chapter 14
|
629
.
Q
Hot
surface
Velocity
profile
Cold
surface
L
FIGURE 14–21
Convective currents in a vertical
rectangular enclosure.
RaL 
Pr

(0.7215)  1.845 
 107
The optimum fin spacing is determined from Eq. 14–32 to be
Sopt  2.714
 7.45 
 103 m  7.45 mm
which is about seven times the thickness of the fins. Therefore, the assump-
tion of negligible fin thickness in this case is acceptable. The number of fins
and the heat transfer coefficient for this optimum fin spacing case are
n 


 14 fins
The convection coefficient for this optimum fin spacing case is, from 
Eq. 14–33,
h  Nuopt
 4.863 W/m2  C
Then the rate of natural convection heat transfer becomes
 hAs(Ts  T)  h(2nLH)(Ts  T)
 (4.863 W/m2  C)[2 
 14(0.18 m)(0.024 m)](80  30)C  29.4 W
Therefore, this heat sink can dissipate heat by natural convection at a rate of
29.4 W.
Q
k
Sopt  1.307 0.02772 W/m  C
0.00745 m
0.12 m
(0.00745  0.001) m
W
S  t
L
Ra L
0.25  2.714
0.18 m
(1.845 
 107)0.25
(9.81 m/s2)[1/(328 K)](80  30 K)(0.18 m)3
(1.847 
 105 m2/s)2
gb(Ts  T)L3
n 2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
633
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The characteristics of heat transfer through a horizontal enclosure depend on
whether the hotter plate is at the top or at the bottom, as shown in Fig. 14–22.
When the hotter plate is at the top, no convection currents develop in the enclo-
sure, since the lighter fluid is always on top of the heavier fluid. Heat transfer in
this case is by pure conduction, and we have Nu  1.When the hotter plate is at
the bottom, the heavier fluid will be on top of the lighter fluid, and there will be
a tendency for the lighter fluid to topple the heavier fluid and rise to the top,
where it comes in contact with the cooler plate and cools down. Until that hap-
pens, however, heat transfer is still by pure conduction and Nu  1. When Ra
 1708, the buoyant force overcomes the fluid resistance and initiates natural
convection currents, which are observed to be in the form of hexagonal cells
called Bénard cells. For Ra  3 
 105, the cells break down and the fluid
motion becomes turbulent.
The Rayleigh number for an enclosure is determined from
RaL 
Pr
(14–40)
where the characteristic length Lc is the distance between the hot and cold
surfaces, and T1 and T2 are the temperatures of the hot and cold surfaces,
respectively. All fluid properties are to be evaluated at the average fluid tem-
perature Tavg  (T1  T2)/2.
Effective Thermal Conductivity
When the Nusselt number is known, the rate of heat transfer through the
enclosure can be determined from
 hAs(T1  T2)  kNuAs
(14–41)
since h  kNu/L. The rate of steady heat conduction across a layer of thick-
ness Lc , area As, and thermal conductivity k is expressed as
cond  kAs
(14–42)
where T1 and T2 are the temperatures on the two sides of the layer. A compar-
ison of this relation with Eq. 14–41 reveals that the convection heat transfer in
an enclosure is analogous to heat conduction across the fluid layer in the
enclosure provided that the thermal conductivity k is replaced by kNu. That
is, the fluid in an enclosure behaves like a fluid whose thermal conductivity is
kNu as a result of convection currents. Therefore, the quantity kNu is called
the effective thermal conductivity of the enclosure. That is,
keff  kNu
(14–43)
Note that for the special case of Nu  1, the effective thermal conductivity
of the enclosure becomes equal to the conductivity of the fluid. This is
expected since this case corresponds to pure conduction (Fig. 14–23).
Natural convection heat transfer in enclosed spaces has been the subject
of many experimental and numerical studies, and numerous correlations for
the Nusselt number exist. Simple power-law type relations in the form of
T1  T2
Lc
Q
T1  T2
Lc
Q
gb(T1  T2)L3
c
n 2
630
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Nu = 3
keff = 3k
Natural
convection
Pure
conduction
(No
motion)
.
Q = 10 W
.
Q = 30 W
k
Hot
Cold
Hot
Cold
FIGURE 14–23
A Nusselt number of 3 for an
enclosure indicates that heat transfer
through the enclosure by natural
convection is three times that by pure
conduction.
Light fluid
Heavy fluid
Heavy fluid
Light fluid
Hot
Cold
Cold
(No fluid motion)
(a) Hot plate at the top
(b) Hot plate at the bottom
Hot
FIGURE 14–22
Convective currents in a horizontal
enclosure with (a) hot plate at the top
and (b) hot plate at the bottom.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
634
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Nu  CRaL
n , where C and n are constants, are sufficiently accurate, but they
are usually applicable to a narrow range of Prandtl and Rayleigh numbers
and aspect ratios. The relations that are more comprehensive are naturally
more complex. Next we present some widely used relations for various
types of enclosures.
Horizontal Rectangular Enclosures
We need no Nusselt number relations for the case of the hotter plate being
at the top, since there are no convection currents in this case and heat trans-
fer is downward by conduction (Nu  1). When the hotter plate is at the
bottom, however, significant convection currents set in for RaL  1708, and
the rate of heat transfer increases (Fig. 14–24).
For horizontal enclosures that contain air, Jakob (1949) recommends the
following simple correlations
Nu  0.195RaL
1/4
104  RaL  4 
 105
(14–44)
Nu  0.068RaL
1/3
4 
 105  RaL  107
(14–45)
These relations can also be used for other gases with 0.5  Pr  2. Using
water, silicone oil, and mercury in their experiments, Globe and Dropkin
(1959) obtained this correlation for horizontal enclosures heated from below,
Nu  0.069RaL
1/3 Pr0.074
3 
 105  RaL  7 
 109
(14–46)
Based on experiments with air, Hollands et al. (1976) recommend this cor-
relation for horizontal enclosures,
Nu  1  1.44

RaL  108
(14–47)
The notation [ ] indicates that if the quantity in the bracket is negative, it
should be set equal to zero. This relation also correlates data well for liquids
with moderate Prandtl numbers for RaL  105, and thus it can also be used
for water.
Inclined Rectangular Enclosures
Air spaces between two inclined parallel plates are commonly encountered
in flat-plate solar collectors (between the glass cover and the absorber plate)
and the double-pane skylights on inclined roofs. Heat transfer through an
inclined enclosure depends on the aspect ratio H/L as well as the tilt angle u
from the horizontal (Fig. 14–25).
For large aspect ratios (H/L  12), this equation (Hollands et al., 1976)
correlates experimental data extremely well for tilt angles up to 70,
(14–48)
for RaL  105, 0  u  70, and H/L  12. Again any quantity in [ ]
should be set equal to zero if it is negative. This is to ensure that Nu  1
for RaL cos u  1708. Note that this relation reduces to Eq. 14–47 for hor-
izontal enclosures for u  0, as expected.
Nu  1  1.44c1 
1708
RaL cos ud

a1  1708(sin 1.8u)1.6
RaL cos u
b  c(RaL cos u)1/3
18
 1d

c Ra1/3
L
18  1d

c 1  1708
Ra L d

Chapter 14
|
631
H
L
Fluid
T2
T1
Q·
T1 > T2
FIGURE 14–24
A horizontal rectangular enclosure
with isothermal surfaces.
H
L
T2
T1
Q·
θ
T1 > T2
FIGURE 14–25
An inclined rectangular enclosure
with isothermal surfaces.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
635
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
For enclosures with smaller aspect ratios (H/L  12), the next correlation
can be used provided that the tilt angle is less than the critical value ucr
listed in Table 14–2 (Catton, 1978)
(14–49)
For tilt angles greater than the critical value (ucr  u  90), the Nusselt
number can be obtained by multiplying the Nusselt number for a vertical
enclosure by (sin u)1/4 (Ayyaswamy and Catton, 1973),
Nu  Nuu  90(sin u)1/4
ucr  u  90, any H/L
(14–50)
For enclosures tilted more than 90, the recommended relation is [Arnold 
et al. (1974)]
Nu  1  (Nuu  90  1)sin u
90  u  180, any H/L
(14–51)
More recent but more complex correlations are also available in the litera-
ture (e.g., ElSherbiny et al., 1982).
Vertical Rectangular Enclosures
For vertical enclosures (Fig. 14–26), Catton (1978) recommends these two
correlations due to Berkovsky and Polevikov (1977),
Nu  0.18
(14–52)
Nu  0.22
(14–53)
For vertical enclosures with larger aspect ratios, the following correlations
can be used (MacGregor and Emery, 1969)
Nu  0.42RaL
1/4 Pr0.012
(14–54)
Nu  0.46RaL
1/3
(14–55)
Again all fluid properties are to be evaluated at the average temperature
(T1  T2)/2.
Concentric Cylinders
Consider two long concentric horizontal cylinders maintained at uniform but
different temperatures of Ti and To, as shown in Fig. 14–27. The diameters of
the inner and outer cylinders are Di and Do, respectively, and the characteris-
tic length is the spacing between the cylinders, Lc  (Do  Di)/2. The rate of
heat transfer through the annular space between the cylinders by natural
  
1  H/L  40
1  Pr  20
106  RaL  10 9
aH
L b
0.3
    
10  H/L  40
        1  Pr  2 
 104
104  RaL  10 7
2  H/L  10
any Prandtl number
RaL  1010
a
Pr
0.2  Pr RaLb
0.28
aH
Lb
1/4
1  H/L  2
any Prandtl number
RaL Pr/(0.2  Pr)  10 3
a
Pr
0.2  Pr Ra Lb
0.29
Nu  Nuu0º aNuu90º
Nuu0º b
u/ucr
(sin ucr)u/(4ucr)    0º  u  ucr
632
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 14–2
Critical angles for inclined
rectangular enclosures
Aspect ratio, 
Critical angle, 
H/L
ucr
1
25
3
53
6
60
12
67
12
70
H
L
T2
T1
Q·
T1 > T2
FIGURE 14–26
A vertical rectangular enclosure with
isothermal surfaces.
Outer cylinder
at To
Inner cylinder
at Ti
Di
Do
FIGURE 14–27
Two concentric horizontal isothermal
cylinders.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
636
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
convection per unit length is expressed as

(14–56)
The recommended relation for effective thermal conductivity is (Raithby
and Hollands, 1975)
(14–57)
where the geometric factor for concentric cylinders Fcyl is
(14–58)
The keff relation in Eq. 14–57 is applicable for 0.70  Pr  6000 and 102 
FcylRaL  107. For FcylRaL  100, natural convection currents are negligible
and thus keff  k. Note that keff cannot be less than k, and thus we should set
keff  k if keff/k  1. The fluid properties are evaluated at the average tem-
perature of (Ti  To)/2.
Concentric Spheres
For concentric isothermal spheres, the rate of heat transfer through the gap
between the spheres by natural convection is expressed as (Fig. 14–28)

(14–59)
where Lc  (Do  Di)/2 is the characteristic length. The recommended rela-
tion for effective thermal conductivity is (Raithby and Hollands, 1975)
(14–60)
where the geometric factor for concentric spheres Fsph is
(14–61)
The keff relation in Eq. 14–60 is applicable for 0.70  Pr  4200 and 102 
FsphRaL  104. If keff/k  1, we should set keff  k.
Combined Natural Convection and Radiation
Gases are nearly transparent to radiation, and thus heat transfer through a
gas layer is by simultaneous convection (or conduction, if the gas is quies-
cent) and radiation. Natural convection heat transfer coefficients are typi-
cally very low compared to those for forced convection. Therefore, radiation
is usually disregarded in forced convection problems, but it must be consid-
ered in natural convection problems that involve a gas. This is especially the
case for surfaces with high emissivities. For example, about half of the heat
transfer through the air space of a double-pane window is by radiation. The
total rate of heat transfer is determined by adding the convection and radia-
tion components,
total 
conv 
rad
(14–62)
Q
Q
Q
Fsph 
Lc
(DiDo)4(Di
7/5  Do
7/5)5
keff
k  0.74 a
Pr
0.861  Prb
1/4
(FsphRaL)1/4
keff
pDiDo
Lc
 (Ti  To)    (W)
Q
Fcyl 
[ln(Do /Di)]4
L3
c(D3/5
i
 D3/5
o
)5
keff
k  0.386 a
Pr
0.861  Prb
1/4
(FcylRaL)1/4
2pk eff
ln(Do/Di) (Ti  To)    (W/m)
Q
Chapter 14
|
633
Do, To
Di, Ti
Lc
FIGURE 14–28
Two concentric isothermal spheres.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
637
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Radiation heat transfer from a surface at temperature Ts surrounded by sur-
faces at a temperature Tsurr (both in K) is determined from
rad  esAs(

)
(W)
(14–63)
where e is the emissivity of the surface, As is the surface area, and s 
5.67 
 108 W/m2  K4 is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant.
When the end effects are negligible, radiation heat transfer between two
large parallel plates at temperatures T1 and T2 is expressed as (see Chapter 21
for details)
rad 
 eeffective sAs(T 1
4  T 2
4)
(W)
(14–64)
where e1 and e2 are the emissivities of the plates, and eeffective is the effective
emissivity defined as
eeffective 
(14–65)
The emissivity of an ordinary glass surface, for example, is 0.84. Therefore,
the effective emissivity of two parallel glass surfaces facing each other is
0.72. Radiation heat transfer between concentric cylinders and spheres is
discussed in Chapter 15.
Note that in some cases the temperature of the surrounding medium may be
below the surface temperature (T  Ts), while the temperature of the sur-
rounding surfaces is above the surface temperature (Tsurr  Ts). In such cases,
convection and radiation heat transfers are subtracted from each other instead
of being added since they are in opposite directions. Also, for a metal surface,
the radiation effect can be reduced to negligible levels by polishing the sur-
face and thus lowering the surface emissivity to a value near zero.
1
1/e1  1/e2  1
pAs(T 4
1  T 4
2)
1/e1  1/e2  1
Q
T 4
surr
T 4
s
Q
634
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 14–4
Heat Loss through a Double-Pane Window
The vertical 0.8-m-high, 2-m-wide double-pane window shown in Fig. 14–29
consists of two sheets of glass separated by a 2-cm air gap at atmospheric
pressure. If the glass surface temperatures across the air gap are measured
to be 12C and 2C, determine the rate of heat transfer through the window.
Solution
Two glasses of a double-pane window are maintained at specified
temperatures. The rate of heat transfer through the window is to be deter-
mined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Air is an ideal gas. 
3 Radiation heat transfer is not considered.
Properties
The properties of air at the average temperature of Tavg 
(T1  T2)/2  (12  2)/2  7C and 1 atm pressure are (Table A–22)
k  0.02416 W/m  C
Pr  0.7344
n  1.400 
 105 m2/s
b 
Analysis
We have a rectangular enclosure filled with air. The characteristic
length in this case is the distance between the two glasses, Lc  L  0.02 m.
Then the Rayleigh number becomes
1
Tavg 
1
280 K
H = 0.8 m
Glass
Glass
Air
L = 2 cm
FIGURE 14–29
Schematic for Example 14–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
638
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
635
RaL 

(0.7344)  1.050 
 104
The aspect ratio of the geometry is H/L  0.8/0.02  40. Then the Nusselt
number in this case can be determined from Eq. 14–54 to be
Nu  0.42RaL
1/4 Pr 0.012
 0.42(1.050 
 104)1/4(0.7344)0.012
 1.40
Then,
As  H 
 W  (0.8 m)(2 m)  1.6 m2
and
 hAs(T1  T2)  kNuAs
 (0.02416 W/m  C)(1.40)(1.6 m2)
 27.1 W
Therefore, heat is lost through the window at a rate of 27.1 W.
Discussion
Recall that a Nusselt number of Nu  1 for an enclosure corre-
sponds to pure conduction heat transfer through the enclosure. The air in the
enclosure in this case remains still, and no natural convection currents occur
in the enclosure. The Nusselt number in our case is 1.40, which indicates
that heat transfer through the enclosure is 1.40 times that by pure conduc-
tion. The increase in heat transfer is due to the natural convection currents
that develop in the enclosure.
(12  2)C
0.02 m
T1  T2
L
Q
a 0.8
0.02b
0.3
aH
L b
0.3
(9.81 m/s2)[1/(280 K)](12  2 K)(0.02 m)3
(1.400 
 105 m2/s)2
gb(T1  T2)Lc
3
n 2
Pr
EXAMPLE 14–5
Heat Transfer through a Spherical Enclosure
The two concentric spheres of diameters Di  20 cm and Do  30 cm shown in
Fig. 14–30 are separated by air at 1 atm pressure. The surface temperatures of
the two spheres enclosing the air are Ti  320 K and To  280 K, respectively.
Determine the rate of heat transfer from the inner sphere to the outer sphere
by natural convection.
Solution
Two surfaces of a spherical enclosure are maintained at specified
temperatures. The rate of heat transfer through the enclosure is to be
determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Air is an ideal gas. 3
Radiation heat transfer is not considered.
Properties
The properties of air at the average temperature of Tavg  (Ti  To)/2 
(320  280)/2  300 K  27C and 1 atm pressure are (Table A–22)
k  0.02566 W/m  C
Pr  0.7290
n  1.580 
 105 m2/s
b  1
Tavg 
1
300 K
Di = 20 cm
Ti = 320 K
Do = 30 cm
To = 280 K
Lc= 5cm
FIGURE 14–30
Schematic for Example 14–5.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
639
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
636
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
We have a spherical enclosure filled with air. The characteristic
length in this case is the distance between the two spheres,
Lc  (Do  Di)/2  (0.3  0.2)/2  0.05 m
The Rayleigh number is
RaL 

(0.729)  4.775 
 105
The effective thermal conductivity is
Fsph 

 0.005229
keff  0.74k
(FsphRaL)1/4
 0.74(0.02566 W/m  C)
(0.005229 
 4.775 
 105)1/4
 0.1105 W/m  C
Then the rate of heat transfer between the spheres becomes
 keff
(Ti  To)
 (0.1105 W/m  C)
(320  280) K  16.7 W
Therefore, heat will be lost from the inner sphere to the outer one at a rate of
16.7 W.
Discussion
Note that the air in the spherical enclosure acts like a stationary
fluid whose thermal conductivity is keff/k  0.1105/0.02566  4.3 times that
of air as a result of natural convection currents. Also, radiation heat transfer
between spheres is usually significant, and should be considered in a complete
analysis.
p(0.2 m)(0.3 m)
0.05 m
pDi Do
Lc
Q
a
0.729
0.861  0.729b
1/4
a
Pr
0.861  Prb
1/4
0.05 m
[(0.2 m)(0.3 m)]4[(0.2 m)7/5  (0.3 m)7/5]5
Lc
(DiDo)4(D 7/5
i
 Do
7/5)5
(9.81 m/s2)[1/(300 K)](320  280 K)(0.05 m)3
(1.58 
 105 m2/s)2
gb(Ti  To)Lc
3
n 2
Pr
70°F
Water
Aluminum tube
Glass cover
Solar
energy
2 in
4 in
FIGURE 14–31
Schematic for Example 14–6.
EXAMPLE 14–6
Heating Water in a Tube by Solar Energy
A solar collector consists of a horizontal aluminum tube having an outer
diameter of 2 in enclosed in a concentric thin glass tube of 4-in-diameter (Fig.
14–31). Water is heated as it flows through the tube, and the annular space
between the aluminum and the glass tubes is filled with air at 1 atm pressure.
The pump circulating the water fails during a clear day, and the water
temperature in the tube starts rising. The aluminum tube absorbs solar
radiation at a rate of 30 Btu/h per foot length, and the temperature of the
ambient air outside is 70F. Disregarding any heat loss by radiation, determine
the temperature of the aluminum tube when steady operation is established
(i.e., when the rate of heat loss from the tube equals the amount of solar
energy gained by the tube).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
640
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
637
Solution
The circulating pump of a solar collector that consists of a
horizontal tube and its glass cover fails. The equilibrium temperature of the
tube is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The tube and its cover
are isothermal. 3 Air is an ideal gas. 4 Heat loss by radiation is negligible.
Properties
The
properties
of
air
should
be
evaluated
at
the
average
temperature. But we do not know the exit temperature of the air in the duct,
and thus we cannot determine the bulk fluid and glass cover temperatures at
this point, and we cannot evaluate the average temperatures. Therefore, we
assume the glass temperature to be 110F, and use properties at an
anticipated average temperature of (70  110)/2  90F (Table A–22E),
k  0.01505 Btu/h  ft  F
Pr  0.7275
n  1.753 
 104 ft2/s
b 
Analysis
We have a horizontal cylindrical enclosure filled with air at 1 atm
pressure. The problem involves heat transfer from the aluminum tube to the
glass cover and from the outer surface of the glass cover to the surrounding
ambient air. When steady operation is reached, these two heat transfer rates
must equal the rate of heat gain. That is,
tube-glass 
glass-ambient 
solar gain  30 Btu/h
(per foot of tube)
The heat transfer surface area of the glass cover is
Ao  Aglass  (pDo L)  p(4/12 ft)(1 ft)  1.047 ft2
(per foot of tube)
To determine the Rayleigh number, we need to know the surface temperature
of the glass, which is not available. Therefore, it is clear that the solution will
require a trial-and-error approach. Assuming the glass cover temperature to
be 110F, the Rayleigh number, the Nusselt number, the convection heat
transfer coefficient, and the rate of natural convection heat transfer from the
glass cover to the ambient air are determined to be
Ra


(0.7275)  2.054 
 106
Nu 
 17.89
ho 
Nu 
(17.89)  0.8077 Btu/h  ft2  F
o  hoAo(To  T)  (0.8077 Btu/h  ft2  F)(1.047 ft2)(110  70)F
 33.8 Btu/h
which is more than 30 Btu/h. Therefore, the assumed temperature of 110F for
the glass cover is high. Repeating the calculations with lower temperatures,
the glass cover temperature corresponding to 30 Btu/h is determined to be
106F.
Q
0.01505 Btu/h  ft  ºF
4/12 ft
k
D0
b0.6 
0.387 Ra1/6
D
[1  (0.559/Pr)9/16]8/27 r
2
 b0.6 
0.387(2.054 
 106)1/6
[1  (0.559/0.7275)9/16]8/27 r
2
(32.2 ft/s2)[1/(550 R)](110  70 R)(4/12 ft)3
(1.753 
 104 ft2/s)2
gb(Ts  T)Do
3
n 2
Pr
Do
Q
Q
Q
1
Tavg 
1
550 R

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
641
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
638
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
The temperature of the aluminum tube is determined in a similar manner
using the natural convection relations for two horizontal concentric cylinders.
The characteristic length in this case is the distance between the two
cylinders, which is
Lc  (Do  Di)/2  (4  2)/2  1 in  1/12 ft
We start the calculations by assuming the tube temperature to be 200F, and
thus an average temperature of (106  200)/2  153F  613 R. Using air
properties at this temperature gives
RaL 

(0.7184)  4.580 
 104
The effective thermal conductivity is
Fcyl 

keff  0.386k
(FcylRaL)1/4
 0.386(0.01653 Btu/h  ft  F)

 (0.1466 
 4.580 
 104)1/4
 0.04743 Btu/h  ft  F
Then the rate of heat transfer between the cylinders becomes

(Ti  To)

(200  106)F  40.4 Btu/h
which is more than 30 Btu/h. Therefore, the assumed temperature of 200F for
the tube is high. By trying other values, the tube temperature corresponding to
30 Btu/h is determined to be 180F. Therefore, the tube will reach an
equilibrium temperature of 180F when the pump fails.
Discussion
Note that we have not considered heat loss by radiation in the
calculations, and thus the tube temperature determined is probably too high.
This problem is considered in Chapter 15 by accounting for the effect of
radiation heat transfer.
2p(0.04743 Btu/h  ft  F)
ln(4/2)
2pkeff
ln(Do /Di)
Q
a
0.7184
0.861  0.7184b
1/4
a
Pr
0.861  Prb
1/4
[ln(4/2)]4
(1/12 ft)3[(2/12 ft)3/5  (4/12 ft)3/5]5  0.1466
[ln(Do/Di)]4
L3
c(D3/5
i
 Do
3/5)5
(32.2 ft/s2)[1/613 R)](200  106 R)(1/12 ft)3
(2.117 
 104 ft2/s)2
gb(Ti  To)L3
c
n2
Pr

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
642
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
639
In this chapter, we have considered natural convection heat
transfer where any fluid motion occurs by natural means
such as buoyancy. The volume expansion coefficient of a
substance represents the variation of the density of that sub-
stance with temperature at constant pressure, and for an
ideal gas, it is expressed as b  1/T, where T is the absolute
temperature in K or R.
The flow regime in natural convection is governed by a
dimensionless number called the Grashof number, which rep-
resents the ratio of the buoyancy force to the viscous force
acting on the fluid and is expressed as
GrL 
where Lc is the characteristic length, which is the height L
for a vertical plate and the diameter D for a horizontal cylin-
der. The correlations for the Nusselt number Nu  hLc /k in
natural convection are expressed in terms of the Rayleigh
number defined as
RaL  GrL Pr 
Pr
Nusselt number relations for various surfaces are given in
Table 14–1. All fluid properties are evaluated at the film tem-
perature of Tf  (Ts  T). The outer surface of a vertical
cylinder can be treated as a vertical plate when the curvature
effects are negligible. The characteristic length for a horizontal
surface is Lc  As/p, where As is the surface area and p is the
perimeter.
The average Nusselt number for vertical isothermal parallel
plates of spacing S and height L is given as
Nu 

The optimum fin spacing for a vertical heat sink and the Nus-
selt number for optimally spaced fins is
Sopt  2.714
 2.714
andNu 
 1.307
In a horizontal rectangular enclosure with the hotter plate
at the top, heat transfer is by pure conduction and Nu  1.
When the hotter plate is at the bottom, the Nusselt number is
Nu  1  1.44

RaL  108
The notation [ ] indicates that if the quantity in the bracket
is negative, it should be set equal to zero. For vertical hori-
c Ra1/3
L
18  1 d

c 1  1708
Ra L d

hSopt
k
L
Ra 0.25
L
aS 3L
RaSb
0.25
c
576
(RaSS/L)2 
2.873
(RaSS/L)0.5 d
0.5
hS
k
1
2
gb(Ts  T)L3
c
n 2
gb(Ts  T)L3
c
n 2
zontal enclosures, the Nusselt number can be determined
from
Nu  0.18
Nu  0.22
For aspect ratios greater than 10, Eqs. 14–54 and 14–55
should be used. For inclined enclosures, Eqs. 14–48 through
14–51 should be used.
For concentric horizontal cylinders, the rate of heat trans-
fer through the annular space between the cylinders by nat-
ural convection per unit length is

(Ti  To)
where
 0.386 
(FcylRaL)1/4
and
Fcyl 
For a spherical enclosure, the rate of heat transfer through
the space between the spheres by natural convection is
expressed as
 keff
(Ti  To)
where
 0.74 
(FsphRaL)1/4
Lc  (Do  Di)/2
Fsph 
The quantity kNu is called the effective thermal conductivity
of the enclosure, since a fluid in an enclosure behaves like a
quiescent fluid whose thermal conductivity is kNu as a result
of convection currents. The fluid properties are evaluated at
the average temperature of (Ti  To)/2.
Lc
(DiDo)4(Di
7/5  D7/5
o
)5
a
Pr
0.861  Prb
1/4
keff
k
pDiDo
Lc
Q
[ln(Do/Di)]4
L3
c(D3/5
i
 D3/5
o
)5
a
Pr
0.861  Prb
1/4
keff
k
2pkeff
ln(Do/Di)
Q
2  H/L  10
any Prandtl number
RaL  1010
a
Pr
0.2  Pr RaLb
0.28
aH
L b
1/4
1  H/L  2
any Prandtl number
RaL Pr/(0.2  Pr)  10 3
a
Pr
0.2  Pr RaLb
0.29
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
643
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
1. J. N Arnold, I. Catton, and D. K. Edwards. “Experimental
Investigation of Natural Convection in Inclined
Rectangular Region of Differing Aspects Ratios.” ASME
Paper No. 75-HT-62, 1975.
2. P. S. Ayyaswamy and I. Catton. “The Boundary-Layer
Regime for Natural Convection in a Differently Heated
Tilted Rectangular Cavity.” Journal of Heat Transfer 95
(1973), p. 543.
3. A. Bar-Cohen. “Fin Thickness for an Optimized Natural
Convection Array of Rectangular Fins.” Journal of Heat
Transfer 101 (1979), pp. 564–566.
4. A. Bar-Cohen and W. M. Rohsenow. “Thermally
Optimum Spacing of Vertical Natural Convection Cooled
Parallel Plates.” Journal of Heat Transfer 106 (1984),
p. 116.
5. B. M. Berkovsky and V. K. Polevikov. “Numerical Study
of Problems on High-Intensive Free Convection.” In
Heat Transfer and Turbulent Buoyant Convection, eds.
D. B. Spalding and N. Afgan, pp. 443–445. Washington,
DC: Hemisphere, 1977.
6. I. Catton. “Natural Convection in Enclosures.”
Proceedings of Sixth International Heat Transfer
Conference. Toronto: Canada, 1978, Vol. 6, pp. 13–31.
7. T. Cebeci. “Laminar Free Convection Heat Transfer from
the Outer Surface of a Vertical Slender Circular Cylinder.”
Proceedings of Fifth International Heat Transfer
Conference paper NCI.4, 1974 pp. 15–19.
8. Y.A. Çengel and P. T. L. Zing. “Enhancement of Natural
Convection Heat Transfer from Heat Sinks by Shrouding.”
Proceedings of ASME/JSME Thermal Engineering
Conference. Honolulu: HA, 1987, Vol. 3, pp. 451–475.
9. S. W. Churchill. “Free Convection around Immersed
Bodies.” In Heat Exchanger Design Handbook, ed.
E. U. Schlünder, Section 2.5.7. New York: Hemisphere,
1983.
10. S. W. Churchill. “Combined Free and Forced Convection
around Immersed Bodies.” In Heat Exchanger Design
Handbook, Section 2.5.9. New York: Hemisphere
Publishing, 1986.
11. S. W. Churchill and H. H. S. Chu. “Correlating Equations
for Laminar and Turbulent Free Convection from a
Horizontal Cylinder.” International Journal of Heat Mass
Transfer 18 (1975), p. 1049.
12. S. W. Churchill and H. H. S. Chu. “Correlating Equations
for Laminar and Turbulent Free Convection from a
Vertical Plate.” International Journal of Heat Mass
Transfer 18 (1975), p. 1323.
13. E. R. G. Eckert and E. Soehngen. “Studies on Heat
Transfer in Laminar Free Convection with Zehnder–Mach
640
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Interferometer.” USAF Technical Report 5747, December
1948.
14. E. R. G. Eckert and E. Soehngen. “Interferometric Studies
on the Stability and Transition to Turbulence of a Free
Convection Boundary Layer.” Proceedings of General
Discussion, Heat Transfer ASME-IME, London, 1951.
15. S. M. ElSherbiny, G. D. Raithby, and K. G. T. Hollands.
“Heat Transfer by Natural Convection Across Vertical and
Inclined Air Layers. Journal of Heat Transfer 104 (1982),
pp. 96–102.
16. T. Fuji and H. Imura. “Natural Convection Heat Transfer
from a Plate with Arbitrary Inclination.” International
Journal of Heat Mass Transfer 15 (1972), p. 755.
17. K. G. T. Hollands, T. E. Unny, G. D. Raithby, and 
L. Konicek. “Free Convective Heat Transfer Across
Inclined Air Layers.” Journal of Heat Transfer 98
(1976), pp. 182–193.
18. M. Jakob. Heat Transfer. New York: Wiley, 1949.
19. W. M. Kays and M. E. Crawford. Convective Heat
and Mass Transfer. 3rd ed. NewYork: McGraw-Hill, 1993.
20. R. K. MacGregor and A. P. Emery. “Free Convection
Through Vertical Plane Layers: Moderate and High
Prandtl Number Fluids.” Journal of Heat Transfer 91
(1969), p. 391.
21. S. Ostrach. “An Analysis of Laminar Free Convection
Flow and Heat Transfer About a Flat Plate Parallel
to the Direction of the Generating Body Force.”
National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, Report
1111, 1953.
22. G. D. Raithby and K. G. T. Hollands. “A General Method
of Obtaining Approximate Solutions to Laminar and
Turbulent Free Convection Problems.” In Advances in
Heat Transfer, ed. F. Irvine and J. P. Hartnett, Vol. II,
pp. 265–315. New York: Academic Press, 1975.
23. E. M. Sparrow and J. L. Gregg. “Laminar Free
Convection from a Vertical Flat Plate.” Transactions of the
ASME 78 (1956), p. 438.
24. E. M. Sparrow and J. L. Gregg. “Laminar Free
Convection Heat Transfer from the Outer Surface of a
Vertical Circular Cylinder.” ASME 78 (1956), p. 1823.
25. E. M. Sparrow and C. Prakash. “Enhancement of Natural
Convection Heat Transfer by a Staggered Array of
Vertical Plates.” Journal of Heat Transfer 102 (1980),
pp. 215–220.
26. E. M. Sparrow and S. B. Vemuri. “Natural
Convection/Radiation Heat Transfer from Highly
Populated Pin Fin Arrays.” Journal of Heat Transfer 107
(1985), pp. 190–197.
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
644
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
641
Physical Mechanism of Natural Convection
14–1C
What is natural convection? How does it differ from
forced convection? What force causes natural convection
currents?
14–2C
In which mode of heat transfer is the convection
heat transfer coefficient usually higher, natural convection or
forced convection? Why?
14–3C
Consider a hot boiled egg in a spacecraft that is
filled with air at atmospheric pressure and temperature at all
times. Will the egg cool faster or slower when the spacecraft
is in space instead of on the ground? Explain.
14–4C
What is buoyancy force? Compare the relative mag-
nitudes of the buoyancy force acting on a body immersed in
these mediums: (a) air, (b) water, (c) mercury, and (d) an
evacuated chamber.
14–5C
When will the hull of a ship sink in water deeper:
when the ship is sailing in fresh water or in seawater? Why?
14–6C
A person weighs himself on a waterproof spring
scale placed at the bottom of a 1-m-deep swimming pool.
Will the person weigh more or less in water? Why?
14–7C
Consider two fluids, one with a large coefficient of
volume expansion and the other with a small one. In what
fluid will a hot surface initiate stronger natural convection cur-
rents? Why? Assume the viscosity of the fluids to be the same.
14–8C
Consider a fluid whose volume does not change
with temperature at constant pressure. What can you say
about natural convection heat transfer in this medium?
14–9C
What do the lines on an interferometer photograph
represent? What do closely packed lines on the same photo-
graph represent?
14–10C
Physically, what does the Grashof number repre-
sent? How does the Grashof number differ from the Reynolds
number?
14–11
Show that the volume expansion coefficient of an
ideal gas is b  1/T, where T is the absolute temperature.
Natural Convection over Surfaces
14–12C
How does the Rayleigh number differ from the
Grashof number?
14–13C
Under what conditions can the outer surface of a
vertical cylinder be treated as a vertical plate in natural con-
vection calculations?
14–14C
Will a hot horizontal plate whose back side is insu-
lated cool faster or slower when its hot surface is facing
down instead of up?
14–15C
Consider laminar natural convection from a verti-
cal hot-plate. Will the heat flux be higher at the top or at the
bottom of the plate? Why?
14–16
Consider a thin 16-cm-long and 20-cm-wide hori-
zontal plate suspended in air at 20C. The plate is equipped
with electric resistance heating elements with a rating of
20 W. Now the heater is turned on and the plate temperature
rises. Determine the temperature of the plate when steady
operating conditions are reached. The plate has an emissivity
of 0.90 and the surrounding surfaces are at 17C.
14–17
Flue gases from an incinerator are released to atmo-
sphere using a stack that is 0.6 m in diameter and 10.0 m
high. The outer surface of the stack is at 40C and the sur-
rounding air is at 10C. Determine the rate of heat transfer
from the stack assuming (a) there is no wind and (b) the
stack is exposed to 20 km/h winds.
14–18
Thermal energy generated by the electrical resis-
tance of a 5-mm-diameter and 4-m-long bare cable is dissi-
pated to the surrounding air at 20C. The voltage drop and
the electric current across the cable in steady operation are
measured to be 60 V and 1.5 A, respectively. Disregarding
radiation, estimate the surface temperature of the cable.
14–19
A 10-m-long section of a 6-cm-diameter horizontal
hot-water pipe passes through a large room whose tempera-
ture is 27C. If the temperature and the emissivity of the
outer surface of the pipe are 73C and 0.8, respectively,
determine the rate of heat loss from the pipe by (a) natural
convection and (b) radiation.
14–20
Consider a wall-mounted power transistor that dissi-
pates 0.18 W of power in an environment at 35C. The tran-
sistor is 0.45 cm long and has a diameter of 0.4 cm. The
emissivity of the outer surface of the transistor is 0.1, and the
average temperature of the surrounding surfaces is 25C. Dis-
regarding any heat transfer from the base surface, determine
PROBLEMS*
L=16 cm
Resistance wire
Air
T=20°C
FIGURE P14–16
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and
students are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated
by an “E” are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them.
Problems with the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete
solutions together with parametric studies are included on the
enclosed DVD. Problems with the 
icon are comprehensive in
nature, and are intended to be solved with a computer, preferably
using the EES software that accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
645
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the surface temperature of the transistor. Use air properties at
100C.
Answer: 183C
14–21
Reconsider Prob. 14–20. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of ambient tem-
perature on the surface temperature of the transistor. Let the
environment temperature vary from 10C to 40C and assume
that the surrounding surfaces are 10C colder than the envi-
ronment temperature. Plot the surface temperature of the
transistor versus the environment temperature, and discuss
the results.
14–22E
Consider a 2-ft 
 2-ft thin square plate in a room
at 75F. One side of the plate is maintained at a temperature
of 130F, while the other side is insulated. Determine the rate
of heat transfer from the plate by natural convection if the
plate is (a) vertical; (b) horizontal with hot surface facing up;
and (c) horizontal with hot surface facing down.
14–23E
Reconsider Prob. 14–22E. Using EES (or
other) software, plot the rate of natural con-
vection heat transfer for different orientations of the plate as
a function of the plate temperature as the temperature varies
from 80F to 180F, and discuss the results.
14–24
A 300-W cylindrical resistance heater is 0.75 m long
and 0.5 cm in diameter. The resistance wire is placed hori-
zontally in a fluid at 20C. Determine the outer surface tem-
perature of the resistance wire in steady operation if the fluid
is (a) air and (b) water. Ignore any heat transfer by radiation.
Use properties at 500C for air and 40C for water.
14–25
Water is boiling in a 12-cm-deep pan with an outer
diameter of 25 cm that is placed on top of a stove. The ambient
air and the surrounding surfaces are at a temperature of 25C,
and the emissivity of the outer surface of the pan is 0.80.
Assuming the entire pan to be at an average temperature of
98C, determine the rate of heat loss from the cylindrical side
surface of the pan to the surroundings by (a) natural convec-
tion and (b) radiation. (c) If water is boiling at a rate of
1.5 kg/h at 100C, determine the ratio of the heat lost from the
side surfaces of the pan to that by the evaporation of water.
The enthalpy of vaporization of water at 100C is 2257 kJ/kg.
Answers: 46.2 W, 47.3 W, 0.099
642
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
14–26
Repeat Prob. 14–25 for a pan whose outer surface is
polished and has an emissivity of 0.1.
14–27
In a plant that manufactures canned aerosol paints,
the cans are temperature-tested in water baths at 55C before
they are shipped to ensure that they withstand temperatures
up to 55C during transportation and shelving. The cans,
moving on a conveyor, enter the open hot water bath, which
is 0.5 m deep, 1 m wide, and 3.5 m long, and move slowly in
the hot water toward the other end. Some of the cans fail the
test and explode in the water bath. The water container is
made of sheet metal, and the entire container is at about 
the same temperature as the hot water. The emissivity of the
outer surface of the container is 0.7. If the temperature of the
surrounding air and surfaces is 20C, determine the rate of
heat loss from the four side surfaces of the container (disre-
gard the top surface, which is open).
The water is heated electrically by resistance heaters, and
the cost of electricity is $0.085/kWh. If the plant operates 24 h
a day 365 days a year and thus 8760 h a year, determine the
annual cost of the heat losses from the container for this
facility.
14–28
Reconsider Prob. 14–27. In order to reduce the heat-
ing cost of the hot water, it is proposed to insulate the side
and bottom surfaces of the container with 5-cm-thick fiber-
glass insulation (k  0.035 W/m · C) and to wrap the
insulation with aluminum foil (e  0.1) in order to minimize
the heat loss by radiation. An estimate is obtained from a
local insulation contractor, who proposes to do the insulation
job for $350, including materials and labor. Would you sup-
port this proposal? How long will it take for the insulation to
pay for itself from the energy it saves?
Water bath
55°C
Aerosol
can
FIGURE P14–27
Power
transistor
0.18 W
   = 0.1
ε
0.4 cm
35°C
0.45 cm
FIGURE P14–20
25°C
98°C
   = 0.80
Vapor
1.5 kg/h
Water
100°C
ε
FIGURE P14–25

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
646
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
643
14–29
Consider a 15-cm 
 20-cm printed circuit board
(PCB) that has electronic components on one side. The board
is placed in a room at 20C. The heat loss from the back
surface of the board is negligible. If the circuit board is dissi-
pating 8 W of power in steady operation, determine the aver-
age temperature of the hot surface of the board, assuming the
board is (a) vertical; (b) horizontal with hot surface facing
up; and (c) horizontal with hot surface facing down. Take the
emissivity of the surface of the board to be 0.8 and assume
the surrounding surfaces to be at the same temperature as the
air in the room.
Answers: (a) 46.6C, (b) 42.6C, (c) 50.7C
14–30
Reconsider Prob. 14–29. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the room
temperature and the emissivity of the board on the tempera-
ture of the hot surface of the board for different orientations
of the board. Let the room temperature vary from 5C to
35C and the emissivity from 0.1 to 1.0. Plot the hot surface
temperature for different orientations of the board as the
functions of the room temperature and the emissivity, and
discuss the results.
14–31
A manufacturer makes absorber plates that are
1.2 m 
 0.8 m in size for use in solar collectors.
The back side of the plate is heavily insulated, while its front
surface is coated with black chrome, which has an absorptivity
of 0.87 for solar radiation and an emissivity of 0.09. Consider
such a plate placed horizontally outdoors in calm air at 25C.
Solar radiation is incident on the plate at a rate of 700 W/m2.
Taking the effective sky temperature to be 10C, determine the
equilibrium temperature of the absorber plate. What would
your answer be if the absorber plate is made of ordinary alu-
minum plate that has a solar absorptivity of 0.28 and an emis-
sivity of 0.07?
14–32
Repeat Prob. 14–31 for an aluminum plate painted
flat black (solar absorptivity 0.98 and emissivity 0.98) and
also for a plate painted white (solar absorptivity 0.26 and
emissivity 0.90).
14–33
The following experiment is conducted to determine
the natural convection heat transfer coefficient for a horizontal
cylinder that is 80 cm long and 2 cm in diameter. A 80-cm-
long resistance heater is placed along the centerline of the
cylinder, and the surfaces of the cylinder are polished to mini-
mize the radiation effect. The two circular side surfaces of the
cylinder are well insulated. The resistance heater is turned on,
and the power dissipation is maintained constant at 60 W. If
the average surface temperature of the cylinder is measured to
be 120C in the 20C room air when steady operation is
reached, determine the natural convection heat transfer coeffi-
cient. If the emissivity of the outer surface of the cylinder is
0.1 and a 5 percent error is acceptable, do you think we need
to do any correction for the radiation effect? Assume the sur-
rounding surfaces to be at 20C also.
14–34
Thick fluids such as asphalt and waxes and the pipes
in which they flow are often heated in order to reduce the vis-
cosity of the fluids and thus to reduce the pumping costs. Con-
sider the flow of such a fluid through a 100-m-long pipe of
outer diameter 30 cm in calm ambient air at 0C. The pipe is
heated electrically, and a thermostat keeps the outer surface
temperature of the pipe constant at 25C. The emissivity of the
FIGURE P14–29
20°C
120°C
Insulated
Insulated
Resistance
heater
60 W
FIGURE P14–33
Insulation
Absorber plate
  s = 0.87
   = 0.09
α
Solar radiation
700 W/m2
ε
FIGURE P14–31
Ts = 25°C
   = 0.8
Tsky = 30°C
0°C
Resistance
heater
Asphalt
30 cm
ε
FIGURE P14–34

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
647
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
outer surface of the pipe is 0.8, and the effective sky tempera-
ture is 30C. Determine the power rating of the electric resis-
tance heater, in kW, that needs to be used. Also, determine the
cost of electricity associated with heating the pipe during a 
10-h period under the above conditions if the price of electric-
ity is $0.09/kWh.
Answers: 29.1 kW, $26.2
14–35
Reconsider Prob. 14–34. To reduce the heating cost
of the pipe, it is proposed to insulate it with sufficiently thick
fiberglass insulation (k  0.035 W/m · C) wrapped with alu-
minum foil (e  0.1) to cut down the heat losses by 85 per-
cent. Assuming the pipe temperature to remain constant at
25C, determine the thickness of the insulation that needs to
be used. How much money will the insulation save during
this 10-h period?
Answers: 1.3 cm, $22.3
14–36E
Consider an industrial furnace that resembles a
13-ft-long horizontal cylindrical enclosure 8 ft in diameter
whose end surfaces are well insulated. The furnace burns nat-
ural gas at a rate of 48 therms/h. The combustion efficiency of
the furnace is 82 percent (i.e., 18 percent of the chemical
energy of the fuel is lost through the flue gases as a result of
incomplete combustion and the flue gases leaving the furnace
at high temperature). If the heat loss from the outer surfaces of
the furnace by natural convection and radiation is not to
exceed 1 percent of the heat generated inside, determine the
highest allowable surface temperature of the furnace. Assume
the air and wall surface temperature of the room to be 75F,
and take the emissivity of the outer surface of the furnace to be
0.85. If the cost of natural gas is $1.15/therm and the furnace
operates 2800 h per year, determine the annual cost of this
heat loss to the plant.
14–37
Consider 
a 
1.2-m-high 
and 
2-m-wide 
glass
window with a thickness of 6 mm, thermal conductivity
k  0.78 W/m · C, and emissivity e  0.9. The room and
the walls that face the window are maintained at 25C, and
the average temperature of the inner surface of the window
is measured to be 5C. If the temperature of the outdoors is
5C, determine (a) the convection heat transfer coefficient
on the inner surface of the window, (b) the rate of total heat
transfer through the window, and (c) the combined natural
convection and radiation heat transfer coefficient on the
644
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
outer surface of the window. Is it reasonable to neglect the
thermal resistance of the glass in this case?
14–38
A 3-mm-diameter and 12-m-long electric wire is
tightly wrapped with a 1.5-mm-thick plastic cover whose
thermal conductivity and emissivity are k  0.20 W/m · C
and e  0.9. Electrical measurements indicate that a current
of 10 A passes through the wire and there is a voltage drop of
7 V along the wire. If the insulated wire is exposed to calm
atmospheric air at T  30C, determine the temperature at
the interface of the wire and the plastic cover in steady oper-
ation. Take the surrounding surfaces to be at about the same
temperature as the air.
14–39
During a visit to a plastic sheeting plant, it was
observed that a 60-m-long section of a 2-in nominal (6.03-cm-
outer-diameter) steam pipe extended from one end of the
plant to the other with no insulation on it. The temperature
measurements at several locations revealed that the average
temperature of the exposed surfaces of the steam pipe was
170C, while the temperature of the surrounding air was
20C. The outer surface of the pipe appeared to be oxidized,
and its emissivity can be taken to be 0.7. Taking the tempera-
ture of the surrounding surfaces to be 20C also, determine
the rate of heat loss from the steam pipe.
Steam is generated in a gas furnace that has an efficiency of
78 percent, and the plant pays $1.10 per therm (1 therm
 105,500 kJ) of natural gas. The plant operates 24 h a day
365 days a year, and thus 8760 h a year. Determine the annual
cost of the heat losses from the steam pipe for this facility.
Furnace
   = 0.85
75°F
8 ft
13 ft
ε
FIGURE P14–36E
Wall
Glass
5°C
   = 0.9
5°C
Room
25°C
1.2 m
ε
FIGURE P14–37
170°C
   = 0.7
20°C
6.03 cm
Steam
60 m
ε
FIGURE P14–39

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
648
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
645
14–40
Reconsider Prob. 14–39. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the surface
temperature of the steam pipe on the rate of heat loss from
the pipe and the annual cost of this heat loss. Let the surface
temperature vary from 100C to 200C. Plot the rate of heat
loss and the annual cost as a function of the surface tempera-
ture, and discuss the results.
14–41
Reconsider Prob. 14–39. In order to reduce heat
losses, it is proposed to insulate the steam pipe with 5-cm-
thick fiberglass insulation (k  0.038 W/m · C) and to wrap
it with aluminum foil (e  0.1) in order to minimize the radi-
ation losses. Also, an estimate is obtained from a local insula-
tion contractor, who proposed to do the insulation job for
$750, including materials and labor. Would you support this
proposal? How long will it take for the insulation to pay for
itself from the energy it saves? Assume the temperature of
the steam pipe to remain constant at 170C.
14–42
A 50-cm 
 50-cm circuit board that contains 121
square chips on one side is to be cooled by combined natural
convection and radiation by mounting it on a vertical surface
in a room at 25C. Each chip dissipates 0.18 W of power, and
the emissivity of the chip surfaces is 0.7. Assuming the heat
transfer from the back side of the circuit board to be negligi-
ble, and the temperature of the surrounding surfaces to be the
same as the air temperature of the room, determine the sur-
face temperature of the chips.
Answer: 36.2C
14–43
Repeat Prob. 14–42 assuming the circuit board to be
positioned horizontally with (a) chips facing up and (b) chips
facing down.
14–44
The side surfaces of a 2-m-high cubic industrial
furnace burning natural gas are not insulated,
and the temperature at the outer surface of this section is mea-
sured to be 110C. The temperature of the furnace room,
including its surfaces, is 30C, and the emissivity of the outer
surface of the furnace is 0.7. It is proposed that this section of
the furnace wall be insulated with glass wool insulation (k 
0.038 W/m · C) wrapped by a reflective sheet (e  0.2) in
order to reduce the heat loss by 90 percent. Assuming the outer
surface temperature of the metal section still remains at about
110C, determine the thickness of the insulation that needs to
be used.
The furnace operates continuously throughout the year and
has an efficiency of 78 percent. The price of the natural gas is
$0.55/therm (1 therm  105,500 kJ of energy content). If the
installation of the insulation will cost $550 for materials and
labor, determine how long it will take for the insulation to
pay for itself from the energy it saves.
14–45
A 1.5-m-diameter, 4-m-long cylindrical propane tank
is initially filled with liquid propane, whose density is
581 kg/m3. The tank is exposed to the ambient air at 25C in
calm weather. The outer surface of the tank is polished so
that the radiation heat transfer is negligible. Now a crack
develops at the top of the tank, and the pressure inside drops
to 1 atm while the temperature drops to 42C, which is the
boiling temperature of propane at 1 atm. The heat of vapor-
ization of propane at 1 atm is 425 kJ/kg. The propane is
slowly vaporized as a result of the heat transfer from the
ambient air into the tank, and the propane vapor escapes the
tank at 42C through the crack. Assuming the propane tank
to be at about the same temperature as the propane inside at
all times, determine how long it will take for the tank to
empty if it is not insulated.
14–46E
An average person generates heat at a rate of
240 Btu/h while resting in a room at 70F. Assuming one-
quarter of this heat is lost from the head and taking the emis-
sivity of the skin to be 0.9, determine the average surface
temperature of the head when it is not covered. The head can
be approximated as a 12-in-diameter sphere, and the interior
surfaces of the room can be assumed to be at the room 
temperature.
14–47
An incandescent lightbulb is an inexpensive but
highly inefficient device that converts electrical energy into
light. It converts about 10 percent of the electrical energy it
consumes into light while converting the remaining 90 percent
into heat. The glass bulb of the lamp heats up very quickly as a
result of absorbing all that heat and dissipating it to the sur-
roundings by convection and radiation. Consider an 8-cm-
diameter 60-W lightbulb in a room at 25C. The emissivity of
the glass is 0.9. Assuming that 10 percent of the energy passes
through the glass bulb as light with negligible absorption and
the rest of the energy is absorbed and dissipated by the bulb
Furnace
110°C
   = 0.7
Hot
gases
30°C
2 m
2 m
2 m
ε
FIGURE P14–44
Propane tank
42°C
25°C
Propane
vapor
1.5 m
4 m
FIGURE P14–45

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
649
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
itself by natural convection and radiation, determine the equi-
librium temperature of the glass bulb. Assume the interior sur-
faces of the room to be at room temperature.
Answer: 169C
14–48
A 40-cm-diameter, 110-cm-high cylindrical hot-
water tank is located in the bathroom of a house maintained
at 20C. The surface temperature of the tank is measured to
be 44C and its emissivity is 0.4. Taking the surrounding sur-
face temperature to be also 20C, determine the rate of heat
loss from all surfaces of the tank by natural convection and
radiation.
14–49
A 28-cm-high, 18-cm-long, and 18-cm-wide rectan-
gular container suspended in a room at 24C is initially filled
with cold water at 2C. The surface temperature of the con-
tainer is observed to be nearly the same as the water tempera-
ture inside. The emissivity of the container surface is 0.6, and
the temperature of the surrounding surfaces is about the same
as the air temperature. Determine the water temperature in
the container after 3 h, and the average rate of heat transfer to
the water. Assume the heat transfer coefficient on the top and
bottom surfaces to be the same as that on the side surfaces.
14–50
Reconsider Prob. 14–49. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the water temperature in the con-
tainer as a function of the heating time as the time varies
from 30 min to 10 h, and discuss the results.
14–51
A room is to be heated by a coal-burning stove,
which is a cylindrical cavity with an outer diameter of 32 cm
and a height of 70 cm. The rate of heat loss from the room is
estimated to be 1.5 kW when the air temperature in the room
is maintained constant at 24C. The emissivity of the stove
surface is 0.85 and the average temperature of the surround-
ing wall surfaces is 14C. Determine the surface temperature
of the stove. Neglect the transfer from the bottom surface and
take the heat transfer coefficient at the top surface to be the
same as that on the side surface.
The heating value of the coal is 30,000 kJ/kg, and the
combustion efficiency is 65 percent. Determine the amount of
coal burned a day if the stove operates 14 h a day.
14–52
The water in a 40-L tank is to be heated from 15C
to 45C by a 6-cm-diameter spherical heater whose surface
temperature is maintained at 85C. Determine how long the
heater should be kept on.
646
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Natural Convection from Finned Surfaces and PCBs
14–53C
Why are finned surfaces frequently used in prac-
tice? Why are the finned surfaces referred to as heat sinks in
the electronics industry?
14–54C
Why are heat sinks with closely packed fins not
suitable for natural convection heat transfer, although they
increase the heat transfer surface area more?
14–55C
Consider a heat sink with optimum fin spacing.
Explain how heat transfer from this heat sink will be affected
by (a) removing some of the fins on the heat sink and (b) dou-
bling the number of fins on the heat sink by reducing the fin
spacing. The base area of the heat sink remains unchanged at
all times.
14–56
Aluminum heat sinks of rectangular profile are com-
monly used to cool electronic components. Consider a
7.62-cm-long and 9.68-cm-wide commercially available heat
sink whose cross section and dimensions are as shown in Fig.
P14–56. The heat sink is oriented vertically and is used to cool
a power transistor that can dissipate up to 125 W of power.
The back surface of the heat sink is insulated. The surfaces of
the heat sink are untreated, and thus they have a low emissivity
(under 0.1). Therefore, radiation heat transfer from the heat
sink can be neglected. During an experiment conducted in
room air at 22C, the base temperature of the heat sink was
measured to be 120C when the power dissipation of the tran-
sistor was 15 W. Assuming the entire heat sink to be at the
base temperature, determine the average natural convection
heat transfer coefficient for this case.
Answer: 7.13 W/m2  C
9.68 cm
3.17 cm
Transistor
Heat sink
0.48 cm
1.52 cm
1.45 cm
FIGURE P14–56
Heat sink
Airflow
7.62
cm
Shroud
FIGURE P14–57
   = 0.9
Light, 6 W
25°C
60 W
ε
FIGURE P14–47
14–57
Reconsider the heat sink in Prob. 14–56. In order to
enhance heat transfer, a shroud (a thin rectangular metal
plate) whose surface area is equal to the base area of the heat

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
650
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
647
sink is placed very close to the tips of the fins such that the
interfin spaces are converted into rectangular channels. The
base temperature of the heat sink in this case was measured
to be 108C. Noting that the shroud loses heat to the ambient
air from both sides, determine the average natural convection
heat transfer coefficient in this shrouded case. (For complete
details, see Çengel and Zing, 1987.)
14–58E
A 6-in-wide and 8-in-high vertical hot surface in
78F air is to be cooled by a heat sink with equally spaced
fins of rectangular profile. The fins are 0.08 in thick and 8 in
long in the vertical direction and have a height of 1.2 in from
the base. Determine the optimum fin spacing and the rate of
heat transfer by natural convection from the heat sink if the
base temperature is 180F.
14–59E
Reconsider Prob. 14–58E. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effect of the
length of the fins in the vertical direction on the optimum fin
spacing and the rate of heat transfer by natural convection.
Let the fin length vary from 2 in to 10 in. Plot the optimum
fin spacing and the rate of convection heat transfer as a func-
tion of the fin length, and discuss the results.
14–60
A 15-cm-wide and 18-cm-high vertical hot surface
in 25C air is to be cooled by a heat sink with equally spaced
fins of rectangular profile. The fins are 0.1 cm thick and 
18 cm long in the vertical direction. Determine the optimum
fin height and the rate of heat transfer by natural convection
from the heat sink if the base temperature is 85C.
The criteria for optimum fin height H in the literature is 
given by 
. Take the thermal conductivity of
fin material to be 177 W/m · C
Natural Convection inside Enclosures
14–61C
The upper and lower compartments of a well-
insulated container are separated by two parallel sheets of
glass with an air space between them. One of the compart-
ments is to be filled with a hot fluid and the other with a cold
fluid. If it is desired that heat transfer between the two com-
partments be minimal, would you recommend putting the hot
fluid into the upper or the lower compartment of the con-
tainer? Why?
14–62C
Someone claims that the air space in a double-pane
window enhances the heat transfer from a house because of
the natural convection currents that occur in the air space and
recommends that the double-pane window be replaced by a
single sheet of glass whose thickness is equal to the sum of
the thicknesses of the two glasses of the double-pane window
to save energy. Do you agree with this claim?
14–63C
Consider a double-pane window consisting of two
glass sheets separated by a 1-cm-wide air space. Someone
suggests inserting a thin vinyl sheet in the middle of the two
glasses to form two 0.5-cm-wide compartments in the window
in order to reduce natural convection heat transfer through the
H  2hAc/pk
window. From a heat transfer point of view, would you be in
favor of this idea to reduce heat losses through the window?
14–64C
What does the effective conductivity of an enclo-
sure represent? How is the ratio of the effective conductivity
to thermal conductivity related to the Nusselt number?
14–65
Show that the thermal resistance of a rectangular
enclosure can be expressed as R  Lc/(Ak Nu), where k is the
thermal conductivity of the fluid in the enclosure.
14–66
Determine the U-factors for the center-of-glass sec-
tion of a double-pane window and a triple-pane window. The
heat transfer coefficients on the inside and outside surfaces
are 6 and 25 W/m2 · C, respectively. The thickness of the air
layer is 1.5 cm and there are two such air layers in triple-
pane window. The Nusselt number across an air layer is esti-
mated to be 1.2. Take the thermal conductivity of air to be
0.025 W/m · C and neglect the thermal resistance of glass
sheets. Also, assume that the effect of radiation through the
air space is of the same magnitude as the convection.
Considering that about 70 percent of total heat transfer
through a window is due to center-of-glass section, estimate
the percentage decrease in total heat transfer when triple-
pane window is used in place of double-pane window.
14–67
A vertical 1.5-m-high and 3.0-m-wide enclosure con-
sists of two surfaces separated by a 0.4-m air gap at atmos-
pheric pressure. If the surface temperatures across the air gap
are measured to be 280 K and 336 K and the surface emissivi-
ties to be 0.15 and 0.90, determine the fraction of heat trans-
ferred through the enclosure by radiation.
Answer: 0.30
14–68E
A vertical 4-ft-high and 6-ft-wide double-pane win-
dow consists of two sheets of glass separated by a 1-in air gap
at atmospheric pressure. If the glass surface temperatures
across the air gap are measured to be 65F and 40F, determine
the rate of heat transfer through the window by (a) natural
convection and (b) radiation. Also, determine the R-value of
insulation of this window such that multiplying the inverse of
the R-value by the surface area and the temperature difference
gives the total rate of heat transfer through the window. The
effective emissivity for use in radiation calculations between
two large parallel glass plates can be taken to be 0.82.
4 ft
Frame
40°F
1 in
Glass
65°F
FIGURE P14–68E

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
651
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
14–69E
Reconsider Prob. 14–68E. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effect of the
air gap thickness on the rates of heat transfer by natural con-
vection and radiation, and the R-value of insulation. Let the
air gap thickness vary from 0.2 in to 2.0 in. Plot the rates of
heat transfer by natural convection and radiation, and the R-
value of insulation as a function of the air gap thickness, and
discuss the results.
14–70
Two concentric spheres of diameters 15 cm and 
25 cm are separated by air at 1 atm pressure. The surface tem-
peratures of the two spheres enclosing the air are T1  350 K
and T2  275 K, respectively. Determine the rate of heat
transfer from the inner sphere to the outer sphere by natural
convection.
14–71
Reconsider Prob. 14–70. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate of natural convection
heat transfer as a function of the hot surface temperature of
the sphere as the temperature varies from 300 K to 500 K,
and discuss the results.
14–72
Flat-plate solar collectors are often tilted up toward
the sun in order to intercept a greater amount of direct solar
radiation. The tilt angle from the horizontal also affects the
rate of heat loss from the collector. Consider a 1.5-m-high and
3-m-wide solar collector that is tilted at an angle u from the
horizontal. The back side of the absorber is heavily insulated.
The absorber plate and the glass cover, which are spaced
2.5 cm from each other, are maintained at temperatures of
80C and 40C, respectively. Determine the rate of heat loss
from the absorber plate by natural convection for u  0, 30,
and 90.
14–73
A simple solar collector is built by placing a 5-cm-
diameter clear plastic tube around a garden hose whose outer
diameter is 1.6 cm. The hose is painted black to maximize
solar absorption, and some plastic rings are used to keep the
spacing between the hose and the clear plastic cover constant.
During a clear day, the temperature of the hose is measured to
be 65C, while the ambient air temperature is 26C. Determine
the rate of heat loss from the water in the hose per meter of its
648
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
length by natural convection. Also, discuss how the perfor-
mance of this solar collector can be improved.
Answer: 8.2 W
14–74
Reconsider Prob. 14–73. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the rate of heat loss from the
water by natural convection as a function of the ambient air
temperature as the temperature varies from 4C to 40C, and
discuss the results.
14–75
A vertical 1.3-m-high, 2.8-m-wide double-pane win-
dow consists of two layers of glass separated by a 2.2-cm air
gap at atmospheric pressure. The room temperature is 26C
while the inner glass temperature is 18C. Disregarding radia-
tion heat transfer, determine the temperature of the outer glass
layer and the rate of heat loss through the window by natural
convection.
14–76
Consider two concentric horizontal cylinders of
diameters 55 cm and 65 cm, and length 125 cm. The surfaces
of the inner and outer cylinders are maintained at 54C and
106C, respectively. Determine the rate of heat transfer
between the cylinders by natural convection if the annular
space is filled with (a) water and (b) air.
Review Problems
14–77
A 10-cm-diameter and 10-m-long cylinder with a
surface temperature of 10C is placed horizontally in air at
40C. Calculate the steady rate of heat transfer for the cases
of (a) free-stream air velocity of 10 m/s due to normal winds
and (b) no winds and thus a free stream velocity of zero.
14–78
A spherical vessel, with 30.0-cm outside diameter, is
used as a reactor for a slow endothermic reaction. The vessel is
completely submerged in a large water-filled tank, held at a
constant temperature of 30C. The outside surface temperature
of the vessel is 20C. Calculate the rate of heat transfer in
steady operation for the following cases: (a) the water in the
tank is still, (b) the water in the tank is still (as in a part a),
however, the buoyancy force caused by the difference in water
density is assumed to be negligible, and (c) the water in the
tank is circulated at an average velocity of 20 cm/s.
θ
80°C
40°C
Glass
cover
Absorber
plate
Air space
Insulation
Solar
radiation
FIGURE P14–72
26°C
Garden hose
65°C
Solar
radiation
Clear plastic tube
Spacer
Water
FIGURE P14–73

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
652
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
649
14–79
A vertical cylindrical pressure vessel is 1.0 m in
diameter and 3.0 m in height. Its outside average wall tem-
perature is 60C, while the surrounding air is at 0C. Calcu-
late the rate of heat loss from the vessel’s cylindrical surface
when there is (a) no wind and (b) a crosswind of 20 km/h.
14–80
Consider a solid sphere, 50 cm in diameter embedded
with electrical heating elements such that its surface tempera-
ture is always maintained constant at 60C. The sphere is
placed in a large pool of oil held at a constant temperature of
20C. Using the oil properties tabulated below, calculate the
rate of heat transfer in steady operation for each of the follow-
ing scenarios.
(a) Heat flow in the oil is assumed to occur only by
conduction.
(b) The oil is circulated across the sphere at an average
velocity of 1.50 m/s.
(c) The pump causing the oil circulation in part (b) has
broken down.
T, C
k, W/m · K
r, kg/m3 cp, J/kg · K m, mPa · s
b, K1
20.0
0.22
888.0
1880
10.0
0.00070
40.0
0.21
876.0
1965
7.0
0.00070
60.0
0.20
864.0
2050
4.0
0.00070
14–81E
A 0.1-W small cylindrical resistor mounted on a
lower part of a vertical circuit board is 0.3 in long and has a
diameter of 0.2 in. The view of the resistor is largely
blocked by another circuit board facing it, and the heat
transfer through the connecting wires is negligible. The air
is free to flow through the large parallel flow passages
between the boards as a result of natural convection cur-
rents. If the air temperature at the vicinity of the resistor is
120F, determine the approximate surface temperature of
the resistor.
Answer: 212F
air is at 20C. Disregarding any heat transfer from the 40 cm

 40 cm base of the ice chest, determine how long it will
take for the ice in the chest to melt completely if the ice chest
is subjected to (a) calm air and (b) winds at 50 km/h. Assume
the heat transfer coefficient on the front, back, and top sur-
faces to be the same as that on the side surfaces.
14–83
An electronic box that consumes 200 W of power is
cooled by a fan blowing air into the box enclosure. The
dimensions of the electronic box are 15 cm 
 50 cm 
 50
cm, and all surfaces of the box are exposed to the ambient
except the base surface. Temperature measurements indicate
that the box is at an average temperature of 32C when the
ambient temperature and the temperature of the surrounding
walls are 25C. If the emissivity of the outer surface of the
box is 0.75, determine the fraction of the heat lost from the
outer surfaces of the electronic box.
14–84
A 6-m-internal-diameter spherical tank made of 
1.5-cm-thick stainless steel (k  15 W/m · C) is used to store
iced water at 0C in a room at 20C. The walls of the room are
also at 20C. The outer surface of the tank is black (emissivity
e  1), and heat transfer between the outer surface of the tank
and the surroundings is by natural convection and radiation.
Assuming the entire steel tank to be at 0C and thus the ther-
mal resistance of the tank to be negligible, determine (a) the
rate of heat transfer to the iced water in the tank and (b) the
amount of ice at 0C that melts during a 24-h period. The heat
of fusion of water is 333.7 kJ/kg
Answers: (a) 15.4 kW, (b)
3988 kg
14–85
Consider a 1.2-m-high and 2-m-wide double-pane
window consisting of two 3-mm-thick layers of glass
(k  0.78 W/m · C) separated by a 3-cm-wide air space.
Determine the steady rate of heat transfer through this window
and the temperature of its inner surface for a day during which
the room is maintained at 20C while the temperature of the
outdoors is 0C. Take the heat transfer coefficients on the inner
and outer surfaces of the window to be h1  10 W/m2 · C
and h2  25 W/m2 · C and disregard any heat transfer by
radiation.
14–86
An electric resistance space heater is designed such
that it resembles a rectangular box 50 cm high, 80 cm long,
and 15 cm wide filled with 45 kg of oil. The heater is to be
placed against a wall, and thus heat transfer from its back
surface is negligible. The surface temperature of the heater is
not to exceed 75C in a room at 25C for safety considera-
FIGURE P14–81E
32°C
   = 0.75
25°C
15 cm
50 cm
50 cm
ε
FIGURE P14–83
14–82
An ice chest whose outer dimensions are 30 cm 
40
cm 
40 cm is
made of 3-cm-thick Styrofoam
(k  0.033 W/m · C). Initially, the chest is filled with 30 kg
of ice at 0C, and the inner surface temperature of the ice
chest can be taken to be 0C at all times. The heat of fusion
of water at 0C is 333.7 kJ/kg, and the surrounding ambient

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
653
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
tions. Disregarding heat transfer from the bottom and top sur-
faces of the heater in anticipation that the top surface will be
used as a shelf, determine the power rating of the heater in
W. Take the emissivity of the outer surface of the heater to be
0.8 and the average temperature of the ceiling and wall sur-
faces to be the same as the room air temperature.
Also, determine how long it will take for the heater to reach
steady operation when it is first turned on (i.e., for the oil tem-
perature to rise from 25C to 75C). State your assumptions in
the calculations.
14–87
Skylights or “roof windows” are commonly used in
homes and manufacturing facilities since they let natural
light in during day time and thus reduce the lighting costs.
However, they offer little resistance to heat transfer, and
large amounts of energy are lost through them in winter
unless they are equipped with a motorized insulating cover
that can be used in cold weather and at nights to reduce heat
losses. Consider a 1-m-wide and 2.5-m-long horizontal
skylight on the roof of a house that is kept at 20C. The
glazing of the skylight is made of a single layer of 0.5-cm-
thick glass (k  0.78 W/m  C and e  0.9). Determine the
650
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
rate of heat loss through the skylight when the air tempera-
ture outside is 10C and the effective sky temperature is
30C. Compare your result with the rate of heat loss
through an equivalent surface area of the roof that has a
common R-5.34 construction in SI units (i.e., a thickness-
to-effective-thermal-conductivity ratio of 5.34 m2 · C/W).
14–88
A solar collector consists of a horizontal copper tube
of outer diameter 5 cm enclosed in a concentric thin glass tube
of 9 cm diameter. Water is heated as it flows through the tube,
and the annular space between the copper and glass tube is
filled with air at 1 atm pressure. During a clear day, the tem-
peratures of the tube surface and the glass cover are measured
to be 60C and 32C, respectively. Determine the rate of heat
loss from the collector by natural convection per meter length
of the tube.
Answer: 17.4 W
14–89
A solar collector consists of a horizontal aluminum
tube of outer diameter 5 cm enclosed in a concentric thin
glass tube of 7 cm diameter. Water is heated as it flows
through the aluminum tube, and the annular space between
the aluminum and glass tubes is filled with air at 1 atm
pressure. The pump circulating the water fails during a clear
day, and the water temperature in the tube starts rising. The
aluminum tube absorbs solar radiation at a rate of 20 W per
meter length, and the temperature of the ambient air outside
is 30C. Approximating the surfaces of the tube and the
glass cover as being black (emissivity e  1) in radiation
calculations and taking the effective sky temperature to be
20C, determine the temperature of the aluminum tube
when equilibrium is established (i.e., when the net heat loss
from the tube by convection and radiation equals the
amount of solar energy absorbed by the tube).
14–90E
The components of an electronic system dissipat-
ing 180 W are located in a 4-ft-long horizontal duct whose
cross section is 6 in 
 6 in. The components in the duct are
cooled by forced air, which enters at 85F at a rate of 22 cfm
and leaves at 100F. The surfaces of the sheet metal duct are
not painted, and thus radiation heat transfer from the outer
surfaces is negligible. If the ambient air temperature is 80F,
determine (a) the heat transfer from the outer surfaces of the
duct to the ambient air by natural convection and (b) the
average temperature of the duct.
Wall
15 cm
50 cm
Electric heater
Heating element
80 cm
Ts = 75°C
   = 0.8
Oil
ε
FIGURE P14–86
Tsky = 30°C
Tair = 10°C
1 m
2.5 m
Skylight
   = 0.9
Tin = 20°C
ε
FIGURE P14–87
9 cm
Glass cover
5 cm
FIGURE P14–88

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
654
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 14
|
651
14–91E
Repeat Prob. 14–90E for a circular horizontal duct
of diameter 4 in.
14–92E
Repeat Prob. 14–90E assuming the fan fails and
thus the entire heat generated inside the duct must be rejected
to the ambient air by natural convection through the outer
surfaces of the duct.
14–93
Consider a cold aluminum canned drink that is ini-
tially at a uniform temperature of 5C. The can is 12.5 cm
high and has a diameter of 6 cm. The emissivity of the outer
surface of the can is 0.6. Disregarding any heat transfer from
the bottom surface of the can, determine how long it will take
for the average temperature of the drink to rise to 7C if the
surrounding air and surfaces are at 25C.
Answer: 12.1 min
14–94
Consider a 2-m-high electric hot-water heater that has
a diameter of 40 cm and maintains the hot water at 60C. The
tank is located in a small room at 20C whose walls and the
ceiling are at about the same temperature. The tank is placed
in a 44-cm-diameter sheet metal shell of negligible thickness,
and the space between the tank and the shell is filled with
foam insulation. The average temperature and emissivity of
the outer surface of the shell are 40C and 0.7, respectively.
The price of electricity is $0.08/kWh. Hot-water tank insula-
tion kits large enough to wrap the entire tank are available on
the market for about $60. If such an insulation is installed on
this water tank by the home owner himself, how long will it
take for this additional insulation to pay for itself? Disregard
any heat loss from the top and bottom surfaces, and assume
the insulation to reduce the heat losses by 80 percent.
14–95
During a plant visit, it was observed that a 1.5-m-
high and 1-m-wide section of the vertical front section of a
natural gas furnace wall was too hot to touch. The tempera-
ture measurements on the surface revealed that the average
temperature of the exposed hot surface was 110C, while the
temperature of the surrounding air was 25C. The surface
appeared to be oxidized, and its emissivity can be taken to be
0.7. Taking the temperature of the surrounding surfaces to be
25C also, determine the rate of heat loss from this furnace.
The furnace has an efficiency of 79 percent, and the plant
pays $1.20 per therm of natural gas. If the plant operates 10 h
a day, 310 days a year, and thus 3100 h a year, determine the
annual cost of the heat loss from this vertical hot surface on
the front section of the furnace wall.
14–96
A group of 25 power transistors, dissipating 1.5 W
each, are to be cooled by attaching them to a black-anodized
2 cm
Foam
insulation
40 cm
Water
heater
Tw = 60°C
20°C
40°C
   = 0.7
2 m
ε
FIGURE P14–94
100°F
Natural
convection
80°F
85°F
22 cfm
4 ft
180 W
FIGURE P14–90E
Tair = 25°C
Furnace
Ts = 110°C
   = 0.7
1.5m
1 m
ε
FIGURE P14–95
Power
transistor, 1.5 W
Black-anodized
aluminum
plate
FIGURE P14–96

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
14. Natural Convection
655
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
square aluminum plate and mounting the plate on the wall of
a room at 30C. The emissivity of the transistor and the plate
surfaces is 0.9. Assuming the heat transfer from the back side
of the plate to be negligible and the temperature of the sur-
rounding surfaces to be the same as the air temperature of the
room, determine the size of the plate if the average surface
temperature of the plate is not to exceed 50C.
Answer:
43 cm 
 43 cm
14–97
Repeat Prob. 14–96 assuming the plate to be posi-
tioned horizontally with (a) transistors facing up and (b) tran-
sistors facing down.
14–98E
Hot water is flowing at an average velocity of 4 ft/s
through a cast iron pipe (k  30 Btu/h · ft · F) whose inner
and outer diameters are 1.0 in and 1.2 in, respectively. The
pipe passes through a 50-ft-long section of a basement whose
temperature is 60F. The emissivity of the outer surface of the
pipe is 0.5, and the walls of the basement are also at about
60F. If the inlet temperature of the water is 150F and the
heat transfer coefficient on the inner surface of the pipe is 
30 Btu/h · ft2 · F, determine the temperature drop of water as
it passes through the basement.
14–99
Consider a flat-plate solar collector placed horizon-
tally on the flat roof of a house. The collector is 1.5 m wide
and 6 m long, and the average temperature of the exposed
surface of the collector is 42C. Determine the rate of heat
loss from the collector by natural convection during a calm
day when the ambient air temperature is 8C. Also, deter-
mine the heat loss by radiation by taking the emissivity of
the collector surface to be 0.9 and the effective sky tempera-
ture to be 15C.
Answers: 1750 W, 2490 W
14–100
Solar radiation is incident on the glass cover of a
solar collector at a rate of 650 W/m2. The glass transmits 
88 percent of the incident radiation and has an emissivity of
0.90. The hot water needs of a family in summer can be met
652
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
completely by a collector 1.5 m high and 2 m wide, and tilted
40 from the horizontal. The temperature of the glass cover is
measured to be 40C on a calm day when the surrounding air
temperature is 20C. The effective sky temperature for radia-
tion exchange between the glass cover and the open sky is
40C. Water enters the tubes attached to the absorber plate
at a rate of 1 kg/min. Assuming the back surface of the
absorber plate to be heavily insulated and the only heat loss
occurs through the glass cover, determine (a) the total rate of
heat loss from the collector; (b) the collector efficiency,
which is the ratio of the amount of heat transferred to the
water to the solar energy incident on the collector; and (c) the
temperature rise of water as it flows through the collector.
Design and Essay Problems
14–101
Write a computer program to optimize the spacing
between the two glasses of a double-pane window. Assume
the spacing is filled with dry air at atmospheric pressure. The
program should evaluate the recommended practical value of
the spacing to minimize the heat losses and list it when the
size of the window (the height and the width) and the temper-
atures of the two glasses are specified.
14–102
Contact a manufacturer of aluminum heat sinks and
obtain their product catalog for cooling electronic compo-
nents by natural convection and radiation. Write an essay on
how to select a suitable heat sink for an electronic component
when its maximum power dissipation and maximum allow-
able surface temperature are specified.
14–103
The top surfaces of practically all flat-plate solar
collectors are covered with glass in order to reduce the heat
losses from the absorber plate underneath. Although the glass
cover reflects or absorbs about 15 percent of the incident solar
radiation, it saves much more from the potential heat losses
from the absorber plate, and thus it is considered to be an
essential part of a well-designed solar collector. Inspired by
the energy efficiency of double-pane windows, someone pro-
poses to use double glazing on solar collectors instead of a sin-
gle glass. Investigate if this is a good idea for the town in
which you live. Use local weather data and base your conclu-
sion on heat transfer analysis and economic considerations.
40°
Solar
radiation
650 W/m2
Insulation
Absorber
plate
Glass
cover
FIGURE P14–100

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
656
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
RADIATION HEAT TRANSFER
|
653
S
o far, we have considered the conduction and convec-
tion modes of heat transfer, which are related to the
nature of the media involved and the presence of fluid
motion, among other things. We now turn our attention to the
third mechanism of heat transfer: radiation, which is charac-
teristically different from the other two.
We start this chapter with a discussion of electromagnetic
waves and the electromagnetic spectrum, with particular
emphasis on thermal radiation. Then we introduce the ideal-
ized blackbody, blackbody radiation, and blackbody radiation
function, together with the Stefan–Boltzmann law, Planck’s
law, and Wien’s displacement law. Various radiation fluxes
such as emissive power, irradiation, and radiosity are defined.
This is followed by a discussion of radiative properties of
materials such as emissivity, absorptivity, reflectivity, and
transmissivity and their dependence on wavelength and tem-
perature. The greenhouse effect is presented as an example
of the consequences of the wavelength dependence of radia-
tion properties.
We continue with a discussion of view factors and the rules
associated with them. View factor expressions and charts for
some common configurations are given, and the crossed-
strings method is presented. Finally, we discuss radiation
heat transfer, first between black surfaces and then between
nonblack surfaces using the radiation network approach.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Classify electromagnetic radiation, and identify thermal
radiation,
• Understand the idealized blackbody, and calculate the total
and spectral blackbody emissive power,
• Calculate the fraction of radiation emitted in a specified
wavelength band using the blackbody radiation functions,
• Develop a clear understanding of the properties emissivity,
absorptivity, reflectivity, and transmissivity on spectral and
total basis,
• Apply Kirchhoff law’s to determine the absorptivity of a
surface when its emissivity is known,
• Define view factor, and understand its importance in
radiation heat transfer calculations,
• Calculate radiation heat transfer between black surfaces,
• Obtain relations for net rate of radiation heat transfer between
the surfaces of a two-zone enclosure, including two large
parallel plates, two long concentric cylinders, and two
concentric spheres,
• Understand radiation heat transfer in three-surface
enclosures.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
657
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
15–1
■INTRODUCTION
Consider a hot object that is suspended in an evacuated chamber whose walls
are at room temperature (Fig. 15–1). The hot object will eventually cool down
and reach thermal equilibrium with its surroundings. That is, it will lose heat
until its temperature reaches the temperature of the walls of the chamber.
Heat transfer between the object and the chamber could not have taken place
by conduction or convection, because these two mechanisms cannot occur in
a vacuum. Therefore, heat transfer must have occurred through another
mechanism that involves the emission of the internal energy of the object.
This mechanism is radiation.
Radiation differs from the other two heat transfer mechanisms in that it
does not require the presence of a material medium to take place. In fact,
energy transfer by radiation is fastest (at the speed of light) and it suffers no
attenuation in a vacuum. Also, radiation transfer occurs in solids as well as
liquids and gases. In most practical applications, all three modes of heat
transfer occur concurrently at varying degrees. But heat transfer through an
evacuated space can occur only by radiation. For example, the energy of the
sun reaches the earth by radiation.
You will recall that heat transfer by conduction or convection takes place in
the direction of decreasing temperature; that is, from a high-temperature
medium to a lower-temperature one. It is interesting that radiation heat trans-
fer can occur between two bodies separated by a medium colder than both
bodies (Fig. 15–2). For example, solar radiation reaches the surface of the
earth after passing through cold air layers at high altitudes. Also, the radia-
tion-absorbing surfaces inside a greenhouse reach high temperatures even
when its plastic or glass cover remains relatively cool.
The theoretical foundation of radiation was established in 1864 by physi-
cist James Clerk Maxwell, who postulated that accelerated charges or chang-
ing electric currents give rise to electric and magnetic fields. These rapidly
moving fields are called electromagnetic waves or electromagnetic radia-
tion, and they represent the energy emitted by matter as a result of the
changes in the electronic configurations of the atoms or molecules. In 1887,
Heinrich Hertz experimentally demonstrated the existence of such waves.
Electromagnetic waves transport energy just like other waves, and all electro-
magnetic waves travel at the speed of light in a vacuum, which is c0  2.9979

 108 m/s. Electromagnetic waves are characterized by their frequency n or
wavelength l. These two properties in a medium are related by
l 
(15–1)
where c is the speed of propagation of a wave in that medium. The speed
of propagation in a medium is related to the speed of light in a vacuum by
c  c0/n, where n is the index of refraction of that medium. The refractive
index is essentially unity for air and most gases, about 1.5 for glass, and 1.33
for water. The commonly used unit of wavelength is the micrometer (m) or
micron, where 1 m  106 m. Unlike the wavelength and the speed of prop-
agation, the frequency of an electromagnetic wave depends only on the
source and is independent of the medium through which the wave travels.
The frequency (the number of oscillations per second) of an electromagnetic
c
n
654
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Vacuum
chamber
Radiation
Hot
object
FIGURE 15–1
A hot object in a vacuum chamber
loses heat by radiation only.
Person
30°C
Fire
900°C
Air
5°C
Radiation
FIGURE 15–2
Unlike conduction and convection,
heat transfer by radiation can occur
between two bodies, even when they
are separated by a medium colder 
than both.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
658
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
wave can range from less than a million Hz to a septillion Hz or higher,
depending on the source. Note from Eq. 15–1 that the wavelength and the
frequency of electromagnetic radiation are inversely proportional.
It has proven useful to view electromagnetic radiation as the propagation
of a collection of discrete packets of energy called photons or quanta, as
proposed by Max Planck in 1900 in conjunction with his quantum theory. In
this view, each photon of frequency n is considered to have an energy of
e  hn 
(15–2)
where h  6.626069 
 1034 J  s is Planck’s constant. Note from the sec-
ond part of Eq. 15–2 that the energy of a photon is inversely proportional to
its wavelength. Therefore, shorter-wavelength radiation possesses larger
photon energies. It is no wonder that we try to avoid very-short-wavelength
radiation such as gamma rays and X-rays since they are highly destructive.
15–2
■THERMAL RADIATION
Although all electromagnetic waves have the same general features, waves of
different wavelength differ significantly in their behavior. The electromag-
netic radiation encountered in practice covers a wide range of wavelengths,
varying from less than 1010 m for cosmic rays to more than 1010 m for
electrical power waves. The electromagnetic spectrum also includes gamma
rays, X-rays, ultraviolet radiation, visible light, infrared radiation, thermal
radiation, microwaves, and radio waves, as shown in Fig. 15–3.
Different types of electromagnetic radiation are produced through various
mechanisms. For example, gamma rays are produced by nuclear reactions,
X-rays by the bombardment of metals with high-energy electrons, micro-
waves by special types of electron tubes such as klystrons and magnetrons,
and radio waves by the excitation of some crystals or by the flow of alternat-
ing current through electric conductors.
The short-wavelength gamma rays and X-rays are primarily of concern to
nuclear engineers, while the long-wavelength microwaves and radio waves
are of concern to electrical engineers. The type of electromagnetic radiation
that is pertinent to heat transfer is the thermal radiation emitted as a result
of energy transitions of molecules, atoms, and electrons of a substance. Tem-
perature is a measure of the strength of these activities at the microscopic
level, and the rate of thermal radiation emission increases with increasing
temperature. Thermal radiation is continuously emitted by all matter whose
temperature is above absolute zero. That is, everything around us such as
walls, furniture, and our friends constantly emits (and absorbs) radiation
(Fig. 15–4). Thermal radiation is also defined as the portion of the electro-
magnetic spectrum that extends from about 0.1 to 100 m, since the radiation
emitted by bodies due to their temperature falls almost entirely into this
wavelength range. Thus, thermal radiation includes the entire visible and
infrared (IR) radiation as well as a portion of the ultraviolet (UV) radiation.
What we call light is simply the visible portion of the electromagnetic
spectrum that lies between 0.40 and 0.76 m. Light is characteristically no
different than other electromagnetic radiation, except that it happens to trig-
hc
l
Chapter 15
|
655
FIGURE 15–4
Everything around us constantly
emits thermal radiation.
Plants
Furniture
Walls
People
FIGURE 15–3
The electromagnetic wave spectrum.
1010
109
108
107
106
105
104
103
102
10
1
10–1
10–2
10–3
10–4
10–5
10–6
10–7
10–8
10–9
Radio and
TV waves
Electrical
power waves
Microwaves
Infrared
Visible
Ultraviolet
X-rays
Thermal
radiation
γ-rays
Cosmic
rays
  , μm
λ

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
659
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
ger the sensation of seeing in the human eye. Light, or the visible spectrum,
consists of narrow bands of color from violet (0.40–0.44 m) to red
(0.63–0.76 m), as shown in Table 15–1. 
A body that emits some radiation in the visible range is called a light
source. The sun is obviously our primary light source. The electromagnetic
radiation emitted by the sun is known as solar radiation, and nearly all of it
falls into the wavelength band 0.3–3 m. Almost half of solar radiation is
light (i.e., it falls into the visible range), with the remaining being ultraviolet
and infrared.
The radiation emitted by bodies at room temperature falls into the infrared
region of the spectrum, which extends from 0.76 to 100 m. Bodies start
emitting noticeable visible radiation at temperatures above 800 K. The tung-
sten filament of a lightbulb must be heated to temperatures above 2000 K
before it can emit any significant amount of radiation in the visible range.
The ultraviolet radiation includes the low-wavelength end of the thermal
radiation spectrum and lies between the wavelengths 0.01 and 0.40 m.
Ultraviolet rays are to be avoided since they can kill microorganisms and
cause serious damage to humans and other living beings. About 12 percent
of solar radiation is in the ultraviolet range, and it would be devastating if it
were to reach the surface of the earth. Fortunately, the ozone (O3) layer in
the atmosphere acts as a protective blanket and absorbs most of this ultravio-
let radiation. The ultraviolet rays that remain in sunlight are still sufficient to
cause serious sunburns to sun worshippers, and prolonged exposure to direct
sunlight is the leading cause of skin cancer, which can be lethal. Recent dis-
coveries of “holes” in the ozone layer have prompted the international com-
munity to ban the use of ozone-destroying chemicals such as the refrigerant
Freon-12 in order to save the earth. Ultraviolet radiation is also produced
artificially in fluorescent lamps for use in medicine as a bacteria killer and in
tanning parlors as an artificial tanner.
Microwave ovens utilize electromagnetic radiation in the microwave
region of the spectrum generated by microwave tubes called magnetrons.
Microwaves in the range of 102–105 m are very suitable for use in cooking
since they are reflected by metals, transmitted by glass and plastics, and
absorbed by food (especially water) molecules. Thus, the electric energy con-
verted to radiation in a microwave oven eventually becomes part of the inter-
nal energy of the food. The fast and efficient cooking of microwave ovens has
made them one of the essential appliances in modern kitchens (Fig. 15–5).
Radars and cordless telephones also use electromagnetic radiation in the
microwave region. The wavelength of the electromagnetic waves used in
radio and TV broadcasting usually ranges between 1 and 1000 m in the
radio wave region of the spectrum.
In heat transfer studies, we are interested in the energy emitted by bodies
because of their temperature only. Therefore, we limit our consideration to
thermal radiation, which we simply call radiation. The relations developed
below are restricted to thermal radiation only and may not be applicable to
other forms of electromagnetic radiation.
The electrons, atoms, and molecules of all solids, liquids, and gases above
absolute zero temperature are constantly in motion, and thus radiation is
constantly emitted, as well as being absorbed or transmitted throughout the
entire volume of matter. That is, radiation is a volumetric phenomenon.
656
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 15–1
The wavelength ranges of
different colors
Color
Wavelength band
Violet
0.40–0.44 m
Blue
0.44–0.49 m
Green
0.49–0.54 m
Yellow
0.54–0.60 m
Orange
0.60–0.67 m
Red
0.63–0.76 m
FIGURE 15–5
Food is heated or cooked in a
microwave oven by absorbing the
electromagnetic radiation energy
generated by the magnetron of 
the oven.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
660
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
However, for opaque (nontransparent) solids such as metals, wood, and
rocks, radiation is considered to be a surface phenomenon, since the radia-
tion emitted by the interior regions can never reach the surface, and the radi-
ation incident on such bodies is usually absorbed within a few microns from
the surface (Fig. 15–6). Note that the radiation characteristics of surfaces
can be changed completely by applying thin layers of coatings on them.
15–3
■BLACKBODY RADIATION
A body at a thermodynamic (or absolute) temperature above zero emits radi-
ation in all directions over a wide range of wavelengths. The amount of radia-
tion energy emitted from a surface at a given wavelength depends on the
material of the body and the condition of its surface as well as the surface
temperature. Therefore, different bodies may emit different amounts of radia-
tion per unit surface area, even when they are at the same temperature. Thus,
it is natural to be curious about the maximum amount of radiation that can be
emitted by a surface at a given temperature. Satisfying this curiosity requires
the definition of an idealized body, called a blackbody, to serve as a standard
against which the radiative properties of real surfaces may be compared.
A blackbody is defined as a perfect emitter and absorber of radiation. At a
specified temperature and wavelength, no surface can emit more energy than
a blackbody. A blackbody absorbs all incident radiation, regardless of wave-
length and direction. Also, a blackbody emits radiation energy uniformly in
all directions per unit area normal to direction of emission (Fig. 15–7). That
is, a blackbody is a diffuse emitter. The term diffuse means “independent of
direction.”
The radiation energy emitted by a blackbody per unit time and per unit
surface area was determined experimentally by Joseph Stefan in 1879 and
expressed as
Eb(T )  sT 4
(W/m2)
(15–3)
where s  5.670 
 108 W/m2  K4 is the Stefan–Boltzmann constant and
T is the absolute temperature of the surface in K. This relation was theoreti-
cally verified in 1884 by Ludwig Boltzmann. Equation 15–3 is known as
the Stefan–Boltzmann law and Eb is called the blackbody emissive
power. Note that the emission of thermal radiation is proportional to the
fourth power of the absolute temperature.
Although a blackbody would appear black to the eye, a distinction should
be made between the idealized blackbody and an ordinary black surface. Any
surface that absorbs light (the visible portion of radiation) would appear black
to the eye, and a surface that reflects it completely would appear white. Con-
sidering that visible radiation occupies a very narrow band of the spectrum
from 0.4 to 0.76 m, we cannot make any judgments about the blackness of a
surface on the basis of visual observations. For example, snow and white
paint reflect light and thus appear white. But they are essentially black for
infrared radiation since they strongly absorb long-wavelength radiation. Sur-
faces coated with lampblack paint approach idealized blackbody behavior.
Another type of body that closely resembles a blackbody is a large cavity
with a small opening, as shown in Fig. 15–8. Radiation coming in through
the opening of area A undergoes multiple reflections, and thus it has several
Chapter 15
|
657
FIGURE 15–6
Radiation in opaque solids is
considered a surface phenomenon
since the radiation emitted only by the
molecules at the surface can escape
the solid.
Radiation
emitted
Gas or
vacuum
Solid
FIGURE 15–7
A blackbody is said to be a diffuse
emitter since it emits radiation energy
uniformly in all directions.
Blackbody
Real body
Nonuniform
Uniform
FIGURE 15–8
A large isothermal cavity at
temperature T with a small opening of
area A closely resembles a blackbody
of surface area A at the same
temperature.
Small opening
of area A
Large cavity
T

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
661
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
chances to be absorbed by the interior surfaces of the cavity before any part
of it can possibly escape. Also, if the surface of the cavity is isothermal at
temperature T, the radiation emitted by the interior surfaces streams through
the opening after undergoing multiple reflections, and thus it has a diffuse
nature. Therefore, the cavity acts as a perfect absorber and perfect emitter,
and the opening will resembles a blackbody of surface area A at temperature
T, regardless of the actual radiative properties of the cavity.
The Stefan–Boltzmann law in Eq. 15–3 gives the total blackbody
emissive power Eb, which is the sum of the radiation emitted over all wave-
lengths. Sometimes we need to know the spectral blackbody emissive
power, which is the amount of radiation energy emitted by a blackbody at a
thermodynamic temperature T per unit time, per unit surface area, and per
unit wavelength about the wavelength l. For example, we are more inter-
ested in the amount of radiation an incandescent lightbulb emits in the visi-
ble wavelength spectrum than we are in the total amount emitted.
The relation for the spectral blackbody emissive power Ebl was developed
by Max Planck in 1901 in conjunction with his famous quantum theory.
This relation is known as Planck’s law and is expressed as
Ebl(l, T) 
(W/m2  m)
(15–4)
where
C1  2phc2
0  3.74177 
 108 W  m4/m2
C2  hc0/k  1.43878 
 104 m  K
Also, T is the absolute temperature of the surface, l is the wavelength of the
radiation emitted, and k  1.38065 
 1023 J/K is Boltzmann’s constant.
This relation is valid for a surface in a vacuum or a gas. For other mediums,
it needs to be modified by replacing C1 by C1/n2, where n is the index of
refraction of the medium. Note that the term spectral indicates dependence
on wavelength.
The variation of the spectral blackbody emissive power with wavelength
is plotted in Fig. 15–9 for selected temperatures. Several observations can
be made from this figure:
1. The emitted radiation is a continuous function of wavelength. At any
specified temperature, it increases with wavelength, reaches a peak, and
then decreases with increasing wavelength.
2. At any wavelength, the amount of emitted radiation increases with
increasing temperature.
3. As temperature increases, the curves shift to the left to the shorter-
wavelength region. Consequently, a larger fraction of the radiation is
emitted at shorter wavelengths at higher temperatures.
4. The radiation emitted by the sun, which is considered to be a blackbody
at 5780 K (or roughly at 5800 K), reaches its peak in the visible region
of the spectrum. Therefore, the sun is in tune with our eyes. On the
other hand, surfaces at T  800 K emit almost entirely in the infrared
region and thus are not visible to the eye unless they reflect light com-
ing from other sources.
C1
l5[exp (C2/lT)  1]
658
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
662
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
As the temperature increases, the peak of the curve in Fig. 15–9 shifts
toward shorter wavelengths. The wavelength at which the peak occurs for a
specified temperature is given by Wien’s displacement law as
(lT )max power  2897.8 m  K
(15–5)
This relation was originally developed by Willy Wien in 1894 using classi-
cal thermodynamics, but it can also be obtained by differentiating Eq. 15–4
with respect to l while holding T constant and setting the result equal to
zero. A plot of Wien’s displacement law, which is the locus of the peaks of
the radiation emission curves, is also given in Fig. 15–9.
The peak of the solar radiation, for example, occurs at l  2897.8/
5780  0.50 m, which is near the middle of the visible range. The peak of
the radiation emitted by a surface at room temperature (T  298 K) occurs
at 9.72 m, which is well into the infrared region of the spectrum.
An electrical resistance heater starts radiating heat soon after it is plugged
in, and we can feel the emitted radiation energy by holding our hands against
the heater. But this radiation is entirely in the infrared region and thus cannot
Chapter 15
|
659
FIGURE 15–9
The variation of the blackbody
emissive power with wavelength for
several temperatures.
Violet
Red
Visible light region
5800 K (Solar)
4000 K
Locus of
maximum power:
  T = 2897.8 μm · K
λ
2000 K
1000 K
500 K
300 K
100 K
Wavelength   , μm
 
λ
0.01
10–6
10–4
10–2
100
102
104
106
108
0.1
1
Ebl, W/m2 · μm
10
100
1000

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
663
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
be sensed by our eyes. The heater would appear dull red when its temperature
reaches about 1000 K, since it starts emitting a detectable amount (about
1 W/m2  m) of visible red radiation at that temperature. As the temperature
rises even more, the heater appears bright red and is said to be red hot. When
the temperature reaches about 1500 K, the heater emits enough radiation in
the entire visible range of the spectrum to appear almost white to the eye, and
it is called white hot.
Although it cannot be sensed directly by the human eye, infrared radiation
can be detected by infrared cameras, which transmit the information to
microprocessors to display visual images of objects at night. Rattlesnakes can
sense the infrared radiation or the “body heat” coming off warm-blooded ani-
mals, and thus they can see at night without using any instruments. Similarly,
honeybees are sensitive to ultraviolet radiation. A surface that reflects all of
the light appears white, while a surface that absorbs all of the light incident
on it appears black. (Then how do we see a black surface?)
It should be clear from this discussion that the color of an object is not due
to emission, which is primarily in the infrared region, unless the surface tem-
perature of the object exceeds about 1000 K. Instead, the color of a surface
depends on the absorption and reflection characteristics of the surface and is
due to selective absorption and reflection of the incident visible radiation
coming from a light source such as the sun or an incandescent lightbulb. A
piece of clothing containing a pigment that reflects red while absorbing the
remaining parts of the incident light appears “red” to the eye (Fig. 15–10).
Leaves appear “green” because their cells contain the pigment chlorophyll,
which strongly reflects green while absorbing other colors.
It is left as an exercise to show that integration of the spectral blackbody
emissive power Ebl over the entire wavelength spectrum gives the total
blackbody emissive power Eb:
Eb(T) 
Ebl(l, T) dl  sT 4
(W/m2)
(15–6)
Thus, we obtained the Stefan–Boltzmann law (Eq. 15–3) by integrating
Planck’s law (Eq. 15–4) over all wavelengths. Note that on an Ebl–l chart,
Ebl corresponds to any value on the curve, whereas Eb corresponds to the
area under the entire curve for a specified temperature (Fig. 15–11). Also,
the term total means “integrated over all wavelengths.”


0
660
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 15–11
On an Ebl–l chart, the area under
a curve for a given temperature
represents the total radiation energy
emitted by a blackbody at that
temperature.
Eb  (  , T)
λ λ
λ
Ebλ
Eb(T)
FIGURE 15–10
A surface that reflects red while
absorbing the remaining parts of the
incident light appears red to the eye.
Reflected
Red
Yellow
Green
Blue
Red
Absorbed
Yellow
Green
Blue
Incident
light
EXAMPLE 15–1
Radiation Emission from a Black Ball
Consider a 20-cm-diameter spherical ball at 800 K suspended in air as
shown in Fig. 15–12. Assuming the ball closely approximates a blackbody,
determine (a) the total blackbody emissive power, (b) the total amount of
radiation emitted by the ball in 5 min, and (c) the spectral blackbody emis-
sive power at a wavelength of 3 m.
Solution
An isothermal sphere is suspended in air. The total blackbody
emissive power, the total radiation emitted in 5 min, and the spectral black-
body emissive power at 3 m are to be determined.
Assumptions
The ball behaves as a blackbody.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
664
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The Stefan–Boltzmann law Eb(T )  sT 4 gives the total radiation emit-
ted by a blackbody at all wavelengths from l  0 to l  . But we are
often interested in the amount of radiation emitted over some wavelength
band. For example, an incandescent lightbulb is judged on the basis of the
radiation it emits in the visible range rather than the radiation it emits at
all wavelengths.
The radiation energy emitted by a blackbody per unit area over a wave-
length band from l  0 to l is determined from (Fig. 15–13)
Eb, 0–l(T ) 
Ebl(l, T ) dl
(W/m2)
(15–7)
It looks like we can determine Eb, 0–l by substituting the Ebl relation from
Eq. 15–4 and performing this integration. But it turns out that this integra-
tion does not have a simple closed-form solution, and performing a
numerical integration each time we need a value of Eb,0–l is not practical.
Therefore, we define a dimensionless quantity fl called the blackbody
radiation function as

l
0
Chapter 15
|
661
FIGURE 15–12
The spherical ball considered in
Example 15–1.
20 cm
800 K
Ball
FIGURE 15–13
On an Ebl–l chart, the area under
the curve to the left of the l  l1 line
represents the radiation energy emitted
by a blackbody in the wavelength
range 0–l1 for the given temperature.
Ebλ
Eb, 0 –   1(T) = Eb  (  , T )d
Eb  (  , T )
1
1
0
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
λ
Analysis
(a) The total blackbody emissive power is determined from the
Stefan–Boltzmann law to be
Eb  sT 4  (5.67 
 108 W/m2  K4)(800 K)4  23.2 kW/m2
That is, the ball emits 23.2 kJ of energy in the form of electromagnetic radi-
ation per second per m2 of the surface area of the ball.
(b) The total amount of radiation energy emitted from the entire ball in 
5 min is determined by multiplying the blackbody emissive power obtained
above by the total surface area of the ball and the given time interval:
As  pD2  p(0.2 m)2  0.1257 m2
t  (5 min)
 300 s
Qrad  EbAs t  (23.2 kW/m2)(0.1257 m2)(300 s)
 875 kJ
That is, the ball loses 875 kJ of its internal energy in the form of electro-
magnetic waves to the surroundings in 5 min, which is enough energy to heat
20 kg of water from 0C to 100C. Note that the surface temperature of the
ball cannot remain constant at 800 K unless there is an equal amount of
energy flow to the surface from the surroundings or from the interior regions
of the ball through some mechanisms such as chemical or nuclear reactions.
(c) The spectral blackbody emissive power at a wavelength of 3 m is deter-
mined from Planck’s distribution law to be
Ebl 
 3846 W/m2  m
C1
l5cexp a C2
lT b  1 d

3.74177 
 108 W # m4/m2
(3 m)5 cexp a 1.43878 
 104 m # K
(3 m)(800 K)
b  1 d
a
1 kJ
1 kW  sb
a 60 s
1 minb

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
665
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
fl(T) 
(15–8)
The function fl represents the fraction of radiation emitted from a blackbody
at temperature T in the wavelength band from l  0 to l. The values of fl
are listed in Table 15–2 as a function of lT, where l is in m and T is in K.
The fraction of radiation energy emitted by a blackbody at tempera-
ture T over a finite wavelength band from l  l1 to l  l2 is determined
from (Fig. 15–14)
fl1–l2(T)  fl2(T)  fl1(T)
(15–9)
where fl1(T) and fl2(T) are blackbody radiation functions corresponding to
l1T and l2T, respectively.

l
0 Ebl(l, T) dl
sT 4
662
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 15–14
Graphical representation of the
fraction of radiation emitted in the
wavelength band from l1 to l2.
Eb  λ
fλ1– λ2= f0 – λ2– f0 – λ1
Eb  (  , T)
λ λ
Eb(T)
———–—
Eb
1
2
λ
λ
λ
——
TABLE 15–2
Blackbody radiation functions fl
lT,
lT,
m  K
fl
m  K
fl
200
0.000000
6200
0.754140
400
0.000000
6400
0.769234
600
0.000000
6600
0.783199
800
0.000016
6800
0.796129
1000
0.000321
7000
0.808109
1200
0.002134
7200
0.819217
1400
0.007790
7400
0.829527
1600
0.019718
7600
0.839102
1800
0.039341
7800
0.848005
2000
0.066728
8000
0.856288
2200
0.100888
8500
0.874608
2400
0.140256
9000
0.890029
2600
0.183120
9500
0.903085
2800
0.227897
10,000
0.914199
3000
0.273232
10,500
0.923710
3200
0.318102
11,000
0.931890
3400
0.361735
11,500
0.939959
3600
0.403607
12,000
0.945098
3800
0.443382
13,000
0.955139
4000
0.480877
14,000
0.962898
4200
0.516014
15,000
0.969981
4400
0.548796
16,000
0.973814
4600
0.579280
18,000
0.980860
4800
0.607559
20,000
0.985602
5000
0.633747
25,000
0.992215
5200
0.658970
30,000
0.995340
5400
0.680360
40,000
0.997967
5600
0.701046
50,000
0.998953
5800
0.720158
75,000
0.999713
6000
0.737818
100,000
0.999905

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
666
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
15–4
■RADIATIVE PROPERTIES
Most materials encountered in practice, such as metals, wood, and bricks,
are opaque to thermal radiation, and radiation is considered to be a surface
phenomenon for such materials. That is, thermal radiation is emitted or
absorbed within the first few microns of the surface, and thus we speak of
radiative properties of surfaces for opaque materials.
Some other materials, such as glass and water, allow visible radiation to
penetrate to considerable depths before any significant absorption takes
place. Radiation through such semitransparent materials obviously cannot be
considered to be a surface phenomenon since the entire volume of the mater-
ial interacts with radiation. On the other hand, both glass and water are prac-
Chapter 15
|
663
FIGURE 15–15
Graphical representation of the
fraction of radiation emitted in the
visible range in Example 15–2.
Ebλ
f0.4–0.76 = f0–0.76 – f0–0.4
Eb
  , μm
λ
1.16
0.76
0.4
——
EXAMPLE 15–2
Emission of Radiation from a Lightbulb
The temperature of the filament of an incandescent lightbulb is 2500 K.
Assuming the filament to be a blackbody, determine the fraction of the radiant
energy emitted by the filament that falls in the visible range. Also, determine
the wavelength at which the emission of radiation from the filament peaks.
Solution
The temperature of the filament of an incandescent lightbulb is
given. The fraction of visible radiation emitted by the filament and the wave-
length at which the emission peaks are to be determined.
Assumptions
The filament behaves as a blackbody.
Analysis
The visible range of the electromagnetic spectrum extends from
l1  0.4 m to l2  0.76 m. Noting that T  2500 K, the blackbody
radiation functions corresponding to l1T and l2T are determined from Table
15–2 to be
l1T  (0.40 m)(2500 K)  1000 m  K
⎯→
fl1  0.000321
l2T  (0.76 m)(2500 K)  1900 m  K
⎯→
fl2  0.053035
That is, 0.03 percent of the radiation is emitted at wavelengths less than
0.4 m and 5.3 percent at wavelengths less than 0.76 m. Then the frac-
tion of radiation emitted between these two wavelengths is (Fig. 15–15)
fl1–l2  fl2  fl1  0.053035  0.000321  0.052714
Therefore, only about 5 percent of the radiation emitted by the filament of
the lightbulb falls in the visible range. The remaining 95 percent of the radi-
ation appears in the infrared region in the form of radiant heat or “invisible
light,” as it used to be called. This is certainly not a very efficient way of
converting electrical energy to light and explains why fluorescent tubes are a
wiser choice for lighting.
The wavelength at which the emission of radiation from the filament
peaks is easily determined from Wien’s displacement law to be
(lT )max power  2897.8 m  K
→
lmax power 
 1.16 m
Discussion
Note that the radiation emitted from the filament peaks in the
infrared region.
2897.8 m # K
2500 K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
667
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
tically opaque to infrared radiation. Therefore, materials can exhibit different
behavior at different wavelengths, and the dependence on wavelength is an
important consideration in the study of radiative properties such as emissiv-
ity, absorptivity, reflectivity, and transmissivity of materials.
In the preceding section, we defined a blackbody as a perfect emitter and
absorber of radiation and said that no body can emit more radiation than a
blackbody at the same temperature. Therefore, a blackbody can serve as a
convenient reference in describing the emission and absorption characteris-
tics of real surfaces.
Emissivity
The emissivity of a surface represents the ratio of the radiation emitted by
the surface at a given temperature to the radiation emitted by a blackbody
at the same temperature. The emissivity of a surface is denoted by e, and it
varies between zero and one, 0  e  1. Emissivity is a measure of how
closely a surface approximates a blackbody, for which e  1.
The emissivity of a real surface is not a constant. Rather, it varies with the
temperature of the surface as well as the wavelength and the direction of the
emitted radiation. Therefore, different emissivities can be defined for a sur-
face, depending on the effects considered. For example, the emissivity of a
surface at a specified wavelength is called spectral emissivity and is denoted
by el. Likewise, the emissivity in a specified direction is called directional
emissivity, denoted by eu, where u is the angle between the direction of radi-
ation and the normal of the surface. The most elemental emissivity of a sur-
face at a given temperature is the spectral directional emissivity el,u, which
is the emissivity at a specified wavelength in a specified direction. Note that
blackbody radiation is independent of direction.
In practice, it is usually more convenient to work with radiation properties
averaged over all directions, called hemispherical properties. Noting that the
integral of the rate of radiation energy emitted at a specified wavelength per
unit surface area over the entire hemisphere is spectral emissive power, the
spectral hemispherical emissivity can be expressed as
el(l, T) 
(15–10)
Note that the emissivity of a surface at a given wavelength can be different
at different temperatures since the spectral distribution of emitted radiation
(and thus the amount of radiation emitted at a given wavelength) changes
with temperature.
The total hemispherical emissivity is defined in terms of the radiation
energy emitted over all wavelengths in all directions as
e(T) 
(15–11)
Therefore, the total hemispherical emissivity (or simply the “average emis-
sivity”) of a surface at a given temperature represents the ratio of the total
radiation energy emitted by the surface to the radiation emitted by a black-
body of the same surface area at the same temperature.
E(T)
Eb(T)
El(l, T )
Ebl(l, T)
664
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
668
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Noting that E 
Eldl and El(l, T)  el(l, T)Ebl(l, T), the total
hemispherical emissivity can also be expressed as
(15–12)
since Eb(T )  sT 4. To perform this integration, we need to know the varia-
tion of spectral emissivity with wavelength at the specified temperature. The
integrand is usually a complicated function, and the integration has to be
performed numerically. However, the integration can be performed quite
easily by dividing the spectrum into a sufficient number of wavelength
bands and assuming the emissivity to remain constant over each band; that
is, by expressing the function el(l, T) as a step function. This simplification
offers great convenience for little sacrifice of accuracy, since it allows us to
transform the integration into a summation in terms of blackbody emission
functions.
As an example, consider the emissivity function plotted in Fig. 15–16. It
seems like this function can be approximated reasonably well by a step
function of the form
e1  constant,
0  l  l1
el  • e2  constant,
l1  l  l2
(15–13)
e3  constant,
l2  l  
Then the average emissivity can be determined from Eq. 15–12 by breaking
the integral into three parts and utilizing the definition of the blackbody
radiation function as
e(T) 
 e1 f0l1(T)  e2 fl1l2(T)  e3 fl2(T)
(15–14)
Radiation is a complex phenomenon as it is, and the consideration of the
wavelength and direction dependence of properties, assuming sufficient data
exist, makes it even more complicated. Therefore, the gray and diffuse
approximations are often utilized in radiation calculations. A surface is said
to be diffuse if its properties are independent of direction, and gray if its
properties are independent of wavelength. Therefore, the emissivity of a
gray, diffuse surface is simply the total hemispherical emissivity of that sur-
face because of independence of direction and wavelength (Fig. 15–17).
A few comments about the validity of the diffuse approximation are in
order. Although real surfaces do not emit radiation in a perfectly diffuse man-
ner as a blackbody does, they often come close. The variation of emissivity
with direction for both electrical conductors and nonconductors is given in
Fig. 15–18. Here u is the angle measured from the normal of the surface, and
thus u  0 for radiation emitted in a direction normal to the surface. Note that
eu remains nearly constant for about u  40 for conductors such as metals
and for u  70 for nonconductors such as plastics. Therefore, the directional
e1
l1
0 Ebl dl
Eb

e2
l 2
l1
Ebl dl
Eb

e3

l 2
Ebl dl
E b
e(T )  E(T )
Eb(T )  

0 el(l, T )Ebl(l, T )dl
sT 4


0
Chapter 15
|
665
FIGURE 15–16
Approximating the actual variation
of emissivity with wavelength
by a step function.
λ
1
1
3
1
2
ε
ε
ε
ε
3
2
ε
ε
2
λ
λ
Actual
variation
ελ
FIGURE 15–17
The effect of diffuse and gray
approximations on the emissivity
of a surface.
Real surface:
          ≠ constant
          ≠ constant
Diffuse surface:
           = constant
Gray surface:
           = constant
Diffuse, gray surface:
          =     =     = constant
ελ
ελ
ελ
εθ
εθ
εθ
ε
FIGURE 15–18
Typical variations of emissivity with
direction for electrical conductors
and nonconductors.
Nonconductor
Conductor
1
εθ
0.5
0
15°
0°
30°
45°
u
60°
75°
90°

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
669
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
emissivity of a surface in the normal direction is representative of the hemi-
spherical emissivity of the surface. In radiation analysis, it is common practice
to assume the surfaces to be diffuse emitters with an emissivity equal to the
value in the normal (u  0) direction.
The effect of the gray approximation on emissivity and emissive power of a
real surface is illustrated in Fig. 15–19. Note that the radiation emission from
a real surface, in general, differs from the Planck distribution, and the emis-
sion curve may have several peaks and valleys. A gray surface should emit as
much radiation as the real surface it represents at the same temperature.
Therefore, the areas under the emission curves of the real and gray surfaces
must be equal.
The emissivities of common materials are listed in Table A–26 in the
appendix, and the variation of emissivity with wavelength and temperature is
illustrated in Fig. 15–20. Typical ranges of emissivity of various materials are
666
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 15–19
Comparison of the emissivity (a) and
emissive power (b) of a real surface
with those of a gray surface and a
blackbody at the same temperature.
1
0
0
(a)
(b)
λ
λ
Blackbody,    = 1
ε
ε
Blackbody, Ebλ
T = const.
T = const.
Gray surface,    = const.
Gray surface,
E   =   Eb
λ
ε
λ
λ
ε
λ
λ
Real surface,    
ελ
Real surface,
E   =     Eb  
λ
ε
E  λ
ε
FIGURE 15–20
The variation of normal emissivity with (a) wavelength and (b) temperature for various materials.
1.0
0.8
Spectral, normal emissivity,    ,n
ελ
Total normal emissivity,   n
ε
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0
1000
500
0
1500
2000
2500
3000
3500
0.1
0.2
0.4
2
40
4
(a)
(b)
Wavelength,   , μm
λ
Temperature, K
1
6
0.6
10
60
100
20
Silicon carbide,
1000 K
2800 K
Stainless steel,
1200 K
heavily oxidized
Stainless steel,
800 K
lightly oxidized
Tungsten
1600 K
Aluminum
oxide,
1400 K
Heavily oxidized
stainless steel
Aluminum oxide
Tungsten
Lightly oxidized
stainless steel

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
670
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
given in Fig. 15–21. Note that metals generally have low emissivities, as low
as 0.02 for polished surfaces, and nonmetals such as ceramics and organic
materials have high ones. The emissivity of metals increases with tempera-
ture. Also, oxidation causes significant increases in the emissivity of metals.
Heavily oxidized metals can have emissivities comparable to those of
nonmetals.
Care should be exercised in the use and interpretation of radiation prop-
erty data reported in the literature, since the properties strongly depend on
the surface conditions such as oxidation, roughness, type of finish, and
cleanliness. Consequently, there is considerable discrepancy and uncer-
tainty in the reported values. This uncertainty is largely due to the diffi-
culty in characterizing and describing the surface conditions precisely.
Chapter 15
|
667
FIGURE 15–21
Typical ranges of emissivity for
various materials.
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Vegetation, water, skin
Building materials, paints
Rocks, soil
Glasses, minerals
Carbon
Ceramics
Oxidized
metals
Metals, unpolished
Polished metals
FIGURE 15–22
The spectral emissivity of the surface
considered in Example 15–3.
3
0
0.1
0
0.3
0.8
1.0
ελ
7
  , μm
λ
EXAMPLE 15–3
Emissivity of a Surface and Emissive Power
The spectral emissivity function of an opaque surface at 800 K is approxi-
mated as (Fig. 15–22)
e1  0.3,
0  l  3 m
el 
e2  0.8,
3 m  l  7 m
e3  0.1,
7 m  l  
Determine the average emissivity of the surface and its emissive power.
SOLUTION
The variation of emissivity of a surface at a specified tempera-
ture with wavelength is given. The average emissivity of the surface and its
emissive power are to be determined.
Analysis
The variation of the emissivity with wavelength is given as a step
function. Therefore, the average emissivity of the surface can be determined
from Eq. 15–12 by breaking the integral into three parts,
e(T ) 
 e1 f0–l1(T )  e2 fl1–l2(T )  e3 fl2–(T)
 e1 fl1  e2(fl2  fl1)  e3(1  fl2)
where fl1 and fl2 are blackbody radiation functions and are determined from
Table 15–2 to be
l1T  (3 m)(800 K)  2400 m  K
→
fl1  0.140256
l2T  (7 m)(800 K)  5600 m  K
→
fl2  0.701046
Note that f0–l1  fl1  f0  fl1 since f0  0, and fl2–  f  fl2  1  fl2
since f  1. Substituting,
e  0.3 
 0.140256  0.8(0.701046  0.140256)  0.1(1  0.701046)
 0.521
e1 
l1
0 Ebl dl
sT 4

e2 
l2
l1
Ebl dl
sT 4

e3 

l2
Ebl dl
sT 4
d

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
671
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Absorptivity, Reflectivity, and Transmissivity
Everything around us constantly emits radiation, and the emissivity repre-
sents the emission characteristics of those bodies. This means that every
body, including our own, is constantly bombarded by radiation coming from
all directions over a range of wavelengths. Recall that radiation flux incident
on a surface is called irradiation and is denoted by G.
When radiation strikes a surface, part of it is absorbed, part of it is
reflected, and the remaining part, if any, is transmitted, as illustrated in
Fig. 15–23. The fraction of irradiation absorbed by the surface is called the
absorptivity a, the fraction reflected by the surface is called the reflectivity
r, and the fraction transmitted is called the transmissivity t. That is,
Absorptivity:
a  
,
0  a  1
(15–15)
Reflectivity:
r  
,
0  r  1
(15–16)
Transmissivity:
t  
,
0  t  1
(15–17)
where G is the radiation flux incident on the surface, and Gabs, Gref, and Gtr
are the absorbed, reflected, and transmitted portions of it, respectively. The
first law of thermodynamics requires that the sum of the absorbed, reflected,
and transmitted radiation be equal to the incident radiation. That is,
Gabs  Gref  Gtr  G
(15–18)
Dividing each term of this relation by G yields
a  r  t  1
(15–19)
For opaque surfaces, t  0, and thus
a  r  1
(15–20)
This is an important property relation since it enables us to determine both
the absorptivity and reflectivity of an opaque surface by measuring either of
these properties.
These definitions are for total hemispherical properties, since G represents
the radiation flux incident on the surface from all directions over the hemi-
spherical space and over all wavelengths. Thus, a, r, and t are the average
properties of a medium for all directions and all wavelengths. However, like
Transmitted radiation
Incident radiation
 Gtr
G
Reflected radiation
Incident radiation  Gref
G
Absorbed radiation
Incident radiation  Gabs
G
668
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
That is, the surface will emit as much radiation energy at 800 K as a gray sur-
face having a constant emissivity of e  0.521. The emissive power of the sur-
face is
E  esT 4  0.521(5.67 
 108 W/m2  K4)(800 K)4  12,100 W/m2
Discussion
Note that the surface emits 12.1 kJ of radiation energy per sec-
ond per m2 area of the surface.
FIGURE 15–23
The absorption, reflection, and
transmission of incident radiation by a
semitransparent material.
Absorbed
  G
Incident
radiation
G, W/m2
Reflected
  G
Semitransparent
material
Transmitted
  G
α
ρ
τ

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
672
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
emissivity, these properties can also be defined for a specific wavelength
and/or direction. For example, the spectral hemispherical absorptivity and
spectral hemispherical reﬂectivity of a surface are deﬁned as
al(l) 
and
rl(l) 
(15–21)
where Gl is the spectral irradiation (in W/m2  m) incident on the surface,
and Gl, abs and Gl, ref are the reflected and absorbed portions of it, respectively.
Similar quantities can be defined for the transmissivity of semitransparent
materials. For example, the spectral hemispherical transmissivity of a
medium can be expressed as
tl(l) 
(15–22)
The average absorptivity, reflectivity, and transmissivity of a surface can
also be defined in terms of their spectral counterparts as
a 
,
r 
,
t 
(15–23)
The reflectivity differs somewhat from the other properties in that it is
bidirectional in nature. That is, the value of the reflectivity of a surface
depends not only on the direction of the incident radiation but also the direc-
tion of reflection. Therefore, the reflected rays of a radiation beam incident
on a real surface in a specified direction forms an irregular shape, as shown
in Fig. 15–24. Such detailed reflectivity data do not exist for most surfaces,
and even if they did, they would be of little value in radiation calculations
since this would usually add more complication to the analysis.
In practice, for simplicity, surfaces are assumed to reflect in a perfectly specu-
lar or diffuse manner. In specular (or mirrorlike) reflection, the angle of reflec-
tion equals the angle of incidence of the radiation beam. In diffuse reflection,
radiation is reflected equally in all directions, as shown in Fig. 15–24.
Reflection from smooth and polished surfaces approximates specular reflec-
tion, whereas reflection from rough surfaces approximates diffuse reflection.
In radiation analysis, smoothness is defined relative to wavelength. A surface
is said to be smooth if the height of the surface roughness is much smaller
than the wavelength of the incident radiation.
Unlike emissivity, the absorptivity of a material is practically independent
of surface temperature. However, the absorptivity depends strongly on the
temperature of the source at which the incident radiation is originating. This
is also evident from Fig. 15–25, which shows the absorptivities of various
materials at room temperature as functions of the temperature of the radia-
tion source. For example, the absorptivity of the concrete roof of a house is
about 0.6 for solar radiation (source temperature: 5780 K) and 0.9 for radia-
tion originating from the surrounding trees and buildings (source tempera-
ture: 300 K), as illustrated in Fig. 15–26.


0 tl Gl dl


0 Gl dl


0 rl Gl dl


0 Gl dl


0 al Gl dl


0 Gl dl
Gl, tr(l)
Gl(l)
Gl, ref(l)
Gl(l)
Gl, abs(l)
Gl(l)
Chapter 15
|
669
FIGURE 15–24
Different types of reflection from
a surface: (a) actual or irregular,
(b) diffuse, and (c) specular
or mirrorlike.
Reflected ray
Incident
ray
Normal
Reflected rays
(a)
Incident
ray
Normal
Reflected rays
(b)
Incident
ray
Normal
θ
θ
(c)
FIGURE 15–25
Variation of absorptivity with
the temperature of the source of
irradiation for various common
materials at room temperature.
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
Absorptivity,   α
0.2
0
300400 600
1000
Source temperature, K
2000
6000
4000
1
8
4
3
2
5
6
9
7
1. White fireclay
2. Asbestos
3. Cork
4. Wood
5. Porcelain
6. Concrete
7. Roof shingles
8. Aluminum
9. Graphite

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
673
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Notice that the absorptivity of aluminum increases with the source
temperature, a characteristic for metals, and the absorptivity of electric non-
conductors, in general, decreases with temperature. This decrease is most
pronounced for surfaces that appear white to the eye. For example, the
absorptivity of a white painted surface is low for solar radiation, but it is
rather high for infrared radiation.
Kirchhoff’s Law
Consider a small body of surface area As , emissivity e, and absorptivity a at
temperature T contained in a large isothermal enclosure at the same temper-
ature, as shown in Fig. 15–27. Recall that a large isothermal enclosure
forms a blackbody cavity regardless of the radiative properties of the enclo-
sure surface, and the body in the enclosure is too small to interfere with the
blackbody nature of the cavity. Therefore, the radiation incident on any part
of the surface of the small body is equal to the radiation emitted by a black-
body at temperature T. That is, G  Eb(T)  sT 4, and the radiation
absorbed by the small body per unit of its surface area is
Gabs  aG  asT 4
The radiation emitted by the small body is 
Eemit  esT 4
Considering that the small body is in thermal equilibrium with the enclo-
sure, the net rate of heat transfer to the body must be zero. Therefore, the
radiation emitted by the body must be equal to the radiation absorbed by it:
As esT 4  As asT 4
(15–24)
Thus, we conclude that
e(T)  a(T)
(15–25)
That is, the total hemispherical emissivity of a surface at temperature T is
equal to its total hemispherical absorptivity for radiation coming from 
a blackbody at the same temperature. This relation, which greatly simplifies
the radiation analysis, was first developed by Gustav Kirchhoff in 1860 
and is now called Kirchhoff’s law. Note that this relation is derived 
under the condition that the surface temperature is equal to the temperature
of the source of irradiation, and the reader is cautioned against using it when
considerable difference (more than a few hundred degrees) exists between
the surface temperature and the temperature of the source of irradiation.
The derivation above can also be repeated for radiation at a specified
wavelength to obtain the spectral form of Kirchhoff’s law:
el(T)  al(T)
(15–26)
This relation is valid when the irradiation or the emitted radiation is inde-
pendent of direction. The form of Kirchhoff’s law that involves no restric-
tions is the spectral directional form expressed as el, u(T)  al, u(T). That
670
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 15–26
The absorptivity of a material may be
quite different for radiation originating
from sources at different temperatures.
   = 0.6
   = 0.9
α
α
Sun
FIGURE 15–27
The small body contained in a large
isothermal enclosure used in the
development of Kirchhoff’s law.
T
T
As,  ,   
ε α
G
Eemit

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
674
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
is, the emissivity of a surface at a specified wavelength, direction, and tem-
perature is always equal to its absorptivity at the same wavelength, direc-
tion, and temperature.
It is very tempting to use Kirchhoff’s law in radiation analysis since the
relation e  a together with r  1  a enables us to determine all three
properties of an opaque surface from a knowledge of only one property.
Although Eq. 15–25 gives acceptable results in most cases, in practice, care
should be exercised when there is considerable difference between the sur-
face temperature and the temperature of the source of incident radiation.
The Greenhouse Effect
You have probably noticed that when you leave your car under direct sunlight
on a sunny day, the interior of the car gets much warmer than the air outside,
and you may have wondered why the car acts like a heat trap. The answer
lies in the spectral transmissivity curve of the glass, which resembles an
inverted U, as shown in Fig. 15–28. We observe from this figure that glass at
thicknesses encountered in practice transmits over 90 percent of radiation in
the visible range and is practically opaque (nontransparent) to radiation in the
longer-wavelength infrared regions of the electromagnetic spectrum (roughly
l  3 m). Therefore, glass has a transparent window in the wavelength
range 0.3 m  l  3 m in which over 90 percent of solar radiation is
emitted. On the other hand, the entire radiation emitted by surfaces at room
temperature falls in the infrared region. Consequently, glass allows the solar
radiation to enter but does not allow the infrared radiation from the interior
surfaces to escape. This causes a rise in the interior temperature as a result of
the energy buildup in the car. This heating effect, which is due to the nongray
characteristic of glass (or clear plastics), is known as the greenhouse effect,
since it is utilized extensively in greenhouses (Fig. 15–29).
The greenhouse effect is also experienced on a larger scale on earth. The
surface of the earth, which warms up during the day as a result of the
absorption of solar energy, cools down at night by radiating its energy into
deep space as infrared radiation. The combustion gases such as CO2 and
water vapor in the atmosphere transmit the bulk of the solar radiation but
absorb the infrared radiation emitted by the surface of the earth. Thus, there
is concern that the energy trapped on earth will eventually cause global
warming and thus drastic changes in weather patterns.
In humid places such as coastal areas, there is not a large change between
the daytime and nighttime temperatures, because the humidity acts as a bar-
rier on the path of the infrared radiation coming from the earth, and thus
slows down the cooling process at night. In areas with clear skies such as
deserts, there is a large swing between the daytime and nighttime tempera-
tures because of the absence of such barriers for infrared radiation.
15–5
■THE VIEW FACTOR
Radiation heat transfer between surfaces depends on the orientation of
the surfaces relative to each other as well as their radiation properties and
Chapter 15
|
671
FIGURE 15–28
The spectral transmissivity of low-iron
glass at room temperature for different
thicknesses.
Visible
1.0
τλ
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0
0.25 0.4
0.6
1.5
Wavelength   , μm
λ
0.7
3.1
4.7
6.3
7.9
Thickness
0.038 cm
0.318 cm
0.635 cm
FIGURE 15–29
A greenhouse traps energy by
allowing the solar radiation to come in
but not allowing the infrared radiation
to go out.
Infrared
radiation
Greenhouse
Solar
radiation

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
675
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
temperatures, as illustrated in Fig. 15–30. For example, a camper can make
the most use of a campfire on a cold night by standing as close to the fire as
possible and by blocking as much of the radiation coming from the fire by
turning his or her front to the fire instead of the side. Likewise, a person can
maximize the amount of solar radiation incident on him or her and take a
sunbath by lying down on his or her back instead of standing.
To account for the effects of orientation on radiation heat transfer between
two surfaces, we define a new parameter called the view factor, which is a
purely geometric quantity and is independent of the surface properties and
temperature. It is also called the shape factor, configuration factor, and
angle factor. The view factor based on the assumption that the surfaces are
diffuse emitters and diffuse reflectors is called the diffuse view factor, and
the view factor based on the assumption that the surfaces are diffuse emit-
ters but specular reflectors is called the specular view factor. In this book,
we consider radiation exchange between diffuse surfaces only, and thus the
term view factor simply means diffuse view factor.
The view factor from a surface i to a surface j is denoted by Fi → j or just
Fij, and is defined as
Fij  the fraction of the radiation leaving surface i that strikes surface j directly
The notation Fi →j is instructive for beginners, since it emphasizes that the
view factor is for radiation that travels from surface i to surface j. However,
this notation becomes rather awkward when it has to be used many times in
a problem. In such cases, it is convenient to replace it by its shorthand ver-
sion Fij.
The view factor F12 represents the fraction of radiation leaving surface 1
that strikes surface 2 directly, and F21 represents the fraction of radiation
leaving surface 2 that strikes surface 1 directly. Note that the radiation that
strikes a surface does not need to be absorbed by that surface. Also, radia-
tion that strikes a surface after being reflected by other surfaces is not con-
sidered in the evaluation of view factors.
For the special case of j  i, we have
Fi →i  the fraction of radiation leaving surface i that strikes itself directly
Noting that in the absence of strong electromagnetic fields radiation beams
travel in straight paths, the view factor from a surface to itself is zero unless
the surface “sees” itself. Therefore, Fi →i  0 for plane or convex surfaces
and Fi →i  0 for concave surfaces, as illustrated in Fig. 15–31.
The value of the view factor ranges between zero and one. The limiting
case Fi →j  0 indicates that the two surfaces do not have a direct view of
each other, and thus radiation leaving surface i cannot strike surface j
directly. The other limiting case Fi →j  1 indicates that surface j com-
pletely surrounds surface i, so that the entire radiation leaving surface i is
intercepted by surface j. For example, in a geometry consisting of two con-
centric spheres, the entire radiation leaving the surface of the smaller sphere
672
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Point
source
Surface 3
Surface 1
Surface 2
FIGURE 15–30
Radiation heat exchange between
surfaces depends on the orientation
of the surfaces relative to each other,
and this dependence on orientation is
accounted for by the view factor.
F1 → 1 = 0
1
2
3
F2 → 2 = 0
F3 → 3 ≠ 0
(a) Plane surface
(b) Convex surface
(c) Concave surface
FIGURE 15–31
The view factor from a surface to itself
is zero for plane or convex surfaces
and nonzero for concave surfaces.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
676
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
(surface 1) strikes the larger sphere (surface 2), and thus F1 →2  1, as illus-
trated in Fig. 15–32.
The view factor has proven to be very useful in radiation analysis because it
allows us to express the fraction of radiation leaving a surface that strikes
another surface in terms of the orientation of these two surfaces relative to
each other. The underlying assumption in this process is that the radiation a
surface receives from a source is directly proportional to the angle the surface
subtends when viewed from the source. This would be the case only if the
radiation coming off the source is uniform in all directions throughout its
surface and the medium between the surfaces does not absorb, emit, or
scatter radiation. That is, it is the case when the surfaces are isothermal and
diffuse emitters and reflectors and the surfaces are separated by a non-
participating medium such as a vacuum or air.
The view factor F1 →2 between two surfaces A1 and A2 can be determined
in a systematic manner first by expressing the view factor between two dif-
ferential areas dA1 and dA2 in terms of the spatial variables and then by per-
forming the necessary integrations. However, this approach is not practical,
since, even for simple geometries, the resulting integrations are usually very
complex and difficult to perform.
View factors for hundreds of common geometries are evaluated and the
results are given in analytical, graphical, and tabular form in several publi-
cations. View factors for selected geometries are given in Tables 15–3 and
15–4 in analytical form and in Figs. 15–33 to 15–36 in graphical form. The
view factors in Table 15–3 are for three-dimensional geometries. The view
factors in Table 15–4, on the other hand, are for geometries that are infi-
nitely long in the direction perpendicular to the plane of the paper and are
therefore two-dimensional.
View Factor Relations
Radiation analysis on an enclosure consisting of N surfaces requires the
evaluation of N2 view factors, and this evaluation process is probably the
most time-consuming part of a radiation analysis. However, it is neither
practical nor necessary to evaluate all of the view factors directly. Once a suf-
ficient number of view factors are available, the rest of them can be deter-
mined by utilizing some fundamental relations for view factors, as discussed
next.
1
The Reciprocity Relation
The view factors Fi →j and Fj →i are not equal to each other unless the areas
of the two surfaces are. That is,
Fj →i  Fi →j
when
Ai  Aj
Fj →i  Fi →j
when
Ai  Aj
We have shown earlier that the pair of view factors Fi →j and Fj →i are
related to each other by
AiFi →j  AjFj →i
(15–27)
Chapter 15
|
673
Outer
sphere
2
F1 → 2 = 1
Inner
sphere
1
FIGURE 15–32
In a geometry that consists of two
concentric spheres, the view factor
F1 →2  1 since the entire radiation
leaving the surface of the smaller
sphere is intercepted by the
larger sphere.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
677
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
This relation is referred to as the reciprocity relation or the reciprocity
rule, and it enables us to determine the counterpart of a view factor from a
knowledge of the view factor itself and the areas of the two surfaces. When
determining the pair of view factors Fi →j and Fj →i, it makes sense to eval-
uate first the easier one directly and then the more difficult one by applying
the reciprocity relation.
2
The Summation Rule
The radiation analysis of a surface normally requires the consideration of
the radiation coming in or going out in all directions. Therefore, most radia-
tion problems encountered in practice involve enclosed spaces. When for-
674
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 15–3
View factor expressions for some common geometries of finite size (3-D)
L
Y
X
i
j
j
i
rj
ri
L
Z
Y
X
i
j
2
——
pXY
(1 + X2)(1 + Y 2)
———————
1 + X2 + Y 2
X = X/L and Y = Y/L
Aligned parallel rectangles
Geometry
Relation
––
Fi → j =
Fi → j =
S –
( )
ln
––
––
––
––
––
––
––
X
———–—
(1 + Y 2)1/2
+ X(1 + Y 2)1/2 tan–1
––
––
––
––
Y
———–—
(1 + X2)1/2
+ Y(1 + X2)1/2 tan–1
––
––
– X tan–1 X – Y tan–1 Y
––
––
––
––
––
––
1
—–
pW
1—
W
1—
H
H = Z/X and W = Y/X
Perpendicular rectangles
with a common edge
Fi → j =
W tan–1
+ H tan–1
1
———–——
(H2 + W2)1/2
– (H2 + W2)1/2 tan–1
(1 + W2)(1 + H2)
———————
1 + W2 + H2
1–4
+    ln
1 + Rj
2
——–
Ri
2
rj—ri
Ri = ri /L and Rj = rj/L
Coaxial parallel disks
S = 1 +
S2 – 4
(
)
2
1/2
W2
W2(1 + W2 + H2)
————————
(1 + W2)(W2 + H2)
H2
H2(1 + H2 + W2)
————————
(1 + H2)(H2 + W2)
×
1–2
1/2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
678
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
mulating a radiation problem, we usually form an enclosure consisting of
the surfaces interacting radiatively. Even openings are treated as imaginary
surfaces with radiation properties equivalent to those of the opening.
The conservation of energy principle requires that the entire radiation
leaving any surface i of an enclosure be intercepted by the surfaces of 
Chapter 15
|
675
TABLE 15–4
View factor expressions for some infinitely long (2-D) geometries
Parallel plates with midlines
connected by perpendicular line
Geometry
Relation
Fi → j = 1 – sin
α
Perpendicular plates with a common edge
Three-sided enclosure
Infinite plane and row of cylinders
Inclined plates of equal width
and with a common edge
1–2
Fi → j =
Wi = wi/L and Wj = wj/L
[(Wi + Wj)2 + 4]1/2 – (Wj – Wi)2 + 4]1/2
———————————————
2Wi
Fi → j =
wi + wj – wk
—————
2wi
j
i
wi
wj
L
i
j
wi
j
i
α
w
w
k
j
i
i
j
D
wj
wj
wi
wk
s
Fi → j =
( )
wj
—
wi
1 +
wj
—
wi
1 +
–
2
1/2
1–2
Fi → j = 1 –   1 – ( )
(
)
D
—s
D
—s
+
tan–1
2
1/2
1/2
s2 – D2
———
D2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
679
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
676
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 15–33
View factor between two
aligned parallel rectangles of
equal size.
10
0.9
1.5
0.8 0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.25
0.2
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
10


0.14
0.16
0.12
5
3
1
A2
A1
L2
L1
R
at
io
L1/
D
Ratio L2/D
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4 0.5 0.6 0.8
1
2
3
4
5 6
8
10
20
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.01
0.02
0.03
0.04
0.05
0.06
0.07
0.08
0.09
4
2
0.18
F1 → 2
D
Ratio L1/
W
0.15
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
2.5
0.5
2
Ratio L2/W
0.2
0.1
0.3
0.4 0.5 0.6
0.8 1
2
3
4
5
6
8
10
20
1
4
5
8
10
5
0.9
1.8
2.0
20
6
3
A2
A1
L2 L1
W
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
Asymptote
10
F1 → 2
FIGURE 15–34
View factor between two
perpendicular rectangles with
a common edge.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
680
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
677
FIGURE 15–35
View factor between two coaxial
parallel disks.
5
4
3
2
1.5
1.25
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.4
r2/L = 0.3
r2 /L = 8
6
r2
r1
L/r1
2
1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.1
0.2
0.3 0.4
0.6
1.0
2
3
4
5 6
8 10
F1 → 2
L
FIGURE 15–36
View factors for two concentric cylinders of finite length: (a) outer cylinder to inner cylinder; (b) outer cylinder to itself.
r1/r2
L/r2 = 
L/r2 = 
4
2
1
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0
0.5
0.25
0.25
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.1
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.9
r1/r2
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
0.5
0.1
1
2
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
A1
L
r1
r2
A2
F2 → 1
F2 → 2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
681
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
the enclosure. Therefore, the sum of the view factors from surface i of an
enclosure to all surfaces of the enclosure, including to itself, must equal
unity. This is known as the summation rule for an enclosure and is
expressed as (Fig. 15–37)
Fi →j  1
(15–28)
where N is the number of surfaces of the enclosure. For example, applying
the summation rule to surface 1 of a three-surface enclosure yields
F1 →j  F1 →1  F1 →2  F1 →3  1
The summation rule can be applied to each surface of an enclosure by
varying i from 1 to N. Therefore, the summation rule applied to each of the
N surfaces of an enclosure gives N relations for the determination of the
view factors. Also, the reciprocity rule gives N(N  1) additional relations.
Then the total number of view factors that need to be evaluated directly for
an N-surface enclosure becomes
N2  [N  N(N  1)]  N(N  1)
For example, for a six-surface enclosure, we need to determine only 

 6(6  1)  15 of the 62  36 view factors directly. The remaining
21 view factors can be determined from the 21 equations that are obtained
by applying the reciprocity and the summation rules.
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2

3
j1

N
j1
678
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Surface i
FIGURE 15–37
Radiation leaving any surface i of
an enclosure must be intercepted
completely by the surfaces of the
enclosure. Therefore, the sum of
the view factors from surface i to
each one of the surfaces of the
enclosure must be unity.
EXAMPLE 15–4
View Factors Associated with Two Concentric
Spheres
Determine the view factors associated with an enclosure formed by two con-
centric spheres, shown in Fig. 15–38.
Solution
The view factors associated with two concentric spheres are to be
determined.
Assumptions
The surfaces are diffuse emitters and reflectors.
Analysis
The outer surface of the smaller sphere (surface 1) and inner sur-
face of the larger sphere (surface 2) form a two-surface enclosure. Therefore,
N  2 and this enclosure involves N 2  22  4 view factors, which are F11,
F12, F21, and F22. In this two-surface enclosure, we need to determine only
N(N  1) 

 2(2  1)  1
view factor directly. The remaining three view factors can be determined by
the application of the summation and reciprocity rules. But it turns out that
we can determine not only one but two view factors directly in this case by a
simple inspection:
F11  0,
since no radiation leaving surface 1 strikes itself
F12  1,
since all radiation leaving surface 1 strikes surface 2
1
2
1
2
r1
r2
2
1
FIGURE 15–38
The geometry considered
in Example 15–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
682
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
3
The Superposition Rule
Sometimes the view factor associated with a given geometry is not available
in standard tables and charts. In such cases, it is desirable to express the given
geometry as the sum or difference of some geometries with known view fac-
tors, and then to apply the superposition rule, which can be expressed as the
view factor from a surface i to a surface j is equal to the sum of the view fac-
tors from surface i to the parts of surface j. Note that the reverse of this is not
true. That is, the view factor from a surface j to a surface i is not equal to the
sum of the view factors from the parts of surface j to surface i.
Consider the geometry in Fig. 15–39, which is infinitely long in the
direction perpendicular to the plane of the paper. The radiation that leaves
surface 1 and strikes the combined surfaces 2 and 3 is equal to the sum of
the radiation that strikes surfaces 2 and 3. Therefore, the view factor from
surface 1 to the combined surfaces of 2 and 3 is
F1 → (2, 3)  F1 → 2  F1 → 3
(15–29)
Suppose we need to find the view factor F1 →3. A quick check of the view
factor expressions and charts in this section reveals that such a view factor
Chapter 15
|
679
Actually it would be sufficient to determine only one of these view factors by
inspection, since we could always determine the other one from the summa-
tion rule applied to surface 1 as F11  F12  1.
The view factor F21 is determined by applying the reciprocity relation to sur-
faces 1 and 2:
A1F12  A2F21
which yields
F21 
F12 

 1 
Finally, the view factor F22 is determined by applying the summation rule to
surface 2:
F21  F22  1
and thus
F22  1  F21  1 
Discussion
Note that when the outer sphere is much larger than the inner
sphere (r2  r1), F22 approaches one. This is expected, since the fraction of
radiation leaving the outer sphere that is intercepted by the inner sphere will
be negligible in that case. Also note that the two spheres considered above
do not need to be concentric. However, the radiation analysis will be most
accurate for the case of concentric spheres, since the radiation is most likely
to be uniform on the surfaces in that case.
ar1
r2b
2

r1
r2
2
4pr 2
1
4pr 2
2
A1
A2
=
+
1
2
1
2
3
1
3
F1 → (2, 3) =F1 → 2 + F1 → 3
FIGURE 15–39
The view factor from a surface to a
composite surface is equal to the sum
of the view factors from the surface to
the parts of the composite surface.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
683
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
cannot be evaluated directly. However, the view factor F1 →3 can be deter-
mined from Eq. 15–29 after determining both F1 →2 and F1 →(2, 3) from the
chart in Table 15–4. Therefore, it may be possible to determine some diffi-
cult view factors with relative ease by expressing one or both of the areas as
the sum or differences of areas and then applying the superposition rule.
To obtain a relation for the view factor F(2, 3) →1, we multiply Eq. 15–29
by A1,
A1F1 →(2, 3)  A1F1 →2  A1F1 →3
and apply the reciprocity relation to each term to get
(A2  A3)F(2, 3) →1  A2F2 →1  A3F3 →1
or
F(2, 3) →1 
(15–30)
Areas that are expressed as the sum of more than two parts can be handled
in a similar manner.
A2 F2 → 1  A3 F3 → 1
A2  A3
680
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
r1 = 10 cm
1
2
r3 = 8 cm
r2 = 5 cm
3
FIGURE 15–40
The cylindrical enclosure
considered in Example 15–5.
EXAMPLE 15–5
Fraction of Radiation Leaving
through an Opening
Determine the fraction of the radiation leaving the base of the cylindrical
enclosure shown in Fig. 15–40 that escapes through a coaxial ring opening
at its top surface. The radius and the length of the enclosure are r1  10 cm
and L  10 cm, while the inner and outer radii of the ring are r2  5 cm
and r3  8 cm, respectively.
Solution
The fraction of radiation leaving the base of a cylindrical enclo-
sure through a coaxial ring opening at its top surface is to be determined.
Assumptions
The base surface is a diffuse emitter and reflector.
Analysis
We are asked to determine the fraction of the radiation leaving the
base of the enclosure that escapes through an opening at the top surface.
Actually, what we are asked to determine is simply the view factor F1 →ring
from the base of the enclosure to the ring-shaped surface at the top.
We do not have an analytical expression or chart for view factors between
a circular area and a coaxial ring, and so we cannot determine F1 →ring
directly. However, we do have a chart for view factors between two coaxial
parallel disks, and we can always express a ring in terms of disks.
Let the base surface of radius r1  10 cm be surface 1, the circular area
of r2  5 cm at the top be surface 2, and the circular area of r3  8 cm be
surface 3. Using the superposition rule, the view factor from surface 1 to
surface 3 can be expressed as
F1 →3  F1 →2  F1 →ring

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
684
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
4
The Symmetry Rule
The determination of the view factors in a problem can be simplified further
if the geometry involved possesses some sort of symmetry. Therefore, it is
good practice to check for the presence of any symmetry in a problem
before attempting to determine the view factors directly. The presence of
symmetry can be determined by inspection, keeping the definition of the
view factor in mind. Identical surfaces that are oriented in an identical man-
ner with respect to another surface will intercept identical amounts of radia-
tion leaving that surface. Therefore, the symmetry rule can be expressed as
two (or more) surfaces that possess symmetry about a third surface will
have identical view factors from that surface (Fig. 15–41).
The symmetry rule can also be expressed as if the surfaces j and k are
symmetric about the surface i then Fi →j  Fi →k. Using the reciprocity rule,
we can show that the relation Fj →i  Fk →i is also true in this case.
Chapter 15
|
681
since surface 3 is the sum of surface 2 and the ring area. The view factors 
F1 →2 and F1 →3 are determined from the chart in Fig. 15–35.
 1
and
 0.5
⎯⎯⎯→
F1 →2  0.11
(Fig. 15–35)
 1
and
 0.8
⎯⎯⎯→
F1 →3  0.28
(Fig. 15–35)
Therefore,
F1 →ring  F1 →3  F1 →2  0.28  0.11  0.17
which is the desired result. Note that F1 →2 and F1 →3 represent the frac-
tions of radiation leaving the base that strike the circular surfaces 2 and 3,
respectively, and their difference gives the fraction that strikes the ring area.
r3
L  8 cm
10 cm
L
r1  10 cm
10 cm
r2
L  5 cm
10 cm
L
r1  10 cm
10 cm
EXAMPLE 15–6
View Factors Associated with a Tetragon
Determine the view factors from the base of the pyramid shown in Fig.
15–42 to each of its four side surfaces. The base of the pyramid is a square,
and its side surfaces are isosceles triangles.
Solution
The view factors from the base of a pyramid to each of its four side
surfaces for the case of a square base are to be determined.
Assumptions
The surfaces are diffuse emitters and reflectors.
Analysis
The base of the pyramid (surface 1) and its four side surfaces
(surfaces 2, 3, 4, and 5) form a five-surface enclosure. The first thing we
notice about this enclosure is its symmetry. The four side surfaces are
symmetric about the base surface. Then, from the symmetry rule, we have
F12  F13  F14  F15
1
2
3
F1 → 2 = F1 → 3 
F2 → 1 = F3 → 1 )
(Also,
FIGURE 15–41
Two surfaces that are symmetric about
a third surface will have the same view
factor from the third surface.
1
4
5
3
2
FIGURE 15–42
The pyramid considered
in Example 15–6.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
685
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
682
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Also, the summation rule applied to surface 1 yields
F1j  F11  F12  F13  F14  F15  1
However, F11  0, since the base is a flat surface. Then the two relations
above yield
F12  F13  F14  F15  0.25
Discussion
Note that each of the four side surfaces of the pyramid receive
one-fourth of the entire radiation leaving the base surface, as expected. Also
note that the presence of symmetry greatly simplified the determination of
the view factors.

5
j 1
EXAMPLE 15–7
View Factors Associated with a Triangular Duct
Determine the view factor from any one side to any other side of the infi-
nitely long triangular duct whose cross section is given in Fig. 15–43.
Solution
The view factors associated with an infinitely long triangular duct
are to be determined.
Assumptions
The surfaces are diffuse emitters and reflectors.
Analysis
The widths of the sides of the triangular cross section of the duct
are L1, L2, and L3, and the surface areas corresponding to them are A1, A2,
and A3, respectively. Since the duct is infinitely long, the fraction of radiation
leaving any surface that escapes through the ends of the duct is negligible.
Therefore, the infinitely long duct can be considered to be a three-surface
enclosure, N  3.
This enclosure involves N 2  32  9 view factors, and we need to
determine
N(N  1) 

 3(3  1)  3
of these view factors directly. Fortunately, we can determine all three of them
by inspection to be
F11  F22  F33  0
since all three surfaces are flat. The remaining six view factors can be
determined by the application of the summation and reciprocity rules.
Applying the summation rule to each of the three surfaces gives
F11  F12  F13  1
F21  F22  F23  1
F31  F32  F33  1
1
2
1
2
1
2
3
L3
L2
L1
FIGURE 15–43
The infinitely long triangular duct
considered in Example 15–7.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
686
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
View Factors between Infinitely Long Surfaces:
The Crossed-Strings Method
Many problems encountered in practice involve geometries of constant
cross section such as channels and ducts that are very long in one direction
relative to the other directions. Such geometries can conveniently be consid-
ered to be two-dimensional, since any radiation interaction through their end
surfaces is negligible. These geometries can subsequently be modeled as
being infinitely long, and the view factor between their surfaces can be
determined by the amazingly simple crossed-strings method developed by
H. C. Hottel in the 1950s. The surfaces of the geometry do not need to be
flat; they can be convex, concave, or any irregular shape.
To demonstrate this method, consider the geometry shown in Fig. 15–44,
and let us try to find the view factor F1 →2 between surfaces 1 and 2. The
first thing we do is identify the endpoints of the surfaces (the points A, B, C,
and D) and connect them to each other with tightly stretched strings, which
are indicated by dashed lines. Hottel has shown that the view factor F1 →2
Chapter 15
|
683
Noting that F11  F22  F33  0 and multiplying the first equation by A1, the
second by A2, and the third by A3 gives
A1F12  A1F13  A1
A2F21  A2F23  A2
A3F31  A3F32  A3
Finally, applying the three reciprocity relations A1F12  A2F21, A1F13  A3F31,
and A2F23  A3F32 gives
A1F12  A1F13  A1
A1F12  A2F23  A2
A1F13  A2F23  A3
This is a set of three algebraic equations with three unknowns, which can be
solved to obtain
F12 
 
F13 

F23 

(15–31)
Discussion
Note that we have replaced the areas of the side surfaces by
their corresponding widths for simplicity, since A  Ls and the length s can
be factored out and canceled. We can generalize this result as the view factor
from a surface of a very long triangular duct to another surface is equal to the
sum of the widths of these two surfaces minus the width of the third surface,
divided by twice the width of the first surface.
L2  L3  L1
2L2
A2  A3  A1
2A2
L1  L3  L2
2L1
A1  A3  A2
2A1
L1  L2  L3
2L1
A1  A2  A3
2A1
L2
L1
L5
L3
A
B
D
C
L4
L6
1
2
FIGURE 15–44
Determination of the view factor
F1 →2 by the application of
the crossed-strings method.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
687
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
can be expressed in terms of the lengths of these stretched strings, which are
straight lines, as
F1 →2 
(15–32)
Note that L5  L6 is the sum of the lengths of the crossed strings, and L3  L4
is the sum of the lengths of the uncrossed strings attached to the endpoints.
Therefore, Hottel’s crossed-strings method can be expressed verbally as
Fi →j 
(15–33)
The crossed-strings method is applicable even when the two surfaces con-
sidered share a common edge, as in a triangle. In such cases, the common
edge can be treated as an imaginary string of zero length. The method can
also be applied to surfaces that are partially blocked by other surfaces by
allowing the strings to bend around the blocking surfaces.
 (Crossed strings)   (Uncrossed strings)
2 
 (String on surface i)
(L5  L6)  (L3  L4)
2L1
684
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 15–8
The Crossed-Strings Method for View Factors
Two infinitely long parallel plates of widths a  12 cm and b  5 cm are
located a distance c  6 cm apart, as shown in Fig. 15–45. (a) Determine
the view factor F1 →2 from surface 1 to surface 2 by using the crossed-
strings method. (b) Derive the crossed-strings formula by forming triangles
on the given geometry and using Eq. 15–31 for view factors between the
sides of triangles.
Solution
The view factors between two infinitely long parallel plates are to
be determined using the crossed-strings method, and the formula for the
view factor is to be derived.
Assumptions
The surfaces are diffuse emitters and reflectors.
Analysis
(a) First we label the endpoints of both surfaces and draw straight
dashed lines between the endpoints, as shown in Fig. 15–45. Then we iden-
tify the crossed and uncrossed strings and apply the crossed-strings method
(Eq. 15–33) to determine the view factor F1 →2:
F1 →2 
where
L1  a  12 cm
L4 
 9.22 cm
L2  b  5 cm
L5 
 7.81 cm
L3  c  6 cm
L6 
 13.42 cm
Substituting,
F1 →2 
 0.250
[(7.81  13.42)  (6  9.22)] cm
2 
 12 cm
2122  62
252  62
272  62
 (Crossed strings)   (Uncrossed strings)
2 
 (String on surface 1)
 (L5  L6)  (L3  L4)
2L1
C
D
b = L2 = 5 cm
c = 6 cm
a = L1 = 12 cm
A
B
L3
L5
L6
L4
1
2
FIGURE 15–45
The two infinitely long parallel
plates considered in Example 15–8.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
688
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
15–6
■RADIATION HEAT TRANSFER:
BLACK SURFACES
So far, we have considered the nature of radiation, the radiation properties of
materials, and the view factors, and we are now in a position to consider the
rate of heat transfer between surfaces by radiation. The analysis of radiation
exchange between surfaces, in general, is complicated because of reflection:
a radiation beam leaving a surface may be reflected several times, with partial
reflection occurring at each surface, before it is completely absorbed. The
analysis is simplified greatly when the surfaces involved can be approximated
as blackbodies because of the absence of reflection. In this section, we con-
sider radiation exchange between black surfaces only; we extend the analysis
to reflecting surfaces in the next section.
Consider two black surfaces of arbitrary shape maintained at uniform
temperatures T1 and T2, as shown in Fig. 15–46. Recognizing that radiation
leaves a black surface at a rate of Eb  sT 4 per unit surface area and that
the view factor F1 →2 represents the fraction of radiation leaving surface 1
that strikes surface 2, the net rate of radiation heat transfer from surface 1 to
surface 2 can be expressed as
1 →2  °
Radiation leaving
the entire surface 1
that strikes surface 2
¢  °
Radiation leaving
the entire surface 2
that strikes surface 1
¢
Q
#
Chapter 15
|
685
(b) The geometry is infinitely long in the direction perpendicular to the
plane of the paper, and thus the two plates (surfaces 1 and 2) and the two
openings (imaginary surfaces 3 and 4) form a four-surface enclosure. Then
applying the summation rule to surface 1 yields
F11  F12  F13  F14  1
But F11  0 since it is a flat surface. Therefore,
F12  1  F13  F14
where the view factors F13 and F14 can be determined by considering the tri-
angles ABC and ABD, respectively, and applying Eq. 15–31 for view factors
between the sides of triangles. We obtain
F13 
,
F14 
Substituting,
F12  1 

which is the desired result. This is also a miniproof of the crossed-strings
method for the case of two infinitely long plain parallel surfaces.
(L5  L6)  (L3  L4)
2L1
L1  L3  L6
2L1
 L1  L4  L5
2L1
L1  L4  L5
2L1
L1  L3  L6
2L1
T1
A1
T2
A2
Q12
·
2
1
FIGURE 15–46
Two general black surfaces maintained
at uniform temperatures T1 and T2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
689
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
 A1Eb1 F1 →2  A2Eb2 F2 →1
(W)
(15–34)
Applying the reciprocity relation A1F1 →2  A2F2 →1 yields
1 →2  A1F1 →2 s
(W)
(15–35)
which is the desired relation. A negative value for 
1 →2 indicates that net
radiation heat transfer is from surface 2 to surface 1.
Now consider an enclosure consisting of N black surfaces maintained at
specified temperatures. The net radiation heat transfer from any surface i of
this enclosure is determined by adding up the net radiation heat transfers
from surface i to each of the surfaces of the enclosure:
i 
i →j 
Ai Fi →j s
(W)
(15–36)
Again a negative value for
indicates that net radiation heat transfer is to
surface i (i.e., surface i gains radiation energy instead of losing). Also, the net
heat transfer from a surface to itself is zero, regardless of the shape of the
surface.
Q
#
(T 4
i  T 4
j )

N
j  1
Q
#

N
j  1
Q
#
Q
(T 4
1  T 4
2)
Q#
686
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 15–9
Radiation Heat Transfer in a Black Furnace
Consider the 5-m 
 5-m 
 5-m cubical furnace shown in Fig. 15–47,
whose surfaces closely approximate black surfaces. The base, top, and side
surfaces of the furnace are maintained at uniform temperatures of 800 K,
1500 K, and 500 K, respectively. Determine (a) the net rate of radiation
heat transfer between the base and the side surfaces, (b) the net rate of
radiation heat transfer between the base and the top surface, and (c) the net
radiation heat transfer from the base surface.
Solution
The surfaces of a cubical furnace are black and are maintained at
uniform temperatures. The net rate of radiation heat transfer between the
base and side surfaces, between the base and the top surface, and from the
base surface are to be determined.
Assumptions
The surfaces are black and isothermal.
Analysis
(a) The geometry involves six surfaces, and thus we may be
tempted at first to treat the furnace as a six-surface enclosure. However, the
four side surfaces possess the same properties, and thus we can treat them
as a single side surface in radiation analysis. We consider the base surface
to be surface 1, the top surface to be surface 2, and the side surfaces to be
surface 3. Then the problem reduces to determining 
1 →3,
1 →2, and 
1.
The net rate of radiation heat transfer 
1 →3 from surface 1 to surface 3
can be determined from Eq. 15–35, since both surfaces involved are black,
by replacing the subscript 2 by 3:
1 →3  A1F1 →3s
But first we need to evaluate the view factor F1 →3. After checking the view
factor charts and tables, we realize that we cannot determine this view factor
directly. However, we can determine the view factor F1 →2 from Fig. 15–33 
(T 4
1  T 4
3 )
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
1
T2 = 1500 K
T3 = 500 K
T1 = 800 K
3
2
FIGURE 15–47
The cubical furnace of black surfaces
considered in Example 15–9.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
690
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
15–7
■RADIATION HEAT TRANSFER:
DIFFUSE, GRAY SURFACES
The analysis of radiation transfer in enclosures consisting of black surfaces
is relatively easy, as we have seen, but most enclosures encountered in prac-
tice involve nonblack surfaces, which allow multiple reflections to occur.
Radiation analysis of such enclosures becomes very complicated unless
some simplifying assumptions are made.
To make a simple radiation analysis possible, it is common to assume the
surfaces of an enclosure to be opaque, diffuse, and gray. That is, the surfaces
are nontransparent, they are diffuse emitters and diffuse reflectors, and their
radiation properties are independent of wavelength. Also, each surface of the
Chapter 15
|
687
to be F1 →2  0.2, and we know that F1 →1  0 since surface 1 is a plane.
Then applying the summation rule to surface 1 yields
F1 →1  F1 →2  F1 →3  1
or
F1 →3  1  F1 →1  F1 →2  1  0  0.2  0.8
Substituting,
1 →3  (25 m2)(0.8)(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)[(800 K)4  (500 K)4]
 394 kW
(b) The net rate of radiation heat transfer 
1 →2 from surface 1 to surface 2
is determined in a similar manner from Eq. 15–35 to be
1 →2  A1F1 →2s
 (25 m2)(0.2)(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)[(800 K)4  (1500 K)4]
 1319 kW
The negative sign indicates that net radiation heat transfer is from surface 2
to surface 1.
(c) The net radiation heat transfer from the base surface 
1 is determined
from Eq. 15–36 by replacing the subscript i by 1 and taking N  3:
1 
1 →j 
1 →1 
1 →2 
1 →3
 0  (1319 kW)  (394 kW)
 925 kW
Again the negative sign indicates that net radiation heat transfer is to sur-
face 1. That is, the base of the furnace is gaining net radiation at a rate of
925 kW.
Q
Q
Q
Q

3
j  1
Q
Q
(Τ 4
1  Τ 4
2)
Q
Q
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
691
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
enclosure is isothermal, and both the incoming and outgoing radiation are
uniform over each surface. But first we review the concept of radiosity.
Radiosity
Surfaces emit radiation as well as reflect it, and thus the radiation leaving a
surface consists of emitted and reflected parts. The calculation of radiation
heat transfer between surfaces involves the total radiation energy streaming
away from a surface, with no regard for its origin. The total radiation
energy leaving a surface per unit time and per unit area is the radiosity and
is denoted by J (Fig. 15–48).
For a surface i that is gray and opaque (ei  ai and ai  ri  1), the
radiosity can be expressed as
Ji 
 eiEbi  riGi
 eiEbi  (1  ei)Gi
(W/m2)
(15–37)
where Ebi  sTi
4 is the blackbody emissive power of surface i and Gi is
irradiation (i.e., the radiation energy incident on surface i per unit time per
unit area).
For a surface that can be approximated as a blackbody (ei  1), the
radiosity relation reduces to
Ji  Ebi  sTi
4
(blackbody)
(15–38)
That is, the radiosity of a blackbody is equal to its emissive power. This is
expected, since a blackbody does not reflect any radiation, and thus radia-
tion coming from a blackbody is due to emission only.
Net Radiation Heat Transfer to or from a Surface
During a radiation interaction, a surface loses energy by emitting radiation
and gains energy by absorbing radiation emitted by other surfaces. A sur-
face experiences a net gain or a net loss of energy, depending on which
quantity is larger. The net rate of radiation heat transfer from a surface i of
surface area Ai is denoted by 
i and is expressed as
i 
 Ai(Ji  Gi)
(W)
(15–39)
Solving for Gi from Eq. 15–37 and substituting into Eq. 15–39 yields
i  Ai
(Ebi  Ji)
(W)
(15–40)
In an electrical analogy to Ohm’s law, this equation can be rearranged as
i 
(W)
(15–41)
Ebi  Ji
Ri
Q
#
aJi  Ji  iEbi
1  i b  Aii
1  i
Q#
aRadiation leaving
entire surface i
b  aRadiation incident
on entire surface i
b
Q
#
Q
#
aRadiation emitted
by surface i
b  aRadiation reflected
by surface i
b
688
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Surface
Incident
radiation
Reflected
radiation
Emitted
radiation
Radiosity, J
G
Eb
G
ε
ρ
FIGURE 15–48
Radiosity represents the sum of the
radiation energy emitted and
reflected by a surface.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
692
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
689
where
Ri 
(15–42)
is the surface resistance to radiation. The quantity Ebi  Ji corresponds to a
potential difference and the net rate of radiation heat transfer corresponds to
current in the electrical analogy, as illustrated in Fig. 15–49.
The direction of the net radiation heat transfer depends on the relative
magnitudes of Ji (the radiosity) and Ebi (the emissive power of a blackbody
at the temperature of the surface). It is from the surface if Ebi  Ji and to the
surface if Ji  Ebi. A negative value for 
i indicates that heat transfer is to
the surface. All of this radiation energy gained must be removed from the
other side of the surface through some mechanism if the surface tempera-
ture is to remain constant.
The surface resistance to radiation for a blackbody is zero since ei  1
and Ji  Ebi. The net rate of radiation heat transfer in this case is deter-
mined directly from Eq. 15–39.
Some surfaces encountered in numerous practical heat transfer applications
are modeled as being adiabatic since their back sides are well insulated and
the net heat transfer through them is zero. When the convection effects on the
front (heat transfer) side of such a surface is negligible and steady-state con-
ditions are reached, the surface must lose as much radiation energy as it
gains, and thus
i  0. In such cases, the surface is said to reradiate all the
radiation energy it receives, and such a surface is called a reradiating sur-
face. Setting
i  0 in Eq. 15–41 yields
Ji  Ebi  sTi
4
(W/m2)
(15–43)
Therefore, the temperature of a reradiating surface under steady conditions
can easily be determined from the equation above once its radiosity is
known. Note that the temperature of a reradiating surface is independent of
its emissivity. In radiation analysis, the surface resistance of a reradiating
surface is disregarded since there is no net heat transfer through it. (This is
like the fact that there is no need to consider a resistance in an electrical
network if no current is flowing through it.)
Net Radiation Heat Transfer
between Any Two Surfaces
Consider two diffuse, gray, and opaque surfaces of arbitrary shape main-
tained at uniform temperatures, as shown in Fig. 15–50. Recognizing that
the radiosity J represents the rate of radiation leaving a surface per unit sur-
face area and that the view factor Fi →j represents the fraction of radiation
leaving surface i that strikes surface j, the net rate of radiation heat transfer
from surface i to surface j can be expressed as
i →j 
(15–44)
°
Radiation leaving
the entire surface i
that strikes surface j
¢  °
Radiation leaving
the entire surface j
that strikes surface i
¢
Q
#
Q
#
Q
#
Q#
1  i
Aii
.
Qi
Ri = ——–
1 –   i
Ai  i
ε
ε
Ji
Ebi
Surface
i
FIGURE 15–49
Electrical analogy of surface
resistance to radiation.
.
Qij
Rj
Rij
Jj
Ri
Ji
Ai Fij
Ebi
Ebj
Surface i
Surface j
= ——
1
FIGURE 15–50
Electrical analogy of
space resistance to radiation.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
693
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
 Ai Ji Fi →j  Aj Jj Fj →i
(W)
Applying the reciprocity relation AiFi →j  AjFj →i yields
i →j  AiFi →j (Ji  Jj)
(W)
(15–45)
Again in analogy to Ohm’s law, this equation can be rearranged as
i →j 
(W)
(15–46)
where
Ri →j 
(15–47)
is the space resistance to radiation. Again the quantity Ji  Jj corresponds
to a potential difference, and the net rate of heat transfer between two sur-
faces corresponds to current in the electrical analogy, as illustrated in Fig.
15–50.
The direction of the net radiation heat transfer between two surfaces
depends on the relative magnitudes of Ji and Jj. A positive value for 
i →j
indicates that net heat transfer is from surface i to surface j. A negative value
indicates the opposite.
In an N-surface enclosure, the conservation of energy principle requires
that the net heat transfer from surface i be equal to the sum of the net heat
transfers from surface i to each of the N surfaces of the enclosure. That is,
i 
i →j 
Ai Fi →j (Ji  Jj)  
(W)
(15–48)
The network representation of net radiation heat transfer from surface i to
the remaining surfaces of an N-surface enclosure is given in Fig. 15–51.
Note that 
i →i (the net rate of heat transfer from a surface to itself) is zero
regardless of the shape of the surface. Combining Eqs. 15–41 and 15–48
gives

(W)
(15–49)
which has the electrical analogy interpretation that the net radiation flow
from a surface through its surface resistance is equal to the sum of the radi-
ation flows from that surface to all other surfaces through the correspond-
ing space resistances.
Methods of Solving Radiation Problems
In the radiation analysis of an enclosure, either the temperature or the net
rate of heat transfer must be given for each of the surfaces to obtain a
unique solution for the unknown surface temperatures and heat transfer
rates. There are two methods commonly used to solve radiation problems.
Ji  Jj
Ri →j

N
j  1
Ebi  Ji
Ri
Q
Ji  Jj
Ri →j

N
j  1

N
j  1
Q
#

N
j  1
Q
#
Q
1
Ai Fi →j
Ji  Jj
Ri →j
Q#
Q#
690
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
.
Qi
Ri1
Ri2
Ri(N – 1)
RiN
Ji
JN
J1
J2
JN – 1
Ebi
Surface i
Ri
FIGURE 15–51
Network representation of net
radiation heat transfer from surface i
to the remaining surfaces of an
N-surface enclosure.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
694
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
In the first method, Eqs. 15–48 (for surfaces with specified heat transfer
rates) and 15–49 (for surfaces with specified temperatures) are simplified
and rearranged as
Surfaces with specified
net heat transfer rate 
i  Ai
Fi →j(Ji  Jj)
(15–50)
Surfaces with specified
temperature Ti
sTi
4  Ji 
Fi →j(Ji  Jj)
(15–51)
Note that 
i  0 for insulated (or reradiating) surfaces, and sTi
4  Ji for
black surfaces since ei  1 in that case. Also, the term corresponding to
j  i drops out from either relation since Ji  Jj  Ji  Ji  0 in that case.
The equations above give N linear algebraic equations for the determi-
nation of the N unknown radiosities for an N-surface enclosure. Once the
radiosities J1, J2, . . . , JN are available, the unknown heat transfer rates can
be determined from Eq. 15–50 while the unknown surface temperatures can
be determined from Eq. 15–51. The temperatures of insulated or reradiating
surfaces can be determined from sTi
4  Ji. A positive value for 
i indicates
net radiation heat transfer from surface i to other surfaces in the enclosure
while a negative value indicates net radiation heat transfer to the surface.
The systematic approach described above for solving radiation heat trans-
fer problems is very suitable for use with today’s popular equation solvers
such as EES, Mathcad, and Matlab, especially when there are a large num-
ber of surfaces, and is known as the direct method (formerly, the matrix
method, since it resulted in matrices and the solution required a knowledge
of linear algebra). The second method described below, called the network
method, is based on the electrical network analogy.
The network method was first introduced by A. K. Oppenheim in
the 1950s and found widespread acceptance because of its simplicity and
emphasis on the physics of the problem. The application of the method is
straightforward: draw a surface resistance associated with each surface of an
enclosure and connect them with space resistances. Then solve the radiation
problem by treating it as an electrical network problem where the radiation
heat transfer replaces the current and radiosity replaces the potential.
The network method is not practical for enclosures with more than three
or four surfaces, however, because of the increased complexity of the net-
work. Next we apply the method to solve radiation problems in two- and
three-surface enclosures.
Radiation Heat Transfer in Two-Surface Enclosures
Consider an enclosure consisting of two opaque surfaces at specified tem-
peratures T1 and T2, as shown in Fig. 15–52, and try to determine the net
rate of radiation heat transfer between the two surfaces with the network
method. Surfaces 1 and 2 have emissivities e1 and e2 and surface areas A1
and A2 and are maintained at uniform temperatures T1 and T2, respectively.
There are only two surfaces in the enclosure, and thus we can write
12 
1  
2
Q#
Q#
Q#
Q
Q

N
j  1
1  ei
ei

N
j  1
Q
Q
Chapter 15
|
691
.
Q12
  1
A1
1 –   1
A1  1
R1 = ——–
1
A1F12
R12 = ——–
1 –   2
A2  2
R2 = ——–
J1
J2
T1
  2
ε
ε
A2
T2
.
Q1
.
Q12
.
Q2
Eb1
Eb2
2
1
ε
ε
ε
ε
FIGURE 15–52
Schematic of a two-surface
enclosure and the radiation
network associated with it.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
695
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
That is, the net rate of radiation heat transfer from surface 1 to surface 2
must equal the net rate of radiation heat transfer from surface 1 and the net
rate of radiation heat transfer to surface 2.
The radiation network of this two-surface enclosure consists of two sur-
face resistances and one space resistance, as shown in Fig. 15–52. In an
electrical network, the electric current flowing through these resistances
connected in series would be determined by dividing the potential difference
between points A and B by the total resistance between the same two points.
The net rate of radiation transfer is determined in the same manner and is
expressed as
12 

1  
2
or
12 
(W)
(15–52)
This important result is applicable to any two gray, diffuse, and opaque sur-
faces that form an enclosure. The view factor F12 depends on the geometry
and must be determined first. Simplified forms of Eq. 15–52 for some
familiar arrangements that form a two-surface enclosure are given in
Table 15–5. Note that F12  1 for all of these special cases.
s(T 4
1  T 4
2)
1  e1
A1e1

1
A1F12  1  e2
A2e2
Q
#
Q#
Q#
Eb1  Eb2
R1  R12  R2
Q#
692
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 15–10
Radiation Heat Transfer between
Parallel Plates
Two very large parallel plates are maintained at uniform temperatures
T1  800 K and T2  500 K and have emissivities e1  0.2 and e2  0.7,
respectively, as shown in Fig. 15–53. Determine the net rate of radiation
heat transfer between the two surfaces per unit surface area of the plates.
Solution
Two large parallel plates are maintained at uniform temperatures.
The net rate of radiation heat transfer between the plates is to be deter-
mined.
Assumptions
Both surfaces are opaque, diffuse, and gray.
Analysis
The net rate of radiation heat transfer between the two plates per
unit area is readily determined from Eq. 15–54 to be
12 
 3625 W/m2
Discussion
Note that heat at a net rate of 3625 W is transferred from plate
1 to plate 2 by radiation per unit surface area of either plate.
Q
#
12
A  s(T 4
1  T 4
2 )
1
e1  1
e2  1
 (5.67 
 108 W/m2  K4)[(800 K)4  (500 K)4]
1
0.2  1
0.7  1
q
.
Q12
  1 = 0.2
T1 = 800 K
  2 = 0.7
T2 = 500 K
1
2
ε
ε
FIGURE 15–53
The two parallel plates
considered in Example 15–10.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
696
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
693
TABLE 15–5
A2, T2,   2
A1, T1,   1
A1, T1,   1
A1 = A2 = A
A2, T2,   2
r1
r1
r2
r2
A1
A2
F12 = 1
F12 = 1
Q12 = A1    1(T1 – T2)
σ
—– ≈ 0
A1
A2
F12 = 1
—– = r1
r2
—–
A1
2
2
A2
F12 = 1
—– =
r1
r2
—–
Small object in a large cavity
(15–53)
Infinitely large parallel plates
Infinitely long concentric cylinders
Concentric spheres
4
4
.
Q12 = A  (T1 – T2)
σ
(15–54)
4
4
.
———————
1
   — +
  1
1
      — – 1
  2
Q12 = A1  (T1 – T2)
σ
(15–55)
4
4
.
—————————
1
   — +
  1
1 –   2
––—
  2
r1
r2
—–
Q12 = A1  (T1 – T2)
σ
(15–56)
4
4
.
—————————
1
   — +
  1
1 –   2
––—
  2
r1
r2
—–
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
Radiation Heat Transfer
in Three-Surface Enclosures
We now consider an enclosure consisting of three opaque, diffuse, and gray
surfaces, as shown in Fig. 15–54. Surfaces 1, 2, and 3 have surface areas
A1, A2, and A3; emissivities e1, e2, and e3; and uniform temperatures T1, T2,
and T3, respectively. The radiation network of this geometry is constructed
by following the standard procedure: draw a surface resistance associated
with each of the three surfaces and connect these surface resistances with
space resistances, as shown in the figure. Relations for the surface and space
resistances are given by Eqs. 15–42 and 15–47. The three endpoint poten-
tials Eb1, Eb2, and Eb3 are considered known, since the surface temperatures

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
697
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
are specified. Then all we need to find are the radiosities J1, J2, and J3. The
three equations for the determination of these three unknowns are obtained
from the requirement that the algebraic sum of the currents (net radiation
heat transfer) at each node must equal zero. That is,
 0
 0
 0
(15–57)
Once the radiosities J1, J2, and J3 are available, the net rate of radiation heat
transfers at each surface can be determined from Eq. 15–48.
The set of equations above simplify further if one or more surfaces are
“special” in some way. For example, Ji  Ebi  sTi
4 for a black or
reradiating surface. Also,
i  0 for a reradiating surface. Finally, when the
net rate of radiation heat transfer 
i is specified at surface i instead of the
temperature, the term (Ebi  Ji)/Ri should be replaced by the specified 
i.
Q
#
Q#
Q
#
J1  J3
R13
 J2  J3
R23
 Eb3  J3
R3
J1  J2
R12
 Eb2  J2
R2
 J3  J2
R23
Eb1  J1
R1
 J2  J1
R12
 J3  J1
R13
694
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 15–54
Schematic of a three-surface enclosure and the radiation network associated
with it.
1
2
3
  1, A1,T1
  2, A2,T2
  3, A3, T3
1 –   1
A1  1
R1 = ——–
1
A1F12
R12 = ——–
1
A2F23
R23 = ——–
1
A1F13
R13 = ——–
1 –   2
A2  2
R2 = ——–
1 –   3
A3  3
R3 = ——–
J1
J3
J2
.
Q1
.Q12
.Q23
.Q13
.
Q2
.
Q3
Eb1
Eb2
Eb3
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε
EXAMPLE 15–11
Radiation Heat Transfer
in a Cylindrical Furnace
Consider a cylindrical furnace with ro  H  1 m, as shown in Fig. 15–55.
The top (surface 1) and the base (surface 2) of the furnace have emissivities
e1  0.8 and e2  0.4, respectively, and are maintained at uniform
temperatures T1  700 K and T2  500 K. The side surface closely
approximates a blackbody and is maintained at a temperature of T3  400 K.
Determine the net rate of radiation heat transfer at each surface during steady
operation and explain how these surfaces can be maintained at specified
temperatures.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
698
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
695
Solution
The surfaces of a cylindrical furnace are maintained at uniform
temperatures. The net rate of radiation heat transfer at each surface during
steady operation is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The surfaces are opaque,
diffuse, and gray. 3 Convection heat transfer is not considered.
Analysis
We will solve this problem systematically using the direct method
to demonstrate its use. The cylindrical furnace can be considered to be a
three-surface enclosure with surface areas of
A1  A2  pro
2  p(1 m)2  3.14 m2
A3  2proH  2p(1 m)(1 m)  6.28 m2
The view factor from the base to the top surface is, from Fig. 15–35, F12 
0.38. Then the view factor from the base to the side surface is determined by
applying the summation rule to be
F11  F12  F13  1
→
F13  1  F11  F12  1  0  0.38  0.62
since the base surface is flat and thus F11  0. Noting that the top and bot-
tom surfaces are symmetric about the side surface, F21  F12  0.38 and
F23  F13  0.62. The view factor F31 is determined from the reciprocity
relation,
A1F13  A3F31
→
F31  F13(A1/A3)  (0.62)(0.314/0.628)  0.31
Also, F32  F31  0.31 because of symmetry. Now that all the view factors
are available, we apply Eq. 15–51 to each surface to determine the
radiosities:
Top surface (i  1):
s
[F12 (J1  J2)  F13 (J1  J3)]
Bottom surface (i  2):
s
[F21 (J2  J1)  F23 (J2  J3)]
Side surface (i  3): s
 0 (since surface 3 is black and thus e3  1)
Substituting the known quantities,
(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(700 K)4  J1 
[0.38(J1  J2)  0.62(J1  J3)]
(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(500 K)4  J2 
[0.38(J2  J1)  0.62(J2  J3)]
(5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(400 K)4  J3
Solving these equations for J1, J2, and J3 gives
J1  11,418 W/m2, J2  4562 W/m2,
and
J3  1452 W/m2
Then the net rates of radiation heat transfer at the three surfaces are
determined from Eq. 15–50 to be
1  0.4
0.4
1  0.8
0.8
T 4
3  J3
T 4
2  J2  1  e2
e2
T 4
1  J1  1  e1
e1
T1 = 700 K
  1 = 0.8
T2 = 500 K
  2 = 0.4
ro
Black
T3 = 400 K
H
2
3
1
ε
ε
FIGURE 15–55
The cylindrical furnace
considered in Example 15–11.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
699
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
696
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1  A1[F1 →2 (J1  J2)  F1 →3 (J1  J3)]
 (3.14 m2)[0.38(11,418  4562)  0.62(11,418  1452)] W/m2
 27.6 kW
2  A2[F2 →1 (J2  J1)  F2 →3 (J2  J3)]
 (3.14 m2)[0.38(4562  11,418)  0.62(4562  1452)] W/m2
 2.13 kW
3  A3[F3 →1 (J3  J1)  F3 →2 (J3  J2)]
 (6.28 m2)[0.31(1452  11,418)  0.31(1452  4562)] W/m2
 25.5 kW
Note that the direction of net radiation heat transfer is from the top surface
to the base and side surfaces, and the algebraic sum of these three quantities
must be equal to zero. That is,
1 
2 
3  27.6  (2.13)  (25.5)  0
Discussion
To maintain the surfaces at the specified temperatures, we must
supply heat to the top surface continuously at a rate of 27.6 kW while
removing 2.13 kW from the base and 25.5 kW from the side surfaces.
The direct method presented here is straightforward, and it does not
require the evaluation of radiation resistances. Also, it can be applied to
enclosures with any number of surfaces in the same manner.
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
Q
EXAMPLE 15–12
Radiation Heat Transfer in a Triangular
Furnace
A furnace is shaped like a long equilateral triangular duct, as shown in
Fig. 15–56. The width of each side is 1 m. The base surface has an
emissivity of 0.7 and is maintained at a uniform temperature of 600 K. The
heated left-side surface closely approximates a blackbody at 1000 K. The
right-side surface is well insulated. Determine the rate at which heat must be
supplied to the heated side externally per unit length of the duct in order to
maintain these operating conditions.
Solution
Two of the surfaces of a long equilateral triangular furnace are
maintained at uniform temperatures while the third surface is insulated. The
external rate of heat transfer to the heated side per unit length of the duct
during steady operation is to be determined.
FIGURE 15–56
The triangular furnace
considered in Example 15–12.
J1
R12
R13
R23
R1
T1 = 600 K
T2 = 1000 K
Black
  1 = 0.7
(J3 = Eb3)
J2 = Eb2
.
Q1
.
.
Q2 = Q1
.
Q3 = 0
Eb1
1
2
3
Insulated
ε

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
700
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
697
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The surfaces are opaque,
diffuse, and gray. 3 Convection heat transfer is not considered.
Analysis
The furnace can be considered to be a three-surface enclosure with
a radiation network as shown in the figure, since the duct is very long and
thus the end effects are negligible. We observe that the view factor from any
surface to any other surface in the enclosure is 0.5 because of symmetry.
Surface 3 is a reradiating surface since the net rate of heat transfer at that
surface is zero. Then we must have 
1  
2, since the entire heat lost by
surface 1 must be gained by surface 2. The radiation network in this case is a
simple series–parallel connection, and we can determine 
1 directly from
1 
where
A1  A2  A3  wL  1 m 
 1 m  1 m2
(per unit length of the duct)
F12  F13  F23  0.5
(symmetry)
Eb1  sT 1
4  (5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(600 K)4  7348 W/m2
Eb2  sT 2
4  (5.67 
 108 W/m2 · K4)(1000 K)4  56,700 W/m2
Substituting,
1 
 28.0 kW
Therefore, heat at a rate of 28 kW must be supplied to the heated surface per
unit length of the duct to maintain steady operation in the furnace.
(56,700  7348) W/m2
1  0.7
0.7 
 1 m2  c(0.5 
 1 m2) 
1
1/(0.5 
 1 m2)  1/(0.5 
 1 m2)d
1
Q
Eb1  Eb2
R1  a 1
R12 
1
R13  R23b
1 
Eb1  Eb2
1  e1
A1e1  aA1F12 
1
1/A1F13  1/A2F23b
1
Q
#
Q
Q
Q
EXAMPLE 15–13
Heat Transfer through a Tubular Solar
Collector
A solar collector consists of a horizontal aluminum tube having an outer
diameter of 2 in enclosed in a concentric thin glass tube of 4-in diameter, as
shown in Fig. 15–57. Water is heated as it flows through the tube, and the
space between the aluminum and the glass tubes is filled with air at 1 atm
pressure. The pump circulating the water fails during a clear day, and the
water temperature in the tube starts rising. The aluminum tube absorbs solar
radiation at a rate of 30 Btu/h per foot length, and the temperature of the
ambient air outside is 70F. The emissivities of the tube and the glass cover
are 0.95 and 0.9, respectively. Taking the effective sky temperature to be
50F, determine the temperature of the aluminum tube when steady
operating conditions are established (i.e., when the rate of heat loss from the
tube equals the amount of solar energy gained by the tube).
Water
70°F
Aluminum tube
   = 0.95
Glass cover
   = 0.9
Solar
energy
4 in
2 in
ε
ε
FIGURE 15–57
Schematic for Example 15–13.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
701
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
698
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Solution
The circulating pump of a solar collector that consists of a
horizontal tube and its glass cover fails. The equilibrium temperature of the
tube is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The tube and its cover
are isothermal. 3 Air is an ideal gas. 4 The surfaces are opaque, diffuse, and
gray for infrared radiation. 5 The glass cover is transparent to solar radiation.
Properties
The properties of air should be evaluated at the average
temperature. But we do not know the temperature of the air in the duct, and
thus we cannot determine the bulk fluid and glass cover temperatures at this
point, and thus we cannot evaluate the average temperatures. Therefore, we
assume the glass temperature to be 110F, and use properties at an
anticipated average temperature of (70  110)/2  90F (Table A–22E),
k  0.01505 Btu/h  ft  F
Pr  0.7275
n  1.753 
 104 ft2/s
b 
Analysis
This problem was solved in Chapter 14 by disregarding radiation
heat transfer. Now we repeat the solution by considering natural convection
and radiation occurring simultaneously.
We have a horizontal cylindrical enclosure filled with air at 1 atm
pressure. The problem involves heat transfer from the aluminum tube to the
glass cover and from the outer surface of the glass cover to the surrounding
ambient air. When steady operation is reached, these two heat transfer rates
must equal the rate of heat gain. That is,
tube-glass 
glass-ambient 
solar gain  30 Btu/h
(per foot of tube)
The heat transfer surface area of the glass cover is
Ao  Aglass  (pDo L)  p(4/12 ft)(1 ft)  1.047 ft2
(per foot of tube)
To determine the Rayleigh number, we need to know the surface temperature
of the glass, which is not available. Therefore, it is clear that the solution
requires a trial-and-error approach unless we use an equation solver such as
EES. Assuming the glass cover temperature to be 110F, the Rayleigh
number, the Nusselt number, the convection heat transfer coefficient, and
the rate of natural convection heat transfer from the glass cover to the
ambient air are determined to be
Ra

Pr

(0.7275)  2.053 
 106
Nu 

ho 
Nu 
(17.88)  0.8073 Btu/h  ft2  F
 17.88
o, conv  ho Ao(To  T)  (0.8073 Btu/h  ft2  F)(1.047 ft2)(110  70)F
 33.8 Btu/h
Also,
Q
0.01505 Btu/h  ft  F
4/12 ft
k
Do
e0.6 
0.387(2.053 
 106)1/6
[1  (0.559/0.7275)9/16]8/27f
2
e0.6 
0.387 Ra1/6
Do
[1  (0.559/Pr)9/16]8/27f
2
(32.2 ft/s2)[1/(550 R)](110  70 R)(4/12 ft)3
(1.753 
 104 ft2/s)2
gb(To  T) D 3
o
n 2
Do
Q
Q
Q
1
Tave 
1
550 R

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
702
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
699
o, rad  eo sAo(

)
 (0.9)(0.1714 
 108 Btu/h  ft2  R4)(1.047 ft2)[(570 R)4  (510 R)4]
 61.2 Btu/h
Then the total rate of heat loss from the glass cover becomes
o, total 
o, conv 
o, rad  33.8  61.2  95.0 Btu/h
which is much larger than 30 Btu/h. Therefore, the assumed temperature of
110F for the glass cover is high. Repeating the calculations with lower
temperatures (including the evaluation of properties), the glass cover
temperature corresponding to 30 Btu/h is determined to be 78F (it would be
106F if radiation were ignored).
The temperature of the aluminum tube is determined in a similar
manner using the natural convection and radiation relations for two horizontal
concentric cylinders. The characteristic length in this case is the distance
between the two cylinders, which is
Lc  (Do  Di)/2  (4  2)/2  1 in  1/12 ft
Also,
Ai  Atube  (pDi L)  p(2 /12 ft)(1 ft)  0.5236 ft2
(per foot of tube)
We start the calculations by assuming the tube temperature to be 122F, and
thus an average temperature of (78  122)/2  100F  560 R. Using
properties at 100F,
RaL 
Pr

(0.726)  3.246 
 104
The effective thermal conductivity is
Fcyl 

 0.1466
keff  0.386k
(FcylRaL)1/4
 0.386(0.01529 Btu/h  ft  F)
(0.1466 
 3.248 
 104)1/4
 0.04032 Btu/h  ft  F
Then the rate of heat transfer between the cylinders by convection becomes
i, conv 
(Ti  To)

(122  78)F  16.1 Btu/h
2p(0.04032 Btu/h  ft °F)
ln(4/2)
2pkeff
ln(Do /Di)
Q
a
0.726
0.861  0.726b
1/4
a
Pr
0.861  Prb
1/4
[ln(4/2)]4
(1/12 ft)3 [(2/12 ft)3/5  (4/12 ft)3/5]5
[ln(Do /Di)]4
L3
c (D3/5
i
 D3/5
o
)5
(32.2 ft/s2)[1/(560 R)](122  78 R)(1/12 ft)3
(1.809 
 10	4 ft2/s)2
gb(Ti  To)L3
c
n2
Q
Q
Q
T 4
sky
T 4
o
Q

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
703
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Radiation propagates in the form of electromagnetic waves.
The frequency n and wavelength l of electromagnetic waves
in a medium are related by l  c/n, where c is the speed of
propagation in that medium. All matter continuously emits
thermal radiation as a result of vibrational and rotational
motions of molecules, atoms, and electrons of a substance.
A blackbody is defined as a perfect emitter and absorber
of radiation. At a specified temperature and wavelength,
no surface can emit more energy than a blackbody. A black-
body absorbs all incident radiation, regardless of wave-
length and direction. The radiation energy emitted by a
blackbody per unit time and per unit surface area is called the
blackbody emissive power Eb and is expressed by the Stefan–
Boltzmann law as
Eb(T )  sT 4
where s  5.670 
 108 W/m2  K4 is the Stefan–Boltzmann
constant and T is the absolute temperature of the surface in
K. At any specified temperature, the spectral blackbody emis-
sive power Ebl increases with wavelength, reaches a peak,
and then decreases with increasing wavelength. The wave-
length at which the peak occurs for a specified temperature is
given by Wien’s displacement law as
(lT)max power  2897.8 m  K
700
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
The blackbody radiation function fl represents the fraction of
radiation emitted by a blackbody at temperature T in the
wavelength band from l  0 to l. The fraction of radiation
energy emitted by a blackbody at temperature T over a finite
wavelength band from l  l1 to l  l2 is determined from
where 
(T) and 
(T) are the blackbody radiation functions
corresponding to l1T and l2T, respectively.
The emissivity of a surface represents the ratio of the radia-
tion emitted by the surface at a given temperature to the radia-
tion emitted by a blackbody at the same temperature.
Different emissivities are defined as
Spectral hemispherical emissivity:
el(l, T) 
Total hemispherical emissivity:
e(T)  E(T)
Eb(T)  

0
el(l, T )Ebl(l, T) dl
sT 4
El(l, T)
Ebl(l, T)
fl 2
fl1
fl1l2(T)  fl 2(T)  fl1(T)
Also,
i, rad 

 25.1 Btu/h
Then the total rate of heat loss from the glass cover becomes
i, total 
i, conv 
i, rad  16.1  25.1  41.2 Btu/h
which is larger than 30 Btu/h. Therefore, the assumed temperature of 122F
for the tube is high. By trying other values, the tube temperature correspond-
ing to 30 Btu/h is determined to be 112F (it would be 180F if radiation
were ignored). Therefore, the tube will reach an equilibrium temperature of
112F when the pump fails.
Discussion
It is clear from the results obtained that radiation should always
be considered in systems that are heated or cooled by natural convection,
unless the surfaces involved are polished and thus have very low emissivities.
Q
Q
Q
(0.1714 
 108 Btu/h  ft2  R4)(0.5236 ft2)[(582 R)4  (538 R)4]
1
0.95  1  0.9
0.9
a2 in
4 inb
sAi (T 4
i  T 4
o )
1
ei  1  eo
eo
aDi
Dob
Q
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
704
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
701
Emissivity can also be expressed as a step function by divid-
ing the spectrum into a sufficient number of wavelength
bands of constant emissivity as, for example,
The total hemispherical emissivity e of a surface is the aver-
age emissivity over all directions and wavelengths.
When radiation strikes a surface, part of it is absorbed, part
of it is reflected, and the remaining part, if any, is transmit-
ted. The fraction of incident radiation (irradiation G)
absorbed by the surface is called the absorptivity, the fraction
reflected by the surface is called the reflectivity, and the frac-
tion transmitted is called the transmissivity. Various absorp-
tivities, reflectivities, and transmissivities for a medium are
expressed as
al(l) 
, rl(l) 
, and tl(l) 
a 
,
r 
,
and
t 
The consideration of wavelength and direction dependence of
properties makes radiation calculations very complicated.
Therefore, the gray and diffuse approximations are com-
monly utilized in radiation calculations. A surface is said to
be diffuse if its properties are independent of direction and
gray if its properties are independent of wavelength.
The sum of the absorbed, reflected, and transmitted frac-
tions of radiation energy must be equal to unity,
a  r  t  1
For opaque surfaces, t  0, and thus
a  r  1
Surfaces are usually assumed to reflect in a perfectly specu-
lar or diffuse manner for simplicity. In specular (or mirror-
like) reflection, the angle of reflection equals the angle of
incidence of the radiation beam. In diffuse reflection, radia-
tion is reflected equally in all directions. Reflection from
smooth and polished surfaces approximates specular reflec-
tion, whereas reflection from rough surfaces approximates
diffuse reflection. Kirchhoff’s law of radiation is expressed as
el, u(T)  al, u(T),
el(T)  al(T),
and
e(T)  a(T)
Radiaton heat transfer between surfaces depends on the ori-
entation of the surfaces relative to each other. In a radiation
analysis, this effect is accounted for by the geometric parame-
ter view factor. The view factor from a surface i to a surface j
is denoted by Fi →j or Fij, and is defined as the fraction of the
radiation leaving surface i that strikes surface j directly. The
view factor Fi → i represents the fraction of the radiation leav-
Gtr
G
Gref
G
Gabs
G
Gl, tr(l)
Gl(l)
Gl, ref(l)
Gl(l)
Gl, abs(l)
Gl(l)
e(T)  e1 f0l1(T)  e2 fl1l2(T)  e3 fl 2(T)
ing a surface i that strikes itself directly; Fi → i  0 for plane or
convex surfaces and Fi → i  0 for concave surfaces.
For view factors, the reciprocity rule is expressed as
Ai Fi →j  Aj Fj →i
The sum of the view factors from surface i of an enclosure to
all surfaces of the enclosure, including to itself, must equal
unity. This is known as the summation rule for an enclosure.
The superposition rule is expressed as the view factor from a
surface i to a surface j is equal to the sum of the view factors
from surface i to the parts of surface j. The symmetry rule is
expressed as if the surfaces j and k are symmetric about the
surface i then Fi →j  Fi →k.
The rate of net radiation heat transfer between two black
surfaces is determined from
Q·
1 →2  A1F1 →2s
The net radiation heat transfer from any surface i of a
black enclosure is determined by adding up the net radiation
heat transfers from surface i to each of the surfaces of the
enclosure:
Q·
i 
Q·
i →j 
AiFi →j s
The total radiation energy leaving a surface per unit time
and per unit area is called the radiosity and is denoted by J.
The net rate of radiation heat transfer from a surface i of sur-
face area Ai is expressed as
Q·
i 
where
Ri 
is the surface resistance to radiation. The net rate of radiation
heat transfer from surface i to surface j can be expressed as
Q·
i →j 
where
Ri →j 
is the space resistance to radiation. The network method
is applied to radiation enclosure problems by drawing a sur-
face resistance associated with each surface of an enclosure
and connecting them with space resistances. Then the prob-
lem is solved by treating it as an electrical network problem
where the radiation heat transfer replaces the current and the
radiosity replaces the potential. The direct method is based
on the following two equations:
Surfaces with specified
net heat transfer rate Q·
i
Q·
i  Ai
Fi →j(Ji  Jj)

N
j  1
1
Ai Fi →j
Ji  Jj
Ri →j
1  i
Ai i
Ebi  Ji
Ri
(T 4
i  T 4
j )

N
j  1

N
j  1
(T 4
1  T 4
2)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
705
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Surfaces with specified
temperature Ti
Ti
4  Ji 
Fi →j(Ji  Jj)
The first and the second groups of equations give N linear
algebraic equations for the determination of the N unknown
radiosities for an N-surface enclosure. Once the radiosities J1,
J2, . . . , JN are available, the unknown surface temperatures

N
j  1
1  i
i
702
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
and heat transfer rates can be determined from the equations
just shown.
The net rate of radiation transfer between any two gray,
diffuse, opaque surfaces that form an enclosure is given by
Q·
12 
s(T 4
1  T 4
2)
1  1
A1 1 
1
A1 F12  1  2
A2 2
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
*Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and
students are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated
by an “E” are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them.
Problems with the 
icon are solved using EES, and complete
solutions together with parametric studies are included on the
enclosed DVD. Problems with the 
icon are comprehensive in
nature, and are intended to be solved with a computer, preferably
using the EES software that accompanies this text.
1. American Society of Heating, Refrigeration, and Air
Conditioning Engineers, Handbook of Fundamentals,
Atlanta, ASHRAE, 1993.
2. A. G. H. Dietz. “Diathermanous Materials and Properties
of Surfaces.” In Space Heating with Solar Energy, ed.
R. W. Hamilton. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1954.
3. D. C. Hamilton and W. R. Morgan. “Radiation
Interchange Configuration Factors.” National
Advisory Committee for Aeronautics, Technical Note
2836, 1952.
4. H. C. Hottel. “Radiant Heat Transmission.” In Heat
Transmission. 3rd ed., ed. W. H. McAdams. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1954.
5. J. R. Howell. A Catalog of Radiation Configuration
Factors. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1982.
6. M. F. Modest. Radiative Heat Transfer. New York:
McGraw-Hill, 1993.
7. A. K. Oppenheim. “Radiation Analysis by the Network
Method.” Transactions of the ASME 78 (1956),
pp. 725–735.
8. M. Planck. The Theory of Heat Radiation. New York:
Dover, 1959.
9. W. Sieber. Zeitschrift für Technische Physics 22 (1941),
pp. 130–135.
10. R. Siegel and J. R. Howell. Thermal Radiation Heat
Transfer. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: Hemisphere, 1992.
11. Y. S. Touloukain and D. P. DeWitt. “Nonmetallic Solids.”
In Thermal Radiative Properties. Vol. 8. New York:
IFI/Plenum, 1970.
12. Y. S. Touloukian and D. P. DeWitt. “Metallic Elements
and Alloys.” In Thermal Radiative Properties, Vol. 7.
New York: IFI/Plenum, 1970.
PROBLEMS*
Electromagnetic and Thermal Radiation
15–1C
What is an electromagnetic wave? How does it dif-
fer from a sound wave?
15–2C
By what properties is an electromagnetic wave
characterized? How are these properties related to each 
other?
15–3C
What is visible light? How does it differ from the
other forms of electromagnetic radiation?
15–4C
How do ultraviolet and infrared radiation differ? Do
you think your body emits any radiation in the ultraviolet
range? Explain.
15–5C
What is thermal radiation? How does it differ from
the other forms of electromagnetic radiation?
15–6C
What is the cause of color? Why do some objects
appear blue to the eye while others appear red? Is the color of
a surface at room temperature related to the radiation it emits?
15–7C
Why is radiation usually treated as a surface
phenomenon?
15–8C
Why do skiers get sunburned so easily?

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
706
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
703
15–9C
How does microwave cooking differ from conven-
tional cooking?
15–10
The speed of light in vacuum is given to be 3.0 
 108
m/s. Determine the speed of light in air (n  1), in water (n
 1.33), and in glass (n  1.5).
15–11
Electricity is generated and transmitted in power
lines at a frequency of 60 Hz (1 Hz  1 cycle per second).
Determine the wavelength of the electromagnetic waves gen-
erated by the passage of electricity in power lines.
15–12
A microwave oven is designed to operate at a fre-
quency of 2.2 
 109 Hz. Determine the wavelength of these
microwaves and the energy of each microwave.
15–13
A radio station is broadcasting radio waves at a wave-
length of 200 m. Determine the frequency of these waves.
Answer: 1.5 
 106 Hz
15–14
A cordless telephone is designed to operate at a fre-
quency of 8.5 
 108 Hz. Determine the wavelength of these
telephone waves.
Blackbody Radiation
15–15C
What is a blackbody? Does a blackbody actually
exist?
15–16C
Define the total and spectral blackbody emissive
powers. How are they related to each other? How do they differ?
15–17C
Why did we define the blackbody radiation func-
tion? What does it represent? For what is it used?
15–18C
Consider two identical bodies, one at 1000 K and
the other at 1500 K. Which body emits more radiation in the
shorter-wavelength region? Which body emits more radiation
at a wavelength of 20 m?
15–19
Consider a surface at a uniform temperature of 800 K.
Determine the maximum rate of thermal radiation that can be
emitted by this surface, in W/m2.
15–20
Consider a 20-cm 
 20-cm 
 20-cm cubical body
at 750 K suspended in the air. Assuming the body closely
approximates a blackbody, determine (a) the rate at which the
cube emits radiation energy, in W and (b) the spectral black-
body emissive power at a wavelength of 4 m.
15–21E
The sun can be treated as a blackbody at an effec-
tive surface temperature of 10,400 R. Determine the rate at
which infrared radiation energy (l  0.76–100 m) is emit-
ted by the sun, in Btu/h  ft2.
15–22
The sun can be treated as a blackbody at
5780 K. Using EES (or other) software, calcu-
late and plot the spectral blackbody emissive power Ebl of the
sun versus wavelength in the range of 0.01 m to 1000 m.
Discuss the results.
15–23
The temperature of the filament of an incandescent
lightbulb is 3200 K. Treating the filament as a blackbody,
determine the fraction of the radiant energy emitted by the
filament that falls in the visible range. Also, determine the
wavelength at which the emission of radiation from the fila-
ment peaks.
15–24
Reconsider Prob. 15–23. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of temperature
on the fraction of radiation emitted in the visible range. Let
the surface temperature vary from 1000 K to 4000 K, and
plot fraction of radiation emitted in the visible range versus
the surface temperature.
15–25
An incandescent lightbulb is desired to emit at least
15 percent of its energy at wavelengths shorter than 0.8 m.
Determine the minimum temperature to which the filament of
the lightbulb must be heated.
15–26
It is desired that the radiation energy emitted by a
light source reach a maximum in the blue range (l  0.47
m). Determine the temperature of this light source and the
fraction of radiation it emits in the visible range (l 
0.40–0.76 m).
15–27
A 3-mm-thick glass window transmits 90 percent of
the radiation between l  0.3 and 3.0 m and is essentially
opaque for radiation at other wavelengths. Determine the rate
of radiation transmitted through a 2-m 
 2-m glass window
from blackbody sources at (a) 5800 K and (b) 1000 K.
Answers: (a) 218,400 kW, (b) 55.8 kW
Radiation Properties
15–28C
Define the properties emissivity and absorptivity.
When are these two properties equal to each other?
15–29C
Define the properties reflectivity and transmissivity
and discuss the different forms of reflection.
15–30C
What is a graybody? How does it differ from a
blackbody? What is a diffuse gray surface?
15–31C
What is the greenhouse effect? Why is it a matter
of great concern among atmospheric scientists?
15–32C
We can see the inside of a microwave oven during
operation through its glass door, which indicates that visible
radiation is escaping the oven. Do you think that the harmful
microwave radiation might also be escaping?
15–33
The spectral emissivity function of an opaque sur-
face at 1000 K is approximated as
e1  0.4,
0  l  2 m
el 
e2  0.7,
2 m  l  6 m
e3  0.3,
6 m  l  
Determine the average emissivity of the surface and the rate
of radiation emission from the surface, in W/m2.
Answers: 0.575, 32.6 kW/m2
c

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
707
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
15–34
The reflectivity of aluminum coated with lead sulfate
is 0.35 for radiation at wavelengths less than 3 m and 0.95
for radiation greater than 3 m. Determine the average
reflectivity of this surface for solar radiation (T 
 5800 K)
and radiation coming from surfaces at room temperature
(T 
 300 K). Also, determine the emissivity and absorptivity
of this surface at both temperatures. Do you think this mater-
ial is suitable for use in solar collectors?
15–35
A furnace that has a 40-cm 
 40-cm glass window
can be considered to be a blackbody at 1200 K. If the trans-
missivity of the glass is 0.7 for radiation at wavelengths less
than 3 m and zero for radiation at wavelengths greater than
3 m, determine the fraction and the rate of radiation coming
from the furnace and transmitted through the window.
15–36
The emissivity of a tungsten filament can be approxi-
mated to be 0.5 for radiation at wavelengths less than 1 m and
0.15 for radiation at greater than 1 m. Determine the average
emissivity of the filament at (a) 2000 K and (b) 3000 K.
Also, determine the absorptivity and reflectivity of the fila-
ment at both temperatures.
15–37
The variations of the spectral emissivity of two sur-
faces are as given in Fig. P15–37. Determine the average
emissivity of each surface at T  3000 K. Also, determine
the average absorptivity and reflectivity of each surface for
radiation coming from a source at 3000 K. Which surface is
more suitable to serve as a solar absorber?
704
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
15–40E
A 5-in-diameter spherical ball is known to emit
radiation at a rate of 550 Btu/h when its surface temperature
is 950 R. Determine the average emissivity of the ball at this
temperature.
15–41
The variation of the spectral transmissivity of a
0.6-cm-thick glass window is as given in Fig. P15–41. Deter-
mine the average transmissivity of this window for solar radi-
ation (T 
 5800 K) and radiation coming from surfaces at
room temperature (T 
 300 K). Also, determine the amount
of solar radiation transmitted through the window for incident
solar radiation of 650 W/m2.
Answers:
0.848, 0.00015,
551.1 W/m2
The View Factor
15–42C
What does the view factor represent? When is the
view factor from a surface to itself not zero?
15–43C
How can you determine the view factor F12 when
the view factor F21 and the surface areas are available?
15–44C
What are the summation rule and the superposition
rule for view factors?
15–45C
What is the crossed-strings method? For what kind
of geometries is the crossed-strings method applicable?
15–46
Consider an enclosure consisting of eight surfaces.
How many view factors does this geometry involve? How
many of these view factors can be determined by the applica-
tion of the reciprocity and the summation rules?
15–47
Consider an enclosure consisting of five surfaces.
How many view factors does this geometry involve? How
many of these view factors can be determined by the applica-
tion of the reciprocity and summation rules?
0.92
0.3
3
0
0
τλ
  , μm
λ
FIGURE P15–41
0.8
0.2
3
0
0
0.5
1.0
0.1
0.9
(2)
(1)
ελ
  , μm
λ
FIGURE P15–37
15–38
The emissivity of a surface coated with aluminum
oxide can be approximated to be 0.15 for radiation at wave-
lengths less than 5 m and 0.9 for radiation at wavelengths
greater than 5 m. Determine the average emissivity of this
surface at (a) 5800 K and (b) 300 K. What can you say about
the absorptivity of this surface for radiation coming from
sources at 5800 K and 300 K?
Answers: (a) 0.153, (b) 0.89
15–39
The variation of the spectral absorptivity of a surface
is as given in Fig. P15–39. Determine the average absorptiv-
ity and reflectivity of the surface for radiation that originates
from a source at T  2500 K. Also, determine the average
emissivity of this surface at 3000 K.
0.2
0.7
2
αλ
  , μm
λ
FIGURE P15–39

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
708
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
705
15–48
Consider an enclosure consisting of 12 surfaces.
How many view factors does this geometry involve? How
many of these view factors can be determined by the applica-
tion of the reciprocity and the summation rules?
Answers:
144, 78
15–49
Determine the view factors F13 and F23 between the
rectangular surfaces shown in Fig. P15–49.
FIGURE P15–49
15–50
Consider a cylindrical enclosure whose height is
twice the diameter of its base. Determine the view factor
from the side surface of this cylindrical enclosure to its base
surface.
15–51
Consider a hemispherical furnace with a flat circular
base of diameter D. Determine the view factor from the dome
of this furnace to its base.
Answer: 0.5
15–52
Determine the view factors F12 and F21 for the very
long ducts shown in Fig. P15–52 without using any view fac-
tor tables or charts. Neglect end effects.
15–53
Determine the view factors from the very long
grooves shown in Fig. P15–53 to the surroundings without
using any view factor tables or charts. Neglect end effects.
15–54
Determine the view factors from the base of a cube
to each of the other five surfaces.
A3
A1
A2
3 m
1 m
1 m
1 m
15–55
Consider a conical enclosure of height h and base
diameter D. Determine the view factor from the conical side
surface to a hole of diameter d located at the center of the
base.
FIGURE P15–55
15–56
Determine the four view factors associated with an
enclosure formed by two very long concentric cylinders of
radii r1 and r2. Neglect the end effects.
15–57
Determine the view factor F12 between the rectangu-
lar surfaces shown in Fig. P15–57.
15–58
Two infinitely long parallel cylinders of diameter D
are located a distance s apart from each other. Determine the
view factor F12 between these two cylinders.
15–59
Three infinitely long parallel cylinders of diameter 
D are located a distance s apart from each other. Determine
the view factor between the cylinder in the middle and the 
surroundings.
FIGURE P15–59
Radiation Heat Transfer between Surfaces
15–60C
Why is the radiation analysis of enclosures that
consist of black surfaces relatively easy? How is the rate of
1
D
D
s
s
D
D
d
h
D
a
a
b
1
2
3
1
1 50°
50°
2
2
(a)
(b)
(c)
b
FIGURE P15–52
D
a
b
b
(a) Semicylindrical.
(b) Triangular groove.
(c) Rectangular groove.
a
b
FIGURE P15–53
1
2
1
2
1
2
(a)
(b)
(c)
1 m
1 m
1 m
1 m
3 m
1 m
1 m
1 m
1 m
3 m
2 m
1 m
1 m
1 m
1 m
2 m
2 m
FIGURE P15–57

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
709
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
radiation heat transfer between two surfaces expressed in this
case?
15–61C
How does radiosity for a surface differ from the
emitted energy? For what kind of surfaces are these two
quantities identical?
15–62C
What are the radiation surface and space resis-
tances? How are they expressed? For what kind of surfaces is
the radiation surface resistance zero?
15–63C
What are the two methods used in radiation analy-
sis? How do these two methods differ?
15–64C
What is a reradiating surface? What simplifi-
cations does a reradiating surface offer in the radiation
analysis?
15–65
A solid sphere of 1 m diameter at 500 K is kept in
an evacuated, long, equilateral triangular enclosure whose
sides are 2 m long. The emissivity of the sphere is 0.45 and
the temperature of the enclosure is 380 K. If heat is generated
uniformly within the sphere at a rate of 3100 W, determine
(a) the view factor from the enclosure to the sphere and (b)
the emissivity of the enclosure.
FIGURE P15–65
15–66
This question deals with steady–state radiation heat
transfer between a sphere (r1  30 cm) and a circular disk
(r2  120 cm), which are separated by a center-to-center 
distance h  60 cm. When the normal to the center of disk
passes through the center of sphere, the radiation view factor
is given by
F12  0.5
Surface temperatures of the sphere and the disk are 600C
and 200C, respectively; and their emissivities are 0.9 and
0.5, respectively.
(a) Calculate the view factors F12 and F21.
(b) Calculate the net rate of radiation heat exchange
between the sphere and the disk.
(c) For the given radii and temperatures of the sphere and
the disk, the following four possible modifications
could increase the net rate of radiation heat exchange:
paint each of the two surfaces to alter their emissivities,
adjust the distance between them, and provide an
e1  c1  ar2
hb
2
d
0.5
f
T1 = 500 K
    1 = 0.45
2m
2m
2m
1m
T2 = 380 K
706
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(refractory) enclosure. Calculate the net rate of radia-
tion heat exchange between the two bodies if the best
values are selected for each of the above modifications.
FIGURE P15–66
15–67E
Consider a 10-ft 
 10-ft 
 10-ft cubical furnace
whose top and side surfaces closely approximate black sur-
faces and whose base surface has an emissivity e  0.7. The
base, top, and side surfaces of the furnace are maintained at
uniform temperatures of 800 R, 1600 R, and 2400 R, respec-
tively. Determine the net rate of radiation heat transfer
between (a) the base and the side surfaces and (b) the base
and the top surfaces. Also, determine the net rate of radiation
heat transfer to the base surface.
15–68E
Reconsider Prob. 15–67E. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effect of base
surface emissivity on the net rates of radiation heat transfer
between the base and the side surfaces, between the base and
top surfaces, and to the base surface. Let the emissivity vary
from 0.1 to 0.9. Plot the rates of heat transfer as a function of
emissivity, and discuss the results.
15–69
Two very large parallel plates are maintained at uni-
form temperatures of T1  600 K and T2  400 K and have
emissivities e1  0.5 and e2  0.9, respectively. Determine
the net rate of radiation heat transfer between the two sur-
faces per unit area of the plates.
15–70
Reconsider Prob. 15–69. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the tempera-
ture and the emissivity of the hot plate on the net rate of radi-
ation heat transfer between the plates. Let the temperature
vary from 500 K to 1000 K and the emissivity from 0.1 to
0.9. Plot the net rate of radiation heat transfer as functions of
temperature and emissivity, and discuss the results.
15–71
A furnace is of cylindrical shape with R  H  2 m.
The base, top, and side surfaces of the furnace are all black
and are maintained at uniform temperatures of 500, 700, and
1400 K, respectively. Determine the net rate of radiation heat
transfer to or from the top surface during steady operation.
FIGURE P15–71
H = 2 m
R = 2 m
1
2
3
r1
h
r2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
710
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
707
15–72
Consider a hemispherical furnace of diameter
D  5 m with a flat base. The dome of the furnace is black,
and the base has an emissivity of 0.7. The base and the dome
of the furnace are maintained at uniform temperatures of 400
and 1000 K, respectively. Determine the net rate of radiation
heat transfer from the dome to the base surface during steady
operation.
Answer: 759 kW
FIGURE P15–72
15–73
Two very long concentric cylinders of diameters
D1  0.35 m and D2  0.5 m are maintained at uniform tem-
peratures of T1  950 K and T2  500 K and have emissivi-
ties e1  1 and e2  0.55, respectively. Determine the net
rate of radiation heat transfer between the two cylinders per
unit length of the cylinders.
15–74
This experiment is conducted to determine the
emissivity of a certain material. A long cylindrical rod of
diameter D1  0.01 m is coated with this new material and
is placed in an evacuated long cylindrical enclosure of
diameter D2  0.1 m and emissivity e2  0.95, which is
cooled externally and maintained at a temperature of 200 K
at all times. The rod is heated by passing electric current
through it. When steady operating conditions are reached, it
is observed that the rod is dissipating electric power at a
rate of 8 W per unit of its length and its surface temperature
is 500 K. Based on these measurements, determine the
emissivity of the coating on the rod.
15–75E
A furnace is shaped like a long semicylindrical
duct of diameter D  15 ft. The base and the dome of the
furnace have emissivities of 0.5 and 0.9 and are maintained at
uniform temperatures of 550 and 1800 R, respectively. Deter-
mine the net rate of radiation heat transfer from the dome to
the base surface per unit length during steady operation.
FIGURE P15–75E
15–76
Two parallel disks of diameter D  0.6 m separated
by L  0.4 m are located directly on top of each other. Both
disks are black and are maintained at a temperature of 450 K.
The back sides of the disks are insulated, and the environ-
D = 15 ft
1
2
5 m
Black
   = 0.7
1
2
ε
ment that the disks are in can be considered to be a black-
body at 300 K. Determine the net rate of radiation heat trans-
fer from the disks to the environment.
Answer: 781 W
15–77
A furnace is shaped like a long equilateral-triangular
duct where the width of each side is 2 m. Heat is supplied
from the base surface, whose emissivity is e1  0.8, at a rate
of 800 W/m2 while the side surfaces, whose emissivities are
0.5, are maintained at 500 K. Neglecting the end effects,
determine the temperature of the base surface. Can you treat
this geometry as a two-surface enclosure?
15–78
Reconsider Prob. 15–77. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effects of the
rate of the heat transfer at the base surface and the tempera-
ture of the side surfaces on the temperature of the base sur-
face. Let the rate of heat transfer vary from 500 W/m2 to
1000 W/m2 and the temperature from 300 K to 700 K. Plot
the temperature of the base surface as functions of the rate
of heat transfer and the temperature of the side surfaces,
and discuss the results.
15–79
Consider a 4-m 
 4-m 
 4-m cubical furnace
whose floor and ceiling are black and whose side surfaces are
reradiating. The floor and the ceiling of the furnace are main-
tained at temperatures of 550 K and 1100 K, respectively.
Determine the net rate of radiation heat transfer between the
floor and the ceiling of the furnace.
15–80
Two concentric spheres of diameters D1  0.3 m
and D2  0.4 m are maintained at uniform temperatures
T1  700 K and T2  500 K and have emissivities e1  0.5
and e2  0.7, respectively. Determine the net rate of radiation
heat transfer between the two spheres. Also, determine the
convection heat transfer coefficient at the outer surface if both
the surrounding medium and the surrounding surfaces are at
30C. Assume the emissivity of the outer surface is 0.35.
15–81
A spherical tank of diameter D  2 m that is filled
with liquid nitrogen at 100 K is kept in an evacuated cubic
enclosure whose sides are 3 m long. The emissivities of the
spherical tank and the enclosure are e1  0.1 and e2  0.8,
respectively. If the temperature of the cubic enclosure is mea-
sured to be 240 K, determine the net rate of radiation heat
transfer to the liquid nitrogen.
Answer: 228 W
FIGURE P15–81
Liquid
N2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
711
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
15–82
Repeat Prob. 15–81 by replacing the cubic enclosure
by a spherical enclosure whose diameter is 3 m.
15–83
Reconsider Prob. 15–81. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the side
length and the emissivity of the cubic enclosure, and the
emissivity of the spherical tank on the net rate of radiation
heat transfer. Let the side length vary from 2.5 m to 5.0 m
and both emissivities from 0.1 to 0.9. Plot the net rate of
radiation heat transfer as functions of side length and emis-
sivities, and discuss the results.
15–84
Consider a circular grill whose diameter is 0.3 m.
The bottom of the grill is covered with hot coal bricks at 
950 K, while the wire mesh on top of the grill is covered
with steaks initially at 5C. The distance between the coal
bricks and the steaks is 0.20 m. Treating both the steaks and
the coal bricks as blackbodies, determine the initial rate of
radiation heat transfer from the coal bricks to the steaks.
Also, determine the initial rate of radiation heat transfer to
the steaks if the side opening of the grill is covered by alu-
minum foil, which can be approximated as a reradiating sur-
face.
Answers: 928 W, 2085 W
FIGURE P15–84
15–85E
A 19-ft-high room with a base area of 12 ft 
 12 ft
is to be heated by electric resistance heaters placed on the
ceiling, which is maintained at a uniform temperature of 90F
at all times. The floor of the room is at 65F and has an emis-
sivity of 0.8. The side surfaces are well insulated. Treating
the ceiling as a blackbody, determine the rate of heat loss
from the room through the floor.
15–86
Consider two rectangular surfaces perpendicular to
each other with a common edge which is 1.6 m long. The
horizontal surface is 0.8 m wide and the vertical surface is
1.2 m high. The horizontal surface has an emissivity of 0.75
and is maintained at 400 K. The vertical surface is black and
is maintained at 550 K. The back sides of the surfaces are
insulated. The surrounding surfaces are at 290 K, and can be
considered to have an emissivity of 0.85. Determine the net
rate of radiation heat transfers between the two surfaces, and
between the horizontal surface and the surroundings.
Steaks
Coal
bricks
0.20 m
708
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE P15–86
15–87
Two long parallel 20-cm-diameter cylinders are
located 30 cm apart from each other. Both cylinders are
black, and are maintained at temperatures 425 K and 275 K.
The surroundings can be treated as a blackbody at 300 K. For
a 1-m-long section of the cylinders, determine the rates of
radiation heat transfer between the cylinders and between the
hot cylinder and the surroundings.
FIGURE P15–87
15–88
Consider a long semicylindrical duct of diameter
1.0 m. Heat is supplied from the base surface, which is black,
at a rate of 1200 W/m2, while the side surface with an emis-
sivity of 0.4 are is maintained at 650 K. Neglecting the end
effects, determine the temperature of the base surface.
15–89
Consider a 20-cm-diameter hemispherical enclosure.
The dome is maintained at 600 K and heat is supplied from
the dome at a rate of 50 W while the base surface with an
emissivity is 0.55 is maintained at 400 K. Determine the
emissivity of the dome.
Review Problems
15–90
The spectral emissivity of an opaque surface at
1500 K is approximated as
e1  0
for
l  2 m
e2  0.85
for
2  l  6 m
e3  0
for
l  6 m
Determine the total emissivity and the emissive flux of the
surface.
15–91
The spectral transmissivity of a 3-mm-thick regular
glass can be expressed as
s
3
T2 = 275 K
  2 = 1
T1 = 425 K
  1 = 1
T3 = 300 K
  3 = 1
D
D
1
2
ε
ε
ε
T2 = 550 K
  2 = 1
1
2
3
W = 1.6 m
L2 = 1.2 m
L1 = 0.8 m
A2
A1
T1 = 400 K
  1 = 0.75
T3 = 290 K
  3 = 0.85
ε
ε
ε

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
712
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
709
t1  0
for
l  0.35 m
t2  0.85
for
0.35  l  2.5 m
t3  0
for
l  2.5 m
Determine the transmissivity of this glass for solar radiation.
What is the transmissivity of this glass for light?
15–92
A 1-m-diameter spherical cavity is maintained at a
uniform temperature of 600 K. Now a 5-mm-diameter hole is
drilled. Determine the maximum rate of radiation energy
streaming through the hole. What would your answer be if
the diameter of the cavity were 3 m?
15–93
The spectral absorptivity of an opaque surface is as
shown on the graph. Determine the absorptivity of the surface
for radiation emitted by a source at (a) 1000 K and (b) 3000 K.
15–97
A large number of long tubes, each of diameter D,
are placed parallel to each other and at a center-to-center dis-
tance of s. Since all of the tubes are geometrically similar and
at the same temperature, these could be treated collectively as
one surface (Aj) for radiation heat transfer calculations. As
shown in Fig. P15–97, the tube-bank (Aj) is placed opposite a
large flat wall (Ai) such that the tube-bank is parallel to the
wall. The radiation view factor, Fij, for this arrangement is
given by
(a) Calculate the view factors Fij and Fji for s  3.0 cm
and D  1.5 cm.
(b) Calculate the net rate of radiation heat transfer between
the wall and the tube-bank per unit area of the wall
when Ti  900C, Tj  60C, ei  0.8, and ej  0.9.
(c) A fluid flows through the tubes at an average tempera-
ture of 40C, resulting in a heat transfer coefficient of
2.0 kW/m2 · K. Assuming Ti  900C, ei  0.8 and
ej  0.9 (as above) and neglecting the tube wall
thickness and convection from the outer surface,
calculate the temperature of the tube surface in steady
operation.
FIGURE P15–97
15–98E
Consider a sealed 8-in-high electronic box whose
base dimensions are 12 in 
 12 in placed in a vacuum
chamber. The emissivity of the outer surface of the box is
0.95. If the electronic components in the box dissipate a total
of 90 W of power and the outer surface temperature of the
box is not to exceed 130F, determine the highest temperature
at which the surrounding surfaces must be kept if this box is
to be cooled by radiation alone. Assume the heat transfer
from the bottom surface of the box to the stand to be
negligible.
Answer: 54F
FIGURE P15–98E
8 in
Stand
12 in
12 in
90 W
 = 0.95
 = 130°F
ε
Ts
Electronic
box
+
+
+
+
+
+
j
i
s
D
Fij  1  c1  aD
s b
2
d
0.5
 D
s etan1ca s
Db
2
 1d
0.5
f
1.2
0.3
0
0.1
0.8
αλ
  ,   m
μ
λ
FIGURE P15–93
15–94
The surface in Prob. 15–93 receives solar radiation
at a rate of 470 W/m2. Determine the solar absorptivity of the
surface and the rate of absorption of solar radiation.
15–95
The spectral transmissivity of a glass cover used in a
solar collector is given as
t1  0
for
l  0.3 m
t2  0.9
for
0.3  l  3 m
t3  0
for
l  3 m
Solar radiation is incident at a rate of 950 W/m2, and the
absorber plate, which can be considered to be black, is main-
tained at 340 K by the cooling water. Determine (a) the solar
flux incident on the absorber plate, (b) the transmissivity of
the glass cover for radiation emitted by the absorber plate,
and (c) the rate of heat transfer to the cooling water if the
glass cover temperature is also 340 K.
15–96
A thermocouple used to measure the temperature
of hot air flowing in a duct whose walls are maintained at
Tw  500 K shows a temperature reading of Tth  850 K.
Assuming the emissivity of the thermocouple junction to be
e  0.6 and the convection heat transfer coefficient to be
h  60 W/m2 · C, determine the actual temperature of air.
Answer: 1111 K

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
713
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
15–99
A 2-m-internal-diameter double-walled spherical
tank is used to store iced water at 0C. Each wall is 0.5 cm
thick, and the 1.5-cm-thick air space between the two walls
of the tank is evacuated in order to minimize heat transfer.
The surfaces surrounding the evacuated space are polished so
that each surface has an emissivity of 0.15. The temperature
of the outer wall of the tank is measured to be 20C. Assum-
ing the inner wall of the steel tank to be at 0C, determine 
(a) the rate of heat transfer to the iced water in the tank and
(b) the amount of ice at 0C that melts during a 24-h period.
FIGURE P15–99
15–100
Two concentric spheres of diameters D1  15 cm
and D2  25 cm are separated by air at 1 atm pressure. The
surface temperatures of the two spheres enclosing the air are
T1  350 K and T2  275 K, respectively, and their emissivi-
ties are 0.75. Determine the rate of heat transfer from the
inner sphere to the outer sphere by (a) natural convection and 
(b) radiation.
15–101
Consider a 1.5-m-high and 3-m-wide solar collec-
tor that is tilted at an angle 20 from the horizontal. The dis-
tance between the glass cover and the absorber plate is 3 cm,
and the back side of the absorber is heavily insulated. The
absorber plate and the glass cover are maintained at tempera-
tures of 80C and 32C, respectively. The emissivity of the
glass surface is 0.9 and that of the absorber plate is 0.8.
Determine the rate of heat loss from the absorber plate by
natural convection and radiation.
Answers: 750 W, 1289 W
FIGURE P15–101
   = 20°
θ
80°C
32°C
Glass
cover
Absorber
plate
Air space
Insulation
Solar
radiation
Iced
water
2 m
0.5 cm
Vacuum
0.5 cm
1.5
cm
0°C
20°C
   = 0.15
ε
710
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
15–102E
A solar collector consists of a horizontal
aluminum tube having an outer diameter of
2.5 in enclosed in a concentric thin glass tube of diameter
5 in. Water is heated as it flows through the tube, and the
annular space between the aluminum and the glass tube is
filled with air at 0.5 atm pressure. The pump circulating the
water fails during a clear day, and the water temperature in
the tube starts rising. The aluminum tube absorbs solar radia-
tion at a rate of 30 Btu/h per foot length, and the temperature
of the ambient air outside is 75F. The emissivities of the
tube and the glass cover are 0.9. Taking the effective sky tem-
perature to be 60F, determine the temperature of the alu-
minum tube when thermal equilibrium is established (i.e.,
when the rate of heat loss from the tube equals the amount of
solar energy gained by the tube).
15–103
A vertical 2-m-high and 5-m-wide double-pane
window consists of two sheets of glass separated by a 3-cm-
thick air gap. In order to reduce heat transfer through the
window, the air space between the two glasses is partially
evacuated to 0.3 atm pressure. The emissivities of the glass
surfaces are 0.9. Taking the glass surface temperatures
across the air gap to be 15C and 5C, determine the rate of
heat transfer through the window by natural convection and
radiation.
FIGURE P15–103
15–104
A simple solar collector is built by placing a
6-cm-diameter clear plastic tube around a gar-
den hose whose outer diameter is 2 cm. The hose is painted
black to maximize solar absorption, and some plastic rings
are used to keep the spacing between the hose and the clear
plastic cover constant. The emissivities of the hose surface
and the glass cover are 0.9, and the effective sky temperature
is estimated to be 15C. The temperature of the plastic tube
is measured to be 40C, while the ambient air temperature is
25C. Determine the rate of heat loss from the water in the
hose by natural convection and radiation per meter of its
length under steady conditions.
Answers: 5.2 W, 26.2 W
2 m
Frame
5°C
3 cm
Glass
15°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
714
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 15
|
711
FIGURE P15–104
15–105
A solar collector consists of a horizontal copper tube
of outer diameter 5 cm enclosed in a concentric thin glass tube
of diameter 12 cm. Water is heated as it flows through the
tube, and the annular space between the copper and the glass
tubes is filled with air at 1 atm pressure. The emissivities of
the tube surface and the glass cover are 0.85 and 0.9, respec-
tively. During a clear day, the temperatures of the tube surface
and the glass cover are measured to be 60C and 40C, respec-
tively. Determine the rate of heat loss from the collector by
natural convection and radiation per meter length of the tube.
15–106
A furnace is of cylindrical shape with a diameter of
1.2 m and a length of 1.2 m. The top surface has an emissiv-
ity of 0.70 and is maintained at 500 K. The bottom surface
has an emissivity of 0.50 and is maintained at 650 K. The
side surface has an emissivity of 0.40. Heat is supplied from
the base surface at a net rate of 1400 W. Determine the tem-
perature of the side surface and the net rates of heat transfer
between the top and the bottom surfaces, and between the
bottom and side surfaces.
FIGURE P15–106
15–107
Consider a cubical furnace with a side length of 
3 m. The top surface is maintained at 700 K. The base sur-
face has an emissivity of 0.90 and is maintained at 950 K.
The side surface is black and is maintained at 450 K. Heat is
T1 = 500 K
  1 = 0.70
r1 = 0.6 m
T3
  3 = 0.40
T2 = 650 K
  2 = 0.50
r2 = 0.6 m
h = 1.2 m
ε
ε
ε
25°C
Garden hose
Solar
radiation
Tsky = 15°C
Clear plastic tube
40°C
Spacer
Water
supplied from the base surface at a rate of 340 kW. Deter-
mine the emissivity of the top surface and the net rates of
heat transfer between the top and the bottom surfaces, and
between the bottom and side surfaces.
15–108
Two square plates, with the sides a and b (and
b  a), are coaxial and parallel to each other, as shown in
Fig. P15–108, and they are separated by a center-to-center
distance of L. The radiation view factor from the smaller to
the larger plate, Fab, is given by
where, A  a/L and B  b/L.
(a) Calculate the view factors Fab and Fba for a  20 cm,
b  60 cm, and L  40 cm.
(b) Calculate the net rate of radiation heat exchange
between the two plates described above if Ta  800C,
Tb  200C, ea  0.8, and eb  0.4.
(c) A large square plate (with the side c  2.0 m,
ec  0.1, and negligible thickness) is inserted symmet-
rically between the two plates such that it is parallel to
and equidistant from them. For the data given above,
calculate the temperature of this third plate when
steady operating conditions are established.
Fab  1
2Ae[(B  A)2  4]0.5  [(B  A)2  4]0.5f
FIGURE P15–108
L
a
b
a
b
15–109
Two parallel concentric disks, 20 cm and 40 cm in
diameter, are separated by a distance of 10 cm. The smaller
disk (e  0.80) is at a temperature of 300C. The larger disk
(e  0.60) is at a temperature of 800C.
(a) Calculate the radiation view factors.
(b) Determine the rate of radiation heat exchange between
the two disks.
(c) Suppose that the space between the two disks is com-
pletely surrounded by a reflective surface. Estimate the
rate of radiation heat exchange between the two disks.
Design and Essay Problems
15–110
Write an essay on the radiation properties of selec-
tive surfaces used on the absorber plates of solar collectors.
Find out about the various kinds of such surfaces, and dis-
cuss the performance and cost of each type. Recommend a
selective surface that optimizes cost and performance.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
15. Radiation Heat Transfer
715
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
15–111
According to an Atomic Energy Commission report,
a hydrogen bomb can be approximated as a large fireball at
a temperature of 7200 K. You are to assess the impact if such a
bomb exploded 5 km above a city. Assume the diameter of
the fireball to be 1 km, and the blast to last 15 s. Investigate
the level of radiation energy people, plants, and houses will be
exposed to, and how adversely they will be affected by the
blast.
15–112
Consider an enclosure consisting of N diffuse and
gray surfaces. The emissivity and temperature of each surface
as well as the view factors between the surfaces are specified.
Write a program to determine the net rate of radiation heat
transfer for each surface.
712
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
15–113
Thermal comfort in a house is strongly affected by
the so-called radiation effect, which is due to radiation heat
transfer between the person and surrounding surface. A person
feels much colder in the morning, for example, becaus of the
lower surface temperature of the walls at that time, although
the thermostat setting of the house is fixed. Write an essay on
the radiation effect, how it affect human comfort, and how it is
accounted for in heating and air-conditioning applications.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
716
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
HEAT EXCHANGERS
|
713
H
eat exchangers are devices that facilitate the
exchange of heat between two fluids that are at dif-
ferent temperatures while keeping them from mixing
with each other. Heat exchangers are commonly used in
practice in a wide range of applications, from heating and air-
conditioning systems in a household, to chemical processing
and power production in large plants. Heat exchangers differ
from mixing chambers in that they do not allow the two fluids
involved to mix.
Heat transfer in a heat exchanger usually involves convec-
tion in each fluid and conduction through the wall separating
the two fluids. In the analysis of heat exchangers, it is conve-
nient to work with an overall heat transfer coefficient U that
accounts for the contribution of all these effects on heat
transfer. The rate of heat transfer between the two fluids at a
location in a heat exchanger depends on the magnitude of
the temperature difference at that location, which varies along
the heat exchanger.
Heat exchangers are manufactured in a variety of types,
and thus we start this chapter with the classification of heat
exchangers. We then discuss the determination of the overall
heat transfer coefficient in heat exchangers, and the logarith-
mic mean temperature difference (LMTD) for some configu-
rations. We then introduce the correction factor F to account
for the deviation of the mean temperature difference from the
LMTD in complex configurations. Next we discuss the effec-
tiveness–NTU method, which enables us to analyze heat
exchangers when the outlet temperatures of the fluids are not
known. Finally, we discuss the selection of heat exchangers.
Objectives
The objectives of this chapter are to:
• Recognize numerous types of heat exchangers, and classify
them,
• Develop an awareness of fouling on surfaces, and
determine the overall heat transfer coefficient for a heat
exchanger,
• Perform a general energy analysis on heat exchangers,
• Obtain a relation for the logarithmic mean temperature
difference for use in the LMTD method, and modify it for
different types of heat exchangers using the correction
factor,
• Develop relations for effectiveness, and analyze heat
exchangers when outlet temperatures are not known using
the effectiveness-NTU method,
• Know the primary considerations in the selection of heat
exchangers.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
717
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
16–1
■TYPES OF HEAT EXCHANGERS
Different heat transfer applications require different types of hardware and
different configurations of heat transfer equipment. The attempt to match
the heat transfer hardware to the heat transfer requirements within the spec-
ified constraints has resulted in numerous types of innovative heat
exchanger designs.
The simplest type of heat exchanger consists of two concentric pipes of
different diameters, as shown in Fig. 16–1, called the double-pipe heat
exchanger. One fluid in a double-pipe heat exchanger flows through the
smaller pipe while the other fluid flows through the annular space between
the two pipes. Two types of flow arrangement are possible in a double-pipe
heat exchanger: in parallel flow, both the hot and cold fluids enter the heat
exchanger at the same end and move in the same direction. In counter flow,
on the other hand, the hot and cold fluids enter the heat exchanger at oppo-
site ends and flow in opposite directions.
Another type of heat exchanger, which is specifically designed to realize a
large heat transfer surface area per unit volume, is the compact heat
exchanger. The ratio of the heat transfer surface area of a heat exchanger to
its volume is called the area density b. A heat exchanger with b  700
m2/m3 (or 200 ft2/ft3) is classified as being compact. Examples of compact
heat exchangers are car radiators (b 
 1000 m2/m3), glass-ceramic gas tur-
bine heat exchangers (b 
 6000 m2/m3), the regenerator of a Stirling engine
(b 
 15,000 m2/m3), and the human lung (b 
 20,000 m2/m3). Compact
714
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 16–1
Different flow regimes and
associated temperature profiles in
a double-pipe heat exchanger.
Hot
in
Hot
out
Cold
in
Cold
out
(a) Parallel flow
Hot
in
Hot
out
Cold
out
Cold
in
(b) Counter flow
Cold fluid
Hot fluid
Hot fluid
Cold fluid
T
T

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
718
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
heat exchangers enable us to achieve high heat transfer rates between two
fluids in a small volume, and they are commonly used in applications with
strict limitations on the weight and volume of heat exchangers (Fig. 16–2).
The large surface area in compact heat exchangers is obtained by attach-
ing closely spaced thin plate or corrugated fins to the walls separating the
two fluids. Compact heat exchangers are commonly used in gas-to-gas and
gas-to-liquid (or liquid-to-gas) heat exchangers to counteract the low heat
transfer coefficient associated with gas flow with increased surface area. In
a car radiator, which is a water-to-air compact heat exchanger, for example,
it is no surprise that fins are attached to the air side of the tube surface.
In compact heat exchangers, the two fluids usually move perpendicular to
each other, and such flow configuration is called cross-flow. The cross-flow
is further classified as unmixed and mixed flow, depending on the flow con-
figuration, as shown in Fig. 16–3. In (a) the cross-flow is said to be unmixed
since the plate fins force the fluid to flow through a particular interfin spac-
ing and prevent it from moving in the transverse direction (i.e., parallel to
the tubes). The cross-flow in (b) is said to be mixed since the fluid now is
free to move in the transverse direction. Both fluids are unmixed in a car
radiator. The presence of mixing in the fluid can have a significant effect on
the heat transfer characteristics of the heat exchanger.
Perhaps the most common type of heat exchanger in industrial applica-
tions is the shell-and-tube heat exchanger, shown in Fig. 16–4. Shell-and-
tube heat exchangers contain a large number of tubes (sometimes several
hundred) packed in a shell with their axes parallel to that of the shell. Heat
transfer takes place as one fluid flows inside the tubes while the other fluid
flows outside the tubes through the shell. Baffles are commonly placed in
the shell to force the shell-side fluid to flow across the shell to enhance heat
transfer and to maintain uniform spacing between the tubes. Despite their
widespread use, shell-and-tube heat exchangers are not suitable for use in
automotive and aircraft applications because of their relatively large size
and weight. Note that the tubes in a shell-and-tube heat exchanger open to
some large flow areas called headers at both ends of the shell, where the
tube-side fluid accumulates before entering the tubes and after leaving them.
Shell-and-tube heat exchangers are further classified according to the
number of shell and tube passes involved. Heat exchangers in which all the
tubes make one U-turn in the shell, for example, are called one-shell-pass
and two-tube-passes heat exchangers. Likewise, a heat exchanger that
Chapter 16
|
715
FIGURE 16–3
Different flow configurations in 
cross-flow heat exchangers.
Cross-flow
(mixed)
Cross-flow
(unmixed)
Tube flow
(unmixed)
(b) One fluid mixed, one fluid unmixed
(a) Both fluids unmixed
Tube flow
(unmixed)
FIGURE 16–2
A gas-to-liquid compact heat
exchanger for a residential air-
conditioning system. 
(© Yunus Çengel)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
719
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
involves two passes in the shell and four passes in the tubes is called a two-
shell-passes and four-tube-passes heat exchanger (Fig. 16–5).
An innovative type of heat exchanger that has found widespread use is the
plate and frame (or just plate) heat exchanger, which consists of a series of
plates with corrugated flat flow passages (Fig. 16–6). The hot and cold flu-
ids flow in alternate passages, and thus each cold fluid stream is surrounded
by two hot fluid streams, resulting in very effective heat transfer. Also, plate
heat exchangers can grow with increasing demand for heat transfer by sim-
ply mounting more plates. They are well suited for liquid-to-liquid heat
exchange applications, provided that the hot and cold fluid streams are at
about the same pressure.
Another type of heat exchanger that involves the alternate passage of the
hot and cold fluid streams through the same flow area is the regenerative
heat exchanger. The static-type regenerative heat exchanger is basically a
porous mass that has a large heat storage capacity, such as a ceramic wire
mesh. Hot and cold fluids flow through this porous mass alternatively. Heat is
transferred from the hot fluid to the matrix of the regenerator during the flow
of the hot fluid, and from the matrix to the cold fluid during the flow of the
cold fluid. Thus, the matrix serves as a temporary heat storage medium.
The dynamic-type regenerator involves a rotating drum and continuous
flow of the hot and cold fluid through different portions of the drum so that
any portion of the drum passes periodically through the hot stream, storing
heat, and then through the cold stream, rejecting this stored heat. Again the
drum serves as the medium to transport the heat from the hot to the cold
fluid stream.
Heat exchangers are often given specific names to reflect the specific appli-
cation for which they are used. For example, a condenser is a heat exchanger
in which one of the fluids is cooled and condenses as it flows through the heat
exchanger. A boiler is another heat exchanger in which one of the fluids
absorbs heat and vaporizes. A space radiator is a heat exchanger that trans-
fers heat from the hot fluid to the surrounding space by radiation.
16–2
■THE OVERALL HEAT TRANSFER COEFFICIENT
A heat exchanger typically involves two flowing fluids separated by a solid
wall. Heat is first transferred from the hot fluid to the wall by convection,
716
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 16–4
The schematic of
a shell-and-tube
heat exchanger
(one-shell pass
and one-tube
pass).
Tube
outlet
Shell
inlet
Baffles
Front-end
header
Tube
inlet
Shell
outlet
Shell
Tubes
Rear-end
header
Out
Shell-side fluid
Out
In
Out
In
Shell-side fluid
In
Tube-side
fluid
Out
(a) One-shell pass and two-tube passes
(b) Two-shell passes and four-tube passes
In
Tube-
side
fluid
FIGURE 16–5
Multipass flow arrangements in
shell-and-tube heat exchangers.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
720
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
through the wall by conduction, and from the wall to the cold fluid again by
convection. Any radiation effects are usually included in the convection heat
transfer coefficients.
The thermal resistance network associated with this heat transfer process
involves two convection and one conduction resistances, as shown in
Fig. 16–7. Here the subscripts i and o represent the inner and outer surfaces
of the inner tube. For a double-pipe heat exchanger, the thermal resistance
of the tube wall is
Rwall 
(16–1)
where k is the thermal conductivity of the wall material and L is the length
of the tube. Then the total thermal resistance becomes
R  Rtotal  Ri  Rwall  Ro 
(16–2)
The Ai is the area of the inner surface of the wall that separates the two flu-
ids, and Ao is the area of the outer surface of the wall. In other words, Ai and
Ao are surface areas of the separating wall wetted by the inner and the outer
fluids, respectively. When one fluid flows inside a circular tube and the
other outside of it, we have Ai  pDiL and Ao  pDoL (Fig. 16–8).
In the analysis of heat exchangers, it is convenient to combine all the ther-
mal resistances in the path of heat flow from the hot fluid to the cold one
1
hi Ai  ln (Do/Di)
2pkL

1
ho Ao
ln (Do/Di)
2pkL
Chapter 16
|
717
Hot
fluid
Cold
fluid
Ti
Ri = –––
Ti
To
To
Rwall
Wall
Cold
fluid
1
hiAi
Ro = –––
1
hoAo
Ao
ho
Aihi
Hot fluid
Heat
transfer
FIGURE 16–7
Thermal resistance network
associated with heat transfer
in a double-pipe heat exchanger.
FIGURE 16–6
A plate-and-frame liquid-
to-liquid heat exchanger.
(Courtesy of Tranter PHE, Inc.)
Nozzles attached
to end frames allow for
entrance and exit of fluids.
Plates supported by an
upper guide bar are held
in a frame which is
bolted together.
Portholes and gaskets
allow fluids to flow in
alternate channels.
Special gaskets on end plates
prevent fluids from contacting
the frames.
A gasket mounted on each plate 
seals the channel between it and 
the next plate.
A and B plates
are arranged
alternately.
The lower rectangular guide bar
assures absolute plate alignment,
preventing lateral movement.
Tightening bolt.
A Plate
B Plate
A Plate

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
721
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
into a single resistance R, and to express the rate of heat transfer between
the two fluids as

 UAT  UiAiT  Uo Ao T
(16–3)
where U is the overall heat transfer coefficient, whose unit is W/m2  C,
which is identical to the unit of the ordinary convection coefficient h. Can-
celing T, Eq. 16–3 reduces to
 R 
 Rwall 
(16–4)
Perhaps you are wondering why we have two overall heat transfer coeffi-
cients Ui and Uo for a heat exchanger. The reason is that every heat
exchanger has two heat transfer surface areas Ai and Ao, which, in general,
are not equal to each other.
Note that UiAi  Uo Ao, but Ui  Uo unless Ai  Ao. Therefore, the over-
all heat transfer coefficient U of a heat exchanger is meaningless unless the
area on which it is based is specified. This is especially the case when one
side of the tube wall is finned and the other side is not, since the surface
area of the finned side is several times that of the unfinned side.
When the wall thickness of the tube is small and the thermal conductivity
of the tube material is high, as is usually the case, the thermal resistance of
the tube is negligible (Rwall 
 0) and the inner and outer surfaces of the tube
are almost identical (Ai 
 Ao 
 As). Then Eq. 16–4 for the overall heat
transfer coefficient simplifies to

(16–5)
where U 
 Ui 
 Uo. The individual convection heat transfer coefficients
inside and outside the tube, hi and ho, are determined using the convection
relations discussed in earlier chapters.
The overall heat transfer coefficient U in Eq. 16–5 is dominated by the
smaller convection coefficient, since the inverse of a large number is small.
When one of the convection coefficients is much smaller than the other (say,
hi  ho), we have 1/hi  1/ho, and thus U 
 hi. Therefore, the smaller heat
transfer coefficient creates a bottleneck on the path of heat transfer and
seriously impedes heat transfer. This situation arises frequently when one of
the fluids is a gas and the other is a liquid. In such cases, fins are commonly
used on the gas side to enhance the product UA and thus the heat transfer on
that side.
Representative values of the overall heat transfer coefficient U are given in
Table 16–1. Note that the overall heat transfer coefficient ranges from about
10 W/m2  C for gas-to-gas heat exchangers to about 10,000 W/m2  C
for heat exchangers that involve phase changes. This is not surprising, since
gases have very low thermal conductivities, and phase-change processes
involve very high heat transfer coefficients.
1
hi  1
ho
1
U
1
ho Ao
1
hi Ai
1
UAs 
1
Ui Ai 
1
Uo Ao
T
R
Q#
718
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Heat
transfer
Outer
fluid
Outer tube
L
Inner tube
Inner
fluid
Ao =   DoL
Ai =   DiL
π
π
Do Di
FIGURE 16–8
The two heat transfer surface areas
associated with a double-pipe heat
exchanger (for thin tubes, Di 
 Do
and thus Ai 
 Ao).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
722
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
When the tube is finned on one side to enhance heat transfer, the total
heat transfer surface area on the finned side becomes
As  Atotal  Afin  Aunfinned
(16–6)
where Afin is the surface area of the fins and Aunfinned is the area of the
unfinned portion of the tube surface. For short fins of high thermal conduc-
tivity, we can use this total area in the convection resistance relation Rconv 
1/hAs since the fins in this case will be very nearly isothermal. Otherwise,
we should determine the effective surface area A from
As  Aunfinned  hfinAfin
(16–7)
where hfin is the fin efficiency. This way, the temperature drop along the fins
is accounted for. Note that hfin  1 for isothermal fins, and thus Eq. 16–7
reduces to Eq. 16–6 in that case.
Fouling Factor
The performance of heat exchangers usually deteriorates with time as a
result of accumulation of deposits on heat transfer surfaces. The layer of
deposits represents additional resistance to heat transfer and causes the rate
of heat transfer in a heat exchanger to decrease. The net effect of these
accumulations on heat transfer is represented by a fouling factor Rf, which
is a measure of the thermal resistance introduced by fouling.
Chapter 16
|
719
TABLE 16–1
Representative values of the overall heat transfer coefficients in
heat exchangers
Type of heat exchanger
U, W/m2  C*
Water-to-water
850–1700
Water-to-oil
100–350
Water-to-gasoline or kerosene
300–1000
Feedwater heaters
1000–8500
Steam-to-light fuel oil
200–400
Steam-to-heavy fuel oil
50–200
Steam condenser
1000–6000
Freon condenser (water cooled)
300–1000
Ammonia condenser (water cooled)
800–1400
Alcohol condensers (water cooled)
250–700
Gas-to-gas
10–40
Water-to-air in finned tubes (water in tubes)
30–60†
400–850†
Steam-to-air in finned tubes (steam in tubes)
30–300†
400–4000‡
*Multiply the listed values by 0.176 to convert them to Btu/h  ft2  F.
†Based on air-side surface area.
‡Based on water- or steam-side surface area.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
723
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The most common type of fouling is the precipitation of solid deposits in
a fluid on the heat transfer surfaces. You can observe this type of fouling
even in your house. If you check the inner surfaces of your teapot after pro-
longed use, you will probably notice a layer of calcium-based deposits on
the surfaces at which boiling occurs. This is especially the case in areas
where the water is hard. The scales of such deposits come off by scratching,
and the surfaces can be cleaned of such deposits by chemical treatment.
Now imagine those mineral deposits forming on the inner surfaces of fine
tubes in a heat exchanger (Fig. 16–9) and the detrimental effect it may have
on the flow passage area and the heat transfer. To avoid this potential prob-
lem, water in power and process plants is extensively treated and its solid
contents are removed before it is allowed to circulate through the system.
The solid ash particles in the flue gases accumulating on the surfaces of air
preheaters create similar problems.
Another form of fouling, which is common in the chemical process
industry, is corrosion and other chemical fouling. In this case, the surfaces
are fouled by the accumulation of the products of chemical reactions on the
surfaces. This form of fouling can be avoided by coating metal pipes with
glass or using plastic pipes instead of metal ones. Heat exchangers may also
be fouled by the growth of algae in warm fluids. This type of fouling is
called biological fouling and can be prevented by chemical treatment.
In applications where it is likely to occur, fouling should be considered in
the design and selection of heat exchangers. In such applications, it may be
necessary to select a larger and thus more expensive heat exchanger to
ensure that it meets the design heat transfer requirements even after fouling
occurs. The periodic cleaning of heat exchangers and the resulting down
time are additional penalties associated with fouling.
The fouling factor is obviously zero for a new heat exchanger and
increases with time as the solid deposits build up on the heat exchanger sur-
face. The fouling factor depends on the operating temperature and the
velocity of the fluids, as well as the length of service. Fouling increases with
increasing temperature and decreasing velocity.
720
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 16–9
Precipitation fouling of 
ash particles on superheater tubes. 
(From Steam: Its Generation, and Use, Babcock
and Wilcox Co., 1978. Reprinted by permission.)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
724
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The overall heat transfer coefficient relation given above is valid for clean
surfaces and needs to be modified to account for the effects of fouling on
both the inner and the outer surfaces of the tube. For an unfinned shell-and-
tube heat exchanger, it can be expressed as
 R 
(16–8)
where Rf, i and Rf, o are the fouling factors at those surfaces.
Representative values of fouling factors are given in Table 16–2. More
comprehensive tables of fouling factors are available in handbooks. As you
would expect, considerable uncertainty exists in these values, and they
should be used as a guide in the selection and evaluation of heat exchangers
to account for the effects of anticipated fouling on heat transfer. Note that
most fouling factors in the table are of the order of 104 m2  C/W, which
is equivalent to the thermal resistance of a 0.2-mm-thick limestone layer
(k  2.9 W/m  C) per unit surface area. Therefore, in the absence of spe-
cific data, we can assume the surfaces to be coated with 0.2 mm of lime-
stone as a starting point to account for the effects of fouling.
1
hi Ai 
Rf, i
Ai  ln (Do/Di)
2pkL

Rf, o
Ao 
1
ho Ao
1
UAs 
1
Ui Ai 
1
Uo Ao
Chapter 16
|
721
TABLE 16–2
Representative fouling
factors (thermal resistance due
to fouling for a unit surface area)
Fluid
Rf, m2  C/W
Distilled water, sea- 
water, river water, 
boiler feedwater:
Below 50C
0.0001
Above 50C
0.0002
Fuel oil
0.0009
Steam (oil-free)
0.0001
Refrigerants (liquid)
0.0002
Refrigerants (vapor)
0.0004
Alcohol vapors
0.0001
Air
0.0004
(Source: Tubular Exchange Manufacturers
Association.)
EXAMPLE 16–1
Overall Heat Transfer Coefficient of a
Heat Exchanger
Hot oil is to be cooled in a double-tube counter-flow heat exchanger. The
copper inner tubes have a diameter of 2 cm and negligible thickness. The
inner diameter of the outer tube (the shell) is 3 cm. Water flows through the
tube at a rate of 0.5 kg/s, and the oil through the shell at a rate of 0.8 kg/s.
Taking the average temperatures of the water and the oil to be 45C and
80C, respectively, determine the overall heat transfer coefficient of this heat
exchanger.
Solution
Hot oil is cooled by water in a double-tube counter-flow heat
exchanger. The overall heat transfer coefficient is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 The thermal resistance of the inner tube is negligible since
the tube material is highly conductive and its thickness is negligible. 2 Both
the oil and water flow are fully developed. 3 Properties of the oil and water
are constant.
Properties
The properties of water at 45C are (Table A–15)
r  990.1 kg/m3
Pr  3.91
k  0.637 W/m  C
n  m/r  0.602 
 106 m2/s
The properties of oil at 80C are (Table A–19)
r  852 kg/m3
Pr  499.3
k  0.138 W/m  C
n  3.794 
 105 m2/s

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
725
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
722
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Analysis
The schematic of the heat exchanger is given in Fig. 16–10. The
overall heat transfer coefficient U can be determined from Eq. 16–5:

where hi and ho are the convection heat transfer coefficients inside and out-
side the tube, respectively, which are to be determined using the forced con-
vection relations.
The hydraulic diameter for a circular tube is the diameter of the tube
itself, Dh  D  0.02 m. The average velocity of water in the tube and the
Reynolds number are
V 
 1.61 m/s
and
Re 
 53,490
which is greater than 10,000. Therefore, the flow of water is turbulent.
Assuming the flow to be fully developed, the Nusselt number can be deter-
mined from
Nu 
 0.023 Re0.8Pr0.4  0.023(53,490)0.8(3.91)0.4  240.6
Then,
h 
Nu 
(240.6)  7663 W/m2  C
Now we repeat the analysis above for oil. The properties of oil at 80C are
r  852 kg/m3
n  37.5 
 106 m2/s
k  0.138 W/m  C
Pr  490
The hydraulic diameter for the annular space is
Dh  Do  Di  0.03  0.02  0.01 m
The average velocity and the Reynolds number in this case are
V 
 2.39 m/s
and
Re 
 630
which is less than 2300. Therefore, the flow of oil is laminar. Assuming fully
developed flow, the Nusselt number on the tube side of the annular space
Nui corresponding to Di/Do  0.02/0.03  0.667 can be determined from
Table 16–3 by interpolation to be
Nu  5.45
VD
n  (2.39 m/s)(0.01 m)
3.794 
 105 m2/s
m
rAc 
m
r[ 1
4p(D2
o  D2
i )] 
0.8 kg/s
(852 kg/m3)[1
4p(0.032  0.022)] m2
0.637 W/m  C
0.02 m
k
D
hD
k
VD
n  (1.61 m/s)(0.02 m)
0.602 
 106 m2/s
m
rAc

m
r( 1
4pD2) 
0.5 kg/s
(990.1 kg/m3)[1
4p(0.02 m)2]
1
hi  1
ho
1
U
Cold
water
0.5 kg/s
0.8 kg/s
Hot oil
3 cm
2 cm
FIGURE 16–10
Schematic for Example 16–1.
TABLE 16–3
Nusselt number for fully developed
laminar flow in a circular annulus
with one surface insulated and the
other isothermal (Kays and Perkins,
1972)
Di /Do
Nui
Nuo
0.00
—
3.66
0.05
17.46
4.06
0.10
11.56
4.11
0.25
7.37
4.23
0.50
5.74
4.43
1.00
4.86
4.86

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
726
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
723
and
ho 
Nu 
(5.45)  75.2 W/m2  C
Then the overall heat transfer coefficient for this heat exchanger becomes
U 
 74.5 W/m2  C
Discussion
Note that U 
 ho in this case, since hi  ho. This confirms our
earlier statement that the overall heat transfer coefficient in a heat
exchanger is dominated by the smaller heat transfer coefficient when the
difference between the two values is large.
To improve the overall heat transfer coefficient and thus the heat transfer
in this heat exchanger, we must use some enhancement techniques on the
oil side, such as a finned surface.
1
1
hi  1
ho

1
1
7663 W/m2  C 
1
75.2 W/m2  C
0.138 W/m  C
0.01 m
k
Dh
EXAMPLE 16–2
Effect of Fouling on the Overall Heat
Transfer Coefficient
A double-pipe (shell-and-tube) heat exchanger is constructed of a stainless
steel (k  15.1 W/m  C) inner tube of inner diameter Di  1.5 cm and
outer diameter Do  1.9 cm and an outer shell of inner diameter 3.2 cm.
The convection heat transfer coefficient is given to be hi  800 W/m2  C
on the inner surface of the tube and ho  1200 W/m2  C on the outer sur-
face. For a fouling factor of Rf, i  0.0004 m2  C/W on the tube side and
Rf, o  0.0001 m2  C/W on the shell side, determine (a) the thermal resis-
tance of the heat exchanger per unit length and (b) the overall heat transfer
coefficients, Ui and Uo based on the inner and outer surface areas of the
tube, respectively.
SOLUTION
The heat transfer coefficients and the fouling factors on the
tube and shell sides of a heat exchanger are given. The thermal resistance
and the overall heat transfer coefficients based on the inner and outer areas
are to be determined.
Assumptions
The heat transfer coefficients and the fouling factors are con-
stant and uniform.
Analysis
(a) The schematic of the heat exchanger is given in Fig. 16–11.
The thermal resistance for an unfinned shell-and-tube heat exchanger with
fouling on both heat transfer surfaces is given by Eq. 16–8 as
R 
where
Ai  pDiL  p(0.015 m)(1 m)  0.0471 m2
Ao  pDo L  p(0.019 m)(1 m)  0.0597 m2
Substituting, the total thermal resistance is determined to be
1
UAs 
1
Ui Ai 
1
Uo Ao 
1
hi Ai 
Rf, i
Ai  ln (Do /Di)
2pkL

Rf, o
Ao 
1
ho Ao
Hot
fluid
Cold fluid
Hot
fluid
Outer layer of fouling
Tube wall
Inner layer of fouling
Cold fluid
Do = 1.9 cm
ho = 1200 W/m2 · °C
Rf,o = 0.0001 m2 · °C/ W
Di = 1.5 cm
hi = 800 W/m2 · °C
Rf,i = 0.0004 m2 · °C/ W
FIGURE 16–11
Schematic for Example 16–2.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
727
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
16–3
■ANALYSIS OF HEAT EXCHANGERS
Heat exchangers are commonly used in practice, and an engineer often finds
himself or herself in a position to select a heat exchanger that will achieve a
specified temperature change in a fluid stream of known mass flow rate, or
to predict the outlet temperatures of the hot and cold fluid streams in a
specified heat exchanger.
In upcoming sections, we discuss the two methods used in the analysis of
heat exchangers. Of these, the log mean temperature difference (or LMTD)
method is best suited for the first task and the effectiveness–NTU method
for the second task. But first we present some general considerations.
Heat exchangers usually operate for long periods of time with no change
in their operating conditions. Therefore, they can be modeled as steady-flow
devices. As such, the mass flow rate of each fluid remains constant, and the
fluid properties such as temperature and velocity at any inlet or outlet
remain the same. Also, the fluid streams experience little or no change in
their velocities and elevations, and thus the kinetic and potential energy
changes are negligible. The specific heat of a fluid, in general, changes with
724
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
R 


 (0.02654  0.00849  0.0025  0.00168  0.01396)C/W
 0.0532C/W
Note that about 19 percent of the total thermal resistance in this case is
due to fouling and about 5 percent of it is due to the steel tube separating
the two fluids. The rest (76 percent) is due to the convection resistances.
(b) Knowing the total thermal resistance and the heat transfer surface areas,
the overall heat transfer coefficients based on the inner and outer surfaces
of the tube are
Ui 
 399 W/m2  C
and
Uo 
 315 W/m2  C
Discussion
Note that the two overall heat transfer coefficients differ signifi-
cantly (by 27 percent) in this case because of the considerable difference
between the heat transfer surface areas on the inner and the outer sides of
the tube. For tubes of negligible thickness, the difference between the two
overall heat transfer coefficients would be negligible.
1
RAo 
1
(0.0532 C/ W)(0.0597 m2)
1
RAi 
1
(0.0532 C/ W)(0.0471 m2)
0.0001 m2  C/ W
0.0597 m2

1
(1200 W/m2  C)(0.0597 m2)
ln (0.019/0.015)
2p(15.1 W/m  C)(1 m)
1
(800 W/m2  C)(0.0471 m2)  0.0004 m2  C/ W
0.0471 m2

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
728
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
temperature. But, in a specified temperature range, it can be treated as a
constant at some average value with little loss in accuracy. Axial heat con-
duction along the tube is usually insignificant and can be considered negli-
gible. Finally, the outer surface of the heat exchanger is assumed to be
perfectly insulated, so that there is no heat loss to the surrounding medium,
and any heat transfer occurs between the two fluids only.
The idealizations stated above are closely approximated in practice, and
they greatly simplify the analysis of a heat exchanger with little sacrifice
from accuracy. Therefore, they are commonly used. Under these assump-
tions, the first law of thermodynamics requires that the rate of heat transfer
from the hot fluid be equal to the rate of heat transfer to the cold one. That is,

ccpc(Tc, out  Tc, in)
(16–9)
and

hcph(Th, in  Th, out)
(16–10)
where the subscripts c and h stand for cold and hot fluids, respectively, and
c,
h  mass flow rates
cpc, cph  specific heats
Tc, out, Th, out  outlet temperatures
Tc, in, Th, in  inlet temperatures
Note that the heat transfer rate 
is taken to be a positive quantity, and its
direction is understood to be from the hot fluid to the cold one in accor-
dance with the second law of thermodynamics.
In heat exchanger analysis, it is often convenient to combine the product
of the mass flow rate and the specific heat of a fluid into a single quantity.
This quantity is called the heat capacity rate and is defined for the hot and
cold fluid streams as
Ch 
hcph
and
Cc 
ccpc
(16–11)
The heat capacity rate of a fluid stream represents the rate of heat transfer
needed to change the temperature of the fluid stream by 1C as it flows
through a heat exchanger. Note that in a heat exchanger, the fluid with a
large heat capacity rate experiences a small temperature change, and the
fluid with a small heat capacity rate experiences a large temperature
change. Therefore, doubling the mass flow rate of a fluid while leaving
everything else unchanged will halve the temperature change of that fluid.
With the definition of the heat capacity rate above, Eqs. 16–9 and 16–10
can also be expressed as
 Cc(Tc, out  Tc, in)
(16–12)
and
 Ch(Th, in  Th, out)
(16–13)
That is, the heat transfer rate in a heat exchanger is equal to the heat capac-
ity rate of either fluid multiplied by the temperature change of that fluid.
Note that the only time the temperature rise of a cold fluid is equal to the
temperature drop of the hot fluid is when the heat capacity rates of the two
fluids are equal to each other (Fig. 16–12).
Q#
Q#
m#
m#
Q#
m#
m#
m#
Q#
m#
Q#
Chapter 16
|
725
ΔT2
ΔT
ΔT1
ΔT = ΔT1 = ΔT2 = constant
Hot fluid
Cold fluid
Inlet
Outlet
x
T
Cc = Ch
Ch
FIGURE 16–12
Two fluid streams that have the same
capacity rates experience the same
temperature change in a well-insulated
heat exchanger.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
729
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Two special types of heat exchangers commonly used in practice are con-
densers and boilers. One of the fluids in a condenser or a boiler undergoes a
phase-change process, and the rate of heat transfer is expressed as

hfg
(16–14)
where 
is the rate of evaporation or condensation of the fluid and hfg is the
enthalpy of vaporization of the fluid at the specified temperature or pres-
sure.
An ordinary fluid absorbs or releases a large amount of heat essentially
at constant temperature during a phase-change process, as shown in Fig.
16–13. The heat capacity rate of a fluid during a phase-change process must
approach infinity since the temperature change is practically zero. That is,
C 
cp → when T →0, so that the heat transfer rate 

cp T is a
finite quantity. Therefore, in heat exchanger analysis, a condensing or
boiling fluid is conveniently modeled as a fluid whose heat capacity rate is
infinity.
The rate of heat transfer in a heat exchanger can also be expressed in an
analogous manner to Newton’s law of cooling as
 UAs Tm
(16–15)
where U is the overall heat transfer coefficient, As is the heat transfer area,
and Tm is an appropriate average temperature difference between the two
fluids. Here the surface area As can be determined precisely using the
dimensions of the heat exchanger. However, the overall heat transfer coeffi-
cient U and the temperature difference T between the hot and cold fluids,
in general, may vary along the heat exchanger.
The average value of the overall heat transfer coefficient can be deter-
mined as described in the preceding section by using the average convection
coefficients for each fluid. It turns out that the appropriate form of the aver-
age temperature difference between the two fluids is logarithmic in nature,
and its determination is presented in Section 16–4.
16–4
■THE LOG MEAN TEMPERATURE
DIFFERENCE METHOD
Earlier, we mentioned that the temperature difference between the hot and
cold fluids varies along the heat exchanger, and it is convenient to have a
mean temperature difference Tm for use in the relation 
 UAs Tm.
In order to develop a relation for the equivalent average temperature dif-
ference between the two fluids, consider the parallel-flow double-pipe heat
exchanger shown in Fig. 16–14. Note that the temperature difference T
between the hot and cold fluids is large at the inlet of the heat exchanger but
decreases exponentially toward the outlet. As you would expect, the temper-
ature of the hot fluid decreases and the temperature of the cold fluid
increases along the heat exchanger, but the temperature of the cold fluid can
never exceed that of the hot fluid no matter how long the heat exchanger is.
Assuming the outer surface of the heat exchanger to be well insulated so
that any heat transfer occurs between the two fluids, and disregarding any
Q#
Q#
m#
Q#
m
m#
m#
Q#
726
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Hot fluid
Boiling fluid
Inlet
Outlet
Inlet
Outlet
T
T
.
Q
Cold fluid
Condensing fluid
(b) Boiler (Cc →)
(a) Condenser (Ch →)
.
Q
FIGURE 16–13
Variation of fluid temperatures in a
heat exchanger when one of the fluids
condenses or boils.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
730
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
changes in kinetic and potential energy, an energy balance on each fluid in a
differential section of the heat exchanger can be expressed as
d
 
hcph dTh
(16–16)
and
d

ccpc dTc
(16–17)
That is, the rate of heat loss from the hot fluid at any section of a heat
exchanger is equal to the rate of heat gain by the cold fluid in that section.
The temperature change of the hot fluid is a negative quantity, and so a neg-
ative  sign is added to Eq. 16–16 to make the heat transfer rate 
a positive
quantity. Solving the equations above for dTh and dTc gives
dTh  
(16–18)
and
dTc 
(16–19)
Taking their difference, we get
dTh  dTc  d(Th  Tc)  d
(16–20)
The rate of heat transfer in the differential section of the heat exchanger can
also be expressed as
d
 U(Th  Tc) dAs
(16–21)
Substituting this equation into Eq. 16–20 and rearranging give
 U dAs
(16–22)
Integrating from the inlet of the heat exchanger to its outlet, we obtain
ln
 UAs
(16–23)
Finally, solving Eqs. 16–9 and 16–10 for 
ccpc and
hcph and substituting
into Eq. 16–23 give, after some rearrangement,
 UAs Tlm
(16–24)
where
Tlm 
(16–25)
is the log mean temperature difference, which is the suitable form of the
average temperature difference for use in the analysis of heat exchangers.
Here T1 and T2 represent the temperature difference between the two
fluids at the two ends (inlet and outlet) of the heat exchanger. It makes no dif-
T1  T2
ln (T1/T2)
Q
m#
m#
a
1
#mh cph 
1
#mc cpcb
Th, out  Tc, out
Th, in  Tc, in
a
1
#mh cph 
1
#mc cpcb
d(Th  Tc)
Th  Tc
Q#
a
1
#mh cph 
1
#mc cpcb
Q#
dQ#
mc# cpc
dQ#
mh# cph
Q#
m#
Q#
m#
Q#
Chapter 16
|
727
Th,out
Tc,out
dTh
dTc
dAs
dAs
δ
ΔT2
Th
T
Th,in
Tc,in
Tc
1
2
As
.
Q
δ
= U(Th – Tc) dAs
.
Q
Hot
fluid
Cold fluid
Th,in
Th,out
Tc,out
Tc,in
ΔT1
ΔT1 = Th,in – Tc,in
ΔT2 = Th,out – Tc,out
ΔT
FIGURE 16–14
Variation of the fluid temperatures in a
parallel-flow double-pipe heat
exchanger.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
731
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
ference which end of the heat exchanger is designated as the inlet or the out-
let (Fig. 16–15).
The temperature difference between the two fluids decreases from T1 at
the inlet to T2 at the outlet. Thus, it is tempting to use the arithmetic mean
temperature Tam 
(T1  T2) as the average temperature difference.
The logarithmic mean temperature difference Tlm is obtained by tracing
the actual temperature profile of the fluids along the heat exchanger and is
an exact representation of the average temperature difference between the
hot and cold fluids. It truly reflects the exponential decay of the local tem-
perature difference.
Note that Tlm is always less than Tam. Therefore, using Tam in calcula-
tions instead of Tlm will overestimate the rate of heat transfer in a heat
exchanger between the two fluids. When T1 differs from T2 by no more
than 40 percent, the error in using the arithmetic mean temperature differ-
ence is less than 1 percent. But the error increases to undesirable levels
when T1 differs from T2 by greater amounts. Therefore, we should
always use the logarithmic mean temperature difference when determining
the rate of heat transfer in a heat exchanger.
Counter-Flow Heat Exchangers
The variation of temperatures of hot and cold fluids in a counter-flow heat
exchanger is given in Fig. 16–16. Note that the hot and cold fluids enter the
heat exchanger from opposite ends, and the outlet temperature of the cold
fluid in this case may exceed the outlet temperature of the hot fluid. In the
limiting case, the cold fluid will be heated to the inlet temperature of the hot
fluid. However, the outlet temperature of the cold fluid can never exceed the
inlet temperature of the hot fluid, since this would be a violation of the sec-
ond law of thermodynamics.
The relation already given for the log mean temperature difference is
developed using a parallel-flow heat exchanger, but we can show by repeat-
ing the analysis for a counter-flow heat exchanger that is also applicable to
counter-flow heat exchangers. But this time, T1 and T2 are expressed as
shown in Fig. 16–15.
For specified inlet and outlet temperatures, the log mean temperature
difference for a counter-flow heat exchanger is always greater than that for a
parallel-flow heat exchanger. That is, Tlm, CF  Tlm, PF, and thus a smaller
surface area (and thus a smaller heat exchanger) is needed to achieve a
specified heat transfer rate in a counter-flow heat exchanger. Therefore, it is
common practice to use counter-flow arrangements in heat exchangers.
In a counter-flow heat exchanger, the temperature difference between the
hot and the cold fluids remains constant along the heat exchanger when
the heat capacity rates of the two fluids are equal (that is, T  constant
when Ch  Cc or
hcph 
ccpc). Then we have T1  T2, and the log
mean temperature difference relation gives Tlm 
, which is indetermi-
nate. It can be shown by the application of l’Hôpital’s rule that in this case
we have Tlm  T1  T2, as expected.
A condenser or a boiler can be considered to be either a parallel- or
counterflow heat exchanger since both approaches give the same result.
0
0
m#
m#
1
2
728
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Hot
fluid
Cold fluid
(a) Parallel-flow heat exchangers
Cold
fluid
Th,in
Th,out
Tc,in
Tc,out
ΔT2
ΔT1
ΔT1 = Th,in – Tc,in
ΔT2 = Th,out – Tc,out
Hot
fluid
(b) Counter-flow heat exchangers
Th,in
Th,out
Tc,out
Tc,in
ΔT1
ΔT2
ΔT1 = Th,in – Tc,out
ΔT2 = Th,out – Tc,in
FIGURE 16–15
The T1 and T2 expressions in
parallel-flow and counter-flow heat
exchangers.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
732
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Multipass and Cross-Flow Heat Exchangers:
Use of a Correction Factor
The log mean temperature difference Tlm relation developed earlier is lim-
ited to parallel-flow and counter-flow heat exchangers only. Similar rela-
tions are also developed for cross-flow and multipass shell-and-tube heat
exchangers, but the resulting expressions are too complicated because of the
complex flow conditions.
In such cases, it is convenient to relate the equivalent temperature dif-
ference to the log mean temperature difference relation for the counter-flow
case as
Tlm  F Tlm, CF
(16–26)
where F is the correction factor, which depends on the geometry of the
heat exchanger and the inlet and outlet temperatures of the hot and cold
fluid streams. The Tlm, CF is the log mean temperature difference for the
case of a counter-flow heat exchanger with the same inlet and outlet temper-
atures and is determined from Eq. 16–25 by taking Tl  Th, in  Tc, out and
T2  Th, out  Tc, in (Fig. 16–17).
The correction factor is less than unity for a cross-flow and multipass
shell-and-tube heat exchanger. That is, F  1. The limiting value of F  1
corresponds to the counter-flow heat exchanger. Thus, the correction factor
F for a heat exchanger is a measure of deviation of the Tlm from the corre-
sponding values for the counter-flow case.
The correction factor F for common cross-flow and shell-and-tube heat
exchanger configurations is given in Fig. 16–18 versus two temperature
ratios P and R defined as
P 
(16–27)
and
R 
(16–28)
where the subscripts 1 and 2 represent the inlet and outlet, respectively.
Note that for a shell-and-tube heat exchanger, T and t represent the shell-
and tube-side temperatures, respectively, as shown in the correction factor
charts. It makes no difference whether the hot or the cold fluid flows
through the shell or the tube. The determination of the correction factor F
requires the availability of the inlet and the outlet temperatures for both the
cold and hot fluids.
Note that the value of P ranges from 0 to 1. The value of R, on the other
hand, ranges from 0 to infinity, with R  0 corresponding to the phase-
change (condensation or boiling) on the shell-side and R → to phase-
change on the tube side. The correction factor is F  1 for both of these
limiting cases. Therefore, the correction factor for a condenser or boiler is 
F  1, regardless of the configuration of the heat exchanger.
T1  T2
t2  t1 
( #mcp)tube side
( #mcp)shell side
t2  t1
T1  t1
Chapter 16
|
729
Hot
fluid
Cold
fluid
Th,in
Th,out
Tc,out
Tc,in
Th,out
Tc,out
Th
Tc
Tc,in
T
Th,in
ΔT
Hot fluid
Cold
fluid
FIGURE 16–16
The variation of the fluid temperatures
in a counter-flow double-pipe heat
exchanger.
Hot
fluid
Heat transfer rate:
where
and
Cross-flow or multipass
shell-and-tube heat exchanger
Th,in
Th,out
Tc,out
Tc,in
ΔT2
ΔT1
Q = UAs FΔTlm,CF
ΔTlm,CF =
ΔT1 = Th,in – Tc,out
ΔT2 = Th,out – Tc,in
F = … (Fig. 16–18)
ΔT1 – ΔT2
ln(ΔT1/ΔT2)
.
Cold
fluid
FIGURE 16–17
The determination of the heat transfer
rate for cross-flow and multipass
shell-and-tube heat exchangers
using the correction factor.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
733
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
730
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
FIGURE 16–18
Correction factor F charts
for common shell-and-tube and
cross-flow heat exchangers.
(From Bowman, Mueller, and Nagle, 1940.)
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
(a) One-shell pass and 2, 4, 6, etc. (any multiple of 2), tube passes
(b) Two-shell passes and 4, 8, 12, etc. (any multiple of 4), tube passes
(c) Single-pass cross-flow with both fluids unmixed
(d) Single-pass cross-flow with one fluid mixed and the other unmixed
0.1
0.2
0.3
Correction factor F
0.4
t2 – t1
T1 – t1
P = ——–
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Correction factor F
0.4
t2 – t1
T1 – t1
P = ——–
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Correction factor F
0.4
t2 – t1
T1 – t1
P = ——–
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
Correction factor F
0.4
t2 – t1
T1 – t1
P = ——–
T1 – T2
t2 – t1
R = ——–
T1 – T2
t2 – t1
R = ——–
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
3.0
2.0 1.5
1.00.8 0.6
0.4
0.2
T1 – T2
t2 – t1
R = ——–
T1 – T2
t2 – t1
R = ——–
R = 4.0
3.0
2.0
1.5
1.0 0.8 0.6 0.4 0.2
T2
T1
t2t1
T2
T1
T1
t1
t2
T2
T1
t1
t2
T2
t2
t1
R = 4.0
R = 4.0 3.0
2.0
1.5
1.0 0.8 0.6
0.4 0.2
3.0
2.0 1.5
1.0 0.8 0.6
0.4
0.2
R = 4.0

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
734
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
731
EXAMPLE 16–3
The Condensation of Steam in a Condenser
Steam in the condenser of a power plant is to be condensed at a tempera-
ture of 30C with cooling water from a nearby lake, which enters the tubes
of the condenser at 14C and leaves at 22C. The surface area of the tubes
is 45 m2, and the overall heat transfer coefficient is 2100 W/m2  C. Deter-
mine the mass flow rate of the cooling water needed and the rate of conden-
sation of the steam in the condenser.
Solution
Steam is condensed by cooling water in the condenser of a power
plant. The mass flow rate of the cooling water and the rate of condensation
are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The heat exchanger is
well insulated so that heat loss to the surroundings is negligible. 3 Changes
in the kinetic and potential energies of fluid streams are negligible. 4 There
is no fouling. 5 Fluid properties are constant.
Properties
The heat of vaporization of water at 30C is hfg  2431 kJ/kg
and the specific heat of cold water at the average temperature of 18C is
cp  4184 J/kg  C (Table A–15).
Analysis
The schematic of the condenser is given in Fig. 16–19. The con-
denser can be treated as a counter-flow heat exchanger since the tempera-
ture of one of the fluids (the steam) remains constant.
The temperature difference between the steam and the cooling water
at the two ends of the condenser is
T1  Th, in  Tc, out  (30  22)C  8C
T2  Th, out  Tc, in  (30  14)C  16C
That is, the temperature difference between the two fluids varies from 8C at
one end to 16C at the other. The proper average temperature difference
between the two fluids is the logarithmic mean temperature difference (not
the arithmetic), which is determined from
Tlm 

 11.5C
This is a little less than the arithmetic mean temperature difference of
(8  16)  12C. Then the heat transfer rate in the condenser is deter-
mined from
 UAs Tlm  (2100 W/m2  C)(45 m2)(11.5C)  1.087 
 106 W  1087 kW
Therefore, steam will lose heat at a rate of 1087 kW as it flows through the
condenser, and the cooling water will gain practically all of it, since the con-
denser is well insulated.
The mass flow rate of the cooling water and the rate of the condensation 
of the steam are determined from 
 [
cp(Tout  Tin)]cooling water  (
hfg)steam
to be
cooling water 

 32.5 kg/s
1087 kJ/s
(4.184 kJ/kg  °C)(22  14)°C
#Q
cp(Tout  Tin)
m#
m
m
Q
Q#
1
2
8  16
ln (8/16)
T1  T2
ln (T1/T2)
30°C
Steam
30°C
Cooling
water
14°C
22°C
FIGURE 16–19
Schematic for Example 16–3.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
735
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
732
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
and
steam 
 0.45 kg/s
Therefore, we need to circulate about 72 kg of cooling water for each 1 kg of
steam condensing to remove the heat released during the condensation
process.
#Q
hfg  1087 kJ/s
2431 kJ/kg
m#
EXAMPLE 16–4
Heating Water in a Counter-Flow 
Heat Exchanger
A counter-flow double-pipe heat exchanger is to heat water from 20C to
80C at a rate of 1.2 kg/s. The heating is to be accomplished by geothermal
water available at 160C at a mass flow rate of 2 kg/s. The inner tube is
thin-walled and has a diameter of 1.5 cm. If the overall heat transfer coeffi-
cient of the heat exchanger is 640 W/m2  C, determine the length of the
heat exchanger required to achieve the desired heating.
Solution
Water is heated in a counter-flow double-pipe heat exchanger by geo-
thermal water. The required length of the heat exchanger is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The heat exchanger is
well insulated so that heat loss to the surroundings is negligible. 3 Changes
in the kinetic and potential energies of fluid streams are negligible. 4 There is
no fouling. 5 Fluid properties are constant.
Properties
We take the specific heats of water and geothermal fluid to be
4.18 and 4.31 kJ/kg  C, respectively.
Analysis
The schematic of the heat exchanger is given in Fig. 16–20. The
rate of heat transfer in the heat exchanger can be determined from
 [ cp(Tout  Tin)]water  (1.2 kg/s)(4.18 kJ/kg  C)(80  20)C  301 kW
Noting that all of this heat is supplied by the geothermal water, the outlet
temperature of the geothermal water is determined to be
 [ cp(Tin  Tout)]geothermal
⎯→
Tout  Tin 
 160C 
 125C
Knowing the inlet and outlet temperatures of both fluids, the logarithmic
mean temperature difference for this counter-flow heat exchanger becomes
T1  Th, in  Tc, out  (160  80)C  80C
T2  Th, out  Tc, in  (125  20)C  105C
and
Tlm 
 91.9C
Then the surface area of the heat exchanger is determined to be
 UAs Tlm
⎯→
As 
 5.12 m2
#Q
U Tlm

301,000 W
(640 W/m2  C)(91.9C)
Q#
T1  T2
ln (T1/T2)  80  105
ln (80/105)
301 kW
(2 kg/s)(4.31 kJ/kg  C)
Q#
m# cp
m#
Q#
m#
Q#
Cold
water
20°C
1.2 kg/s
160°C
80°C
Hot
geothermal
water
2 kg/s
D = 1.5 cm
FIGURE 16–20
Schematic for Example 16–4.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
736
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
733
To provide this much heat transfer surface area, the length of the tube 
must be
As  pDL
⎯→
L 
 109 m
Discussion
The inner tube of this counter-flow heat exchanger (and thus the
heat exchanger itself) needs to be over 100 m long to achieve the desired
heat transfer, which is impractical. In cases like this, we need to use a plate
heat exchanger or a multipass shell-and-tube heat exchanger with multiple
passes of tube bundles.
As
pD 
5.12 m2
p(0.015 m)
EXAMPLE 16–5
Heating of Glycerin in a
Multipass Heat Exchanger
A 2-shell passes and 4-tube passes heat exchanger is used to heat glycerin
from 20C to 50C by hot water, which enters the thin-walled 2-cm-diameter
tubes at 80C and leaves at 40C (Fig. 16–21). The total length of the tubes
in the heat exchanger is 60 m. The convection heat transfer coefficient is
25 W/m2  C on the glycerin (shell) side and 160 W/m2  C on the water
(tube) side. Determine the rate of heat transfer in the heat exchanger 
(a) before any fouling and (b) after fouling with a fouling factor of 0.0006
m2  C/W occurs on the outer surfaces of the tubes.
Solution
Glycerin is heated in a 2-shell passes and 4-tube passes heat
exchanger by hot water. The rate of heat transfer for the cases of fouling and
no fouling are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The heat exchanger is
well insulated so that heat loss to the surroundings is negligible. 3 Changes
in the kinetic and potential energies of fluid streams are negligible. 4 Heat
transfer coefficients and fouling factors are constant and uniform. 5 The
thermal resistance of the inner tube is negligible since the tube is thin-
walled and highly conductive.
Analysis
The tubes are said to be thin-walled, and thus it is reasonable to
assume the inner and outer surface areas of the tubes to be equal. Then the
heat transfer surface area becomes
As  pDL  p(0.02 m)(60 m)  3.77 m2
The rate of heat transfer in this heat exchanger can be determined from
 UAs F Tlm, CF
where F is the correction factor and Tlm, CF is the log mean temperature dif-
ference for the counter-flow arrangement. These two quantities are deter-
mined from
T1  Th, in  Tc, out  (80  50)C  30C
T2  Th, out  Tc, in  (40  20)C  20C
Tlm, CF 
 24.7C
T1  T2
ln (T1/T2)  30  20
ln (30/20)
Q#
Cold
glycerin
20°C
40°C
50°C
80°C
Hot
water
FIGURE 16–21
Schematic for Example 16–5.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
737
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
734
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
and
F  0.91
(Fig. 16–18b)
(a) In the case of no fouling, the overall heat transfer coefficient U is
U 
 21.6 W/m2  C
Then the rate of heat transfer becomes
 UAs F Tlm, CF  (21.6 W/m2  C)(3.77 m2)(0.91)(24.7C)  1830 W
(b) When there is fouling on one of the surfaces, we have
U 
 21.3 W/m2  C
and
 UAs F Tlm, CF  (21.3 W/m2  C)(3.77 m2)(0.91)(24.7C)  1805 W
Discussion
Note that the rate of heat transfer decreases as a result of foul-
ing, as expected. The decrease is not dramatic, however, because of the rel-
atively low convection heat transfer coefficients involved.
Q#
1
1
hi  1
ho  Rf

1
1
160 W/m2  C 
1
25 W/m2  C  0.0006 m2  C/ W
Q#
1
1
hi  1
ho

1
1
160 W/m2  C 
1
25 W/m2  C
P  t2  t1
T1  t1  40  80
20  80  0.67
R  T1  T2
t2  t1  20  50
40  80  0.75
∂
EXAMPLE 16–6
Cooling of Water in an Automotive Radiator
A test is conducted to determine the overall heat transfer coefficient in an
automotive radiator that is a compact cross-flow water-to-air heat exchanger
with both fluids (air and water) unmixed (Fig. 16–22). The radiator has 40
tubes of internal diameter 0.5 cm and length 65 cm in a closely spaced
plate-finned matrix. Hot water enters the tubes at 90C at a rate of 0.6 kg/s
and leaves at 65C. Air flows across the radiator through the interfin spaces
and is heated from 20C to 40C. Determine the overall heat transfer coeffi-
cient Ui of this radiator based on the inner surface area of the tubes.
Solution
During an experiment involving an automotive radiator, the inlet
and exit temperatures of water and air and the mass flow rate of water are
measured. The overall heat transfer coefficient based on the inner surface
area is to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 Changes in the kinetic
and potential energies of fluid streams are negligible. 3 Fluid properties are
constant.
FIGURE 16–22
Schematic for Example 16–6.
40°C
Air flow
(unmixed)
20°C
65°C
Water flow
(unmixed)
90°C

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
738
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
735
Properties
The specific heat of water at the average temperature of (90 
65)/2  77.5C is 4.195 kJ/kg  C (Table A–15).
Analysis
The rate of heat transfer in this radiator from the hot water to the
air is determined from an energy balance on water flow,
 [ cp(Tin  Tout)]water  (0.6 kg/s)(4.195 kJ/kg  C)(90  65)C
 62.93 kW
The tube-side heat transfer area is the total surface area of the tubes, and is
determined from
Ai  npDiL  (40)p(0.005 m)(0.65 m)  0.408 m2
Knowing the rate of heat transfer and the surface area, the overall heat
transfer coefficient can be determined from
 Ui Ai F Tlm, CF
⎯→
Ui 
where F is the correction factor and Tlm, CF is the log mean temperature dif-
ference for the counter-flow arrangement. These two quantities are found to
be
T1  Th, in  Tc, out  (90  40)C  50C
T2  Th, out  Tc, in  (65  20)C  45C
Tlm, CF 
 47.5C
and
F  0.97
(Fig. 16–18c)
Substituting, the overall heat transfer coefficient Ui is determined to be
Ui 
 3347 W/m2  C
Discussion
Note that the overall heat transfer coefficient on the air side will
be much lower because of the large surface area involved on that side.
#Q
Ai F Tlm, CF

62,930 W
(0.408 m2)(0.97)(47.5C)
P  t2  t1
T1  t1  65  90
20  90  0.36
R  T1  T2
t2  t1  20  40
65  90  0.80
∂
T1  T2
ln (T1/T2)  50  45
ln (50/45)
#Q
Ai F Tlm, CF
Q#
m#
Q#
16–5
■THE EFFECTIVENESS–NTU METHOD
The log mean temperature difference (LMTD) method discussed in Section
16–4 is easy to use in heat exchanger analysis when the inlet and the outlet
temperatures of the hot and cold fluids are known or can be determined
from an energy balance. Once Tlm, the mass flow rates, and the overall

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
739
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
heat transfer coefficient are available, the heat transfer surface area of the
heat exchanger can be determined from
 UAs Tlm
Therefore, the LMTD method is very suitable for determining the size
of a heat exchanger to realize prescribed outlet temperatures when the mass
flow rates and the inlet and outlet temperatures of the hot and cold fluids
are specified.
With the LMTD method, the task is to select a heat exchanger that will
meet the prescribed heat transfer requirements. The procedure to be fol-
lowed by the selection process is:
1. Select the type of heat exchanger suitable for the application.
2. Determine any unknown inlet or outlet temperature and the heat transfer
rate using an energy balance.
3. Calculate the log mean temperature difference Tlm and the correction
factor F, if necessary.
4. Obtain (select or calculate) the value of the overall heat transfer
coefficient U.
5. Calculate the heat transfer surface area As .
The task is completed by selecting a heat exchanger that has a heat transfer
surface area equal to or larger than As .
A second kind of problem encountered in heat exchanger analysis is the
determination of the heat transfer rate and the outlet temperatures of the
hot and cold fluids for prescribed fluid mass flow rates and inlet tempera-
tures when the type and size of the heat exchanger are specified. The heat
transfer surface area of the heat exchanger in this case is known, but the
outlet temperatures are not. Here the task is to determine the heat transfer
performance of a specified heat exchanger or to determine if a heat
exchanger available in storage will do the job.
The LMTD method could still be used for this alternative problem, but
the procedure would require tedious iterations, and thus it is not practical. In
an attempt to eliminate the iterations from the solution of such problems,
Kays and London came up with a method in 1955 called the effective-
ness–NTU method, which greatly simplified heat exchanger analysis.
This method is based on a dimensionless parameter called the heat trans-
fer effectiveness e, defined as
e 
(16–29)
The actual heat transfer rate in a heat exchanger can be determined from an
energy balance on the hot or cold fluids and can be expressed as
 Cc(Tc, out  Tc, in)  Ch(Th, in  Th, out)
(16–30)
where Cc 
ccpc and Ch 
ccph are the heat capacity rates of the cold and
hot fluids, respectively.
m#
m#
Q#
#Q
Qmax 
Actual heat transfer rate
Maximum possible heat transfer rate
Q#
736
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
740
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
To determine the maximum possible heat transfer rate in a heat
exchanger, we first recognize that the maximum temperature difference in a
heat exchanger is the difference between the inlet temperatures of the hot
and cold fluids. That is,
Tmax  Th, in  Tc, in
(16–31)
The heat transfer in a heat exchanger will reach its maximum value when
(1) the cold fluid is heated to the inlet temperature of the hot fluid or (2) the
hot fluid is cooled to the inlet temperature of the cold fluid. These two lim-
iting conditions will not be reached simultaneously unless the heat capacity
rates of the hot and cold fluids are identical (i.e., Cc  Ch). When Cc  Ch,
which is usually the case, the fluid with the smaller heat capacity rate will
experience a larger temperature change, and thus it will be the first to expe-
rience the maximum temperature, at which point the heat transfer will come
to a halt. Therefore, the maximum possible heat transfer rate in a heat
exchanger is (Fig. 16–23)
max  Cmin(Th, in  Tc, in)
(16–32)
where Cmin is the smaller of Ch and Cc. This is further clarified by 
Example 16–7.
Q
Chapter 16
|
737
Hot
oil
Cold
water
130°C
40 kg/s
2.3 kJ/kg.°C
20°C
25 kg/s
4.18 kJ/kg.°C
Cc = mccpc = 104.5 kW/°C
.
Ch = mccph = 92 kW/°C
.
.
Cmin = 92 kW/°C
ΔTmax = Th,in – Tc,in = 110°C
Qmax = Cmin ΔTmax = 10,120 kW
FIGURE 16–23
The determination of the maximum
rate of heat transfer in a heat
exchanger.
Hot
water
Cold
water
70°C
2 kg/s
10°C
8 kg/s
FIGURE 16–24
Schematic for Example 16–7.
EXAMPLE 16–7
Upper Limit for Heat Transfer in a
Heat Exchanger
Cold water enters a counter-flow heat exchanger at 10C at a rate of 8 kg/s,
where it is heated by a hot-water stream that enters the heat exchanger at
70C at a rate of 2 kg/s. Assuming the specific heat of water to remain con-
stant at cp  4.18 kJ/kg  C, determine the maximum heat transfer rate and
the outlet temperatures of the cold- and the hot-water streams for this limit-
ing case.
Solution
Cold- and hot-water streams enter a heat exchanger at specified
temperatures and flow rates. The maximum rate of heat transfer in the heat
exchanger and the outlet temperatures are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The heat exchanger is
well insulated so that heat loss to the surroundings is negligible. 3 Changes
in the kinetic and potential energies of fluid streams are negligible. 4 Fluid
properties are constant.
Properties
The specific heat of water is given to be cp  4.18 kJ/kg  C.
Analysis
A schematic of the heat exchanger is given in Fig. 16–24. The
heat capacity rates of the hot and cold fluids are
Ch 
hcph  (2 kg/s)(4.18 kJ/kg  C)  8.36 kW/C
and
Cc 
ccpc  (8 kg/s)(4.18 kJ/kg  C)  33.4 kW/C
m#
m#

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
741
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
The determination of 
max requires the availability of the inlet tempera-
ture of the hot and cold fluids and their mass flow rates, which are usually
specified. Then, once the effectiveness of the heat exchanger is known, the
actual heat transfer rate 
can be determined from
 e
max  eCmin(Th, in  Tc, in)
(16–33)
Q#
Q#
Q#
Q#
738
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Therefore,
Cmin  Ch  8.36 kW/C
which is the smaller of the two heat capacity rates. Then the maximum heat
transfer rate is determined from Eq. 16–32 to be
max  Cmin(Th, in  Tc, in)
 (8.36 kW/C)(70  10)C
 502 kW
That is, the maximum possible heat transfer rate in this heat exchanger is
502 kW. This value would be approached in a counter-flow heat exchanger
with a very large heat transfer surface area.
The maximum temperature difference in this heat exchanger is Tmax  Th, in
 Tc, in  (70  10)C  60C. Therefore, the hot water cannot be cooled by
more than 60C (to 10C) in this heat exchanger, and the cold water cannot
be heated by more than 60C (to 70C), no matter what we do. The outlet
temperatures of the cold and the hot streams in this limiting case are deter-
mined to be
 Cc(Tc, out  Tc, in)
⎯→
Tc, out  Tc, in 
 10C 
 25C
 Ch(Th, in  Th, out)
⎯→Th, out  Th, in 
 70C 
 10C
Discussion
Note that the hot water is cooled to the limit of 10C (the inlet
temperature of the cold-water stream), but the cold water is heated to 25C
only when maximum heat transfer occurs in the heat exchanger. This is not
surprising, since the mass flow rate of the hot water is only one-fourth that
of the cold water, and, as a result, the temperature of the cold water
increases by 0.25C for each 1C drop in the temperature of the hot water.
You may be tempted to think that the cold water should be heated to 70C
in the limiting case of maximum heat transfer. But this will require the tem-
perature of the hot water to drop to 170C (below 10C), which is impossi-
ble. Therefore, heat transfer in a heat exchanger reaches its maximum value
when the fluid with the smaller heat capacity rate (or the smaller mass flow
rate when both fluids have the same specific heat value) experiences the
maximum temperature change. This example explains why we use Cmin in the
evaluation of 
instead of Cmax.
We can show that the hot water will leave at the inlet temperature of the
cold water and vice versa in the limiting case of maximum heat transfer
when the mass flow rates of the hot- and cold-water streams are identical
(Fig. 16–25). We can also show that the outlet temperature of the cold water
will reach the 70C limit when the mass flow rate of the hot water is greater
than that of the cold water.
Qmax
502 kW
8.38 kW/C
#Q
Ch
Q#
502 kW
33.4 kW/C
#Q
Cc
Q#
Q#
Hot
fluid
Cold
fluid
.
.
.
.
.
mc,cpc
.
mh,cph
.
Q = mh cph ΔTh
    = mccpc ΔTc
If
mccpc = mhcph
then  ΔTh = ΔTc
FIGURE 16–25
The temperature rise of the cold fluid
in a heat exchanger will be equal to
the temperature drop of the hot fluid
when the heat capcity rates of the hot
and cold fluids are identical.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
742
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Therefore, the effectiveness of a heat exchanger enables us to determine the
heat transfer rate without knowing the outlet temperatures of the fluids.
The effectiveness of a heat exchanger depends on the geometry of the heat
exchanger as well as the flow arrangement. Therefore, different types of
heat exchangers have different effectiveness relations. Below we illustrate
the development of the effectiveness e relation for the double-pipe parallel-
flow heat exchanger.
Equation 16–23 developed in Section 16–4 for a parallel-flow heat
exchanger can be rearranged as
(16–34)
Also, solving Eq. 16–30 for Th, out gives
Th, out  Th, in 
(Tc, out  Tc, in)
(16–35)
Substituting this relation into Eq. 16–34 after adding and subtracting
Tc, in gives
which simplifies to
(16–36)
We now manipulate the definition of effectiveness to obtain
e 

⎯→
 e
Substituting this result into Eq. 16–36 and solving for e gives the following
relation for the effectiveness of a parallel-flow heat exchanger:
eparallel flow 
(16–37)
Taking either Cc or Ch to be Cmin (both approaches give the same result), the
relation above can be expressed more conveniently as
eparallel flow 
(16–38)
Again Cmin is the smaller heat capacity ratio and Cmax is the larger one, and
it makes no difference whether Cmin belongs to the hot or cold fluid.
1  exp c UAs
Cmin a1  Cmin
Cmaxbd
1  Cmin
Cmax
1  exp cUAs
Cc a1  Cc
Chbd
a1  Cc
Chb Cmin
Cc
Cmin
Cc
Tc, out  Tc, in
Th, in  Tc, in
Cc(Tc, out  Tc, in)
Cmin(Th, in  Tc, in)
#Q
#Qmax
ln c1  a1  Cc
Chb
Tc, out  Tc, in
Th, in  Tc, in d  UAs
Cc a1  Cc
Chb
ln
Th, in  Tc, in  Tc, in  Tc, out  Cc
Ch (Tc, out  Tc, in)
Th, in  Tc, in
 UAs
Cc a1  Cc
Chb
Cc
Ch
ln
Th, out  Tc, out
Th, in  Tc, in  UAs
Cc a1  Cc
Chb
Chapter 16
|
739

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
743
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Effectiveness relations of the heat exchangers typically involve the dimen-
sionless group UAs /Cmin. This quantity is called the number of transfer
units NTU and is expressed as
NTU 
(16–39)
where U is the overall heat transfer coefficient and As is the heat transfer
surface area of the heat exchanger. Note that NTU is proportional to As.
Therefore, for specified values of U and Cmin, the value of NTU is a measure
of the heat transfer surface area As. Thus, the larger the NTU, the larger the
heat exchanger.
In heat exchanger analysis, it is also convenient to define another dimen-
sionless quantity called the capacity ratio c as
c 
(16–40)
It can be shown that the effectiveness of a heat exchanger is a function of
the number of transfer units NTU and the capacity ratio c. That is,
e  function (UAs /Cmin, Cmin /Cmax)  function (NTU, c)
Effectiveness relations have been developed for a large number of heat
exchangers, and the results are given in Table 16–4. The effectivenesses of
some common types of heat exchangers are also plotted in Fig. 16–26.
Cmin
Cmax
UAs
Cmin 
UAs
(m# cp)min
740
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE 16–4
Effectiveness relations for heat exchangers: NTU  UAs /Cmin and
c  Cmin/Cmax  (
cp)min/(
cp)max
Heat exchanger 
type
Effectiveness relation
1 Double pipe:
Parallel-flow
e 
Counter-flow
e 
2 Shell-and-tube:
One-shell pass
2, 4, . . . tube
e  2
passes
3 Cross-flow
(single-pass)
Both fluids
unmixed
e  1  exp
Cmax mixed,
Cmin unmixed
e 
(1  exp {c [1  exp (NTU)]})
Cmin mixed,
Cmax unmixed
e  1  exp 
[1  exp (c NTU)]
4 All heat
exchangers
e  1  exp(NTU)
with c  0
From W. M. Kays and A. L. London. Compact Heat Exchangers, 3/e. McGraw-Hill, 1984. Reprinted by
permission of William M. Kays.
r
b  1
c
1
c
b NTU0.22
c
 [exp (c NTU0.78)  1] r
c1  c  21  c 2 1  exp [NTU21  c 2]
1  exp [NTU21  c 2]
s
1
1  exp [NTU(1  c )]
1  c exp [NTU(1  c )]
1  exp [NTU(1  c )]
1  c
m
m

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
744
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
741
FIGURE 16–26
Effectiveness for heat exchangers. 
(From Kays and London, 1984.)
0.
2
5
0.
2
5
0.
50
0.7
5
1.0
0
1.0
0
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
0.
50
0.7
5
1.0
0
0.
50
0.7
5
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
C
mi
n/
C
m
ax
=
0
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
(a) Parallel-flow
5
4
3
Number of transfer units NTU = AsU/Cmin
Effectiveness   , %
ε
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
(b) Counter-flow
5
4
3
Number of transfer units NTU = AsU/Cmin
Effectiveness   , %
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
(c) One-shell pass and 2, 4, 6, … tube passes
5
4
3
Number of transfer units NTU = AsU/Cmin
Effectiveness   , %
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
(d) Two-shell passes and 4, 8, 12, … tube passes
5
4
3
Number of transfer units NTU = AsU/Cmin
Effectiveness   , %
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
(e) Cross-flow with both fluids unmixed
5
4
3
Number of transfer units NTU = AsU/Cmin
Effectiveness   , %
100
80
60
40
20
0
1
2
3
4
5
( f ) Cross-flow with one fluid mixed and the
      other unmixed
Number of transfer units NTU = AsU/Cmin
Effectiveness   , %
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
0.
50
0.7
5
Tube
fluid
Shell fluid
Tube
fluid
Shell fluid
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
0.
2
5
0.
2
5
0.
2
5
C
mi
n/
C
ma
x
=
0
0.
50
0.
25
1.
00
0.
75
1.0
0
Shell fluid
Tube fluid
Shell fluid
Tube fluid
Hot
fluid
Cold fluid
Mixed
fluid
0.25
0.5
Unmixed fluid
4
2
1.33
1
0.75
C
mi
xe
d/
C
un
mi
xe
d
=
0,

0.
25
0.50
0.75
1.00
0.25
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
C
mi
n/
C
m
ax
=
0
ε
ε
ε
ε
ε

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
745
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
More extensive effectiveness charts and relations are available in the liter-
ature. The dashed lines in Fig. 16–26f are for the case of Cmin unmixed and
Cmax mixed and the solid lines are for the opposite case. The analytic rela-
tions for the effectiveness give more accurate results than the charts, since
reading errors in charts are unavoidable, and the relations are very suitable
for computerized analysis of heat exchangers.
We make these observations from the effectiveness relations and charts
already given:
1. The value of the effectiveness ranges from 0 to 1. It increases rapidly
with NTU for small values (up to about NTU  1.5) but rather slowly
for larger values. Therefore, the use of a heat exchanger with a large
NTU (usually larger than 3) and thus a large size cannot be justified
economically, since a large increase in NTU in this case corresponds
to a small increase in effectiveness. Thus, a heat exchanger with a
very high effectiveness may be desirable from a heat transfer point of
view but undesirable from an economical point of view.
2. For a given NTU and capacity ratio c  Cmin /Cmax, the counter-flow
heat exchanger has the highest effectiveness, followed closely by the
cross-flow heat exchangers with both fluids unmixed. As you might
expect, the lowest effectiveness values are encountered in parallel-flow
heat exchangers (Fig. 16–27).
3. The effectiveness of a heat exchanger is independent of the capacity
ratio c for NTU values of less than about 0.3.
4. The value of the capacity ratio c ranges between 0 and 1. For a given
NTU, the effectiveness becomes a maximum for c  0 and a minimum
for c  1. The case c  Cmin /Cmax →0 corresponds to Cmax →, which
is realized during a phase-change process in a condenser or boiler. All
effectiveness relations in this case reduce to
e  emax  1  exp(NTU)
(16–41)
regardless of the type of heat exchanger (Fig. 16–28). Note that the
temperature of the condensing or boiling fluid remains constant in
this case. The effectiveness is the lowest in the other limiting case of c 
Cmin/Cmax  1, which is realized when the heat capacity rates of the two
fluids are equal.
Once the quantities c  Cmin /Cmax and NTU  UAs /Cmin have been eval-
uated, the effectiveness e can be determined from either the charts or the
effectiveness relation for the specified type of heat exchanger. Then the rate
of heat transfer 
and the outlet temperatures Th, out and Tc, out can be deter-
mined from Eqs. 16–33 and 16–30, respectively. Note that the analysis of
heat exchangers with unknown outlet temperatures is a straightforward mat-
ter with the effectiveness–NTU method but requires rather tedious iterations
with the LMTD method.
We mentioned earlier that when all the inlet and outlet temperatures
are specified, the size of the heat exchanger can easily be determined
using the LMTD method. Alternatively, it can also be determined from the
effectiveness–NTU method by first evaluating the effectiveness e from its
definition (Eq. 16–29) and then the NTU from the appropriate NTU relation
in Table 16–5.
Q#
742
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1
0.5
0
0
1
2
NTU = UAs/Cmin
3
4
5
Counter-flow
ε
Cross-flow with
both fluids unmixed
Parallel-flow
(for c = 1)
FIGURE 16–27
For a specified NTU and capacity 
ratio c, the counter-flow heat
exchanger has the highest
effectiveness and the parallel-flow the
lowest.
1
0.5
0
0
1
   = 1 – e– NTU
(All heat exchangers
with c = 0)
ε
2
NTU = UAs/Cmin
3
4
5
ε
FIGURE 16–28
The effectiveness relation reduces to
e  emax  1  exp(NTU) for all
heat exchangers when the capacity
ratio c  0.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
746
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Note that the relations in Table 16–5 are equivalent to those in Table 16–4.
Both sets of relations are given for convenience. The relations in Table 16–4
give the effectiveness directly when NTU is known, and the relations in
Table 16–5 give the NTU directly when the effectiveness e is known.
Chapter 16
|
743
TABLE 16–5
NTU relations for heat exchangers: NTU  UAs/Cmin and c  Cmin/Cmax 
(
cp)min/(
cp)max
Heat exchanger type
NTU relation
1 Double-pipe:
Parallel-flow
NTU  
Counter-flow
NTU 
2 Shell and tube:
One-shell pass
NTU  
2, 4, . . . tube passes
3 Cross-flow (single-pass):
Cmax mixed,
NTU  ln
Cmin unmixed
Cmin mixed,
Cmax unmixed
NTU  
4 All heat exchangers
with c  0
NTU  ln(1  e)
From W. M. Kays and A. L. London. Compact Heat Exchangers, 3/e. McGraw-Hill, 1984. Reprinted by
permission of William M. Kays.
ln [c ln (1  e)  1]
c
c1  ln (1  ec )
c
d
1
21  c 2 ln £2/e  1  c  21  c 2
2/e  1  c  21  c 2≥
1
c  1 ln a e  1
ec  1b
ln [1  e(1  c )]
1  c
m
m
EXAMPLE 16–8
Using the Effectiveness–NTU Method
Repeat Example 16–4, which was solved with the LMTD method, using the
effectiveness–NTU method.
Solution
The schematic of the heat exchanger is redrawn in Fig. 16–29,
and the same assumptions are utilized.
Analysis
In the effectiveness–NTU method, we first determine the heat
capacity rates of the hot and cold fluids and identify the smaller one:
Ch 
hcph  (2 kg/s)(4.31 kJ/kg  C)  8.62 kW/C
Cc 
ccpc  (1.2 kg/s)(4.18 kJ/kg  C)  5.02 kW/C
Therefore,
Cmin  Cc  5.02 kW/C
and
c  Cmin /Cmax  5.02/8.62  0.582
Then the maximum heat transfer rate is determined from Eq. 16–32 to be
max  Cmin(Th, in  Tc, in)
 (5.02 kW/C)(160  20)C
 702.8 kW
Q#
m#
m#
Cold
water
20°C
1.2 kg/s
160°C
80°C
D = 1.5 cm
Hot
geothermal
brine
2 kg/s
FIGURE 16–29
Schematic for Example 16–8.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
747
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
744
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
That is, the maximum possible heat transfer rate in this heat exchanger is
702.8 kW. The actual rate of heat transfer is
 [ cp(Tout  Tin)]water  (1.2 kg/s)(4.18 kJ/kg  C)(80  20)C 301.0 kW
Thus, the effectiveness of the heat exchanger is
e 
 0.428
Knowing the effectiveness, the NTU of this counter-flow heat exchanger can
be determined from Fig. 16–26b or the appropriate relation from Table
16–5. We choose the latter approach for greater accuracy:
NTU 
 0.651
Then the heat transfer surface area becomes
NTU 
⎯→
As 
 5.11 m2
To provide this much heat transfer surface area, the length of the tube 
must be
As  pDL
⎯→
L 
 108 m
Discussion
Note that we obtained practically the same result with the
effectiveness–NTU method in a systematic and straightforward manner.
As
pD 
5.11 m2
p(0.015 m)
NTU Cmin
U
 (0.651)(5020 W/C)
640 W/m2  C
UAs
Cmin
1
c  1 ln a   1
c  1b 
1
0.582  1 ln a
0.428  1
0.428 
 0.582  1b
Q#
Q#
max
 301.0kW
702.8 kW
m#
Q#
EXAMPLE 16–9
Cooling Hot Oil by Water in a Multipass
Heat Exchanger
Hot oil is to be cooled by water in a 1-shell-pass and 8-tube-passes heat
exchanger. The tubes are thin-walled and are made of copper with an inter-
nal diameter of 1.4 cm. The length of each tube pass in the heat exchanger
is 5 m, and the overall heat transfer coefficient is 310 W/m2  C. Water
flows through the tubes at a rate of 0.2 kg/s, and the oil through the shell at
a rate of 0.3 kg/s. The water and the oil enter at temperatures of 20C and
150C, respectively. Determine the rate of heat transfer in the heat
exchanger and the outlet temperatures of the water and the oil.
Solution
Hot oil is to be cooled by water in a heat exchanger. The mass
flow rates and the inlet temperatures are given. The rate of heat transfer and
the outlet temperatures are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The heat exchanger is
well insulated so that heat loss to the surroundings is negligible. 3 The
thickness of the tube is negligible since it is thin-walled. 4 Changes in the
kinetic and potential energies of fluid streams are negligible. 5 The overall
heat transfer coefficient is constant and uniform.
Properties
We take the specific heats of water and oil to be 4.18 and
2.13 kJ/kg  C, respectively.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
748
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
745
Analysis
The schematic of the heat exchanger is given in Fig. 16–30. The
outlet temperatures are not specified, and they cannot be determined from
an energy balance. The use of the LMTD method in this case will involve
tedious iterations, and thus the e–NTU method is indicated. The first step in
the e–NTU method is to determine the heat capacity rates of the hot and
cold fluids and identify the smaller one:
Ch 
hcph  (0.3 kg/s)(2.13 kJ/kg  C)  0.639 kW/C
Cc 
ccpc  (0.2 kg/s)(4.18 kJ/kg  C)  0.836 kW/C
Therefore,
Cmin  Ch  0.639 kW/C
and
c 
 0.764
Then the maximum heat transfer rate is determined from Eq. 16–32 to be
max  Cmin(Th, in  Tc, in)  (0.639 kW/C)(150  20)C  83.1 kW
That is, the maximum possible heat transfer rate in this heat exchanger is
83.1 kW. The heat transfer surface area is
As  n(pDL)  8p(0.014 m)(5 m)  1.76 m2
Then the NTU of this heat exchanger becomes
NTU 
 0.854
The effectiveness of this heat exchanger corresponding to c  0.764 and
NTU  0.854 is determined from Fig. 16–26c to be
e  0.47
We could also determine the effectiveness from the third relation in Table
16–4 more accurately but with more labor. Then the actual rate of heat
transfer becomes
 e
max  (0.47)(83.1 kW)  39.1 kW
Finally, the outlet temperatures of the cold and the hot fluid streams are
determined to be
 Cc(Tc, out  Tc, in)
⎯→
Tc, out  Tc, in 
 20C 
 66.8C
 Ch(Th, in  Th, out)
⎯→
Th, out  Th, in 
 150C 
 88.8C
Therefore, the temperature of the cooling water will rise from 20C to 66.8C
as it cools the hot oil from 150C to 88.8C in this heat exchanger.
39.1 kW
0.639 kW/C
#Q
Ch
Q#
39.1 kW
0.836 kW/C
#Q
Cc
Q#
Q#
Q#
UAs
Cmin  (310 W/m2  C)(1.76 m2)
639 W/C
Q#
Cmin
Cmax  0.639
0.836
m#
m#
20°C
150°C
Water
0.2 kg/s
Oil
0.3 kg/s
FIGURE 16–30
Schematic for Example 16–9.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
749
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
16–6
■SELECTION OF HEAT EXCHANGERS
Heat exchangers are complicated devices, and the results obtained with the
simplified approaches presented above should be used with care. For exam-
ple, we assumed that the overall heat transfer coefficient U is constant
throughout the heat exchanger and that the convection heat transfer coeffi-
cients can be predicted using the convection correlations. However, it should
be kept in mind that the uncertainty in the predicted value of U can exceed
30 percent. Thus, it is natural to tend to overdesign the heat exchangers in
order to avoid unpleasant surprises.
Heat transfer enhancement in heat exchangers is usually accompanied by
increased pressure drop, and thus higher pumping power. Therefore, any
gain from the enhancement in heat transfer should be weighed against the
cost of the accompanying pressure drop. Also, some thought should be
given to which fluid should pass through the tube side and which through
the shell side. Usually, the more viscous fluid is more suitable for the shell
side (larger passage area and thus lower pressure drop) and the fluid with
the higher pressure for the tube side.
Engineers in industry often find themselves in a position to select heat
exchangers to accomplish certain heat transfer tasks. Usually, the goal is to
heat or cool a certain fluid at a known mass flow rate and temperature to a
desired temperature. Thus, the rate of heat transfer in the prospective heat
exchanger is

cp(Tin  Tout)
which gives the heat transfer requirement of the heat exchanger before hav-
ing any idea about the heat exchanger itself.
An engineer going through catalogs of heat exchanger manufacturers will
be overwhelmed by the type and number of readily available off-the-shelf
heat exchangers. The proper selection depends on several factors.
Heat Transfer Rate
This is the most important quantity in the selection of a heat exchanger. A
heat exchanger should be capable of transferring heat at the specified rate in
order to achieve the desired temperature change of the fluid at the specified
mass flow rate.
Cost
Budgetary limitations usually play an important role in the selection of heat
exchangers, except for some specialized cases where “money is no object.”
An off-the-shelf heat exchanger has a definite cost advantage over those
made to order. However, in some cases, none of the existing heat exchang-
ers will do, and it may be necessary to undertake the expensive and time-
consuming task of designing and manufacturing a heat exchanger from
scratch to suit the needs. This is often the case when the heat exchanger is
an integral part of the overall device to be manufactured.
The operation and maintenance costs of the heat exchanger are also
important considerations in assessing the overall cost.
m#
Q#
746
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
750
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Pumping Power
In a heat exchanger, both fluids are usually forced to flow by pumps or fans
that consume electrical power. The annual cost of electricity associated with
the operation of the pumps and fans can be determined from
Operating cost  (Pumping power, kW) 
 (Hours of operation, h)

 (Unit cost of electricity, $/kWh)
where the pumping power is the total electrical power consumed by the
motors of the pumps and fans. For example, a heat exchanger that involves
a 1-hp pump and a -hp fan (1 hp  0.746 kW) operating at full load 8 h a
day and 5 days a week will consume 2069 kWh of electricity per year,
which will cost $166 at an electricity cost of 8 cents/kWh.
Minimizing the pressure drop and the mass flow rate of the fluids will
minimize the operating cost of the heat exchanger, but it will maximize the
size of the heat exchanger and thus the initial cost. As a rule of thumb, dou-
bling the mass flow rate will reduce the initial cost by half but will increase
the pumping power requirements by a factor of roughly eight.
Typically, fluid velocities encountered in heat exchangers range between
0.7 and 7 m/s for liquids and between 3 and 30 m/s for gases. Low veloci-
ties are helpful in avoiding erosion, tube vibrations, and noise as well as
pressure drop.
Size and Weight
Normally, the smaller and the lighter the heat exchanger, the better it is.
This is especially the case in the automotive and aerospace industries,
where size and weight requirements are most stringent. Also, a larger heat
exchanger normally carries a higher price tag. The space available for the
heat exchanger in some cases limits the length of the tubes that can be used.
Type
The type of heat exchanger to be selected depends primarily on the type of
fluids involved, the size and weight limitations, and the presence of any
phase-change processes. For example, a heat exchanger is suitable to cool a
liquid by a gas if the surface area on the gas side is many times that on the
liquid side. On the other hand, a plate or shell-and-tube heat exchanger is
very suitable for cooling a liquid by another liquid.
Materials
The materials used in the construction of the heat exchanger may be an
important consideration in the selection of heat exchangers. For example,
the thermal and structural stress effects need not be considered at pressures
below 15 atm or temperatures below 150C. But these effects are major con-
siderations above 70 atm or 550C and seriously limit the acceptable materi-
als of the heat exchanger.
A temperature difference of 50C or more between the tubes and the shell
will probably pose differential thermal expansion problems and needs to be
considered. In the case of corrosive fluids, we may have to select expensive
1
3
Chapter 16
|
747

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
751
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
corrosion-resistant materials such as stainless steel or even titanium if we
are not willing to replace low-cost heat exchangers frequently.
Other Considerations
There are other considerations in the selection of heat exchangers that may
or may not be important, depending on the application. For example, being
leak-tight is an important consideration when toxic or expensive fluids are
involved. Ease of servicing, low maintenance cost, and safety and reliability
are some other important considerations in the selection process. Quietness
is one of the primary considerations in the selection of liquid-to-air heat
exchangers used in heating and air-conditioning applications.
748
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
EXAMPLE 16–10
Installing a Heat Exchanger to Save Energy
and Money
In a dairy plant, milk is pasteurized by hot water supplied by a natural gas
furnace. The hot water is then discharged to an open floor drain at 80C at a
rate of 15 kg/min. The plant operates 24 h a day and 365 days a year. The
furnace has an efficiency of 80 percent, and the cost of the natural gas is
$1.10 per therm (1 therm  105,500 kJ). The average temperature of the
cold water entering the furnace throughout the year is 15C. The drained hot
water cannot be returned to the furnace and recirculated, because it is cont-
aminated during the process.
In order to save energy, installation of a water-to-water heat exchanger to
preheat the incoming cold water by the drained hot water is proposed. Assum-
ing that the heat exchanger will recover 75 percent of the available heat in the
hot water, determine the heat transfer rating of the heat exchanger that needs
to be purchased and suggest a suitable type. Also, determine the amount of
money this heat exchanger will save the company per year from natural gas
savings.
Solution
A water-to-water heat exchanger is to be installed to transfer
energy from drained hot water to the incoming cold water to preheat it. The
rate of heat transfer in the heat exchanger and the amounts of energy and
money saved per year are to be determined.
Assumptions
1 Steady operating conditions exist. 2 The effectiveness of the
heat exchanger remains constant.
Properties
We use the specific heat of water at room temperature, cp 
4.18 kJ/kg  C, and treat it as a constant.
Analysis
A schematic of the prospective heat exchanger is given in Fig.
16–31. The heat recovery from the hot water will be a maximum when 
it leaves the heat exchanger at the inlet temperature of the cold water.
Therefore,
max 
hcp(Th, in  Tc, in)

(4.18 kJ/kg  C)(80  15)C
 67.9 kJ/s
That is, the existing hot-water stream has the potential to supply heat at a
rate of 67.9 kJ/s to the incoming cold water. This value would be
approached in a counter-flow heat exchanger with a very large heat transfer 
a15
60 kg/sb
m#
Q#
Cold
water
15°C
80°C
Hot
water
FIGURE 16–31
Schematic for Example 16–10.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
752
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
749
Heat exchangers are devices that allow the exchange of heat
between two fluids without allowing them to mix with each
other. Heat exchangers are manufactured in a variety of
types, the simplest being the double-pipe heat exchanger. In a
parallel-flow type, both the hot and cold fluids enter the heat
exchanger at the same end and move in the same direction,
whereas in a counter-flow type, the hot and cold fluids enter
the heat exchanger at opposite ends and flow in opposite
directions. In compact heat exchangers, the two fluids move
perpendicular to each other, and such a flow configuration is
surface area. A heat exchanger of reasonable size and cost can capture 
75 percent of this heat transfer potential. Thus, the heat transfer rating of
the prospective heat exchanger must be
 e
max  (0.75)(67.9 kJ/s)  50.9 kJ/s
That is, the heat exchanger should be able to deliver heat at a rate of 50.9 kJ/s
from the hot to the cold water. An ordinary plate or shell-and-tube heat
exchanger should be adequate for this purpose, since both sides of the heat
exchanger involve the same fluid at comparable flow rates and thus comparable
heat transfer coefficients. (Note that if we were heating air with hot water, we
would have to specify a heat exchanger that has a large surface area on the air
side.)
The heat exchanger will operate 24 h a day and 365 days a year. There-
fore, the annual operating hours are
Operating hours  (24 h/day)(365 days/year)  8760 h/year
Noting that this heat exchanger saves 50.9 kJ of energy per second, the
energy saved during an entire year will be
Energy saved  (Heat transfer rate)(Operation time)
 (50.9 kJ/s)(8760 h/year)(3600 s/h)
 1.605 
 109 kJ/year
The furnace is said to be 80 percent efficient. That is, for each 80 units of
heat supplied by the furnace, natural gas with an energy content of 100
units must be supplied to the furnace. Therefore, the energy savings deter-
mined above result in fuel savings in the amount of
Fuel saved 
 19,020 therms/year
Noting that the price of natural gas is $1.10 per therm, the amount of
money saved becomes
Money saved  (Fuel saved) 
 (Price of fuel)
 (19,020 therms/year)($1.10/therm)
 $20,920/year
Therefore, the installation of the proposed heat exchanger will save the
company $20,920 a year, and the installation cost of the heat exchanger will
probably be paid from the fuel savings in a short time.
Energy saved
Furnace efficiency  1.605 
 109 kJ/year
0.80
a 1 therm
105,500 kJb
Q#
Q#
SUMMARY

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
753
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
called cross-flow. Other common types of heat exchangers in
industrial applications are the plate and the shell-and-tube
heat exchangers.
Heat transfer in a heat exchanger usually involves convec-
tion in each fluid and conduction through the wall separating
the two fluids. In the analysis of heat exchangers, it is conve-
nient to work with an overall heat transfer coefficient U or a
total thermal resistance R, expressed as
 R 
 Rwall 
where the subscripts i and o stand for the inner and outer sur-
faces of the wall that separates the two fluids, respectively.
When the wall thickness of the tube is small and the
thermal conductivity of the tube material is high, the relation
simplifies to

where U 
 Ui 
 Uo. The effects of fouling on both the inner
and the outer surfaces of the tubes of a heat exchanger can be
accounted for by
 R

where Ai  pDi L and Ao  pDo L are the areas of the inner
and outer surfaces and Rf, i and Rf, o are the fouling factors at
those surfaces.
In a well-insulated heat exchanger, the rate of heat transfer
from the hot fluid is equal to the rate of heat transfer to the
cold one. That is,

ccpc(Tc, out  Tc, in)  Cc(Tc, out  Tc, in)
and

hcph(Th, in  Th, out)  Ch(Th, in  Th, out)
where the subscripts c and h stand for the cold and hot fluids,
respectively, and the product of the mass flow rate and the
specific heat of a fluid cp is called the heat capacity rate.
m#
m#
Q#
m#
Q#
1
hi Ai 
Rf, i
Ai  ln (Do/Di)
2pkL

Rf, o
Ao 
1
ho Ao
1
UAs 
1
Ui Ai 
1
Uo Ao
1
hi  1
ho
1
U
1
ho Ao
1
hi Ai
1
UAs 
1
Ui Ai 
1
Uo Ao
750
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
Of the two methods used in the analysis of heat exchang-
ers, the log mean temperature difference (or LMTD) method
is best suited for determining the size of a heat exchanger
when all the inlet and the outlet temperatures are known. The
effectiveness–NTU method is best suited to predict the outlet
temperatures of the hot and cold fluid streams in a specified
heat exchanger. In the LMTD method, the rate of heat trans-
fer is determined from
 UAs Tlm
where
Tlm 
is the log mean temperature difference, which is the suitable
form of the average temperature difference for use in the
analysis of heat exchangers. Here T1 and T2 represent the
temperature differences between the two fluids at the two
ends (inlet and outlet) of the heat exchanger. For cross-flow
and multipass shell-and-tube heat exchangers, the logarithmic
mean temperature difference is related to the counter-flow
one Tlm, CF as
Tlm  F Tlm, CF
where F is the correction factor, which depends on the geom-
etry of the heat exchanger and the inlet and outlet tempera-
tures of the hot and cold fluid streams.
The effectiveness of a heat exchanger is defined as
e 
where
max  Cmin(Th, in  Tc, in)
and Cmin is the smaller of Ch 
hcph and Cc 
ccpc. The
effectiveness of heat exchangers can be determined from
effectiveness relations or charts.
The selection or design of a heat exchanger depends on
several factors such as the heat transfer rate, cost, pressure
drop, size, weight, construction type, materials, and operating
environment.
m#
m#
Q#
#Q
Qmax 
Actual heat transfer rate
Maximum possible heat transfer rate
T1  T2
ln (T1/T2)
Q#
REFERENCES AND SUGGESTED READINGS
1. N. Afgan and E. U. Schlunder. Heat Exchanger: Design
and Theory Sourcebook. Washington, DC: McGraw-
Hill/Scripta, 1974.
2. R. A. Bowman, A. C. Mueller, and W. M. Nagle. “Mean
Temperature Difference in Design.” Trans. ASME 62,
1940, p. 283. Reprined with permission of ASME
International.
3. A. P. Fraas. Heat Exchanger Design. 2d ed. New York:
John Wiley & Sons, 1989.
4. K. A. Gardner. “Variable Heat Transfer Rate Correction in
Multipass Exchangers, Shell Side Film Controlling.”
Transactions of the ASME 67 (1945), pp. 31–38.
5. W. M. Kays and A. L. London. Compact Heat
Exchangers. 3rd ed. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1984.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
754
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
751
6. W. M. Kays and H. C. Perkins. In Handbook of Heat
Transfer, ed. W. M. Rohsenow and J. P. Hartnett. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1972, Chap. 7.
7. A. C. Mueller. “Heat Exchangers.” In Handbook of Heat
Transfer, ed. W. M. Rohsenow and J. P. Hartnett. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1972, Chap. 18.
8. M. N. Özis,ik. Heat Transfer—A Basic Approach. New
York: McGraw-Hill, 1985.
9. E. U. Schlunder. Heat Exchanger Design Handbook.
Washington, DC: Hemisphere, 1982.
10. Standards of Tubular Exchanger Manufacturers
Association. New York: Tubular Exchanger Manufacturers
Association, latest ed.
11. R. A. Stevens, J. Fernandes, and J. R. Woolf. “Mean
Temperature Difference in One, Two, and Three Pass
Crossflow Heat Exchangers.” Transactions of the ASME
79 (1957), pp. 287–297.
12. J. Taborek, G. F. Hewitt, and N. Afgan. Heat Exchangers:
Theory and Practice. New York: Hemisphere, 1983.
13. G. Walker. Industrial Heat Exchangers. Washington, DC:
Hemisphere, 1982.
PROBLEMS*
Types of Heat Exchangers
16–1C
Classify heat exchangers according to flow type and
explain the characteristics of each type.
16–2C
Classify heat exchangers according to construction
type and explain the characteristics of each type.
16–3C
When is a heat exchanger classified as being com-
pact? Do you think a double-pipe heat exchanger can be clas-
sified as a compact heat exchanger?
16–4C
How does a cross-flow heat exchanger differ from a
counter-flow one? What is the difference between mixed and
unmixed fluids in cross-flow?
16–5C
What is the role of the baffles in a shell-and-tube
heat exchanger? How does the presence of baffles affect the
heat transfer and the pumping power requirements? Explain.
16–6C
Draw a 1-shell-pass and 6-tube-passes shell-and-
tube heat exchanger. What are the advantages and disadvan-
tages of using 6 tube passes instead of just 2 of the same
diameter?
16–7C
Draw a 2-shell-passes and 8-tube-passes shell-and-
tube heat exchanger. What is the primary reason for using so
many tube passes?
16–8C
What is a regenerative heat exchanger? How does a
static type of regenerative heat exchanger differ from a
dynamic type?
The Overall Heat Transfer Coefficient
16–9C
What are the heat transfer mechanisms involved
during heat transfer from the hot to the cold fluid?
16–10C
Under what conditions is the thermal resistance of
the tube in a heat exchanger negligible?
16–11C
Consider 
a 
double-pipe 
parallel-flow 
heat
exchanger of length L. The inner and outer diameters of the
inner tube are D1 and D2, respectively, and the inner diameter
of the outer tube is D3. Explain how you would determine the
two heat transfer surface areas Ai and Ao. When is it reason-
able to assume Ai 
 Ao 
 As?
16–12C
Is the approximation hi 
 ho 
 h for the convec-
tion heat transfer coefficient in a heat exchanger a reasonable
one when the thickness of the tube wall is negligible?
16–13C
Under what conditions can the overall heat transfer
coefficient of a heat exchanger be determined from U  (1/hi
 1/ho)1?
16–14C
What are the restrictions on the relation UAs 
Ui Ai  Uo Ao for a heat exchanger? Here As is the heat trans-
fer surface area and U is the overall heat transfer coefficient.
16–15C
In a thin-walled double-pipe heat exchanger, when
is the approximation U  hi a reasonable one? Here U is the
overall heat transfer coefficient and hi is the convection heat
transfer coefficient inside the tube.
16–16C
What are the common causes of fouling in a heat
exchanger? How does fouling affect heat transfer and pres-
sure drop?
16–17C
How is the thermal resistance due to fouling in a
heat exchanger accounted for? How do the fluid velocity and
temperature affect fouling?
16–18
A double-pipe heat exchanger is constructed of a
copper (k  380 W/m  C) inner tube of internal diameter
Di  1.2 cm and external diameter Do  1.6 cm and an outer
* Problems designated by a “C” are concept questions, and 
students are encouraged to answer them all. Problems designated 
by an “E” are in English units, and the SI users can ignore them.
Problems with the
icon are solved using EES, and complete
solutions together with parametric studies are included on the 
enclosed DVD. Problems with the
icon are comprehensive in
nature and are intended to be solved with a computer, preferably
using the EES software that accompanies this text.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
755
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
tube of diameter 3.0 cm. The convection heat transfer coeffi-
cient is reported to be hi  700 W/m2  C on the inner surface
of the tube and ho  1400 W/m2  C on its outer surface. For a
fouling factor Rf, i  0.0005 m2  C/W on the tube side and
Rf, o  0.0002 m2  C/W on the shell side, determine (a) the
thermal resistance of the heat exchanger per unit length and
(b) the overall heat transfer coefficients Ui and Uo based on the
inner and outer surface areas of the tube, respectively.
16–19
Reconsider Prob. 16–18. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of pipe con-
ductivity and heat transfer coefficients on the thermal resis-
tance of the heat exchanger. Let the thermal conductivity vary
from 10 W/m  C to 400 W/m  C, the convection heat
transfer coefficient from 500 W/m2  C to 1500 W/m2  C
on the inner surface, and from 1000 W/m2  C to 2000 
W/m2  C on the outer surface. Plot the thermal resistance of
the heat exchanger as functions of thermal conductivity and
heat transfer coefficients, and discuss the results.
16–20
A jacketted-agitated vessel, fitted with a turbine agi-
tator, is used for heating a water stream from 10C to 54C.
The average heat transfer coefficient for water at the
vessel’s
inner-wall 
can 
be 
estimated 
from 
Nu 
0.76Re2/3Pr1/3. Saturated steam at 100C condenses in the
jacket, for which the average heat transfer coefficient in
kW/m2 · K is: ho  13.1(Tg  Tw)0.25. The vessel dimen-
sions are: Dt  0.6 m, H  0.6 m and Da  0.2 m. The agita-
tor speed is 60 rpm. Calculate the mass rate of water that can
be heated in this agitated vessel steadily.
16–21
Water at an average temperature of 110C and an
average velocity of 3.5 m/s flows through a 5-m-long stain-
less steel tube (k  14.2 W/m  C) in a boiler. The inner and
outer diameters of the tube are Di  1.0 cm and Do  1.4 cm,
respectively. If the convection heat transfer coefficient at the
outer surface of the tube where boiling is taking place is
ho  8400 W/m2  C, determine the overall heat transfer
coefficient Ui of this boiler based on the inner surface area of
the tube.
16–22
Repeat Prob. 16–21, assuming a fouling factor
Rf, i  0.0005 m2  C/W on the inner surface of the tube.
16–23
Reconsider Prob. 16–21. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the overall heat transfer coef-
ficient based on the inner surface as a function of fouling fac-
tor as it varies from 0.0001 m2  C/W to 0.0008 m2  C/W,
and discuss the results.
16–24
A long thin-walled double-pipe heat exchanger with
tube and shell diameters of 1.0 cm and 2.5 cm, respectively,
is used to condense refrigerant-134a by water at 20C. The
refrigerant flows through the tube, with a convection heat
transfer coefficient of hi  5000 W/m2  C. Water flows
through the shell at a rate of 0.3 kg/s. Determine the overall
heat transfer coefficient of this heat exchanger.
Answer:
2020 W/m2  C
752
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
16–25
Repeat Prob. 16–24 by assuming a 2-mm-thick layer
of limestone (k  1.3 W/m  C) forms on the outer surface
of the inner tube.
16–26
Reconsider Prob. 16–25. Using EES (or other)
software, plot the overall heat transfer coeffi-
cient as a function of the limestone thickness as it varies from
1 mm to 3 mm, and discuss the results.
16–27E
Water at an average temperature of 180F and
an average velocity of 4 ft/s flows through a thin-walled
-in-diameter tube. The water is cooled by air that flows across
the tube with a velocity of 12 ft/s at an average temperature of
80F. Determine the overall heat transfer coefficient.
Analysis of Heat Exchangers
16–28C
What are the common approximations made in the
analysis of heat exchangers?
16–29C
Under what conditions is the heat transfer relation

ccpc(Tc, out  Tc, in) 
hcph (Th, in  Th, out)
valid for a heat exchanger?
16–30C
What is the heat capacity rate? What can you say
about the temperature changes of the hot and cold fluids in a
heat exchanger if both fluids have the same capacity rate?
What does a heat capacity of infinity for a fluid in a heat
exchanger mean?
16–31C
Consider a condenser in which steam at a specified
temperature is condensed by rejecting heat to the cooling
water. If the heat transfer rate in the condenser and the tem-
perature rise of the cooling water is known, explain how the
rate of condensation of the steam and the mass flow rate of
the cooling water can be determined. Also, explain how the
total thermal resistance R of this condenser can be evaluated
in this case.
16–32C
Under what conditions will the temperature rise of
the cold fluid in a heat exchanger be equal to the temperature
drop of the hot fluid?
The Log Mean Temperature Difference Method
16–33C
In the heat transfer relation 
 UAs Tlm for a
heat exchanger, what is Tlm called? How is it calculated for
a parallel-flow and counter-flow heat exchanger?
16–34C
How does the log mean temperature difference for
a heat exchanger differ from the arithmetic mean temperature
difference? For specified inlet and outlet temperatures, which
one of these two quantities is larger?
16–35C
The temperature difference between the hot and
cold fluids in a heat exchanger is given to be T1 at one end
and T2 at the other end. Can the logarithmic temperature
difference Tlm of this heat exchanger be greater than both
T1 and T2? Explain.
Q#
m#
m#
Q#
3
4

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
756
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
753
16–36C
Can the logarithmic mean temperature difference
Tlm of a heat exchanger be a negative quantity? Explain.
16–37C
Can the outlet temperature of the cold fluid in a
heat exchanger be higher than the outlet temperature of the
hot fluid in a parallel-flow heat exchanger? How about in a
counter-flow heat exchanger? Explain.
16–38C
For specified inlet and outlet temperatures, for
what kind of heat exchanger will the Tlm be greatest: dou-
ble-pipe parallel-flow, double-pipe counter-flow, cross-flow,
or multipass shell-and-tube heat exchanger?
16–39C
In the heat transfer relation 
 UAs FTlm for a
heat exchanger, what is the quantity F called? What does it
represent? Can F be greater than one?
16–40C
When the outlet temperatures of the fluids in a
heat exchanger are not known, is it still practical to use the
LMTD method? Explain.
16–41C
Explain how the LMTD method can be used to
determine the heat transfer surface area of a multipass shell-
and-tube heat exchanger when all the necessary information,
including the outlet temperatures, is given.
16–42
Ethylene glycol is heated from 20C to 40C at a rate
of 1.0 kg/s in a horizontal copper tube (k  386 W/m  K)
with an inner diameter of 2.0 cm and an outer diameter
of 2.5 cm. A saturated vapor (Tg  110C) condenses on the
outside-tube surface with the heat transfer coefficient (in
kW/m2  K) given by 9.2/(Tg  Tw)0.25, where Tw is the aver-
age outside-tube wall temperature. What tube length must be
used? Take the properties of ethylene glycol to be r 
1109 kg/m3, cp  2428 kj/kg  K, k  0.253 W/m  °C, m 
0.01545 kg/m  s, and Pr  148.5.
16–43
A double-pipe parallel-flow heat exchanger is used
to heat cold tap water with hot water. Hot water (cp 
4.25 kJ/kg · C) enters the tube at 85C at a rate of 1.4 kg/s
and leaves at 50C. The heat exchanger is not well insulated,
and it is estimated that 3 percent of the heat given up by the
hot fluid is lost from the heat exchanger. If the overall heat
transfer coefficient and the surface area of the heat exchanger
are 1150 W/m2 · C and 4 m2, respectively, determine the rate
of heat transfer to the cold water and the log mean tempera-
ture difference for this heat exchanger.
Q#
16–44
A stream of hydrocarbon (cp  2.2 kJ/kg · K) is
cooled at a rate of 720 kg/h from 150C to 40C in the tube 
side of a double-pipe counter-flow heat exchanger. Water
(cp  4.18 kJ/kg · K) enters the heat exchanger at 10C at a
rate of 540 kg/h. The outside diameter of the inner tube is
2.5 cm, and its length is 6.0 m. Calculate the overall heat
transfer coefficient.
16–45
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger is used for heating
10 kg/s of oil (cp  2.0 kJ/kg · K) from 25C to 46C. The
heat exchanger has 1-shell pass and 6-tube passes. Water
enters the shell side at 80C and leaves at 60C. The overall
heat transfer coefficient is estimated to be 1000 W/m2 · K.
Calculate the rate of heat transfer and the heat transfer area.
16–46
Steam in the condenser of a steam power plant is to
be condensed at a temperature of 50C (hfg  2383 kJ/kg)
with cooling water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) from a nearby lake,
which enters the tubes of the condenser at 18C and leaves at
27C. The surface area of the tubes is 42 m2, and the overall
heat transfer coefficient is 2400 W/m2  C. Determine the
mass flow rate of the cooling water needed and the rate of
condensation of the steam in the condenser.
Answers: 73.1
kg/s, 1.15 kg/s
16–47
A double-pipe parallel-flow heat exchanger is to heat
water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) from 25C to 60C at a rate of
0.2 kg/s. The heating is to be accomplished by geothermal
water (cp  4310 J/kg  C) available at 140C at a mass flow
rate of 0.3 kg/s. The inner tube is thin-walled and has a diam-
eter of 0.8 cm. If the overall heat transfer coefficient of the
heat exchanger is 550 W/m2  C, determine the length of the
tube required to achieve the desired heating.
16–48
Reconsider Prob. 16–47. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of temperature
and mass flow rate of geothermal water on the length of the
tube. Let the temperature vary from 100C to 200C, and the
mass flow rate from 0.1 kg/s to 0.5 kg/s. Plot the length of
the tube as functions of temperature and mass flow rate, and
discuss the results.
Cold
water
Hot
water
85°C
50°C
FIGURE P16–43
18°C
Water
Steam
50°C
50°C
27°C
FIGURE P16–46

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
757
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
16–49E
A 1-shell-pass and 8-tube-passes heat exchanger is
used to heat glycerin (cp  0.60 Btu/lbm  F) from 65F to
140F by hot water (cp  1.0 Btu/lbm  F) that enters the
thin-walled 0.5-in-diameter tubes at 175F and leaves at
120F. The total length of the tubes in the heat exchanger is
500
ft. The convection heat transfer coefficient is 4 
Btu/h  ft2  F on the glycerin (shell) side and 50 Btu/h  ft2 
F on the water (tube) side. Determine the rate of heat trans-
fer in the heat exchanger (a) before any fouling occurs and
(b) after fouling with a fouling factor of 0.002 h  ft2  F/Btu
on the outer surfaces of the tubes.
16–50
A test is conducted to determine the overall heat
transfer coefficient in a shell-and-tube oil-to-water heat
exchanger that has 24 tubes of internal diameter 1.2 cm and
length 2 m in a single shell. Cold water (cp  4180 J/kg  C)
enters the tubes at 20C at a rate of 3 kg/s and leaves at 55C.
Oil (cp  2150 J/kg  C) flows through the shell and is
cooled from 120C to 45C. Determine the overall heat trans-
fer coefficient Ui of this heat exchanger based on the inner
surface area of the tubes.
Answer: 8.31 kW/m2  C
16–51
A double-pipe counter-flow heat exchanger is to
cool ethylene glycol (cp  2560 J/kg  C) flowing at a rate
of 3.5 kg/s from 80C to 40C by water (cp  4180 J/kg  C)
that enters at 20C and leaves at 55C. The overall heat trans-
fer coefficient based on the inner surface area of the tube is
250 W/m2  C. Determine (a) the rate of heat transfer, (b) the
mass flow rate of water, and (c) the heat transfer surface area
on the inner side of the tube.
754
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
16–54
Reconsider Prob. 16–53. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of oil exit tem-
perature and water inlet temperature on the overall heat trans-
fer coefficient of the heat exchanger. Let the oil exit
temperature vary from 30C to 70C and the water inlet tem-
perature from 5C to 25C. Plot the overall heat transfer coef-
ficient as functions of the two temperatures, and discuss the
results.
16–55
Consider a water-to-water double-pipe heat ex-
changer whose flow arrangement is not known. The tempera-
ture measurements indicate that the cold water enters at 20C
and leaves at 50C, while the hot water enters at 80C and
leaves at 45C. Do you think this is a parallel-flow or counter-
flow heat exchanger? Explain.
16–56
Cold water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) leading to a
shower enters a thin-walled double-pipe counter-flow heat
exchanger at 15C at a rate of 1.25 kg/s and is heated to 45C
by hot water (cp  4190 J/kg  C) that enters at 100C at a
rate of 3 kg/s. If the overall heat transfer coefficient is 880
W/m2  C, determine the rate of heat transfer and the heat
transfer surface area of the heat exchanger.
16–57
Engine oil (cp  2100 J/kg  C) is to be heated
from 20C to 60C at a rate of 0.3 kg/s in a 2-cm-diameter
thin-walled copper tube by condensing steam outside at a
temperature of 130C (hfg  2174 kJ/kg). For an overall
heat transfer coefficient of 650 W/m2  C, determine the
rate of heat transfer and the length of the tube required to
achieve it.
Answers: 25.2 kW, 7.0 m
16–52
Water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) enters the 2.5-cm-
internal-diameter tube of a double-pipe counter-flow heat
exchanger at 17C at a rate of 3 kg/s. It is heated by steam
condensing at 120C (hfg  2203 kJ/kg) in the shell. If the
overall heat transfer coefficient of the heat exchanger is
1500 W/m2  C, determine the length of the tube required in
order to heat the water to 80C.
16–53
A
thin-walled
double-pipe
counter-flow
heat
exchanger is to be used to cool oil (cp  2200 J/kg  C) from
150C to 40C at a rate of 2 kg/s by water (cp  4180
J/kg  C) that enters at 22C at a rate of 1.5 kg/s. The diameter
of the tube is 2.5 cm, and its length is 6 m. Determine the over-
all heat transfer coefficient of this heat exchanger.
Hot glycol
40°C
55°C
80°C
3.5 kg/s
Cold water
20°C
FIGURE P16–51
Oil
60°C
20°C
0.3 kg/s
Steam
130°C
FIGURE P16–57
16–58E
Geothermal water (cp  1.03 Btu/lbm  F) is to be
used as the heat source to supply heat to the hydronic heating
system of a house at a rate of 40 Btu/s in a double-pipe
counter-flow heat exchanger. Water (cp  1.0 Btu/lbm  F) is
heated from 140F to 200F in the heat exchanger as the geo-
thermal water is cooled from 270F to 180F. Determine the
mass flow rate of each fluid and the total thermal resistance
of this heat exchanger.
16–59
Glycerin (cp  2400 J/kg  C) at 20C and 0.3 kg/s
is to be heated by ethylene glycol (cp  2500 J/kg  C) at
60C in a thin-walled double-pipe parallel-flow heat
exchanger. The temperature difference between the two fluids
is 15C at the outlet of the heat exchanger. If the overall heat

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
758
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
755
transfer coefficient is 240 W/m2  C and the heat transfer
surface area is 3.2 m2, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer,
(b) the outlet temperature of the glycerin, and (c) the mass
flow rate of the ethylene glycol.
16–60
Air (cp  1005 J/kg  C) is to be preheated by hot
exhaust gases in a cross-flow heat exchanger before it enters
the furnace. Air enters the heat exchanger at 95 kPa and 20C
at a rate of 0.8 m3/s. The combustion gases (cp  1100
J/kg  C) enter at 180C at a rate of 1.1 kg/s and leave at
95C. The product of the overall heat transfer coefficient and
the heat transfer surface area is UAs  1200 W/C. Assuming
both fluids to be unmixed, determine the rate of heat transfer
and the outlet temperature of the air.
16–61
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger with 2-shell passes
and 12-tube passes is used to heat water (cp  4180 J/kg  C)
in the tubes from 20C to 70C at a rate of 4.5 kg/s. Heat is
supplied by hot oil (cp  2300 J/kg  C) that enters the shell
side at 170C at a rate of 10 kg/s. For a tube-side overall heat
transfer coefficient of 350 W/m2  C, determine the heat
transfer surface area on the tube side.
Answer: 25.6 m2
16–62
Repeat Prob. 16–61 for a mass flow rate of 2 kg/s
for water.
16–63
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger with 2-shell passes
and 8-tube passes is used to heat ethyl alcohol (cp  2670
J/kg  C) in the tubes from 25C to 70C at a rate of 2.1 kg/s.
The heating is to be done by water (cp  4190 J/kg  C) that
enters the shell side at 95C and leaves at 45C. If the overall
heat transfer coefficient is 950 W/m2  C, determine the heat
transfer surface area of the heat exchanger.
side surface area. Let the mass flow rate vary from 0.4 kg/s
to 2.2 kg/s. Plot the rate of heat transfer and the surface area
as a function of the mass flow rate, and discuss the results.
16–66E
Steam is to be condensed on the shell side of a
1-shell-pass and 8-tube-passes condenser, with 50 tubes in
each pass at 90F (hfg  1043 Btu/lbm). Cooling water
(cp  1.0 Btu/lbm  F) enters the tubes at 60F and leaves at
73F. The tubes are thin walled and have a diameter of 3/4 in
and length of 5 ft per pass. If the overall heat transfer
coefficient is 600 Btu/h  ft2  F, determine (a) the rate of heat
transfer, (b) the rate of condensation of steam, and (c) the mass
flow rate of cold water.
16–67E
Reconsider Prob. 16–66E. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effect of the
condensing steam temperature on the rate of heat transfer, the
rate of condensation of steam, and the mass flow rate of cold
water. Let the steam temperature vary from 80F to 120F.
Plot the rate of heat transfer, the condensation rate of steam,
and the mass flow rate of cold water as a function of steam
temperature, and discuss the results.
16–68
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger with 1-shell pass and
20–tube passes is used to heat glycerin (cp  2480 J/kg  C)
in the shell, with hot water in the tubes. The tubes are thin-
walled and have a diameter of 4 cm and length of 2 m per
pass. The water enters the tubes at 100C at a rate of 0.5 kg/s
and leaves at 55C. The glycerin enters the shell at 15C and
leaves at 55C. Determine the mass flow rate of the glycerin
and the overall heat transfer coefficient of the heat exchanger.
16–69
In a binary geothermal power plant, the working
fluid isobutane is to be condensed by air in a condenser at
75C (hfg  255.7 kJ/kg) at a rate of 2.7 kg/s. Air enters the
condenser at 21C and leaves at 28C (see Fig. P16–69 on the
next page). The heat transfer surface area based on the isobu-
tane side is 24 m2. Determine the mass flow rate of air and
the overall heat transfer coefficient.
Water
95°C
70°C
45°C
(8-tube passes)
Ethyl
alcohol
25°C
2.1 kg/s
FIGURE P16–63
16–64
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger with 2-shell passes
and 12-tube passes is used to heat water (cp  4180 J/kg  C)
with ethylene glycol (cp  2680 J/kg  C). Water enters the
tubes at 22C at a rate of 0.8 kg/s and leaves at 70C. Ethyl-
ene glycol enters the shell at 110C and leaves at 60C. If the
overall heat transfer coefficient based on the tube side is 280
W/m2  C, determine the rate of heat transfer and the heat
transfer surface area on the tube side.
16–65
Reconsider Prob. 16–64. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the mass
flow rate of water on the rate of heat transfer and the tube-
60°F
Water
Steam
90°F
90°F
73°F
FIGURE P16–66E

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
759
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
16–70
Hot exhaust gases of a stationary diesel engine are to
be used to generate steam in an evaporator. Exhaust gases
(cp  1051 J/kg  C) enter the heat exchanger at 550C at a
rate of 0.25 kg/s while water enters as saturated liquid and
evaporates at 200C (hfg  1941 kJ/kg). The heat transfer sur-
face area of the heat exchanger based on water side is 0.5 m2
and overall heat transfer coefficient is 1780 W/m2  C.
Determine the rate of heat transfer, the exit temperature of
exhaust gases, and the rate of evaporation of water.
16–71
Reconsider Prob. 16–71. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effect of the exhaust
gas inlet temperature on the rate of heat transfer, the exit
temperature of exhaust gases, and the rate of evaporation of
water. Let the temperature of exhaust gases vary from 300C
to 600C. Plot the rate of heat transfer, the exit temperature
of exhaust gases, and the rate of evaporation of water as a
function of the temperature of the exhaust gases, and discuss
the results.
16–72
In a textile manufacturing plant, the waste dyeing
water (cp  4295 J/kg  C) at 75C is to be used to preheat
fresh water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) at 15C at the same flow rate
in a double-pipe counter-flow heat exchanger. The heat trans-
fer surface area of the heat exchanger is 1.65 m2 and the over-
all heat transfer coefficient is 625 W/m2  C. If the rate of heat
transfer in the heat exchanger is 35 kW, determine the outlet
temperature and the mass flow rate of each fluid stream.
756
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
16–74C
What does the effectiveness of a heat exchanger
represent? Can effectiveness be greater than one? On what
factors does the effectiveness of a heat exchanger depend?
16–75C
For a specified fluid pair, inlet temperatures, and
mass flow rates, what kind of heat exchanger will have the
highest effectiveness: double-pipe parallel-flow, double-pipe
counter-flow, cross-flow, or multipass shell-and-tube heat
exchanger?
16–76C
Explain how you can evaluate the outlet tempera-
tures of the cold and hot fluids in a heat exchanger after its
effectiveness is determined.
16–77C
Can the temperature of the hot fluid drop below
the inlet temperature of the cold fluid at any location in a
heat exchanger? Explain.
16–78C
Can the temperature of the cold fluid rise above
the inlet temperature of the hot fluid at any location in a heat
exchanger? Explain.
16–79C
Consider a heat exchanger in which both fluids
have the same specific heats but different mass flow rates.
Which fluid will experience a larger temperature change: the
one with the lower or higher mass flow rate?
16–80C
Explain how the maximum possible heat transfer
rate
max in a heat exchanger can be determined when the
mass flow rates, specific heats, and the inlet temperatures of
the two fluids are specified. Does the value of 
max depend
on the type of the heat exchanger?
16–81C
Consider two double-pipe counter-flow heat
exchangers that are identical except that one is twice as long
as the other one. Which heat exchanger is more likely to have
a higher effectiveness?
16–82C
Consider a double-pipe counter-flow heat ex-
changer. In order to enhance heat transfer, the length of the
heat exchanger is now doubled. Do you think its effectiveness
will also double?
16–83C
Consider a shell-and-tube water-to-water heat
exchanger with identical mass flow rates for both the hot-
and cold-water streams. Now the mass flow rate of the cold
water is reduced by half. Will the effectiveness of this heat
exchanger increase, decrease, or remain the same as a result
of this modification? Explain. Assume the overall heat trans-
fer coefficient and the inlet temperatures remain the same.
16–84C
Under what conditions can a counter-flow heat
exchanger have an effectiveness of one? What would your
answer be for a parallel-flow heat exchanger?
16–85C
How is the NTU of a heat exchanger defined?
What does it represent? Is a heat exchanger with a very large
NTU (say, 10) necessarily a good one to buy?
16–86C
Consider a heat exchanger that has an NTU of 4.
Someone proposes to double the size of the heat exchanger
and thus double the NTU to 8 in order to increase the effec-
tiveness of the heat exchanger and thus save energy. Would
you support this proposal?
Q#
Q#
Isobutane
75°C
2.7 kg/s
28°C
Air
21°C
FIGURE P16–69
Dyeing
water
Th, out
Tc, out
75°C
Fresh
water
15°C
FIGURE P16–72
The Effectiveness–NTU Method
16–73C
Under what conditions is the effectiveness–NTU
method definitely preferred over the LMTD method in heat
exchanger analysis?

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
760
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
757
16–87C
Consider a heat exchanger that has an NTU of 0.1.
Someone proposes to triple the size of the heat exchanger and
thus triple the NTU to 0.3 in order to increase the effective-
ness of the heat exchanger and thus save energy. Would you
support this proposal?
16–88
The radiator in an automobile is a cross-flow heat
exchanger (UAs  10 kW/K) that uses air (cp  1.00 kJ/kg · K)
to cool the engine-coolant fluid (cp  4.00 kJ/kg · K). The
engine fan draws 30C air through this radiator at a rate of
10 kg/s while the coolant pump circulates the engine coolant
at a rate of 5 kg/s. The coolant enters this radiator at 80C.
Under these conditions, the effectiveness of the radiator is
0.4. Determine (a) the outlet temperature of the air and 
(b) the rate of heat transfer between the two fluids.
16–89
During an experiment,
a shell-and-tube heat
exchanger that is used to transfer heat from a hot-water
stream to a cold-water stream is tested, and the following
measurements are taken:
Hot-Water 
Cold-Water 
Stream
Stream
Inlet temperature, C
71.5
19.7
Outlet temperature, C
58.2
27.8
Volume flow rate, L/min
1.05
1.55
The heat transfer area is calculated to be 0.0200 m2.
(a) Calculate the rate of heat transfer to the cold water.
(b) Calculate the overall heat transfer coefficient.
(c) Determine if the heat exchanger is truly adiabatic. If
not, determine the fraction of heat loss and calculate
the heat transfer efficiency.
(d) Determine the effectiveness and the NTU values of the
heat exchanger.
Also, discuss if the measured values are reasonable.
16–90
Cold water (cp  4.18 kJ/kg · C) enters a cross-flow
heat exchanger at 14C at a rate of 0.35 kg/s where it is
heated by hot air (cp  1.0 kJ/kg · C) that enters the heat
exchanger at 65C at a rate of 0.8 kg/s and leaves at 25C.
Determine the maximum outlet temperature of the cold water
and the effectiveness of this heat exchanger.
16–91
Water from a lake is used as the cooling agent in a
power plant. To achieve condensation of 2.5 kg/s of steam
exiting the turbine, a shell-and-tube heat exchanger is used,
which has a single shell and 300 thin-walled, 25-mm-diameter
tubes, each tube making two passes. Steam flows through the
shell, while cooling water flows through the tubes. Steam
enters as saturated vapor at 60C and leaves as saturated liq-
uid. Cooling water at 20C is available at a rate of 200 kg/s.
The convection coefficient at the outer surface of the tubes is
8500 W/m2 · K. Determine (a) the temperature of the cooling
water leaving the condenser and (b) the required tube length
per pass. (Use the following average properties for water:
cp  4180 J/kg · K, m  8 
 104 N · s/m2, k  0.6 W/m · K,
Pr  6).
16–92
Air (cp  1005 J/kg  C) enters a cross-flow heat
exchanger at 20C at a rate of 3 kg/s, where it is heated by a
hot water stream (cp  4190 J/kg  C) that enters the heat
exchanger at 70C at a rate of 1 kg/s. Determine the maxi-
mum heat transfer rate and the outlet temperatures of both
fluids for that case.
16–93
Hot oil (cp  2200 J/kg  C) is to be cooled by
water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) in a 2-shell-passes and 12-tube-
passes heat exchanger. The tubes are thin-walled and are
made of copper with a diameter of 1.8 cm. The length of
each tube pass in the heat exchanger is 3 m, and the overall
heat transfer coefficient is 340 W/m2  C. Water flows
through the tubes at a total rate of 0.1 kg/s, and the oil
through the shell at a rate of 0.2 kg/s. The water and the oil
enter at temperatures 18C and 160C, respectively. Deter-
mine the rate of heat transfer in the heat exchanger and the
outlet temperatures of the water and the oil.
Answers: 36.2
kW, 104.6C, 77.7C
Air
65°C
0.8 kg/s
14°C
0.35 kg/s
FIGURE P16–90
Oil
160°C
0.2 kg/s
(12-tube passes)
Water
18°C
0.1 kg/s
FIGURE P16–93
16–94
Consider an oil-to-oil double-pipe heat exchanger
whose flow arrangement is not known. The temperature mea-
surements indicate that the cold oil enters at 20C and leaves
at 55C, while the hot oil enters at 80C and leaves at 45C.
Do you think this is a parallel-flow or counter-flow heat
exchanger? Why? Assuming the mass flow rates of both flu-
ids to be identical, determine the effectiveness of this heat
exchanger.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
761
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
16–95E
Hot water enters a double-pipe counter-flow water-
to-oil heat exchanger at 190F and leaves at 100F. Oil enters
at 70F and leaves at 130F. Determine which fluid has the
smaller heat capacity rate and calculate the effectiveness of
this heat exchanger.
16–96
A 
thin-walled 
double-pipe 
parallel-flow 
heat
exchanger is used to heat a chemical whose specific heat is
1800 J/kg  C with hot water (cp  4180 J/kg  C). The
chemical enters at 20C at a rate of 3 kg/s, while the water
enters at 110C at a rate of 2 kg/s. The heat transfer surface
area of the heat exchanger is 7 m2 and the overall heat trans-
fer coefficient is 1200 W/m2  C. Determine the outlet tem-
peratures of the chemical and the water.
16–97
Reconsider Prob. 16–96. Using EES (or other)
software, investigate the effects of the inlet
temperatures of the chemical and the water on their outlet
temperatures. Let the inlet temperature vary from 10C to
50C for the chemical and from 80C to 150C for water. Plot
the outlet temperature of each fluid as a function of the inlet
temperature of that fluid, and discuss the results.
16–98
A cross-flow air-to-water heat exchanger with an ef-
fectiveness of 0.65 is used to heat water (cp  4180 J/kg  C)
with hot air (cp  1010 J/kg  C). Water enters the heat
exchanger at 20C at a rate of 4 kg/s, while air enters at
100C at a rate of 9 kg/s. If the overall heat transfer coeffi-
cient based on the water side is 260 W/m2  C, determine the
heat transfer surface area of the heat exchanger on the water
side. Assume both fluids are unmixed.
Answer: 52.4 m2
16–99
Water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) enters the 2.5-cm-
internal-diameter tube of a double-pipe counter-flow heat
exchanger at 17C at a rate of 1.8 kg/s. Water is heated by
steam condensing at 120C (hfg  2203 kJ/kg) in the shell. If
the overall heat transfer coefficient of the heat exchanger is
700 W/m2  C, determine the length of the tube required in
order to heat the water to 80C using (a) the LMTD method
and (b) the e–NTU method.
16–100
Ethanol is vaporized at 78C (hfg  846 kJ/kg) in a
double-pipe parallel-flow heat exchanger at a rate of 0.03
kg/s by hot oil (cp  2200 J/kg  C) that enters at 120C. If
the heat transfer surface area and the overall heat transfer
coefficients are 6.2 m2 and 320 W/m2  C, respectively,
758
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
determine the outlet temperature and the mass flow rate of oil
using (a) the LMTD method and (b) the e–NTU method.
16–101
Water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) is to be heated by solar-
heated hot air (cp  1010 J/kg  C) in a double-pipe counter-
flow heat exchanger. Air enters the heat exchanger at 90C at a
rate of 0.3 kg/s, while water enters at 22C at a rate of 0.1 kg/s.
The overall heat transfer coefficient based on the inner side of
the tube is given to be 80 W/m2  C. The length of the tube is
12 m and the internal diameter of the tube is 1.2 cm. Deter-
mine the outlet temperatures of the water and the air.
16–102
Reconsider Prob. 16–101. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effects of the
mass flow rate of water and the tube length on the outlet tem-
peratures of water and air. Let the mass flow rate vary from
0.05 kg/s to 1.0 kg/s and the tube length from 5 m to 25 m.
Plot the outlet temperatures of the water and the air as func-
tions of the mass flow rate and the tube length, and discuss
the results.
16–103E
A thin-walled double-pipe heat exchanger is to be
used to cool oil (cp  0.525 Btu/lbm  F) from 300F to
105F at a rate of 5 lbm/s by water (cp  1.0 Btu/lbm  F)
that enters at 70F at a rate of 3 lbm/s. The diameter of the
tube is 5 in and its length is 200 ft. Determine the overall
heat transfer coefficient of this heat exchanger using (a) the
LMTD method and (b) the e–NTU method.
16–104
Cold water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) leading to a
shower enters a thin-walled double-pipe counter-flow heat
exchanger at 15C at a rate of 0.25 kg/s and is heated to 45C
by hot water (cp  4190 J/kg  C) that enters at 100C at a
rate of 3 kg/s. If the overall heat transfer coefficient is
950 W/m2  C, determine the rate of heat transfer and the
Chemical
20°C
3 kg/s
Hot water
110°C
2 kg/s
FIGURE P16–96
Ethanol
78°C
0.03 kg/s
Oil
120°C
FIGURE P16–100
Hot water
45°C
100°C
3 kg/s
Cold water
15°C
0.25 kg/s
FIGURE P16–104

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
762
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
759
heat transfer surface area of the heat exchanger using the
e–NTU method.
Answers: 31.35 kW, 0.482 m2
16–105
Reconsider Prob. 16–104. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effects of the
inlet temperature of hot water and the heat transfer coeffi-
cient on the rate of heat transfer and the surface area. Let the
inlet temperature vary from 60C to 120C and the overall heat
transfer coefficient from 750 W/m2  C to 1250 W/m2  C.
Plot the rate of heat transfer and surface area as functions of
the inlet temperature and the heat transfer coefficient, and
discuss the results.
16–106
Glycerin (cp  2400 J/kg  C) at 20C and 0.3 kg/s is
to be heated by ethylene glycol (cp  2500 J/kg  C) at 60C
and the same mass flow rate in a thin-walled double-pipe
parallel-flow heat exchanger. If the overall heat transfer coeffi-
cient is 380 W/m2  C and the heat transfer surface area is
5.3 m2, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer and (b) the outlet
temperatures of the glycerin and the glycol.
16–107
A cross-flow heat exchanger consists of 80 thin-
walled tubes of 3-cm diameter located in a duct of 1 m 
 1
m cross section. There are no fins attached to the tubes. Cold
water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) enters the tubes at 18C with an
average velocity of 3 m/s, while hot air (cp  1010 J/kg  C)
enters the channel at 130C and 105 kPa at an average veloc-
ity of 12 m/s. If the overall heat transfer coefficient is
130 W/m2  C, determine the outlet temperatures of both flu-
ids and the rate of heat transfer.
16–108
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger with 2-shell
passes and 8-tube passes is used to heat ethyl
alcohol (cp  2670 J/kg  C) in the tubes from 25C to 70C
at a rate of 2.1 kg/s. The heating is to be done by water
(cp  4190 J/kg  C) that enters the shell at 95C and leaves at
60C. If the overall heat transfer coefficient is 800 W/m2  C,
determine the heat transfer surface area of the heat exchanger
using (a) the LMTD method and (b) the e–NTU method.
Answer: (a) 11.4 m2
16–109
Steam is to be condensed on the shell side of a
1-shell-pass and 8-tube-passes condenser, with 50 tubes in
each pass, at 30C (hfg  2431 kJ/kg). Cooling water
(cp  4180 J/kg  C) enters the tubes at 15C at a rate of 1800
kg/h. The tubes are thin-walled, and have a diameter of 1.5 cm
and length of 2 m per pass. If the overall heat transfer coeffi-
cient is 3000 W/m2  C, determine (a) the rate of heat transfer
and (b) the rate of condensation of steam.
16–110
Reconsider Prob. 16–109. Using EES (or
other) software, investigate the effects of the
condensing steam temperature and the tube diameter on the
rate of heat transfer and the rate of condensation of steam.
Let the steam temperature vary from 20C to 70C and the
tube diameter from 1.0 cm to 2.0 cm. Plot the rate of heat
transfer and the rate of condensation as functions of steam
temperature and tube diameter, and discuss the results.
16–111
Cold water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) enters the tubes
of a heat exchanger with 2-shell passes and 23-tube passes at
14C at a rate of 3 kg/s, while hot oil (cp  2200 J/kg  C)
enters the shell at 200C at the same mass flow rate. The
overall heat transfer coefficient based on the outer surface of
the tube is 300 W/m2  C and the heat transfer surface area
on that side is 20 m2. Determine the rate of heat transfer
using (a) the LMTD method and (b) the e–NTU method.
Selection of Heat Exchangers
16–112C
A heat exchanger is to be selected to cool a hot
liquid chemical at a specified rate to a specified temperature.
Explain the steps involved in the selection process.
16–113C
There are two heat exchangers that can meet the
heat transfer requirements of a facility. One is smaller and
cheaper but requires a larger pump, while the other is larger
and more expensive but has a smaller pressure drop and thus
requires a smaller pump. Both heat exchangers have the same
life expectancy and meet all other requirements. Explain
which heat exchanger you would choose under what condi-
tions.
16–114C
There are two heat exchangers that can meet the
heat transfer requirements of a facility. Both have the same
pumping power requirements, the same useful life, and the
same price tag. But one is heavier and larger in size. Under
what conditions would you choose the smaller one?
Water
18°C
3 m/s
1 m
1 m
Hot air
130°C
105 kPa
12 m/s
FIGURE P16–107
15°C
Water
1800 kg/h
Steam
30°C
30°C
FIGURE P16–109

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
763
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
16–115
A heat exchanger is to cool oil (cp  2200 J/kg  C)
at a rate of 13 kg/s from 120C to 50C by air. Determine the
heat transfer rating of the heat exchanger and propose a suit-
able type.
16–116
A shell-and-tube process heater is to be selected to
heat water (cp  4190 J/kg  C) from 20C to 90C by steam
flowing on the shell side. The heat transfer load of the heater
is 600 kW. If the inner diameter of the tubes is 1 cm and the
velocity of water is not to exceed 3 m/s, determine how many
tubes need to be used in the heat exchanger.
16–117
Reconsider Prob. 16–116. Using EES (or
other) software, plot the number of tube
passes as a function of water velocity as it varies from 1 m/s
to 8 m/s, and discuss the results.
16–118
The condenser of a large power plant is to remove
500 MW of heat from steam condensing at 30C (hfg 
2431 kJ/kg). The cooling is to be accomplished by cooling
water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) from a nearby river, which enters
the tubes at 18C and leaves at 26C. The tubes of the heat
exchanger have an internal diameter of 2 cm, and the overall
heat transfer coefficient is 3500 W/m2  C. Determine the
total length of the tubes required in the condenser. What type
of heat exchanger is suitable for this task?
Answer: 312.3 km
16–119
Repeat Prob. 16–118 for a heat transfer load of
50 MW.
Review Problems
16–120
The mass flow rate, specific heat, and inlet temper-
ature of the tube-side stream in a double-pipe, parallel-flow
heat exchanger are 2700 kg/h, 2.0 kJ/kg · K, and 120C,
respectively. The mass flow rate, specific heat, and inlet tem-
perature of the other stream are 1800 kg/h, 4.2 kJ/kg · K, and
20C, respectively. The heat transfer area and overall heat
transfer coefficient are 0.50 m2 and 2.0 kW/m2 · K, respec-
tively. Find the outlet temperatures of both streams in steady
operation using (a) the LMTD method and (b) the effective-
ness–NTU method.
760
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
16–121
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger is used for cooling
47 kg/s of a process stream flowing through the tubes from
160C to 100C. This heat exchanger has a total of 100 iden-
tical tubes, each with an inside diameter of 2.5 cm and negli-
gible wall thickness. The average properties of the process
stream are: r  950 kg/m3, k  0.50 W/m · K, cp  3.5
kJ/kg · K and m  2.0 mPa · s. The coolant stream is water
(cp  4.18 kJ/kg · K) at a flow rate of 66 kg/s and an inlet
temperature of 10C, which yields an average shell-side heat
transfer coefficient of 4.0 kW/m2 · K. Calculate the tube
length if the heat exchanger has (a) a 1-shell pass and a 1-
tube pass and (b) a 1-shell pass and 4-tube passes.
16–122
A 2-shell passes and 4-tube passes heat exchanger
is used for heating a hydrocarbon stream (cp  2.0 kJ/kg · K)
steadily from 20C to 50C. A water stream enters the shell-
side at 80C and leaves at 40C. There are 160 thin-walled
tubes, each with a diameter of 2.0 cm and length of 1.5 m.
The tube-side and shell-side heat transfer coefficients are 1.6
and 2.5 kW/m2 · K, respectively. (a) Calculate the rate of heat
transfer and the mass rates of water and hydrocarbon streams.
(b) With usage, the outlet hydrocarbon-stream temperature
was found to decrease by 5C due to the deposition of solids
on the tube surface. Estimate the magnitude of fouling factor.
16–123
Hot water at 60C is cooled to 36C through the
tube side of a 1–shell pass and 2-tube passes heat exchanger.
The coolant is also a water stream, for which the inlet and
outlet temperatures are 7C and 31C, respectively. The over-
all heat transfer coefficient and the heat transfer area are
950 W/m2 · K and 15 m2, respectively. Calculate the mass
flow rates of hot and cold water streams in steady operation.
16–124
Hot oil is to be cooled in a multipass shell-and-tube
heat exchanger by water. The oil flows through the shell,
with a heat transfer coefficient of ho  35 W/m2  C, and the
water flows through the tube with an average velocity of 
3 m/s. The tube is made of brass (k  110 W/m  C) with
internal and external diameters of 1.3 cm and 1.5 cm, respec-
tively. Using water properties at 25C, determine the overall
heat transfer coefficient of this heat exchanger based on the
inner surface.
16–125
Repeat Prob. 16–124 by assuming a fouling factor
Rf, o  0.0004 m2  C/W on the outer surface of the tube.
16–126
Cold water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) enters the tubes of
a heat exchanger with 2-shell passes and 20-tube passes at
20C at a rate of 3 kg/s, while hot oil (cp  2200 J/kg  C)
enters the shell at 130C at the same mass flow rate and leaves
at 60C. If the overall heat transfer coefficient based on the
outer surface of the tube is 220 W/m2  C, determine (a) the
rate of heat transfer and (b) the heat transfer surface area on
the outer side of the tube.
Answers: (a) 462 kW, (b) 39.8 m2
20°C
Water
Steam
90°C
FIGURE P16–116

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
764
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
761
16–127E
Water (cp  1.0 Btu/lbm  F) is to be heated by
solar-heated hot air (cp  0.24 Btu/lbm  F) in a double-pipe
counter-flow heat exchanger. Air enters the heat exchanger
at 190F at a rate of 0.7 lbm/s and leaves at 135F. Water
enters at 70F at a rate of 0.35 lbm/s. The overall heat trans-
fer coefficient based on the inner side of the tube is given to
be 20 Btu/h  ft2  F. Determine the length of the tube
required for a tube internal diameter of 0.5 in.
16–128
By taking the limit as T2 →T1, show that when
T1  T2 for a heat exchanger, the Tlm relation reduces to
Tlm  T1  T2.
16–129
The condenser of a room air conditioner is designed
to reject heat at a rate of 15,000 kJ/h from refrigerant-134a
as the refrigerant is condensed at a temperature of 40C.
Air (cp  1005 J/kg  C) flows across the finned con-
denser coils, entering at 25C and leaving at 35C. If the
overall heat transfer coefficient based on the refrigerant side
is 150 W/m2  C, determine the heat transfer area on the
refrigerant side.
Answer: 3.05 m2
16–130
Air (cp  1005 J/kg  C) is to be preheated by hot
exhaust gases in a cross-flow heat exchanger before it enters
the furnace. Air enters the heat exchanger at 95 kPa and 20C
at a rate of 0.4 m3/s. The combustion gases (cp  1100
J/kg  C) enter at 180C at a rate of 0.65 kg/s and leave at
95C. The product of the overall heat transfer coefficient and
the heat transfer surface area is UAs  1620 W/C. Assuming
both fluids to be unmixed, determine the rate of heat transfer.
16–131
In a chemical plant, a certain chemical is heated by
hot water supplied by a natural gas furnace. The hot water
(cp  4180 J/kg  C) is then discharged at 60C at a rate of
8 kg/min. The plant operates 8 h a day, 5 days a week, 52
weeks a year. The furnace has an efficiency of 78 percent, and
the cost of the natural gas is $1.00 per therm (1 therm 
105,500 kJ). The average temperature of the cold water enter-
ing the furnace throughout the year is 14C. In order to save
energy, it is proposed to install a water-to-water heat
exchanger to preheat the incoming cold water by the drained
hot water. Assuming that the heat exchanger will recover 72
percent of the available heat in the hot water, determine the
heat transfer rating of the heat exchanger that needs to be pur-
chased and suggest a suitable type. Also, determine the
amount of money this heat exchanger will save the company
per year from natural gas savings.
16–132
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger with 1-shell pass
and 14-tube passes is used to heat water in the tubes with geo-
thermal steam condensing at 120C (hfg  2203 kJ/kg) on the
shell side. The tubes are thin-walled and have a diameter of
2.4 cm and length of 3.2 m per pass. Water (cp  4180 J/kg  C)
enters the tubes at 22C at a rate of 3.9 kg/s. If the temperature
difference between the two fluids at the exit is 46C, determine
(a) the rate of heat transfer, (b) the rate of condensation of
steam, and (c) the overall heat transfer coefficient.
16–133
Geothermal water (cp  4250 J/kg  C) at 75C is
to be used to heat fresh water (cp  4180 J/kg  C) at 17C
at a rate of 1.2 kg/s in a double-pipe counter-flow heat
exchanger. The heat transfer surface area is 25 m2, the overall
heat transfer coefficient is 480 W/m2  C, and the mass flow
rate of geothermal water is larger than that of fresh water. If
the effectiveness of the heat exchanger is desired to be 0.823,
determine the mass flow rate of geothermal water and the
outlet temperatures of both fluids.
16–134 Air at 18C (cp  1006 J/kg  C) is to be heated to
70C by hot oil at 80C (cp  2150 J/kg  C) in a cross-flow
Hot oil
130°C
3 kg/s
60°C
(20-tube passes)
Cold water
20°C
3 kg/s
FIGURE P16–126
Air
25°C
35°C
R-134a
40°C
40°C
FIGURE P16–129
22°C
Water
3.9 kg/s
Steam
120°C
(14 tubes)
120°C
FIGURE P16–132

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
765
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
heat exchanger with air mixed and oil unmixed. The product
of heat transfer surface area and the overall heat transfer coef-
ficient is 750 W/C and the mass flow rate of air is twice that
of oil. Determine (a) the effectiveness of the heat exchanger,
(b) the mass flow rate of air, and (c) the rate of heat transfer.
16–135
Consider 
a 
water-to-water 
counter-flow 
heat
exchanger with these specifications. Hot water enters at 95C
while cold water enters at 20C. The exit temperature of hot
water is 15C greater than that of cold water, and the mass
flow rate of hot water is 50 percent greater than that of cold
water. The product of heat transfer surface area and the over-
all heat transfer coefficient is 1400 W/C. Taking the specific
heat of both cold and hot water to be cp  4180 J/kg  C,
determine (a) the outlet temperature of the cold water, (b) the
effectiveness of the heat exchanger, (c) the mass flow rate of
the cold water, and (d) the heat transfer rate.
16–136
A shell-and-tube heat exchanger with 2-shell passes
and 4-tube passes is used for cooling oil (cp  2.0 kJ/kg · K)
from 125C to 55C. The coolant is water, which enters the
shell side at 25C and leaves at 46C. The overall heat transfer
coefficient is 900 W/m2 · K. For an oil flow rate of 10 kg/s,
calculate the cooling water flow rate and the heat transfer area.
16–137
A polymer solution (cp  2.0 kJ/kg · K) at 20C and
0.3 kg/s is heated by ethylene glycol (cp  2.5 kJ/kg · K) at
60C
in
a
thin-walled
double-pipe
parallel-flow
heat
exchanger. The temperature difference between the two outlet
fluids is 15C. The overall heat transfer coefficient is
240 W/m2 · K and the heat transfer area is 0.8 m2. Calculate
(a) the rate of heat transfer, (b) the outlet temperature of poly-
mer solution, and (c) the mass flow rate of ethylene glycol.
16–138
During an experiment, a plate heat exchanger that is
used to transfer heat from a hot-water stream to a cold-water
stream is tested, and the following measurements are taken:
The heat transfer area is calculated to be 0.0400 m2.
Hot-Water
Cold-Water 
Stream
Stream
Inlet temperature, C
38.9
14.3
Outlet temperature, C
27.0
19.8
Volume flow rate, L/min
2.5
4.5
762
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(a) Calculate the rate of heat transfer to the cold water.
(b) Calculate the overall heat transfer coefficient.
(c) Determine if the heat exchanger is truly adiabatic. If
not, determine the fraction of heat loss and calculate
the heat transfer efficiency.
(d) Determine the effectiveness and the NTU values of the
heat exchanger.
Also, discuss if the measured values are reasonable.
Design and Essay Problems
16–139
Water flows through a shower head steadily at a
rate of 8 kg/min. The water is heated in an electric water
heater from 15C to 45C. In an attempt to conserve energy,
it is proposed to pass the drained warm water at a tempera-
ture of 38C through a heat exchanger to preheat the incom-
ing cold water. Design a heat exchanger that is suitable for
this task, and discuss the potential savings in energy and
money for your area.
16–140
Open the engine compartment of your car and
search for heat exchangers. How many do you have? What
type are they? Why do you think those specific types are
selected? If you were redesigning the car, would you use dif-
ferent kinds? Explain.
16–141
Design a hydrocooling unit that can cool fruits and
vegetables from 30C to 5C at a rate of 20,000 kg/h under
the following conditions:
The unit will be of flood type that will cool the products as
they are conveyed into the channel filled with water. The
products will be dropped into the channel filled with water at
one end and picked up at the other end. The channel can be
as wide as 3 m and as high as 90 cm. The water is to be cir-
culated and cooled by the evaporator section of a refrigera-
tion system. The refrigerant temperature inside the coils is to
be –2C, and the water temperature is not to drop below 1C
and not to exceed 6C.
Assuming reasonable values for the average product den-
sity, specific heat, and porosity (the fraction of air volume in
a box), recommend reasonable values for the quantities
related to the thermal aspects of the hydrocooler, including
(a) how long the fruits and vegetables need to remain in the
channel, (b) the length of the channel, (c) the water velocity
through the channel, (d) the velocity of the conveyor and
thus the fruits and vegetables through the channel, (e) the
refrigeration capacity of the refrigeration system, and ( f ) the
type of heat exchanger for the evaporator and the surface area
on the water side.
16–142
A company owns a refrigeration system whose
refrigeration capacity is 200 tons (1 ton of refrigeration 
211 kJ/min), and you are to design a forced-air cooling sys-
tem for fruits whose diameters do not exceed 7 cm under the
following conditions:
Hot water
95°C
Cold water
20°C
FIGURE P16–135

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
II. Heat Transfer
16. Heat Exchangers
766
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Chapter 16
|
763
The fruits are to be cooled from 28C to an average tem-
perature of 8C. The air temperature is to remain above –2C
and below 10C at all times, and the velocity of air approach-
ing the fruits must remain under 2 m/s. The cooling section
can be as wide as 3.5 m and as high as 2 m.
Assuming reasonable values for the average fruit density,
specific heat, and porosity (the fraction of air volume in a
box), recommend reasonable values for the quantities related
to the thermal aspects of the forced-air cooling, including (a)
how long the fruits need to remain in the cooling section, (b)
the length of the cooling section, (c) the air velocity
approaching the cooling section, (d) the product cooling
capacity of the system, in kg  fruit/h, (e) the volume flow
rate of air, and ( f ) the type of heat exchanger for the evapo-
rator and the surface area on the air side.
16–143
A counterflow double-pipe heat exchanger with
As  9.0 m2 is used for cooling a liquid stream (cp 
3.15 kJ/kg · K) at a rate of 10.0 kg/s with an inlet temperature
of 90C. The coolant (cp  4.2 kJ/kg · K) enters the heat
exchanger at a rate of 8.0 kg/s with an inlet temperature of
10C. The plant data gave the following equation for the over-
all heat transfer coefficient in W/m2 · K: U  600/(1/mc
0.8 
2/mh
0.8), where m.
c and m.
h are the cold-and hot-stream flow
rates in kg/s, respectively. (a) Calculate the rate of heat trans-
fer and the outlet stream temperatures for this unit. (b) The
existing unit is to be replaced. A vendor is offering a very
attractive discount on two identical heat exchangers that are
presently stocked in its warehouse, each with As  5 m2.
Because the tube diameters in the existing and new units are
the same, the above heat transfer coefficient equation is
expected to be valid for the new units as well. The vendor is
proposing that the two new units could be operated in parallel,
such that each unit would process exactly one-half the flow
rate of each of the hot and cold streams in a counterflow man-
ner; hence, they together would meet (or exceed) the present
plant heat duty. Give your recommendation, with supporting
calculations, on this replacement proposal.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
767
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
PROPERTY TABLES AND CHARTS (SI UNITS)
|
765
Table A–1
Molar mass, gas constant, and 
critical-point properties
766
Table A–2
Ideal-gas specific heats of various 
common gases
767
Table A–3
Properties of common liquids, solids,
and foods
770
Table A–4
Saturated water—Temperature
table
772
Table A–5
Saturated water—Pressure table
774
Table A–6
Superheated water
776
Table A–7
Compressed liquid water
780
Table A–8
Saturated ice–water vapor
781
Figure A–9
T-s diagram for water
782
Figure A–10
Mollier diagram for water
783
Table A–11
Saturated refrigerant-134a—
Temperature table
784
Table A–12
Saturated refrigerant-134a—
Pressure table
786
Table A–13
Superheated refrigerant-134a
787
Figure A–14
P-h diagram for refrigerant-134a
789
Table A–15
Properties of saturated water
790
Table A–16
Properties of saturated 
refrigerant-134a
791
Table A–17
Properties of saturated ammonia
792
Table A–18
Properties of saturated propane
793
Table A–19
Properties of liquids
794
Table A–20
Properties of liquid metals
795
Table A–21
Ideal-gas properties of air
796
Table A–22
Properties of air at 1 atm 
pressure
798
Table A–23
Properties of gases at 1 atm 
pressure
799
Table A–24
Properties of solid metals
801
Table A–25
Properties of solid non-metals
804
Table A–26
Emissivities of surfaces
805
Figure A–27
The Moody Chart
807
Figure A–28
Nelson-Obert generalized
compressibility chart
808

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
768
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–1
Molar mass, gas constant, and critical-point properties
Gas
Critical-point properties
Molar mass,
constant,
Temperature,
Pressure,
Volume,
Substance
Formula
M kg/kmol
R kJ/kg · K*
K
MPa
m3/kmol
Air
—
28.97
0.2870
132.5
3.77
0.0883
Ammonia
NH3
17.03
0.4882
405.5
11.28
0.0724
Argon
Ar
39.948
0.2081
151
4.86
0.0749
Benzene
C6H6
78.115
0.1064
562
4.92
0.2603
Bromine
Br2
159.808
0.0520
584
10.34
0.1355
n-Butane
C4H10
58.124
0.1430
425.2
3.80
0.2547
Carbon dioxide
CO2
44.01
0.1889
304.2
7.39
0.0943
Carbon monoxide
CO
28.011
0.2968
133
3.50
0.0930
Carbon tetrachloride
CCl4
153.82
0.05405
556.4
4.56
0.2759
Chlorine
Cl2
70.906
0.1173
417
7.71
0.1242
Chloroform
CHCl3
119.38
0.06964
536.6
5.47
0.2403
Dichlorodifluoromethane (R-12)
CCl2F2
120.91
0.06876
384.7
4.01
0.2179
Dichlorofluoromethane (R-21)
CHCl2F
102.92
0.08078
451.7
5.17
0.1973
Ethane
C2H6
30.070
0.2765
305.5
4.48
0.1480
Ethyl alcohol
C2H5OH
46.07
0.1805
516
6.38
0.1673
Ethylene
C2H4
28.054
0.2964
282.4
5.12
0.1242
Helium
He
4.003
2.0769
5.3
0.23
0.0578
n-Hexane
C6H14
86.179
0.09647
507.9
3.03
0.3677
Hydrogen (normal)
H2
2.016
4.1240
33.3
1.30
0.0649
Krypton
Kr
83.80
0.09921
209.4
5.50
0.0924
Methane
CH4
16.043
0.5182
191.1
4.64
0.0993
Methyl alcohol
CH3OH
32.042
0.2595
513.2
7.95
0.1180
Methyl chloride
CH3Cl
50.488
0.1647
416.3
6.68
0.1430
Neon
Ne
20.183
0.4119
44.5
2.73
0.0417
Nitrogen
N2
28.013
0.2968
126.2
3.39
0.0899
Nitrous oxide
N2O
44.013
0.1889
309.7
7.27
0.0961
Oxygen
O2
31.999
0.2598
154.8
5.08
0.0780
Propane
C3H8
44.097
0.1885
370
4.26
0.1998
Propylene
C3H6
42.081
0.1976
365
4.62
0.1810
Sulfur dioxide
SO2
64.063
0.1298
430.7
7.88
0.1217
Tetrafluoroethane (R-134a)
CF3CH2F
102.03
0.08149
374.2
4.059
0.1993
Trichlorofluoromethane (R-11)
CCl3F
137.37
0.06052
471.2
4.38
0.2478
Water
H2O
18.015
0.4615
647.1
22.06
0.0560
Xenon
Xe
131.30
0.06332
289.8
5.88
0.1186
*The unit kJ/kg · K is equivalent to kPa · m3/kg · K. The gas constant is calculated from R  Ru /M, where Ru  8.31447 kJ/kmol · K and M is the molar
mass.
Source: K. A. Kobe and R. E. Lynn, Jr., Chemical Review 52 (1953), pp. 117–236; and ASHRAE, Handbook of Fundamentals (Atlanta, GA: American 
Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993), pp. 16.4 and 36.1.
766
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
769
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
767
TABLE A–2
Ideal-gas specific heats of various common gases
(a) At 300 K
Gas constant, R
cp
cv
Gas
Formula
kJ/kg · K
kJ/kg · K
kJ/kg · K
k
Air
—
0.2870
1.005
0.718
1.400
Argon
Ar
0.2081
0.5203
0.3122
1.667
Butane
C4H10
0.1433
1.7164
1.5734
1.091
Carbon dioxide
CO2
0.1889
0.846
0.657
1.289
Carbon monoxide
CO
0.2968
1.040
0.744
1.400
Ethane
C2H6
0.2765
1.7662
1.4897
1.186
Ethylene
C2H4
0.2964
1.5482
1.2518
1.237
Helium
He
2.0769
5.1926
3.1156
1.667
Hydrogen
H2
4.1240
14.307
10.183
1.405
Methane
CH4
0.5182
2.2537
1.7354
1.299
Neon
Ne
0.4119
1.0299
0.6179
1.667
Nitrogen
N2
0.2968
1.039
0.743
1.400
Octane
C8H18
0.0729
1.7113
1.6385
1.044
Oxygen
O2
0.2598
0.918
0.658
1.395
Propane
C3H8
0.1885
1.6794
1.4909
1.126
Steam
H2O
0.4615
1.8723
1.4108
1.327
Note: The unit kJ/kg · K is equivalent to kJ/kg · °C.
Source: Chemical and Process Thermodynamics 3/E by Kyle, B. G., © 2000. Adapted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
770
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–2
Ideal-gas specific heats of various common gases (Continued)
(b) At various temperatures
cp
cv
cp
cv
cp
cv
Temperature,
kJ/kg · K
kJ/kg · K
k
kJ/kg · K
kJ/kg · K
k
kJ/kg · K
kJ/kg · K
k
K
Air
Carbon dioxide, CO2
Carbon monoxide, CO
250
1.003
0.716
1.401
0.791
0.602
1.314
1.039
0.743
1.400
300
1.005
0.718
1.400
0.846
0.657
1.288
1.040
0.744
1.399
350
1.008
0.721
1.398
0.895
0.706
1.268
1.043
0.746
1.398
400
1.013
0.726
1.395
0.939
0.750
1.252
1.047
0.751
1.395
450
1.020
0.733
1.391
0.978
0.790
1.239
1.054
0.757
1.392
500
1.029
0.742
1.387
1.014
0.825
1.229
1.063
0.767
1.387
550
1.040
0.753
1.381
1.046
0.857
1.220
1.075
0.778
1.382
600
1.051
0.764
1.376
1.075
0.886
1.213
1.087
0.790
1.376
650
1.063
0.776
1.370
1.102
0.913
1.207
1.100
0.803
1.370
700
1.075
0.788
1.364
1.126
0.937
1.202
1.113
0.816
1.364
750
1.087
0.800
1.359
1.148
0.959
1.197
1.126
0.829
1.358
800
1.099
0.812
1.354
1.169
0.980
1.193
1.139
0.842
1.353
900
1.121
0.834
1.344
1.204
1.015
1.186
1.163
0.866
1.343
1000
1.142
0.855
1.336
1.234
1.045
1.181
1.185
0.888
1.335
Hydrogen, H2
Nitrogen, N2
Oxygen, O2
250
14.051
9.927
1.416
1.039
0.742
1.400
0.913
0.653
1.398
300
14.307
10.183
1.405
1.039
0.743
1.400
0.918
0.658
1.395
350
14.427
10.302
1.400
1.041
0.744
1.399
0.928
0.668
1.389
400
14.476
10.352
1.398
1.044
0.747
1.397
0.941
0.681
1.382
450
14.501
10.377
1.398
1.049
0.752
1.395
0.956
0.696
1.373
500
14.513
10.389
1.397
1.056
0.759
1.391
0.972
0.712
1.365
550
14.530
10.405
1.396
1.065
0.768
1.387
0.988
0.728
1.358
600
14.546
10.422
1.396
1.075
0.778
1.382
1.003
0.743
1.350
650
14.571
10.447
1.395
1.086
0.789
1.376
1.017
0.758
1.343
700
14.604
10.480
1.394
1.098
0.801
1.371
1.031
0.771
1.337
750
14.645
10.521
1.392
1.110
0.813
1.365
1.043
0.783
1.332
800
14.695
10.570
1.390
1.121
0.825
1.360
1.054
0.794
1.327
900
14.822
10.698
1.385
1.145
0.849
1.349
1.074
0.814
1.319
1000
14.983
10.859
1.380
1.167
0.870
1.341
1.090
0.830
1.313
Source: Kenneth Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983), p. 783, Table A–4M. Originally published in Tables of Thermal 
Properties of Gases, NBS Circular 564, 1955.
768
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
771
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
769
TABLE A–2
Ideal-gas specific heats of various common gases (Concluded)
(c) As a function of temperature
_cp  a  bT  cT 2  dT 3
(T in K, cp in kJ/kmol · K)
Temperature
% error
Substance
Formula
a
b
c
d
range, K
Max.
Avg.
Nitrogen
N2
28.90
0.1571 
 102
0.8081 
 105
2.873 
 109
273–1800
0.59
0.34
Oxygen
O2
25.48
1.520 
 102
0.7155 
 105
1.312 
 109
273–1800
1.19
0.28
Air
—
28.11
0.1967 
 102
0.4802 
 105
1.966 
 109
273–1800
0.72
0.33
Hydrogen
H2
29.11
0.1916 
 102
0.4003 
 105
0.8704 
 109
273–1800
1.01
0.26
Carbon
monoxide
CO
28.16
0.1675 
 102
0.5372 
 105
2.222 
 109
273–1800
0.89
0.37
Carbon
dioxide
CO2
22.26
5.981 
 102
3.501 
 105
7.469 
 109
273–1800
0.67
0.22
Water vapor
H2O
32.24
0.1923 
 102
1.055 
 105
3.595 
 109
273–1800
0.53
0.24
Nitric oxide
NO
29.34
0.09395 
 102
0.9747 
 105
4.187 
 109
273–1500
0.97
0.36
Nitrous oxide
N2O
24.11
5.8632 
 102
3.562 
 105
10.58 
 109
273–1500
0.59
0.26
Nitrogen
dioxide
NO2
22.9
5.715 
 102
3.52 
 105
7.87 
 109
273–1500
0.46
0.18
Ammonia
NH3
27.568
2.5630 
 102
0.99072 
 105
6.6909 
 109
273–1500
0.91
0.36
Sulfur
S2
27.21
2.218 
 102
1.628 
 105
3.986 
 109
273–1800
0.99
0.38
Sulfur
dioxide
SO2
25.78
5.795 
 102
3.812 
 105
8.612 
 109
273–1800
0.45
0.24
Sulfur
trioxide
SO3
16.40
14.58 
 102
11.20 
 105
32.42 
 109
273–1300
0.29
0.13
Acetylene
C2H2
21.8
9.2143 
 102
6.527 
 105
18.21 
 109
273–1500
1.46
0.59
Benzene
C6H6
36.22
48.475 
 102
31.57 
 105
77.62 
 109
273–1500
0.34
0.20
Methanol
CH4O
19.0
9.152 
 102
1.22 
 105
8.039 
 109
273–1000
0.18
0.08
Ethanol
C2H6O
19.9
20.96 
 102
10.38 
 105
20.05 
 109
273–1500
0.40
0.22
Hydrogen
chloride
HCl
30.33
0.7620 
 102
1.327 
 105
4.338 
 109
273–1500
0.22
0.08
Methane
CH4
19.89
5.024 
 102
1.269 
 105
11.01 
 109
273–1500
1.33
0.57
Ethane
C2H6
6.900
17.27 
 102
6.406 
 105
7.285 
 109
273–1500
0.83
0.28
Propane
C3H8
4.04
30.48 
 102
15.72 
 105
31.74 
 109
273–1500
0.40
0.12
n-Butane
C4H10
3.96
37.15 
 102
18.34 
 105
35.00 
 109
273–1500
0.54
0.24
i-Butane
C4H10
7.913
41.60 
 102
23.01 
 105
49.91 
 109
273–1500
0.25
0.13
n-Pentane
C5H12
6.774
45.43 
 102
22.46 
 105
42.29 
 109
273–1500
0.56
0.21
n-Hexane
C6H14
6.938
55.22 
 102
28.65 
 105
57.69 
 109
273–1500
0.72
0.20
Ethylene
C2H4
3.95
15.64 
 102
8.344 
 105
17.67 
 109
273–1500
0.54
0.13
Propylene
C3H6
3.15
23.83 
 102
12.18 
 105
24.62 
 109
273–1500
0.73
0.17
Source: Chemical and Process Thermodynamics 3/E by Kyle, B. G., © 2000. Adapted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
772
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–3
Properties of common liquids, solids, and foods
(a) Liquids
Boiling data at 1 atm
Freezing data
Liquid properties
Normal
Latent heat of
Latent heat
Specific
boiling
vaporization
Freezing
of fusion
Temperature,
Density
heat
Substance
point, °C
hfg, kJ/kg
point, °C
hif, kJ/kg
°C
r, kg/m3
cp, kJ/kg · K
Ammonia
33.3
1357
77.7
322.4
33.3
682
4.43
20
665
4.52
0
639
4.60
25
602
4.80
Argon
185.9
161.6
189.3
28
185.6
1394
1.14
Benzene
80.2
394
5.5
126
20
879
1.72
Brine (20% sodium
chloride by mass)
103.9
—
17.4
—
20
1150
3.11
n-Butane
0.5
385.2
138.5
80.3
0.5
601
2.31
Carbon dioxide
78.4*
230.5 (at 0°C)
56.6
0
298
0.59
Ethanol
78.2
838.3
114.2
109
25
783
2.46
Ethyl alcohol
78.6
855
156
108
20
789
2.84
Ethylene glycol
198.1
800.1
10.8
181.1
20
1109
2.84
Glycerine
179.9
974
18.9
200.6
20
1261
2.32
Helium
268.9
22.8
—
—
268.9
146.2
22.8
Hydrogen
252.8
445.7
259.2
59.5
252.8
70.7
10.0
Isobutane
11.7
367.1
160
105.7
11.7
593.8
2.28
Kerosene
204–293
251
24.9
—
20
820
2.00
Mercury
356.7
294.7
38.9
11.4
25
13,560
0.139
Methane
161.5
510.4
182.2
58.4
161.5
423
3.49
100
301
5.79
Methanol
64.5
1100
97.7
99.2
25
787
2.55
Nitrogen
195.8
198.6
210
25.3
195.8
809
2.06
160
596
2.97
Octane
124.8
306.3
57.5
180.7
20
703
2.10
Oil (light)
25
910
1.80
Oxygen
183
212.7
218.8
13.7
183
1141
1.71
Petroleum
—
230–384
20
640
2.0
Propane
42.1
427.8
187.7
80.0
42.1
581
2.25
0
529
2.53
50
449
3.13
Refrigerant-134a
26.1
217.0
96.6
—
50
1443
1.23
26.1
1374
1.27
0
1295
1.34
25
1207
1.43
Water
100
2257
0.0
333.7
0
1000
4.22
25
997
4.18
50
988
4.18
75
975
4.19
100
958
4.22
* Sublimation temperature. (At pressures below the triple-point pressure of 518 kPa, carbon dioxide exists as a solid or gas. Also, the freezing-point temperature
of carbon dioxide is the triple-point temperature of 56.5°C.)
770
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
773
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–3
Properties of common liquids, solids, and foods (Concluded)
(b) Solids (values are for room temperature unless indicated otherwise)
Density,
Specific heat,
Density,
Specific heat,
Substance
r kg/m3
cp kJ/kg · K
Substance
r kg/m3
cp kJ/kg · K
Metals
Nonmetals
Aluminum
Asphalt
2110
0.920
200 K
0.797
Brick, common
1922
0.79
250 K
0.859
Brick, fireclay (500°C)
2300
0.960
300 K
2,700
0.902
Concrete
2300
0.653
350 K
0.929
Clay
1000
0.920
400 K
0.949
Diamond
2420
0.616
450 K
0.973
Glass, window
2700
0.800
500 K
0.997
Glass, pyrex
2230
0.840
Bronze (76% Cu, 2% Zn,
8,280
0.400
Graphite
2500
0.711
2% Al)
Granite
2700
1.017
Brass, yellow (65% Cu,
8,310
0.400
Gypsum or plaster board
800
1.09
35% Zn)
Ice
Copper
200 K
1.56
173°C
0.254
220 K
1.71
100°C
0.342
240 K
1.86
50°C
0.367
260 K
2.01
0°C
0.381
273 K
921
2.11
27°C
8,900
0.386
Limestone
1650
0.909
100°C
0.393
Marble
2600
0.880
200°C
0.403
Plywood (Douglas Fir)
545
1.21
Iron
7,840
0.45
Rubber (soft)
1100
1.840
Lead
11,310
0.128
Rubber (hard)
1150
2.009
Magnesium
1,730
1.000
Sand
1520
0.800
Nickel
8,890
0.440
Stone
1500
0.800
Silver
10,470
0.235
Woods, hard (maple, oak, etc.)
721
1.26
Steel, mild
7,830
0.500
Woods, soft (fir, pine, etc.)
513
1.38
Tungsten
19,400
0.130
(c) Foods
Specific heat,
Specific heat,
kJ/kg · K
Latent
kJ/kg · K
Latent
Water
heat of
Water
heat of
content,
Freezing
Above
Below
fusion,
content,
Freezing
Above
Below
fusion,
Food
% (mass)
point, °C
freezing
freezing
kJ/kg
Food
% (mass)
point, °C
freezing
freezing
kJ/kg
Apples
84
1.1
3.65
1.90
281
Lettuce
95
0.2
4.02
2.04
317
Bananas
75
0.8
3.35
1.78
251
Milk, whole
88
0.6
3.79
1.95
294
Beef round
67
—
3.08
1.68
224
Oranges
87
0.8
3.75
1.94
291
Broccoli
90
0.6
3.86
1.97
301
Potatoes
78
0.6
3.45
1.82
261
Butter
16
—
—
1.04
53
Salmon fish
64
2.2
2.98
1.65
214
Cheese, swiss
39
10.0
2.15
1.33
130
Shrimp
83
2.2
3.62
1.89
277
Cherries
80
1.8
3.52
1.85
267
Spinach
93
0.3
3.96
2.01
311
Chicken
74
2.8
3.32
1.77
247
Strawberries
90
0.8
3.86
1.97
301
Corn, sweet
74
0.6
3.32
1.77
247
Tomatoes, ripe
94
0.5
3.99
2.02
314
Eggs, whole
74
0.6
3.32
1.77
247
Turkey
64
—
2.98
1.65
214
Ice cream
63
5.6
2.95
1.63
210
Watermelon
93
0.4
3.96
2.01
311
Source: Values are obtained from various handbooks and other sources or are calculated. Water content and freezing-point data of foods are from ASHRAE,
Handbook of Fundamentals, SI version (Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993), Chapter 30,
Table 1. Freezing point is the temperature at which freezing starts for fruits and vegetables, and the average freezing temperature for other foods.
Appendix 1
|
771

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
774
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–4
Saturated water—Temperature table
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg · K
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp.,
press.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap., vapor,
T °C
Psat kPa
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
0.01
0.6117
0.001000
206.00
0.000
2374.9
2374.9
0.001
2500.9
2500.9
0.0000
9.1556 9.1556
5
0.8725
0.001000
147.03
21.019
2360.8
2381.8
21.020
2489.1
2510.1
0.0763
8.9487 9.0249
10
1.2281
0.001000
106.32
42.020
2346.6
2388.7
42.022
2477.2
2519.2
0.1511
8.7488 8.8999
15
1.7057
0.001001
77.885
62.980
2332.5
2395.5
62.982
2465.4
2528.3
0.2245
8.5559 8.7803
20
2.3392
0.001002
57.762
83.913
2318.4
2402.3
83.915
2453.5
2537.4
0.2965
8.3696 8.6661
25
3.1698
0.001003
43.340
104.83
2304.3
2409.1
104.83
2441.7
2546.5
0.3672
8.1895 8.5567
30
4.2469
0.001004
32.879
125.73
2290.2
2415.9
125.74
2429.8
2555.6
0.4368
8.0152 8.4520
35
5.6291
0.001006
25.205
146.63
2276.0
2422.7
146.64
2417.9
2564.6
0.5051
7.8466 8.3517
40
7.3851
0.001008
19.515
167.53
2261.9
2429.4
167.53
2406.0
2573.5
0.5724
7.6832 8.2556
45
9.5953
0.001010
15.251
188.43
2247.7
2436.1
188.44
2394.0
2582.4
0.6386
7.5247 8.1633
50
12.352
0.001012
12.026
209.33
2233.4
2442.7
209.34
2382.0
2591.3
0.7038
7.3710 8.0748
55
15.763
0.001015
9.5639
230.24
2219.1
2449.3
230.26
2369.8
2600.1
0.7680
7.2218 7.9898
60
19.947
0.001017
7.6670
251.16
2204.7
2455.9
251.18
2357.7
2608.8
0.8313
7.0769 7.9082
65
25.043
0.001020
6.1935
272.09
2190.3
2462.4
272.12
2345.4
2617.5
0.8937
6.9360 7.8296
70
31.202
0.001023
5.0396
293.04
2175.8
2468.9
293.07
2333.0
2626.1
0.9551
6.7989 7.7540
75
38.597
0.001026
4.1291
313.99
2161.3
2475.3
314.03
2320.6
2634.6
1.0158
6.6655 7.6812
80
47.416
0.001029
3.4053
334.97
2146.6
2481.6
335.02
2308.0
2643.0
1.0756
6.5355 7.6111
85
57.868
0.001032
2.8261
355.96
2131.9
2487.8
356.02
2295.3
2651.4
1.1346
6.4089 7.5435
90
70.183
0.001036
2.3593
376.97
2117.0
2494.0
377.04
2282.5
2659.6
1.1929
6.2853 7.4782
95
84.609
0.001040
1.9808
398.00
2102.0
2500.1
398.09
2269.6
2667.6
1.2504
6.1647 7.4151
100
101.42
0.001043
1.6720
419.06
2087.0
2506.0
419.17
2256.4
2675.6
1.3072
6.0470 7.3542
105
120.90
0.001047
1.4186
440.15
2071.8
2511.9
440.28
2243.1
2683.4
1.3634
5.9319 7.2952
110
143.38
0.001052
1.2094
461.27
2056.4
2517.7
461.42
2229.7
2691.1
1.4188
5.8193 7.2382
115
169.18
0.001056
1.0360
482.42
2040.9
2523.3
482.59
2216.0
2698.6
1.4737
5.7092 7.1829
120
198.67
0.001060
0.89133
503.60
2025.3
2528.9
503.81
2202.1
2706.0
1.5279
5.6013 7.1292
125
232.23
0.001065
0.77012
524.83
2009.5
2534.3
525.07
2188.1
2713.1
1.5816
5.4956 7.0771
130
270.28
0.001070
0.66808
546.10
1993.4
2539.5
546.38
2173.7
2720.1
1.6346
5.3919 7.0265
135
313.22
0.001075
0.58179
567.41
1977.3
2544.7
567.75
2159.1
2726.9
1.6872
5.2901 6.9773
140
361.53
0.001080
0.50850
588.77
1960.9
2549.6
589.16
2144.3
2733.5
1.7392
5.1901 6.9294
145
415.68
0.001085
0.44600
610.19
1944.2
2554.4
610.64
2129.2
2739.8
1.7908
5.0919 6.8827
150
476.16
0.001091
0.39248
631.66
1927.4
2559.1
632.18
2113.8
2745.9
1.8418
4.9953 6.8371
155
543.49
0.001096
0.34648
653.19
1910.3
2563.5
653.79
2098.0
2751.8
1.8924
4.9002 6.7927
160
618.23
0.001102
0.30680
674.79
1893.0
2567.8
675.47
2082.0
2757.5
1.9426
4.8066 6.7492
165
700.93
0.001108
0.27244
696.46
1875.4
2571.9
697.24
2065.6
2762.8
1.9923
4.7143 6.7067
170
792.18
0.001114
0.24260
718.20
1857.5
2575.7
719.08
2048.8
2767.9
2.0417
4.6233 6.6650
175
892.60
0.001121
0.21659
740.02
1839.4
2579.4
741.02
2031.7
2772.7
2.0906
4.5335 6.6242
180
1002.8
0.001127
0.19384
761.92
1820.9
2582.8
763.05
2014.2
2777.2
2.1392
4.4448 6.5841
185
1123.5
0.001134
0.17390
783.91
1802.1
2586.0
785.19
1996.2
2781.4
2.1875
4.3572 6.5447
190
1255.2
0.001141
0.15636
806.00
1783.0
2589.0
807.43
1977.9
2785.3
2.2355
4.2705 6.5059
195
1398.8
0.001149
0.14089
828.18
1763.6
2591.7
829.78
1959.0
2788.8
2.2831
4.1847 6.4678
200
1554.9
0.001157
0.12721
850.46
1743.7
2594.2
852.26
1939.8
2792.0
2.3305
4.0997 6.4302
772
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
775
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–4
Saturated water—Temperature table (Concluded)
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg · K
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp.,
press.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap., vapor,
T °C
Psat kPa
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
205
1724.3
0.001164
0.11508
872.86
1723.5
2596.4
874.87 1920.0
2794.8
2.3776
4.0154 6.3930
210
1907.7
0.001173
0.10429
895.38
1702.9
2598.3
897.61 1899.7
2797.3
2.4245
3.9318 6.3563
215
2105.9
0.001181
0.094680
918.02
1681.9
2599.9
920.50 1878.8
2799.3
2.4712
3.8489 6.3200
220
2319.6
0.001190
0.086094
940.79
1660.5
2601.3
943.55 1857.4
2801.0
2.5176
3.7664 6.2840
225
2549.7
0.001199
0.078405
963.70
1638.6
2602.3
966.76 1835.4
2802.2
2.5639
3.6844 6.2483
230
2797.1
0.001209
0.071505
986.76
1616.1
2602.9
990.14 1812.8
2802.9
2.6100
3.6028 6.2128
235
3062.6
0.001219
0.065300
1010.0
1593.2
2603.2
1013.7
1789.5
2803.2
2.6560
3.5216 6.1775
240
3347.0
0.001229
0.059707
1033.4
1569.8
2603.1
1037.5
1765.5
2803.0
2.7018
3.4405 6.1424
245
3651.2
0.001240
0.054656
1056.9
1545.7
2602.7
1061.5
1740.8
2802.2
2.7476
3.3596 6.1072
250
3976.2
0.001252
0.050085
1080.7
1521.1
2601.8
1085.7
1715.3
2801.0
2.7933
3.2788 6.0721
255
4322.9
0.001263
0.045941
1104.7
1495.8
2600.5
1110.1
1689.0
2799.1
2.8390
3.1979 6.0369
260
4692.3
0.001276
0.042175
1128.8
1469.9
2598.7
1134.8
1661.8
2796.6
2.8847
3.1169 6.0017
265
5085.3
0.001289
0.038748
1153.3
1443.2
2596.5
1159.8
1633.7
2793.5
2.9304
3.0358 5.9662
270
5503.0
0.001303
0.035622
1177.9
1415.7
2593.7
1185.1
1604.6
2789.7
2.9762
2.9542 5.9305
275
5946.4
0.001317
0.032767
1202.9
1387.4
2590.3
1210.7
1574.5
2785.2
3.0221
2.8723 5.8944
280
6416.6
0.001333
0.030153
1228.2
1358.2
2586.4
1236.7
1543.2
2779.9
3.0681
2.7898 5.8579
285
6914.6
0.001349
0.027756
1253.7
1328.1
2581.8
1263.1
1510.7
2773.7
3.1144
2.7066 5.8210
290
7441.8
0.001366
0.025554
1279.7
1296.9
2576.5
1289.8
1476.9
2766.7
3.1608
2.6225 5.7834
295
7999.0
0.001384
0.023528
1306.0
1264.5
2570.5
1317.1
1441.6
2758.7
3.2076
2.5374 5.7450
300
8587.9
0.001404
0.021659
1332.7
1230.9
2563.6
1344.8
1404.8
2749.6
3.2548
2.4511 5.7059
305
9209.4
0.001425
0.019932
1360.0
1195.9
2555.8
1373.1
1366.3
2739.4
3.3024
2.3633 5.6657
310
9865.0
0.001447
0.018333
1387.7
1159.3
2547.1
1402.0
1325.9
2727.9
3.3506
2.2737 5.6243
315
10,556
0.001472
0.016849
1416.1
1121.1
2537.2
1431.6
1283.4
2715.0
3.3994
2.1821 5.5816
320
11,284
0.001499
0.015470
1445.1
1080.9
2526.0
1462.0
1238.5
2700.6
3.4491
2.0881 5.5372
325
12,051
0.001528
0.014183
1475.0
1038.5
2513.4
1493.4
1191.0
2684.3
3.4998
1.9911 5.4908
330
12,858
0.001560
0.012979
1505.7
993.5
2499.2
1525.8
1140.3
2666.0
3.5516
1.8906 5.4422
335
13,707
0.001597
0.011848
1537.5
945.5
2483.0
1559.4
1086.0
2645.4
3.6050
1.7857 5.3907
340
14,601
0.001638
0.010783
1570.7
893.8
2464.5
1594.6
1027.4
2622.0
3.6602
1.6756 5.3358
345
15,541
0.001685
0.009772
1605.5
837.7
2443.2
1631.7
963.4
2595.1
3.7179
1.5585 5.2765
350
16,529
0.001741
0.008806
1642.4
775.9
2418.3
1671.2
892.7
2563.9
3.7788
1.4326 5.2114
355
17,570
0.001808
0.007872
1682.2
706.4
2388.6
1714.0
812.9
2526.9
3.8442
1.2942 5.1384
360
18,666
0.001895
0.006950
1726.2
625.7
2351.9
1761.5
720.1
2481.6
3.9165
1.1373 5.0537
365
19,822
0.002015
0.006009
1777.2
526.4
2303.6
1817.2
605.5
2422.7
4.0004
0.9489 4.9493
370
21,044
0.002217
0.004953
1844.5
385.6
2230.1
1891.2
443.1
2334.3
4.1119
0.6890 4.8009
373.95 22,064
0.003106
0.003106
2015.7
0
2015.7
2084.3
0
2084.3
4.4070
0
4.4070
Source: Tables A–4 through A–8 are generated using the Engineering Equation Solver (EES) software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. The
routine used in calculations is the highly accurate Steam_IAPWS, which incorporates the 1995 Formulation for the Thermodynamic Properties of Ordinary
Water Substance for General and Scientific Use, issued by The International Association for the Properties of Water and Steam (IAPWS). This formulation
replaces the 1984 formulation of Haar, Gallagher, and Kell (NBS/NRC Steam Tables, Hemisphere Publishing Co., 1984), which is also available in EES
as the routine STEAM. The new formulation is based on the correlations of Saul and Wagner (J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 16, 893, 1987) with modifica-
tions to adjust to the International Temperature Scale of 1990. The modifications are described by Wagner and Pruss (J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 22,
783, 1993). The properties of ice are based on Hyland and Wexler, “Formulations for the Thermodynamic Properties of the Saturated Phases of H2O
from 173.15 K to 473.15 K,” ASHRAE Trans., Part 2A, Paper 2793, 1983.
Appendix 1
|
773

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
776
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–5
Saturated water—Pressure table
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg · K
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Press.,
temp.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
P kPa
Tsat °C
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
1.0
6.97
0.001000 129.19
29.302
2355.2
2384.5
29.303
2484.4
2513.7
0.1059
8.8690
8.9749
1.5
13.02
0.001001
87.964
54.686
2338.1
2392.8
54.688
2470.1
2524.7
0.1956
8.6314
8.8270
2.0
17.50
0.001001
66.990
73.431
2325.5
2398.9
73.433
2459.5
2532.9
0.2606
8.4621
8.7227
2.5
21.08
0.001002
54.242
88.422
2315.4
2403.8
88.424
2451.0
2539.4
0.3118
8.3302
8.6421
3.0
24.08
0.001003
45.654
100.98
2306.9
2407.9
100.98
2443.9
2544.8
0.3543
8.2222
8.5765
4.0
28.96
0.001004
34.791
121.39
2293.1
2414.5
121.39
2432.3
2553.7
0.4224
8.0510
8.4734
5.0
32.87
0.001005
28.185
137.75
2282.1
2419.8
137.75
2423.0
2560.7
0.4762
7.9176
8.3938
7.5
40.29
0.001008
19.233
168.74
2261.1
2429.8
168.75
2405.3
2574.0
0.5763
7.6738
8.2501
10
45.81
0.001010
14.670
191.79
2245.4
2437.2
191.81
2392.1
2583.9
0.6492
7.4996
8.1488
15
53.97
0.001014
10.020
225.93
2222.1
2448.0
225.94
2372.3
2598.3
0.7549
7.2522
8.0071
20
60.06
0.001017
7.6481
251.40
2204.6
2456.0
251.42
2357.5
2608.9
0.8320
7.0752
7.9073
25
64.96
0.001020
6.2034
271.93
2190.4
2462.4
271.96
2345.5
2617.5
0.8932
6.9370
7.8302
30
69.09
0.001022
5.2287
289.24
2178.5
2467.7
289.27
2335.3
2624.6
0.9441
6.8234
7.7675
40
75.86
0.001026
3.9933
317.58
2158.8
2476.3
317.62
2318.4
2636.1
1.0261
6.6430
7.6691
50
81.32
0.001030
3.2403
340.49
2142.7
2483.2
340.54
2304.7
2645.2
1.0912
6.5019
7.5931
75
91.76
0.001037
2.2172
384.36
2111.8
2496.1
384.44
2278.0
2662.4
1.2132
6.2426
7.4558
100
99.61
0.001043
1.6941
417.40
2088.2
2505.6
417.51
2257.5
2675.0
1.3028
6.0562
7.3589
101.325
99.97
0.001043
1.6734
418.95
2087.0
2506.0
419.06
2256.5
2675.6
1.3069
6.0476
7.3545
125
105.97
0.001048
1.3750
444.23
2068.8
2513.0
444.36
2240.6
2684.9
1.3741
5.9100
7.2841
150
111.35
0.001053
1.1594
466.97
2052.3
2519.2
467.13
2226.0
2693.1
1.4337
5.7894
7.2231
175
116.04
0.001057
1.0037
486.82
2037.7
2524.5
487.01
2213.1
2700.2
1.4850
5.6865
7.1716
200
120.21
0.001061
0.88578
504.50
2024.6
2529.1
504.71
2201.6
2706.3
1.5302
5.5968
7.1270
225
123.97
0.001064
0.79329
520.47
2012.7
2533.2
520.71
2191.0
2711.7
1.5706
5.5171
7.0877
250
127.41
0.001067
0.71873
535.08
2001.8
2536.8
535.35
2181.2
2716.5
1.6072
5.4453
7.0525
275
130.58
0.001070
0.65732
548.57
1991.6
2540.1
548.86
2172.0
2720.9
1.6408
5.3800
7.0207
300
133.52
0.001073
0.60582
561.11
1982.1
2543.2
561.43
2163.5
2724.9
1.6717
5.3200
6.9917
325
136.27
0.001076
0.56199
572.84
1973.1
2545.9
573.19
2155.4
2728.6
1.7005
5.2645
6.9650
350
138.86
0.001079
0.52422
583.89
1964.6
2548.5
584.26
2147.7
2732.0
1.7274
5.2128
6.9402
375
141.30
0.001081
0.49133
594.32
1956.6
2550.9
594.73
2140.4
2735.1
1.7526
5.1645
6.9171
400
143.61
0.001084
0.46242
604.22
1948.9
2553.1
604.66
2133.4
2738.1
1.7765
5.1191
6.8955
450
147.90
0.001088
0.41392
622.65
1934.5
2557.1
623.14
2120.3
2743.4
1.8205
5.0356
6.8561
500
151.83
0.001093
0.37483
639.54
1921.2
2560.7
640.09
2108.0
2748.1
1.8604
4.9603
6.8207
550
155.46
0.001097
0.34261
655.16
1908.8
2563.9
655.77
2096.6
2752.4
1.8970
4.8916
6.7886
600
158.83
0.001101
0.31560
669.72
1897.1
2566.8
670.38
2085.8
2756.2
1.9308
4.8285
6.7593
650
161.98
0.001104
0.29260
683.37
1886.1
2569.4
684.08
2075.5
2759.6
1.9623
4.7699
6.7322
700
164.95
0.001108
0.27278
696.23
1875.6
2571.8
697.00
2065.8
2762.8
1.9918
4.7153
6.7071
750
167.75
0.001111
0.25552
708.40
1865.6
2574.0
709.24
2056.4
2765.7
2.0195
4.6642
6.6837
774
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
777
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–5
Saturated water—Pressure table (Concluded)
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg · K
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Press.,
temp.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
P kPa
Tsat °C
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
800
170.41
0.001115
0.24035
719.97 1856.1
2576.0
720.87
2047.5
2768.3
2.0457
4.6160
6.6616
850
172.94
0.001118
0.22690
731.00 1846.9
2577.9
731.95
2038.8
2770.8
2.0705
4.5705
6.6409
900
175.35
0.001121
0.21489
741.55 1838.1
2579.6
742.56
2030.5
2773.0
2.0941
4.5273
6.6213
950
177.66
0.001124
0.20411
751.67 1829.6
2581.3
752.74
2022.4
2775.2
2.1166
4.4862
6.6027
1000
179.88
0.001127
0.19436
761.39 1821.4
2582.8
762.51
2014.6
2777.1
2.1381
4.4470
6.5850
1100
184.06
0.001133
0.17745
779.78 1805.7
2585.5
781.03
1999.6
2780.7
2.1785
4.3735
6.5520
1200
187.96
0.001138
0.16326
796.96 1790.9
2587.8
798.33
1985.4
2783.8
2.2159
4.3058
6.5217
1300
191.60
0.001144
0.15119
813.10 1776.8
2589.9
814.59
1971.9
2786.5
2.2508
4.2428
6.4936
1400
195.04
0.001149
0.14078
828.35 1763.4
2591.8
829.96
1958.9
2788.9
2.2835
4.1840
6.4675
1500
198.29
0.001154
0.13171
842.82 1750.6
2593.4
844.55
1946.4
2791.0
2.3143
4.1287
6.4430
1750
205.72
0.001166
0.11344
876.12 1720.6
2596.7
878.16
1917.1
2795.2
2.3844
4.0033
6.3877
2000
212.38
0.001177
0.099587
906.12 1693.0
2599.1
908.47
1889.8
2798.3
2.4467
3.8923
6.3390
2250
218.41
0.001187
0.088717
933.54 1667.3
2600.9
936.21
1864.3
2800.5
2.5029
3.7926
6.2954
2500
223.95
0.001197
0.079952
958.87 1643.2
2602.1
961.87
1840.1
2801.9
2.5542
3.7016
6.2558
3000
233.85
0.001217
0.066667
1004.6
1598.5
2603.2 1008.3
1794.9
2803.2
2.6454
3.5402
6.1856
3500
242.56
0.001235
0.057061
1045.4
1557.6
2603.0 1049.7
1753.0
2802.7
2.7253
3.3991
6.1244
4000
250.35
0.001252
0.049779
1082.4
1519.3
2601.7 1087.4
1713.5
2800.8
2.7966
3.2731
6.0696
5000
263.94
0.001286
0.039448
1148.1
1448.9
2597.0 1154.5
1639.7
2794.2
2.9207
3.0530
5.9737
6000
275.59
0.001319
0.032449
1205.8
1384.1
2589.9 1213.8
1570.9
2784.6
3.0275
2.8627
5.8902
7000
285.83
0.001352
0.027378
1258.0
1323.0
2581.0 1267.5
1505.2
2772.6
3.1220
2.6927
5.8148
8000
295.01
0.001384
0.023525
1306.0
1264.5
2570.5 1317.1
1441.6
2758.7
3.2077
2.5373
5.7450
9000
303.35
0.001418
0.020489
1350.9
1207.6
2558.5 1363.7
1379.3
2742.9
3.2866
2.3925
5.6791
10,000
311.00
0.001452
0.018028
1393.3
1151.8
2545.2 1407.8
1317.6
2725.5
3.3603
2.2556
5.6159
11,000
318.08
0.001488
0.015988
1433.9
1096.6
2530.4 1450.2
1256.1
2706.3
3.4299
2.1245
5.5544
12,000
324.68
0.001526
0.014264
1473.0
1041.3
2514.3 1491.3
1194.1
2685.4
3.4964
1.9975
5.4939
13,000
330.85
0.001566
0.012781
1511.0
985.5
2496.6 1531.4
1131.3
2662.7
3.5606
1.8730
5.4336
14,000
336.67
0.001610
0.011487
1548.4
928.7
2477.1 1571.0
1067.0
2637.9
3.6232
1.7497
5.3728
15,000
342.16
0.001657
0.010341
1585.5
870.3
2455.7 1610.3
1000.5
2610.8
3.6848
1.6261
5.3108
16,000
347.36
0.001710
0.009312
1622.6
809.4
2432.0 1649.9
931.1
2581.0
3.7461
1.5005
5.2466
17,000
352.29
0.001770
0.008374
1660.2
745.1
2405.4 1690.3
857.4
2547.7
3.8082
1.3709
5.1791
18,000
356.99
0.001840
0.007504
1699.1
675.9
2375.0 1732.2
777.8
2510.0
3.8720
1.2343
5.1064
19,000
361.47
0.001926
0.006677
1740.3
598.9
2339.2 1776.8
689.2
2466.0
3.9396
1.0860
5.0256
20,000
365.75
0.002038
0.005862
1785.8
509.0
2294.8 1826.6
585.5
2412.1
4.0146
0.9164
4.9310
21,000
369.83
0.002207
0.004994
1841.6
391.9
2233.5 1888.0
450.4
2338.4
4.1071
0.7005
4.8076
22,000
373.71
0.002703
0.003644
1951.7
140.8
2092.4 2011.1
161.5
2172.6
4.2942
0.2496
4.5439
22,064
373.95
0.003106
0.003106
2015.7
0
2015.7 2084.3
0
2084.3
4.4070
0
4.4070
Appendix 1
|
775

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
778
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
776
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–6
Superheated water
T
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
°C
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
P  0.01 MPa (45.81°C)*
P  0.05 MPa (81.32°C)
P  0.10 MPa (99.61°C)
Sat.†
14.670
2437.2
2583.9
8.1488
3.2403
2483.2
2645.2
7.5931
1.6941
2505.6
2675.0
7.3589
50
14.867
2443.3
2592.0
8.1741
100
17.196
2515.5
2687.5
8.4489
3.4187
2511.5
2682.4
7.6953
1.6959
2506.2
2675.8
7.3611
150
19.513
2587.9
2783.0
8.6893
3.8897
2585.7
2780.2
7.9413
1.9367
2582.9
2776.6
7.6148
200
21.826
2661.4
2879.6
8.9049
4.3562
2660.0
2877.8
8.1592
2.1724
2658.2
2875.5
7.8356
250
24.136
2736.1
2977.5
9.1015
4.8206
2735.1
2976.2
8.3568
2.4062
2733.9
2974.5
8.0346
300
26.446
2812.3
3076.7
9.2827
5.2841
2811.6
3075.8
8.5387
2.6389
2810.7
3074.5
8.2172
400
31.063
2969.3
3280.0
9.6094
6.2094
2968.9
3279.3
8.8659
3.1027
2968.3
3278.6
8.5452
500
35.680
3132.9
3489.7
9.8998
7.1338
3132.6
3489.3
9.1566
3.5655
3132.2
3488.7
8.8362
600
40.296
3303.3
3706.3
10.1631
8.0577
3303.1
3706.0
9.4201
4.0279
3302.8
3705.6
9.0999
700
44.911
3480.8
3929.9
10.4056
8.9813
3480.6
3929.7
9.6626
4.4900
3480.4
3929.4
9.3424
800
49.527
3665.4
4160.6
10.6312
9.9047
3665.2
4160.4
9.8883
4.9519
3665.0
4160.2
9.5682
900
54.143
3856.9
4398.3
10.8429
10.8280
3856.8
4398.2 10.1000
5.4137
3856.7
4398.0
9.7800
1000
58.758
4055.3
4642.8
11.0429
11.7513
4055.2
4642.7 10.3000
5.8755
4055.0
4642.6
9.9800
1100
63.373
4260.0
4893.8
11.2326
12.6745
4259.9
4893.7 10.4897
6.3372
4259.8
4893.6 10.1698
1200
67.989
4470.9
5150.8
11.4132
13.5977
4470.8
5150.7 10.6704
6.7988
4470.7
5150.6 10.3504
1300
72.604
4687.4
5413.4
11.5857
14.5209
4687.3
5413.3 10.8429
7.2605
4687.2
5413.3 10.5229
P  0.20 MPa (120.21°C)
P  0.30 MPa (133.52°C)
P  0.40 MPa (143.61°C)
Sat.
0.88578
2529.1
2706.3
7.1270
0.60582
2543.2
2724.9
6.9917
0.46242 2553.1
2738.1
6.8955
150
0.95986
2577.1
2769.1
7.2810
0.63402
2571.0
2761.2
7.0792
0.47088 2564.4
2752.8
6.9306
200
1.08049
2654.6
2870.7
7.5081
0.71643
2651.0
2865.9
7.3132
0.53434 2647.2
2860.9
7.1723
250
1.19890
2731.4
2971.2
7.7100
0.79645
2728.9
2967.9
7.5180
0.59520 2726.4
2964.5
7.3804
300
1.31623
2808.8
3072.1
7.8941
0.87535
2807.0
3069.6
7.7037
0.65489 2805.1
3067.1
7.5677
400
1.54934
2967.2
3277.0
8.2236
1.03155
2966.0
3275.5
8.0347
0.77265 2964.9
3273.9
7.9003
500
1.78142
3131.4
3487.7
8.5153
1.18672
3130.6
3486.6
8.3271
0.88936 3129.8
3485.5
8.1933
600
2.01302
3302.2
3704.8
8.7793
1.34139
3301.6
3704.0
8.5915
1.00558 3301.0
3703.3
8.4580
700
2.24434
3479.9
3928.8
9.0221
1.49580
3479.5
3928.2
8.8345
1.12152 3479.0
3927.6
8.7012
800
2.47550
3664.7
4159.8
9.2479
1.65004
3664.3
4159.3
9.0605
1.23730 3663.9
4158.9
8.9274
900
2.70656
3856.3
4397.7
9.4598
1.80417
3856.0
4397.3
9.2725
1.35298 3855.7
4396.9
9.1394
1000
2.93755
4054.8
4642.3
9.6599
1.95824
4054.5
4642.0
9.4726
1.46859 4054.3
4641.7
9.3396
1100
3.16848
4259.6
4893.3
9.8497
2.11226
4259.4
4893.1
9.6624
1.58414 4259.2
4892.9
9.5295
1200
3.39938
4470.5
5150.4
10.0304
2.26624
4470.3
5150.2
9.8431
1.69966 4470.2
5150.0
9.7102
1300
3.63026
4687.1
5413.1
10.2029
2.42019
4686.9
5413.0 10.0157
1.81516 4686.7
5412.8
9.8828
P  0.50 MPa (151.83°C)
P  0.60 MPa (158.83°C)
P  0.80 MPa (170.41°C)
Sat.
0.37483
2560.7
2748.1
6.8207
0.31560
2566.8
2756.2
6.7593
0.24035 2576.0
2768.3
6.6616
200
0.42503
2643.3
2855.8
7.0610
0.35212
2639.4
2850.6
6.9683
0.26088 2631.1
2839.8
6.8177
250
0.47443
2723.8
2961.0
7.2725
0.39390
2721.2
2957.6
7.1833
0.29321 2715.9
2950.4
7.0402
300
0.52261
2803.3
3064.6
7.4614
0.43442
2801.4
3062.0
7.3740
0.32416 2797.5
3056.9
7.2345
350
0.57015
2883.0
3168.1
7.6346
0.47428
2881.6
3166.1
7.5481
0.35442 2878.6
3162.2
7.4107
400
0.61731
2963.7
3272.4
7.7956
0.51374
2962.5
3270.8
7.7097
0.38429 2960.2
3267.7
7.5735
500
0.71095
3129.0
3484.5
8.0893
0.59200
3128.2
3483.4
8.0041
0.44332 3126.6
3481.3
7.8692
600
0.80409
3300.4
3702.5
8.3544
0.66976
3299.8
3701.7
8.2695
0.50186 3298.7
3700.1
8.1354
700
0.89696
3478.6
3927.0
8.5978
0.74725
3478.1
3926.4
8.5132
0.56011 3477.2
3925.3
8.3794
800
0.98966
3663.6
4158.4
8.8240
0.82457
3663.2
4157.9
8.7395
0.61820 3662.5
4157.0
8.6061
900
1.08227
3855.4
4396.6
9.0362
0.90179
3855.1
4396.2
8.9518
0.67619 3854.5
4395.5
8.8185
1000
1.17480
4054.0
4641.4
9.2364
0.97893
4053.8
4641.1
9.1521
0.73411 4053.3
4640.5
9.0189
1100
1.26728
4259.0
4892.6
9.4263
1.05603
4258.8
4892.4
9.3420
0.79197 4258.3
4891.9
9.2090
1200
1.35972
4470.0
5149.8
9.6071
1.13309
4469.8
5149.6
9.5229
0.84980 4469.4
5149.3
9.3898
1300
1.45214
4686.6
5412.6
9.7797
1.21012
4686.4
5412.5
9.6955
0.90761 4686.1
5412.2
9.5625
*The temperature in parentheses is the saturation temperature at the specified pressure.
† Properties of saturated vapor at the specified pressure.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
779
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
777
TABLE A–6
Superheated water (Continued)
T
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
°C
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
P  1.00 MPa (179.88C)
P  1.20 MPa (187.96C)
P  1.40 MPa (195.04C)
Sat.
0.19437
2582.8
2777.1
6.5850
0.16326
2587.8
2783.8
6.5217
0.14078
2591.8
2788.9 6.4675
200
0.20602
2622.3
2828.3
6.6956
0.16934
2612.9
2816.1
6.5909
0.14303
2602.7
2803.0 6.4975
250
0.23275
2710.4
2943.1
6.9265
0.19241
2704.7
2935.6
6.8313
0.16356
2698.9
2927.9 6.7488
300
0.25799
2793.7
3051.6
7.1246
0.21386
2789.7
3046.3
7.0335
0.18233
2785.7
3040.9 6.9553
350
0.28250
2875.7
3158.2
7.3029
0.23455
2872.7
3154.2
7.2139
0.20029
2869.7
3150.1 7.1379
400
0.30661
2957.9
3264.5
7.4670
0.25482
2955.5
3261.3
7.3793
0.21782
2953.1
3258.1 7.3046
500
0.35411
3125.0
3479.1
7.7642
0.29464
3123.4
3477.0
7.6779
0.25216
3121.8
3474.8 7.6047
600
0.40111
3297.5
3698.6
8.0311
0.33395
3296.3
3697.0
7.9456
0.28597
3295.1
3695.5 7.8730
700
0.44783
3476.3
3924.1
8.2755
0.37297
3475.3
3922.9
8.1904
0.31951
3474.4
3921.7 8.1183
800
0.49438
3661.7
4156.1
8.5024
0.41184
3661.0
4155.2
8.4176
0.35288
3660.3
4154.3 8.3458
900
0.54083
3853.9
4394.8
8.7150
0.45059
3853.3
4394.0
8.6303
0.38614
3852.7
4393.3 8.5587
1000
0.58721
4052.7
4640.0
8.9155
0.48928
4052.2
4639.4
8.8310
0.41933
4051.7
4638.8 8.7595
1100
0.63354
4257.9
4891.4
9.1057
0.52792
4257.5
4891.0
9.0212
0.45247
4257.0
4890.5 8.9497
1200
0.67983
4469.0
5148.9
9.2866
0.56652
4468.7
5148.5
9.2022
0.48558
4468.3
5148.1 9.1308
1300
0.72610
4685.8
5411.9
9.4593
0.60509
4685.5
5411.6
9.3750
0.51866
4685.1
5411.3 9.3036
P  1.60 MPa (201.37C)
P  1.80 MPa (207.11C)
P  2.00 MPa (212.38C)
Sat.
0.12374
2594.8
2792.8
6.4200
0.11037
2597.3
2795.9
6.3775
0.09959
2599.1
2798.3 6.3390
225
0.13293
2645.1
2857.8
6.5537
0.11678
2637.0
2847.2
6.4825
0.10381
2628.5
2836.1 6.4160
250
0.14190
2692.9
2919.9
6.6753
0.12502
2686.7
2911.7
6.6088
0.11150
2680.3
2903.3 6.5475
300
0.15866
2781.6
3035.4
6.8864
0.14025
2777.4
3029.9
6.8246
0.12551
2773.2
3024.2 6.7684
350
0.17459
2866.6
3146.0
7.0713
0.15460
2863.6
3141.9
7.0120
0.13860
2860.5
3137.7 6.9583
400
0.19007
2950.8
3254.9
7.2394
0.16849
2948.3
3251.6
7.1814
0.15122
2945.9
3248.4 7.1292
500
0.22029
3120.1
3472.6
7.5410
0.19551
3118.5
3470.4
7.4845
0.17568
3116.9
3468.3 7.4337
600
0.24999
3293.9
3693.9
7.8101
0.22200
3292.7
3692.3
7.7543
0.19962
3291.5
3690.7 7.7043
700
0.27941
3473.5
3920.5
8.0558
0.24822
3472.6
3919.4
8.0005
0.22326
3471.7
3918.2 7.9509
800
0.30865
3659.5
4153.4
8.2834
0.27426
3658.8
4152.4
8.2284
0.24674
3658.0
4151.5 8.1791
900
0.33780
3852.1
4392.6
8.4965
0.30020
3851.5
4391.9
8.4417
0.27012
3850.9
4391.1 8.3925
1000
0.36687
4051.2
4638.2
8.6974
0.32606
4050.7
4637.6
8.6427
0.29342
4050.2
4637.1 8.5936
1100
0.39589
4256.6
4890.0
8.8878
0.35188
4256.2
4889.6
8.8331
0.31667
4255.7
4889.1 8.7842
1200
0.42488
4467.9
5147.7
9.0689
0.37766
4467.6
5147.3
9.0143
0.33989
4467.2
5147.0 8.9654
1300
0.45383
4684.8
5410.9
9.2418
0.40341
4684.5
5410.6
9.1872
0.36308
4684.2
5410.3 9.1384
P  2.50 MPa (223.95C)
P  3.00 MPa (233.85C)
P  3.50 MPa (242.56C)
Sat.
0.07995
2602.1
2801.9
6.2558
0.06667
2603.2
2803.2
6.1856
0.05706
2603.0
2802.7 6.1244
225
0.08026
2604.8
2805.5
6.2629
250
0.08705
2663.3
2880.9
6.4107
0.07063
2644.7
2856.5
6.2893
0.05876
2624.0
2829.7 6.1764
300
0.09894
2762.2
3009.6
6.6459
0.08118
2750.8
2994.3
6.5412
0.06845
2738.8
2978.4 6.4484
350
0.10979
2852.5
3127.0
6.8424
0.09056
2844.4
3116.1
6.7450
0.07680
2836.0
3104.9 6.6601
400
0.12012
2939.8
3240.1
7.0170
0.09938
2933.6
3231.7
6.9235
0.08456
2927.2
3223.2 6.8428
450
0.13015
3026.2
3351.6
7.1768
0.10789
3021.2
3344.9
7.0856
0.09198
3016.1
3338.1 7.0074
500
0.13999
3112.8
3462.8
7.3254
0.11620
3108.6
3457.2
7.2359
0.09919
3104.5
3451.7 7.1593
600
0.15931
3288.5
3686.8
7.5979
0.13245
3285.5
3682.8
7.5103
0.11325
3282.5
3678.9 7.4357
700
0.17835
3469.3
3915.2
7.8455
0.14841
3467.0
3912.2
7.7590
0.12702
3464.7
3909.3 7.6855
800
0.19722
3656.2
4149.2
8.0744
0.16420
3654.3
4146.9
7.9885
0.14061
3652.5
4144.6 7.9156
900
0.21597
3849.4
4389.3
8.2882
0.17988
3847.9
4387.5
8.2028
0.15410
3846.4
4385.7 8.1304
1000
0.23466
4049.0
4635.6
8.4897
0.19549
4047.7
4634.2
8.4045
0.16751
4046.4
4632.7 8.3324
1100
0.25330
4254.7
4887.9
8.6804
0.21105
4253.6
4886.7
8.5955
0.18087
4252.5
4885.6 8.5236
1200
0.27190
4466.3
5146.0
8.8618
0.22658
4465.3
5145.1
8.7771
0.19420
4464.4
5144.1 8.7053
1300
0.29048
4683.4
5409.5
9.0349
0.24207
4682.6
5408.8
8.9502
0.20750
4681.8
5408.0 8.8786

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
780
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–6
Superheated water (Continued)
T
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
°C
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
P  4.0 MPa (250.35C)
P  4.5 MPa (257.44C)
P  5.0 MPa (263.94C)
Sat.
0.04978
2601.7
2800.8
6.0696
0.04406
2599.7
2798.0
6.0198
0.03945
2597.0
2794.2 5.9737
275
0.05461
2668.9
2887.3
6.2312
0.04733
2651.4
2864.4
6.1429
0.04144
2632.3
2839.5 6.0571
300
0.05887
2726.2
2961.7
6.3639
0.05138
2713.0
2944.2
6.2854
0.04535
2699.0
2925.7 6.2111
350
0.06647
2827.4
3093.3
6.5843
0.05842
2818.6
3081.5
6.5153
0.05197
2809.5
3069.3 6.4516
400
0.07343
2920.8
3214.5
6.7714
0.06477
2914.2
3205.7
6.7071
0.05784
2907.5
3196.7 6.6483
450
0.08004
3011.0
3331.2
6.9386
0.07076
3005.8
3324.2
6.8770
0.06332
3000.6
3317.2 6.8210
500
0.08644
3100.3
3446.0
7.0922
0.07652
3096.0
3440.4
7.0323
0.06858
3091.8
3434.7 6.9781
600
0.09886
3279.4
3674.9
7.3706
0.08766
3276.4
3670.9
7.3127
0.07870
3273.3
3666.9 7.2605
700
0.11098
3462.4
3906.3
7.6214
0.09850
3460.0
3903.3
7.5647
0.08852
3457.7
3900.3 7.5136
800
0.12292
3650.6
4142.3
7.8523
0.10916
3648.8
4140.0
7.7962
0.09816
3646.9
4137.7 7.7458
900
0.13476
3844.8
4383.9
8.0675
0.11972
3843.3
4382.1
8.0118
0.10769
3841.8
4380.2 7.9619
1000
0.14653
4045.1
4631.2
8.2698
0.13020
4043.9
4629.8
8.2144
0.11715
4042.6
4628.3 8.1648
1100
0.15824
4251.4
4884.4
8.4612
0.14064
4250.4
4883.2
8.4060
0.12655
4249.3
4882.1 8.3566
1200
0.16992
4463.5
5143.2
8.6430
0.15103
4462.6
5142.2
8.5880
0.13592
4461.6
5141.3 8.5388
1300
0.18157
4680.9
5407.2
8.8164
0.16140
4680.1
5406.5
8.7616
0.14527
4679.3
5405.7 8.7124
P  6.0 MPa (275.59C)
P  7.0 MPa (285.83C)
P  8.0 MPa (295.01C)
Sat.
0.03245
2589.9
2784.6
5.8902
0.027378 2581.0
2772.6
5.8148
0.023525 2570.5
2758.7 5.7450
300
0.03619
2668.4
2885.6
6.0703
0.029492 2633.5
2839.9
5.9337
0.024279 2592.3
2786.5 5.7937
350
0.04225
2790.4
3043.9
6.3357
0.035262 2770.1
3016.9
6.2305
0.029975 2748.3
2988.1 6.1321
400
0.04742
2893.7
3178.3
6.5432
0.039958 2879.5
3159.2
6.4502
0.034344 2864.6
3139.4 6.3658
450
0.05217
2989.9
3302.9
6.7219
0.044187 2979.0
3288.3
6.6353
0.038194 2967.8
3273.3 6.5579
500
0.05667
3083.1
3423.1
6.8826
0.048157 3074.3
3411.4
6.8000
0.041767 3065.4
3399.5 6.7266
550
0.06102
3175.2
3541.3
7.0308
0.051966 3167.9
3531.6
6.9507
0.045172 3160.5
3521.8 6.8800
600
0.06527
3267.2
3658.8
7.1693
0.055665 3261.0
3650.6
7.0910
0.048463 3254.7
3642.4 7.0221
700
0.07355
3453.0
3894.3
7.4247
0.062850 3448.3
3888.3
7.3487
0.054829 3443.6
3882.2 7.2822
800
0.08165
3643.2
4133.1
7.6582
0.069856 3639.5
4128.5
7.5836
0.061011 3635.7
4123.8 7.5185
900
0.08964
3838.8
4376.6
7.8751
0.076750 3835.7
4373.0
7.8014
0.067082 3832.7
4369.3 7.7372
1000
0.09756
4040.1
4625.4
8.0786
0.083571 4037.5
4622.5
8.0055
0.073079 4035.0
4619.6 7.9419
1100
0.10543
4247.1
4879.7
8.2709
0.090341 4245.0
4877.4
8.1982
0.079025 4242.8
4875.0 8.1350
1200
0.11326
4459.8
5139.4
8.4534
0.097075 4457.9
5137.4
8.3810
0.084934 4456.1
5135.5 8.3181
1300
0.12107
4677.7
5404.1
8.6273
0.103781 4676.1
5402.6
8.5551
0.090817 4674.5
5401.0 8.4925
P  9.0 MPa (303.35C)
P  10.0 MPa (311.00C)
P  12.5 MPa (327.81C)
Sat.
0.020489 2558.5
2742.9
5.6791
0.018028 2545.2
2725.5
5.6159
0.013496 2505.6
2674.3 5.4638
325
0.023284 2647.6
2857.1
5.8738
0.019877 2611.6
2810.3
5.7596
350
0.025816 2725.0
2957.3
6.0380
0.022440 2699.6
2924.0
5.9460
0.016138 2624.9
2826.6 5.7130
400
0.029960 2849.2
3118.8
6.2876
0.026436 2833.1
3097.5
6.2141
0.020030 2789.6
3040.0 6.0433
450
0.033524 2956.3
3258.0
6.4872
0.029782 2944.5
3242.4
6.4219
0.023019 2913.7
3201.5 6.2749
500
0.036793 3056.3
3387.4
6.6603
0.032811 3047.0
3375.1
6.5995
0.025630 3023.2
3343.6 6.4651
550
0.039885 3153.0
3512.0
6.8164
0.035655 3145.4
3502.0
6.7585
0.028033 3126.1
3476.5 6.6317
600
0.042861 3248.4
3634.1
6.9605
0.038378 3242.0
3625.8
6.9045
0.030306 3225.8
3604.6 6.7828
650
0.045755 3343.4
3755.2
7.0954
0.041018 3338.0
3748.1
7.0408
0.032491 3324.1
3730.2 6.9227
700
0.048589 3438.8
3876.1
7.2229
0.043597 3434.0
3870.0
7.1693
0.034612 3422.0
3854.6 7.0540
800
0.054132 3632.0
4119.2
7.4606
0.048629 3628.2
4114.5
7.4085
0.038724 3618.8
4102.8 7.2967
900
0.059562 3829.6
4365.7
7.6802
0.053547 3826.5
4362.0
7.6290
0.042720 3818.9
4352.9 7.5195
1000
0.064919 4032.4
4616.7
7.8855
0.058391 4029.9
4613.8
7.8349
0.046641 4023.5
4606.5 7.7269
1100
0.070224 4240.7
4872.7
8.0791
0.063183 4238.5
4870.3
8.0289
0.050510 4233.1
4864.5 7.9220
1200
0.075492 4454.2
5133.6
8.2625
0.067938 4452.4
5131.7
8.2126
0.054342 4447.7
5127.0 8.1065
1300
0.080733 4672.9
5399.5
8.4371
0.072667 4671.3
5398.0
8.3874
0.058147 4667.3
5394.1 8.2819
778
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
781
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–6
Superheated water (Concluded)
T
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
°C
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
P  15.0 MPa (342.16C)
P  17.5 MPa (354.67C)
P  20.0 MPa (365.75C)
Sat.
0.010341
2455.7
2610.8
5.3108
0.007932
2390.7 2529.5 5.1435
0.005862
2294.8
2412.1
4.9310
350
0.011481
2520.9
2693.1
5.4438
400
0.015671
2740.6
2975.7
5.8819
0.012463
2684.3 2902.4 5.7211
0.009950
2617.9
2816.9
5.5526
450
0.018477
2880.8
3157.9
6.1434
0.015204
2845.4 3111.4 6.0212
0.012721
2807.3
3061.7
5.9043
500
0.020828
2998.4
3310.8
6.3480
0.017385
2972.4 3276.7 6.2424
0.014793
2945.3
3241.2
6.1446
550
0.022945
3106.2
3450.4
6.5230
0.019305
3085.8 3423.6 6.4266
0.016571
3064.7
3396.2
6.3390
600
0.024921
3209.3
3583.1
6.6796
0.021073
3192.5 3561.3 6.5890
0.018185
3175.3
3539.0
6.5075
650
0.026804
3310.1
3712.1
6.8233
0.022742
3295.8 3693.8 6.7366
0.019695
3281.4
3675.3
6.6593
700
0.028621
3409.8
3839.1
6.9573
0.024342
3397.5 3823.5 6.8735
0.021134
3385.1
3807.8
6.7991
800
0.032121
3609.3
4091.1
7.2037
0.027405
3599.7 4079.3 7.1237
0.023870
3590.1
4067.5
7.0531
900
0.035503
3811.2
4343.7
7.4288
0.030348
3803.5 4334.6 7.3511
0.026484
3795.7
4325.4
7.2829
1000
0.038808
4017.1
4599.2
7.6378
0.033215
4010.7 4592.0 7.5616
0.029020
4004.3
4584.7
7.4950
1100
0.042062
4227.7
4858.6
7.8339
0.036029
4222.3 4852.8 7.7588
0.031504
4216.9
4847.0
7.6933
1200
0.045279
4443.1
5122.3
8.0192
0.038806
4438.5 5117.6 7.9449
0.033952
4433.8
5112.9
7.8802
1300
0.048469
4663.3
5390.3
8.1952
0.041556
4659.2 5386.5 8.1215
0.036371
4655.2
5382.7
8.0574
P  25.0 MPa 
P  30.0 MPa 
P  35.0 MPa 
375
0.001978
1799.9
1849.4
4.0345
0.001792
1738.1 1791.9 3.9313
0.001701
1702.8
1762.4
3.8724
400
0.006005
2428.5
2578.7
5.1400
0.002798
2068.9 2152.8 4.4758
0.002105
1914.9
1988.6
4.2144
425
0.007886
2607.8
2805.0
5.4708
0.005299
2452.9 2611.8 5.1473
0.003434
2253.3
2373.5
4.7751
450
0.009176
2721.2
2950.6
5.6759
0.006737
2618.9 2821.0 5.4422
0.004957
2497.5
2671.0
5.1946
500
0.011143
2887.3
3165.9
5.9643
0.008691
2824.0 3084.8 5.7956
0.006933
2755.3
2997.9
5.6331
550
0.012736
3020.8
3339.2
6.1816
0.010175
2974.5 3279.7 6.0403
0.008348
2925.8
3218.0
5.9093
600
0.014140
3140.0
3493.5
6.3637
0.011445
3103.4 3446.8 6.2373
0.009523
3065.6
3399.0
6.1229
650
0.015430
3251.9
3637.7
6.5243
0.012590
3221.7 3599.4 6.4074
0.010565
3190.9
3560.7
6.3030
700
0.016643
3359.9
3776.0
6.6702
0.013654
3334.3 3743.9 6.5599
0.011523
3308.3
3711.6
6.4623
800
0.018922
3570.7
4043.8
6.9322
0.015628
3551.2 4020.0 6.8301
0.013278
3531.6
3996.3
6.7409
900
0.021075
3780.2
4307.1
7.1668
0.017473
3764.6 4288.8 7.0695
0.014904
3749.0
4270.6
6.9853
1000
0.023150
3991.5
4570.2
7.3821
0.019240
3978.6 4555.8 7.2880
0.016450
3965.8
4541.5
7.2069
1100
0.025172
4206.1
4835.4
7.5825
0.020954
4195.2 4823.9 7.4906
0.017942
4184.4
4812.4
7.4118
1200
0.027157
4424.6
5103.5
7.7710
0.022630
4415.3 5094.2 7.6807
0.019398
4406.1
5085.0
7.6034
1300
0.029115
4647.2
5375.1
7.9494
0.024279
4639.2 5367.6 7.8602
0.020827
4631.2
5360.2
7.7841
P  40.0 MPa 
P  50.0 MPa 
P  60.0 MPa 
375
0.001641
1677.0
1742.6
3.8290
0.001560
1638.6 1716.6 3.7642
0.001503
1609.7
1699.9
3.7149
400
0.001911
1855.0
1931.4
4.1145
0.001731
1787.8 1874.4 4.0029
0.001633
1745.2
1843.2
3.9317
425
0.002538
2097.5
2199.0
4.5044
0.002009
1960.3 2060.7 4.2746
0.001816
1892.9
2001.8
4.1630
450
0.003692
2364.2
2511.8
4.9449
0.002487
2160.3 2284.7 4.5896
0.002086
2055.1
2180.2
4.4140
500
0.005623
2681.6
2906.5
5.4744
0.003890
2528.1 2722.6 5.1762
0.002952
2393.2
2570.3
4.9356
550
0.006985
2875.1
3154.4
5.7857
0.005118
2769.5 3025.4 5.5563
0.003955
2664.6
2901.9
5.3517
600
0.008089
3026.8
3350.4
6.0170
0.006108
2947.1 3252.6 5.8245
0.004833
2866.8
3156.8
5.6527
650
0.009053
3159.5
3521.6
6.2078
0.006957
3095.6 3443.5 6.0373
0.005591
3031.3
3366.8
5.8867
700
0.009930
3282.0
3679.2
6.3740
0.007717
3228.7 3614.6 6.2179
0.006265
3175.4
3551.3
6.0814
800
0.011521
3511.8
3972.6
6.6613
0.009073
3472.2 3925.8 6.5225
0.007456
3432.6
3880.0
6.4033
900
0.012980
3733.3
4252.5
6.9107
0.010296
3702.0 4216.8 6.7819
0.008519
3670.9
4182.1
6.6725
1000
0.014360
3952.9
4527.3
7.1355
0.011441
3927.4 4499.4 7.0131
0.009504
3902.0
4472.2
6.9099
1100
0.015686
4173.7
4801.1
7.3425
0.012534
4152.2 4778.9 7.2244
0.010439
4130.9
4757.3
7.1255
1200
0.016976
4396.9
5075.9
7.5357
0.013590
4378.6 5058.1 7.4207
0.011339
4360.5
5040.8
7.3248
1300
0.018239
4623.3
5352.8
7.7175
0.014620
4607.5 5338.5 7.6048
0.012213
4591.8
5324.5
7.5111
Appendix 1
|
779

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
782
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–7
Compressed liquid water
T
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
°C
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
P  5 MPa (263.94C)
P  10 MPa (311.00C)
P  15 MPa (342.16C)
Sat.
0.0012862 1148.1
1154.5
2.9207
0.0014522 1393.3
1407.9
3.3603
0.0016572 1585.5
1610.3
3.6848
0
0.0009977
0.04
5.03
0.0001
0.0009952
0.12
10.07
0.0003
0.0009928
0.18
15.07
0.0004
20
0.0009996
83.61
88.61
0.2954
0.0009973
83.31
93.28
0.2943
0.0009951
83.01
97.93
0.2932
40
0.0010057
166.92
171.95
0.5705
0.0010035
166.33
176.37
0.5685
0.0010013
165.75
180.77
0.5666
60
0.0010149
250.29
255.36
0.8287
0.0010127
249.43
259.55
0.8260
0.0010105
248.58
263.74
0.8234
80
0.0010267
333.82
338.96
1.0723
0.0010244
332.69
342.94
1.0691
0.0010221
331.59
346.92
1.0659
100
0.0010410
417.65
422.85
1.3034
0.0010385
416.23
426.62
1.2996
0.0010361
414.85
430.39
1.2958
120
0.0010576
501.91
507.19
1.5236
0.0010549
500.18
510.73
1.5191
0.0010522
498.50
514.28
1.5148
140
0.0010769
586.80
592.18
1.7344
0.0010738
584.72
595.45
1.7293
0.0010708
582.69
598.75
1.7243
160
0.0010988
672.55
678.04
1.9374
0.0010954
670.06
681.01
1.9316
0.0010920
667.63
684.01
1.9259
180
0.0011240
759.47
765.09
2.1338
0.0011200
756.48
767.68
2.1271
0.0011160
753.58
770.32
2.1206
200
0.0011531
847.92
853.68
2.3251
0.0011482
844.32
855.80
2.3174
0.0011435
840.84
858.00
2.3100
220
0.0011868
938.39
944.32
2.5127
0.0011809
934.01
945.82
2.5037
0.0011752
929.81
947.43
2.4951
240
0.0012268 1031.6
1037.7
2.6983
0.0012192 1026.2
1038.3
2.6876
0.0012121 1021.0
1039.2
2.6774
260
0.0012755 1128.5
1134.9
2.8841
0.0012653 1121.6
1134.3
2.8710
0.0012560 1115.1
1134.0
2.8586
280
0.0013226 1221.8
1235.0
3.0565
0.0013096 1213.4
1233.0
3.0410
300
0.0013980 1329.4
1343.3
3.2488
0.0013783 1317.6
1338.3
3.2279
320
0.0014733 1431.9
1454.0
3.4263
340
0.0016311 1567.9
1592.4
3.6555
P  20 MPa (365.75C)
P  30 MPa 
P  50 MPa 
Sat.
0.0020378 1785.8
1826.6
4.0146
0
0.0009904
0.23
20.03
0.0005
0.0009857
0.29
29.86
0.0003
0.0009767
0.29
49.13 0.0010
20
0.0009929
82.71
102.57
0.2921
0.0009886
82.11
111.77
0.2897
0.0009805
80.93
129.95
0.2845
40
0.0009992
165.17
185.16
0.5646
0.0009951
164.05
193.90
0.5607
0.0009872
161.90
211.25
0.5528
60
0.0010084
247.75
267.92
0.8208
0.0010042
246.14
276.26
0.8156
0.0009962
243.08
292.88
0.8055
80
0.0010199
330.50
350.90
1.0627
0.0010155
328.40
358.86
1.0564
0.0010072
324.42
374.78
1.0442
100
0.0010337
413.50
434.17
1.2920
0.0010290
410.87
441.74
1.2847
0.0010201
405.94
456.94
1.2705
120
0.0010496
496.85
517.84
1.5105
0.0010445
493.66
525.00
1.5020
0.0010349
487.69
539.43
1.4859
140
0.0010679
580.71
602.07
1.7194
0.0010623
576.90
608.76
1.7098
0.0010517
569.77
622.36
1.6916
160
0.0010886
665.28
687.05
1.9203
0.0010823
660.74
693.21
1.9094
0.0010704
652.33
705.85
1.8889
180
0.0011122
750.78
773.02
2.1143
0.0011049
745.40
778.55
2.1020
0.0010914
735.49
790.06
2.0790
200
0.0011390
837.49
860.27
2.3027
0.0011304
831.11
865.02
2.2888
0.0011149
819.45
875.19
2.2628
220
0.0011697
925.77
949.16
2.4867
0.0011595
918.15
952.93
2.4707
0.0011412
904.39
961.45
2.4414
240
0.0012053 1016.1
1040.2
2.6676
0.0011927 1006.9
1042.7
2.6491
0.0011708
990.55 1049.1
2.6156
260
0.0012472 1109.0
1134.0
2.8469
0.0012314 1097.8
1134.7
2.8250
0.0012044 1078.2
1138.4
2.7864
280
0.0012978 1205.6
1231.5
3.0265
0.0012770 1191.5
1229.8
3.0001
0.0012430 1167.7
1229.9
2.9547
300
0.0013611 1307.2
1334.4
3.2091
0.0013322 1288.9
1328.9
3.1761
0.0012879 1259.6
1324.0
3.1218
320
0.0014450 1416.6
1445.5
3.3996
0.0014014 1391.7
1433.7
3.3558
0.0013409 1354.3
1421.4
3.2888
340
0.0015693 1540.2
1571.6
3.6086
0.0014932 1502.4
1547.1
3.5438
0.0014049 1452.9
1523.1
3.4575
360
0.0018248 1703.6
1740.1
3.8787
0.0016276 1626.8
1675.6
3.7499
0.0014848 1556.5
1630.7
3.6301
380
0.0018729 1782.0
1838.2
4.0026
0.0015884 1667.1
1746.5
3.8102
780
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
783
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
781
TABLE A–8
Saturated ice–water vapor
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg · K
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp.,
press.,
ice,
vapor,
ice,
Subl.,
vapor,
ice,
Subl.,
vapor,
ice,
Subl.,
vapor,
T °C
Psat kPa
vi
vg
ui
uig
ug
hi
hig
hg
si
sig
sg
0.01
0.61169
0.001091
205.99
333.40
2707.9
2374.5
333.40
2833.9
2500.5
1.2202
10.374
9.154
0
0.61115
0.001091
206.17
333.43
2707.9
2374.5
333.43
2833.9
2500.5
1.2204
10.375
9.154
2
0.51772
0.001091
241.62
337.63
2709.4
2371.8
337.63
2834.5
2496.8
1.2358
10.453
9.218
4
0.43748
0.001090
283.84
341.80
2710.8
2369.0
341.80
2835.0
2493.2
1.2513
10.533
9.282
6
0.36873
0.001090
334.27
345.94
2712.2
2366.2
345.93
2835.4
2489.5
1.2667
10.613
9.347
8
0.30998
0.001090
394.66
350.04
2713.5
2363.5
350.04
2835.8
2485.8
1.2821
10.695
9.413
10
0.25990
0.001089
467.17
354.12
2714.8
2360.7
354.12
2836.2
2482.1
1.2976
10.778
9.480
12
0.21732
0.001089
554.47
358.17
2716.1
2357.9
358.17
2836.6
2478.4
1.3130
10.862
9.549
14
0.18121
0.001088
659.88
362.18
2717.3
2355.2
362.18
2836.9
2474.7
1.3284
10.947
9.618
16
0.15068
0.001088
787.51
366.17
2718.6
2352.4
366.17
2837.2
2471.0
1.3439
11.033
9.689
18
0.12492
0.001088
942.51
370.13
2719.7
2349.6
370.13
2837.5
2467.3
1.3593
11.121
9.761
20
0.10326
0.001087
1131.3
374.06
2720.9
2346.8
374.06
2837.7
2463.6
1.3748
11.209
9.835
22
0.08510
0.001087
1362.0
377.95
2722.0
2344.1
377.95
2837.9
2459.9
1.3903
11.300
9.909
24
0.06991
0.001087
1644.7
381.82
2723.1
2341.3
381.82
2838.1
2456.2
1.4057
11.391
9.985
26
0.05725
0.001087
1992.2
385.66
2724.2
2338.5
385.66
2838.2
2452.5
1.4212
11.484
10.063
28
0.04673
0.001086
2421.0
389.47
2725.2
2335.7
389.47
2838.3
2448.8
1.4367
11.578
10.141
30
0.03802
0.001086
2951.7
393.25
2726.2
2332.9
393.25
2838.4
2445.1
1.4521
11.673
10.221
32
0.03082
0.001086
3610.9
397.00
2727.2
2330.2
397.00
2838.4
2441.4
1.4676
11.770
10.303
34
0.02490
0.001085
4432.4
400.72
2728.1
2327.4
400.72
2838.5
2437.7
1.4831
11.869
10.386
36
0.02004
0.001085
5460.1
404.40
2729.0
2324.6
404.40
2838.4
2434.0
1.4986
11.969
10.470
38
0.01608
0.001085
6750.5
408.07
2729.9
2321.8
408.07
2838.4
2430.3
1.5141
12.071
10.557
40
0.01285
0.001084
8376.7
411.70
2730.7
2319.0
411.70
2838.3
2426.6
1.5296
12.174
10.644

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
784
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
782
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1200
1100
1000
800
700
600
500
400
300
200
100
0
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
Entropy, kJ/kg · K
3
2
1
0
10
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
900
Temperature, °C
2800
h = 2650 kJ/kg
= 2650 kJ/kg
2650
2550
2900
3000
3100
3200
3300
3400
3500
3600
3700
3800
3900
4000
4100
4200
4300
4400
4500
4600
4700
4800
4900
5000
h = 5000 kJ/kg
h = 5000 kJ/kg
P = 30000 bar
P = 30000 bar
Density = kg/m
Density = kg/m3
5500
5000
5000
300 kg/m
300 kg/m3
100 kg/m
100 kg/m3
30 kg/m
30 kg/m3
10 kg/m
10 kg/m3
3 kg/m
3 kg/m3
1 kg/m
1 kg/m3
0.3 kg/m
0.3 kg/m3
0.1 kg/m
0.1 kg/m3
0.03 kg/m
0.03 kg/m3
Density = 0.01 kg/m
Density = 0.01 kg/m3
20000
20000
15000
15000
10000
10000
8000
8000
6000
6000
5000
5000
1500
1500
1000
1000
800
800
600
600
500
500
400
400
350
350
300
300
250
250
200
200
150
150
100
100
80
80
60
60
40
80%
80%
70%
70%
60%
60%
50%
50%
40%
40%
30%
20%
30
30
20
20
15
15
10
10
8
6
4
3
2
1.5
1.5
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.80.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.15
0.15
0.1
0.1
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.06
0.04
0.04
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.015
0.015
0.008
0.008
0.006
0.006
0.004
0.004
0.003
0.003
0.002
0.002
2000
2000
3000
3000
4000
4000
h
=
4
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
1
4
0
0
16
00
h =
Quality = 10
Quality = 10%
Saturated liquid
Saturated liquid
2
4
0
0
h
=
2
2
0
0
h
=
2800
h = 2600 kJ/kg
2650
2550
2900
3000
3100
3200
3300
3400
3500
3600
3700
3800
3900
4000
4100
4200
4300
4400
4500
4600
4700
4800
4900
5000
h = 5000 kJ/kg
P = 30000 bar
Density = kg/m3
5500
5000
300 kg/m3
100 kg/m3
30 kg/m3
10 kg/m3
3 kg/m3
1 kg/m3
0.3 kg/m3
0.1 kg/m3
0.03 kg/m3
Density = 0.01 kg/m3
20000
15000
10000
8000
6000
5000
1500
1000
800
600
500
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
80
60
40
80%
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
30
20
15
10
8
6
4
3
2
1.5
1.0
0.80.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.015
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.003
0.002
2000
3000
4000
6
0
0
2
0
0
h
=
4
0
0
k
J/
k
g
8
0
0
1
0
0
0
1
2
0
0
1
4
0
0
16
00
18
00
20
00
22
00
24
00
h =
260
0
Qua
lity
= 90
%
Qua
lity
= 90
%
Quality = 10%
Saturated liquid
2
0
0
0
1
8
0
0
1
6
0
0
14
0
0
12
0
0
10
0
0
2
0
0
0
1
8
0
0
1
6
0
0
14
0
0
12
0
0
10
0
0
h
=
2
2
0
0
3
8
0
0
3
6
0
0
3
4
0
0
3
2
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
6
0
0
3
0
0
0
3
8
0
0
3
6
0
0
3
4
0
0
3
2
0
0
2
8
0
0
2
6
0
0
3
0
0
0
2
4
0
0
4
5
0
0
4
0
0
0
h
=
4
2
0
0
4
5
0
0
4
0
0
0
h
=
4
2
0
0
FIGURE A–9
T-s diagram for water.
Copyright © 1984. From NBS/NRC Steam Tables/1 by Lester Haar, John S. Gallagher, and George S. Kell. Reproduced by permission of Routledge/Taylor & Francis
Books, Inc.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
785
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
783
Enthalpy, kJ/kg
4000
3000
2000
1000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1000
2
3
4
5
6
Entropy, kJ/kg · K
7
8
9
10
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
P = 30000 bar
P = 30000 bar
25000
25000
T = 300
= 300°C
400
400°C
500
500°C
600
600°C
700
700°C
800
800°C
900
900°C
1000
1000°C
1100
1100°C
T = 1100
T = 1100°C
20000
20000
15000
15000
10000
10000
8000
8000
6000
6000
5000
5000
4000
4000
3000
3000
2000
2000
1500
1500
1000
1000
800
800
600
600
400
400
300
300
200
200
150
150
100
100
80
80
60
60
50
50
30
30
20
20
15
15
10
10
8
6
5
3
2
1.5
1.5
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.8
98%
98%
96%
96%
94%
94%
92%
92%
88%
88%
86%
86%
84%
84%
82%
82%
80%
80%
78%
78%
76%
76%
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.2
0.2
0.15
0.15
0.1
0.1
0.08
0.08
0.06
0.06
0.04
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.03
0.03
0.02
0.02
0.015
0.015
0.01
0.01
P = 0.008 bar
P = 0.008 bar
4
40
40
500
500
Den
sit
y =
0.0
1 kg/
m3
0.1 k
g/m3
1 kg/
m3
10 kg/m3
100 kg/m
3
Density = 1000 kg/m3
Qualit
y = 9
0%
74%
74%
72%
72%
70%
70%
68%
68%
66%
66%
64%
64%
62%
62%
60%
60%
58%
58%
56%
56%
54%
54%
52%
52%
50%
50%
48%
48%
46%
46%
44%
44%
42%
42%
40%
40%
P = 30000 bar
25000
T = 300°C
400°C
500°C
600°C
700°C
800°C
900°C
1000°C
1100°C
T = 1100°C
20000
15000
10000
8000
6000
5000
4000
3000
2000
1500
1000
800
600
400
300
200
150
100
80
60
50
30
20
15
10
8
6
5
3
2
1.5
1.0
0.8
98%
96%
94%
92%
88%
86%
84%
82%
80%
78%
76%
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.15
0.1
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.05
0.03
0.02
0.015
0.01
P = 0.008 bar
4
40
500
Den
sit
y =
0.0
1 kg/
m3
0.1 k
g/m3
1 kg/
m3
10 kg/m3
100 kg/m
3
Density = 1000 kg/m3
Qualit
y = 9
0%
74%
72%
70%
68%
66%
64%
62%
60%
58%
56%
54%
52%
50%
48%
46%
44%
42%
40%
5000
FIGURE A–10
Mollier diagram for water.
Copyright © 1984. From NBS/NRC Steam Tables/1 by Lester Haar, John S. Gallagher, and George S. Kell. Reproduced by permission of Routledge/Taylor &
Francis Books, Inc.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
786
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
784
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–11
Saturated refrigerant-134a—Temperature table
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg · K
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp., press.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
T °C
Psat kPa
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
40
51.25
0.0007054
0.36081
0.036
207.40
207.37
0.000 225.86
225.86
0.00000
0.96866
0.96866
38
56.86
0.0007083
0.32732
2.475
206.04
208.51
2.515 224.61
227.12
0.01072
0.95511
0.96584
36
62.95
0.0007112
0.29751
4.992
204.67
209.66
5.037 223.35
228.39
0.02138
0.94176
0.96315
34
69.56
0.0007142
0.27090
7.517
203.29
210.81
7.566 222.09
229.65
0.03199
0.92859
0.96058
32
76.71
0.0007172
0.24711
10.05
201.91
211.96
10.10
220.81
230.91
0.04253
0.91560
0.95813
30
84.43
0.0007203
0.22580
12.59
200.52
213.11
12.65
219.52
232.17
0.05301
0.90278
0.95579
28
92.76
0.0007234
0.20666
15.13
199.12
214.25
15.20
218.22
233.43
0.06344
0.89012
0.95356
26
101.73
0.0007265
0.18946
17.69
197.72
215.40
17.76
216.92
234.68
0.07382
0.87762
0.95144
24
111.37
0.0007297
0.17395
20.25
196.30
216.55
20.33
215.59
235.92
0.08414
0.86527
0.94941
22
121.72
0.0007329
0.15995
22.82
194.88
217.70
22.91
214.26 s237.17
0.09441
0.85307
0.94748
20
132.82
0.0007362
0.14729
25.39
193.45
218.84
25.49
212.91
238.41
0.10463
0.84101
0.94564
18
144.69
0.0007396
0.13583
27.98
192.01
219.98
28.09
211.55
239.64
0.11481
0.82908
0.94389
16
157.38
0.0007430
0.12542
30.57
190.56
221.13
30.69
210.18
240.87
0.12493
0.81729
0.94222
14
170.93
0.0007464
0.11597
33.17
189.09
222.27
33.30
208.79
242.09
0.13501
0.80561
0.94063
12
185.37
0.0007499
0.10736
35.78
187.62
223.40
35.92
207.38
243.30
0.14504
0.79406
0.93911
10
200.74
0.0007535
0.099516
38.40
186.14
224.54
38.55
205.96
244.51
0.15504
0.78263
0.93766
8
217.08
0.0007571
0.092352
41.03
184.64
225.67
41.19
204.52
245.72
0.16498
0.77130
0.93629
6
234.44
0.0007608
0.085802
43.66
183.13
226.80
43.84
203.07
246.91
0.17489
0.76008
0.93497
4
252.85
0.0007646
0.079804
46.31
181.61
227.92
46.50
201.60
248.10
0.18476
0.74896
0.93372
2
272.36
0.0007684
0.074304
48.96
180.08
229.04
49.17
200.11
249.28
0.19459
0.73794
0.93253
0
293.01
0.0007723
0.069255
51.63
178.53
230.16
51.86
198.60
250.45
0.20439
0.72701
0.93139
2
314.84
0.0007763
0.064612
54.30
176.97
231.27
54.55
197.07
251.61
0.21415
0.71616
0.93031
4
337.90
0.0007804
0.060338
56.99
175.39
232.38
57.25
195.51
252.77
0.22387
0.70540
0.92927
6
362.23
0.0007845
0.056398
59.68
173.80
233.48
59.97
193.94
253.91
0.23356
0.69471
0.92828
8
387.88
0.0007887
0.052762
62.39
172.19
234.58
62.69
192.35
255.04
0.24323
0.68410
0.92733
10
414.89
0.0007930
0.049403
65.10
170.56
235.67
65.43
190.73
256.16
0.25286
0.67356
0.92641
12
443.31
0.0007975
0.046295
67.83
168.92
236.75
68.18
189.09
257.27
0.26246
0.66308
0.92554
14
473.19
0.0008020
0.043417
70.57
167.26
237.83
70.95
187.42
258.37
0.27204
0.65266
0.92470
16
504.58
0.0008066
0.040748
73.32
165.58
238.90
73.73
185.73
259.46
0.28159
0.64230
0.92389
18
537.52
0.0008113
0.038271
76.08
163.88
239.96
76.52
184.01
260.53
0.29112
0.63198
0.92310
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
787
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–11
Saturated refrigerant-134a—Temperature table (Concluded)
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg · K
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp., press.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
T °C
Psat kPa
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
20
572.07
0.0008161
0.035969
78.86
162.16
241.02
79.32
182.27
261.59
0.30063
0.62172
0.92234
22
608.27
0.0008210
0.033828
81.64
160.42
242.06
82.14
180.49
262.64
0.31011
0.61149
0.92160
24
646.18
0.0008261
0.031834
84.44
158.65
243.10
84.98
178.69
263.67
0.31958
0.60130
0.92088
26
685.84
0.0008313
0.029976
87.26
156.87
244.12
87.83
176.85
264.68
0.32903
0.59115
0.92018
28
727.31
0.0008366
0.028242
90.09
155.05
245.14
90.69
174.99
265.68
0.33846
0.58102
0.91948
30
770.64
0.0008421
0.026622
92.93
153.22
246.14
93.58
173.08
266.66
0.34789
0.57091
0.91879
32
815.89
0.0008478
0.025108
95.79
151.35
247.14
96.48
171.14
267.62
0.35730
0.56082
0.91811
34
863.11
0.0008536
0.023691
98.66
149.46
248.12
99.40
169.17
268.57
0.36670
0.55074
0.91743
36
912.35
0.0008595
0.022364
101.55
147.54
249.08
102.33
167.16
269.49
0.37609
0.54066
0.91675
38
963.68
0.0008657
0.021119
104.45
145.58
250.04
105.29
165.10
270.39
0.38548
0.53058
0.91606
40
1017.1
0.0008720
0.019952
107.38
143.60
250.97
108.26
163.00
271.27
0.39486
0.52049
0.91536
42
1072.8
0.0008786
0.018855
110.32
141.58
251.89
111.26
160.86
272.12
0.40425
0.51039
0.91464
44
1130.7
0.0008854
0.017824
113.28
139.52
252.80
114.28
158.67
272.95
0.41363
0.50027
0.91391
46
1191.0
0.0008924
0.016853
116.26
137.42
253.68
117.32
156.43
273.75
0.42302
0.49012
0.91315
48
1253.6
0.0008996
0.015939
119.26
135.29
254.55
120.39
154.14
274.53
0.43242
0.47993
0.91236
52
1386.2
0.0009150
0.014265
125.33
130.88
256.21
126.59
149.39
275.98
0.45126
0.45941
0.91067
56
1529.1
0.0009317
0.012771
131.49
126.28
257.77
132.91
144.38
277.30
0.47018
0.43863
0.90880
60
1682.8
0.0009498
0.011434
137.76
121.46
259.22
139.36
139.10
278.46
0.48920
0.41749
0.90669
65
1891.0
0.0009750
0.009950
145.77
115.05
260.82
147.62
132.02
279.64
0.51320
0.39039
0.90359
70
2118.2
0.0010037
0.008642
154.01
108.14
262.15
156.13
124.32
280.46
0.53755
0.36227
0.89982
75
2365.8
0.0010372
0.007480
162.53
100.60
263.13
164.98
115.85
280.82
0.56241
0.33272
0.89512
80
2635.3
0.0010772
0.006436
171.40
92.23
263.63
174.24
106.35
280.59
0.58800
0.30111
0.88912
85
2928.2
0.0011270
0.005486
180.77
82.67
263.44
184.07
95.44
279.51
0.61473
0.26644
0.88117
90
3246.9
0.0011932
0.004599
190.89
71.29
262.18
194.76
82.35
277.11
0.64336
0.22674
0.87010
95
3594.1
0.0012933
0.003726
202.40
56.47
258.87
207.05
65.21
272.26
0.67578
0.17711
0.85289
100
3975.1
0.0015269
0.002630
218.72
29.19
247.91
224.79
33.58
258.37
0.72217
0.08999
0.81215
Source: Tables A–11 through A–13 are generated using the Engineering Equation Solver (EES) software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado.
The routine used in calculations is the R134a, which is based on the fundamental equation of state developed by R. Tillner-Roth and H.D. Baehr, “An
International Standard Formulation for the Thermodynamic Properties of 1,1,1,2-Tetrafluoroethane (HFC-134a) for temperatures from 170 K to 455 K
and Pressures up to 70 MPa,” J. Phys. Chem, Ref. Data, Vol. 23, No. 5, 1994. The enthalpy and entropy values of saturated liquid are set to zero at
40°C (and 40°F).
Appendix 1
|
785

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
788
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–12
Saturated refrigerant-134a—Pressure table
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg · K
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Press.,
temp.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
P kPa
Tsat °C
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
60
36.95
0.0007098
0.31121
3.798 205.32
209.12
3.841 223.95 227.79
0.01634
0.94807
0.96441
70
33.87
0.0007144
0.26929
7.680 203.20
210.88
7.730 222.00 229.73
0.03267
0.92775
0.96042
80
31.13
0.0007185
0.23753
11.15
201.30
212.46
11.21
220.25 231.46
0.04711
0.90999
0.95710
90
28.65
0.0007223
0.21263
14.31
199.57
213.88
14.37
218.65 233.02
0.06008
0.89419
0.95427
100
26.37
0.0007259
0.19254
17.21
197.98
215.19
17.28
217.16 234.44
0.07188
0.87995
0.95183
120
22.32
0.0007324
0.16212
22.40
195.11
217.51
22.49
214.48 236.97
0.09275
0.85503
0.94779
140
18.77
0.0007383
0.14014
26.98
192.57
219.54
27.08
212.08 239.16
0.11087
0.83368
0.94456
160
15.60
0.0007437
0.12348
31.09
190.27
221.35
31.21
209.90 241.11
0.12693
0.81496
0.94190
180
12.73
0.0007487
0.11041
34.83
188.16
222.99
34.97
207.90 242.86
0.14139
0.79826
0.93965
200
10.09
0.0007533
0.099867
38.28
186.21
224.48
38.43
206.03 244.46
0.15457
0.78316
0.93773
240
5.38
0.0007620
0.083897
44.48
182.67
227.14
44.66
202.62 247.28
0.17794
0.75664
0.93458
280
1.25
0.0007699
0.072352
49.97
179.50
229.46
50.18
199.54 249.72
0.19829
0.73381
0.93210
320
2.46
0.0007772
0.063604
54.92
176.61
231.52
55.16
196.71 251.88
0.21637
0.71369
0.93006
360
5.82
0.0007841
0.056738
59.44
173.94
233.38
59.72
194.08 253.81
0.23270
0.69566
0.92836
400
8.91
0.0007907
0.051201
63.62
171.45
235.07
63.94
191.62 255.55
0.24761
0.67929
0.92691
450
12.46
0.0007985
0.045619
68.45
168.54
237.00
68.81
188.71 257.53
0.26465
0.66069
0.92535
500
15.71
0.0008059
0.041118
72.93
165.82
238.75
73.33
185.98 259.30
0.28023
0.64377
0.92400
550
18.73
0.0008130
0.037408
77.10
163.25
240.35
77.54
183.38 260.92
0.29461
0.62821
0.92282
600
21.55
0.0008199
0.034295
81.02
160.81
241.83
81.51
180.90 262.40
0.30799
0.61378
0.92177
650
24.20
0.0008266
0.031646
84.72
158.48
243.20
85.26
178.51 263.77
0.32051
0.60030
0.92081
700
26.69
0.0008331
0.029361
88.24
156.24
244.48
88.82
176.21 265.03
0.33230
0.58763
0.91994
750
29.06
0.0008395
0.027371
91.59
154.08
245.67
92.22
173.98 266.20
0.34345
0.57567
0.91912
800
31.31
0.0008458
0.025621
94.79
152.00
246.79
95.47
171.82 267.29
0.35404
0.56431
0.91835
850
33.45
0.0008520
0.024069
97.87
149.98
247.85
98.60
169.71 268.31
0.36413
0.55349
0.91762
900
35.51
0.0008580
0.022683
100.83
148.01
248.85 101.61
167.66 269.26
0.37377
0.54315
0.91692
950
37.48
0.0008641
0.021438
103.69
146.10
249.79 104.51
165.64 270.15
0.38301
0.53323
0.91624
1000
39.37
0.0008700
0.020313
106.45
144.23
250.68 107.32
163.67 270.99
0.39189
0.52368
0.91558
1200
46.29
0.0008934
0.016715
116.70
137.11
253.81 117.77
156.10 273.87
0.42441
0.48863
0.91303
1400
52.40
0.0009166
0.014107
125.94
130.43
256.37 127.22
148.90 276.12
0.45315
0.45734
0.91050
1600
57.88
0.0009400
0.012123
134.43
124.04
258.47 135.93
141.93 277.86
0.47911
0.42873
0.90784
1800
62.87
0.0009639
0.010559
142.33
117.83
260.17 144.07
135.11 279.17
0.50294
0.40204
0.90498
2000
67.45
0.0009886
0.009288
149.78
111.73
261.51 151.76
128.33 280.09
0.52509
0.37675
0.90184
2500
77.54
0.0010566
0.006936
166.99
96.47
263.45 169.63
111.16 280.79
0.57531
0.31695
0.89226
3000
86.16
0.0011406
0.005275
183.04
80.22
263.26 186.46
92.63 279.09
0.62118
0.25776
0.87894
786
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
789
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–13
Superheated refrigerant-134a
T
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
°C
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
P  0.06 MPa (Tsat  36.95°C)
P  0.10 MPa (Tsat  26.37°C)
P  0.14 MPa (Tsat  18.77°C)
Sat.
0.31121
209.12
227.79
0.9644
0.19254
215.19
234.44
0.9518
0.14014
219.54
239.16
0.9446
20
0.33608
220.60
240.76
1.0174
0.19841
219.66
239.50
0.9721
10
0.35048
227.55
248.58
1.0477
0.20743
226.75
247.49
1.0030
0.14605
225.91
246.36
0.9724
0
0.36476
234.66
256.54
1.0774
0.21630
233.95
255.58
1.0332
0.15263
233.23
254.60
1.0031
10
0.37893
241.92
264.66
1.1066
0.22506
241.30
263.81
1.0628
0.15908
240.66
262.93
1.0331
20
0.39302
249.35
272.94
1.1353
0.23373
248.79
272.17
1.0918
0.16544
248.22
271.38
1.0624
30
0.40705
256.95
281.37
1.1636
0.24233
256.44
280.68
1.1203
0.17172
255.93
279.97
1.0912
40
0.42102
264.71
289.97
1.1915
0.25088
264.25
289.34
1.1484
0.17794
263.79
288.70
1.1195
50
0.43495
272.64
298.74
1.2191
0.25937
272.22
298.16
1.1762
0.18412
271.79
297.57
1.1474
60
0.44883
280.73
307.66
1.2463
0.26783
280.35
307.13
1.2035
0.19025
279.96
306.59
1.1749
70
0.46269
288.99
316.75
1.2732
0.27626
288.64
316.26
1.2305
0.19635
288.28
315.77
1.2020
80
0.47651
297.41
326.00
1.2997
0.28465
297.08
325.55
1.2572
0.20242
296.75
325.09
1.2288
90
0.49032
306.00
335.42
1.3260
0.29303
305.69
334.99
1.2836
0.20847
305.38
334.57
1.2553
100
0.50410
314.74
344.99
1.3520
0.30138
314.46
344.60
1.3096
0.21449
314.17
344.20
1.2814
P  0.18 MPa (Tsat  12.73°C)
P  0.20 MPa (Tsat  10.09°C)
P  0.24 MPa (Tsat  5.38°C)
Sat.
0.11041
222.99
242.86
0.9397
0.09987
224.48
244.46
0.9377
0.08390
227.14
247.28
0.9346
10
0.11189
225.02
245.16
0.9484
0.09991
224.55
244.54
0.9380
0
0.11722
232.48
253.58
0.9798
0.10481
232.09
253.05
0.9698
0.08617
231.29
251.97
0.9519
10
0.12240
240.00
262.04
1.0102
0.10955
239.67
261.58
1.0004
0.09026
238.98
260.65
0.9831
20
0.12748
247.64
270.59
1.0399
0.11418
247.35
270.18
1.0303
0.09423
246.74
269.36
1.0134
30
0.13248
255.41
279.25
1.0690
0.11874
255.14
278.89
1.0595
0.09812
254.61
278.16
1.0429
40
0.13741
263.31
288.05
1.0975
0.12322
263.08
287.72
1.0882
0.10193
262.59
287.06
1.0718
50
0.14230
271.36
296.98
1.1256
0.12766
271.15
296.68
1.1163
0.10570
270.71
296.08
1.1001
60
0.14715
279.56
306.05
1.1532
0.13206
279.37
305.78
1.1441
0.10942
278.97
305.23
1.1280
70
0.15196
287.91
315.27
1.1805
0.13641
287.73
315.01
1.1714
0.11310
287.36
314.51
1.1554
80
0.15673
296.42
324.63
1.2074
0.14074
296.25
324.40
1.1983
0.11675
295.91
323.93
1.1825
90
0.16149
305.07
334.14
1.2339
0.14504
304.92
333.93
1.2249
0.12038
304.60
333.49
1.2092
100
0.16622
313.88
343.80
1.2602
0.14933
313.74
343.60
1.2512
0.12398
313.44
343.20
1.2356
P  0.28 MPa (Tsat  1.25°C)
P  0.32 MPa (Tsat  2.46°C)
P  0.40 MPa (Tsat  8.91°C)
Sat.
0.07235
229.46
249.72
0.9321
0.06360
231.52
251.88
0.9301
0.051201
235.07
255.55
0.9269
0
0.07282
230.44
250.83
0.9362
10
0.07646
238.27
259.68
0.9680
0.06609
237.54
258.69
0.9544
0.051506
235.97
256.58
0.9305
20
0.07997
246.13
268.52
0.9987
0.06925
245.50
267.66
0.9856
0.054213
244.18
265.86
0.9628
30
0.08338
254.06
277.41
1.0285
0.07231
253.50
276.65
1.0157
0.056796
252.36
275.07
0.9937
40
0.08672
262.10
286.38
1.0576
0.07530
261.60
285.70
1.0451
0.059292
260.58
284.30
1.0236
50
0.09000
270.27
295.47
1.0862
0.07823
269.82
294.85
1.0739
0.061724
268.90
293.59
1.0528
60
0.09324
278.56
304.67
1.1142
0.08111
278.15
304.11
1.1021
0.064104
277.32
302.96
1.0814
70
0.09644
286.99
314.00
1.1418
0.08395
286.62
313.48
1.1298
0.066443
285.86
312.44
1.1094
80
0.09961
295.57
323.46
1.1690
0.08675
295.22
322.98
1.1571
0.068747
294.53
322.02
1.1369
90
0.10275
304.29
333.06
1.1958
0.08953
303.97
332.62
1.1840
0.071023
303.32
331.73
1.1640
100
0.10587
313.15
342.80
1.2222
0.09229
312.86
342.39
1.2105
0.073274
312.26
341.57
1.1907
110
0.10897
322.16
352.68
1.2483
0.09503
321.89
352.30
1.2367
0.075504
321.33
351.53
1.2171
120
0.11205
331.32
362.70
1.2742
0.09775
331.07
362.35
1.2626
0.077717
330.55
361.63
1.2431
130
0.11512
340.63
372.87
1.2997
0.10045
340.39
372.54
1.2882
0.079913
339.90
371.87
1.2688
140
0.11818
350.09
383.18
1.3250
0.10314
349.86
382.87
1.3135
0.082096
349.41
382.24
1.2942
Appendix 1
|
787

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
790
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–13
Superheated refrigerant-134a (Concluded)
T
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
°C
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
m3/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg
kJ/kg  K
P  0.50 MPa (Tsat  15.71°C)
P  0.60 MPa (Tsat  21.55°C)
P  0.70 MPa (Tsat  26.69°C)
Sat.
0.041118
238.75
259.30
0.9240
0.034295
241.83
262.40
0.9218
0.029361
244.48
265.03
0.9199
20
0.042115
242.40
263.46
0.9383
30
0.044338
250.84
273.01
0.9703
0.035984
249.22
270.81
0.9499
0.029966
247.48
268.45
0.9313
40
0.046456
259.26
282.48
1.0011
0.037865
257.86
280.58
0.9816
0.031696
256.39
278.57
0.9641
50
0.048499
267.72
291.96
1.0309
0.039659
266.48
290.28
1.0121
0.033322
265.20
288.53
0.9954
60
0.050485
276.25
301.50
1.0599
0.041389
275.15
299.98
1.0417
0.034875
274.01
298.42
1.0256
70
0.052427
284.89
311.10
1.0883
0.043069
283.89
309.73
1.0705
0.036373
282.87
308.33
1.0549
80
0.054331
293.64
320.80
1.1162
0.044710
292.73
319.55
1.0987
0.037829
291.80
318.28
1.0835
90
0.056205
302.51
330.61
1.1436
0.046318
301.67
329.46
1.1264
0.039250
300.82
328.29
1.1114
100
0.058053
311.50
340.53
1.1705
0.047900
310.73
339.47
1.1536
0.040642
309.95
338.40
1.1389
110
0.059880
320.63
350.57
1.1971
0.049458
319.91
349.59
1.1803
0.042010
319.19
348.60
1.1658
120
0.061687
329.89
360.73
1.2233
0.050997
329.23
359.82
1.2067
0.043358
328.55
358.90
1.1924
130
0.063479
339.29
371.03
1.2491
0.052519
338.67
370.18
1.2327
0.044688
338.04
369.32
1.2186
140
0.065256
348.83
381.46
1.2747
0.054027
348.25
380.66
1.2584
0.046004
347.66
379.86
1.2444
150
0.067021
358.51
392.02
1.2999
0.055522
357.96
391.27
1.2838
0.047306
357.41
390.52
1.2699
160
0.068775
368.33
402.72
1.3249
0.057006
367.81
402.01
1.3088
0.048597
367.29
401.31
1.2951
P  0.80 MPa (Tsat  31.31°C)
P  0.90 MPa (Tsat  35.51°C)
P  1.00 MPa (Tsat  39.37°C)
Sat.
0.025621
246.79
267.29
0.9183
0.022683
248.85
269.26
0.9169
0.020313
250.68
270.99
0.9156
40
0.027035
254.82
276.45
0.9480
0.023375
253.13
274.17
0.9327
0.020406
251.30
271.71
0.9179
50
0.028547
263.86
286.69
0.9802
0.024809
262.44
284.77
0.9660
0.021796
260.94
282.74
0.9525
60
0.029973
272.83
296.81
1.0110
0.026146
271.60
295.13
0.9976
0.023068
270.32
293.38
0.9850
70
0.031340
281.81
306.88
1.0408
0.027413
280.72
305.39
1.0280
0.024261
279.59
303.85
1.0160
80
0.032659
290.84
316.97
1.0698
0.028630
289.86
315.63
1.0574
0.025398
288.86
314.25
1.0458
90
0.033941
299.95
327.10
1.0981
0.029806
299.06
325.89
1.0860
0.026492
298.15
324.64
1.0748
100
0.035193
309.15
337.30
1.1258
0.030951
308.34
336.19
1.1140
0.027552
307.51
335.06
1.1031
110
0.036420
318.45
347.59
1.1530
0.032068
317.70
346.56
1.1414
0.028584
316.94
345.53
1.1308
120
0.037625
327.87
357.97
1.1798
0.033164
327.18
357.02
1.1684
0.029592
326.47
356.06
1.1580
130
0.038813
337.40
368.45
1.2061
0.034241
336.76
367.58
1.1949
0.030581
336.11
366.69
1.1846
140
0.039985
347.06
379.05
1.2321
0.035302
346.46
378.23
1.2210
0.031554
345.85
377.40
1.2109
150
0.041143
356.85
389.76
1.2577
0.036349
356.28
389.00
1.2467
0.032512
355.71
388.22
1.2368
160
0.042290
366.76
400.59
1.2830
0.037384
366.23
399.88
1.2721
0.033457
365.70
399.15
1.2623
170
0.043427
376.81
411.55
1.3080
0.038408
376.31
410.88
1.2972
0.034392
375.81
410.20
1.2875
180
0.044554
386.99
422.64
1.3327
0.039423
386.52
422.00
1.3221
0.035317
386.04
421.36
1.3124
P  1.20 MPa (Tsat  46.29°C)
P  1.40 MPa (Tsat  52.40°C)
P  1.60 MPa (Tsat  57.88°C)
Sat.
0.016715
253.81
273.87
0.9130
0.014107
256.37
276.12
0.9105
0.012123
258.47
277.86
0.9078
50
0.017201
257.63
278.27
0.9267
60
0.018404
267.56
289.64
0.9614
0.015005
264.46
285.47
0.9389
0.012372
260.89
280.69
0.9163
70
0.019502
277.21
300.61
0.9938
0.016060
274.62
297.10
0.9733
0.013430
271.76
293.25
0.9535
80
0.020529
286.75
311.39
1.0248
0.017023
284.51
308.34
1.0056
0.014362
282.09
305.07
0.9875
90
0.021506
296.26
322.07
1.0546
0.017923
294.28
319.37
1.0364
0.015215
292.17
316.52
1.0194
100
0.022442
305.80
332.73
1.0836
0.018778
304.01
330.30
1.0661
0.016014
302.14
327.76
1.0500
110
0.023348
315.38
343.40
1.1118
0.019597
313.76
341.19
1.0949
0.016773
312.07
338.91
1.0795
120
0.024228
325.03
354.11
1.1394
0.020388
323.55
352.09
1.1230
0.017500
322.02
350.02
1.1081
130
0.025086
334.77
364.88
1.1664
0.021155
333.41
363.02
1.1504
0.018201
332.00
361.12
1.1360
140
0.025927
344.61
375.72
1.1930
0.021904
343.34
374.01
1.1773
0.018882
342.05
372.26
1.1632
150
0.026753
354.56
386.66
1.2192
0.022636
353.37
385.07
1.2038
0.019545
352.17
383.44
1.1900
160
0.027566
364.61
397.69
1.2449
0.023355
363.51
396.20
1.2298
0.020194
362.38
394.69
1.2163
170
0.028367
374.78
408.82
1.2703
0.024061
373.75
407.43
1.2554
0.020830
372.69
406.02
1.2421
180
0.029158
385.08
420.07
1.2954
0.024757
384.10
418.76
1.2807
0.021456
383.11
417.44
1.2676
788
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
791
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
789
20
10
4
1
0.1
0.04
0.02
0.01
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
Enthalpy, kJ/kg
Pressure, MPa
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
0.2
0.4
2
20
10
4
1
0.1
0.04
0.02
0.01
0.2
R-134a
R-134a
T = 0
T = 0°C
20
20
–20
–20
–40
–40
–60
–60
40
40
60
60
80
80
100
100
1500
1500
0.64
0.64
0.1
0.1
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.4
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.9
0.9
–40
–40
–20
–20
0
20
20
40
40
60
60
80
80
100
100
120
120
140
140
T = 160
T = 160°C
180
180
200
200
2.48
2.48
2.64
2.64
2.72
2.72
s = 2.56
s = 2.56
220
220
240
240
260
260
280
280
300
300
saturated vapor
saturated vapor
X = 0.5
X = 0.5
0.72
0.72
0.80
0.80
0.88
0.88
saturated liquids
saturated liquids
0.96
0.96
1.04
1.04
1.12
1.12
1.20
1.20
1.28
1.28
1.36
1.36
1.44
1.44
1.52
1.52
1.60
1.60
1.68
1.68
1.76
1.76
1.84
1.84
1.92
1.92
2.00
2.00
2.08
2.08
2.24
2.24
2.32
2.32
2.40
2.40
2.48
2.48
s = 2.16 kJ/kg
s = 2.16 kJ/kg	K
1450
1450
1400
1400
1350
1350
1300
1300
1250
1250
1200 kg/m
1200 kg/m3
1150
1150
1100
1100
1050
1050
1000
1000
950
950
900
900
850
850
800
800
700
700
600
600
500
500
400
400
300
300
160
160
120
120
90
90
70
70
60
60
50
50
40
40
32
32
24
24
16
16
12
12
8
6
Densityh = 200 kg/m
Densityh = 200 kg/m3
4
3.2
3.2
2.4
2.4
1.6
1.6
1.2
1.2
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.6
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.3
R-134a
T = 0°C
20
–20
–40
–60
40
60
80
100
1500
0.64
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
–40
–20
0
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
T = 160°C
180
200
2.48
2.64
2.72
s = 2.56
220
240
260
280
300
saturated vapor
X = 0.5
0.72
0.80
0.88
saturated liquids
0.96
1.04
1.12
1.20
1.28
1.36
1.44
1.52
1.60
1.68
1.76
1.84
1.92
2.00
2.08
2.24
2.32
2.40
2.48
s = 2.16 kJ/kgK
1450
1400
1350
1300
1250
1200 kg/m3
1150
1100
1050
1000
950
900
850
800
700
600
500
400
300
160
120
90
70
60
50
40
32
24
16
12
8
6
Density = 200 kg/m3
4
3.2
2.4
1.6
1.2
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.4
2
FIGURE A–14
P-h diagram for refrigerant-134a.
Note: The reference point used for the chart is different than that used in the R-134a tables. Therefore, problems should be solved using all property data
either from the tables or from the chart, but not from both.
Reprinted by permission of American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., Atlanta, GA.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
792
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
790
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–15
Properties of saturated water
Volume
Enthalpy
Specific
Thermal
Prandtl
Expansion
Saturation
Density
of
Heat
Conductivity 
Dynamic Viscosity
Number
Coefficient
Temp.
Pressure
r, kg/m3
Vaporization
cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · k
m, kg/m · s
Pr
b, 1/K
T, C
Psat, kPa
Liquid
Vapor
hfg, kJ/kg
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
0.01
0.6113
999.8
0.0048
2501
4217
1854
0.561
0.0171
1.792 
 103
0.922 
 105
13.5
1.00 0.068 
 103
5
0.8721
999.9
0.0068
2490
4205
1857
0.571
0.0173
1.519 
 103
0.934 
 105
11.2
1.00
0.015 
 103
10
1.2276
999.7
0.0094
2478
4194
1862
0.580
0.0176
1.307 
 103
0.946 
 105
9.45
1.00
0.733 
 103
15
1.7051
999.1
0.0128
2466
4185
1863
0.589
0.0179
1.138 
 103
0.959 
 105
8.09
1.00
0.138 
 103
20
2.339
998.0
0.0173
2454
4182
1867
0.598
0.0182
1.002 
 103
0.973 
 105
7.01
1.00
0.195 
 103
25
3.169
997.0
0.0231
2442
4180
1870
0.607
0.0186
0.891 
 103
0.987 
 105
6.14
1.00
0.247 
 103
30
4.246
996.0
0.0304
2431
4178
1875
0.615
0.0189
0.798 
 103
1.001 
 105
5.42
1.00
0.294 
 103
35
5.628
994.0
0.0397
2419
4178
1880
0.623
0.0192
0.720 
 103
1.016 
 105
4.83
1.00
0.337 
 103
40
7.384
992.1
0.0512
2407
4179
1885
0.631
0.0196
0.653 
 103
1.031 
 105
4.32
1.00
0.377 
 103
45
9.593
990.1
0.0655
2395
4180
1892
0.637
0.0200
0.596 
 103
1.046 
 105
3.91
1.00
0.415 
 103
50
12.35
988.1
0.0831
2383
4181
1900
0.644
0.0204
0.547 
 103
1.062 
 105
3.55
1.00
0.451 
 103
55
15.76
985.2
0.1045
2371
4183
1908
0.649
0.0208
0.504 
 103
1.077 
 105
3.25
1.00
0.484 
 103
60
19.94
983.3
0.1304
2359
4185
1916
0.654
0.0212
0.467 
 103
1.093 
 105
2.99
1.00
0.517 
 103
65
25.03
980.4
0.1614
2346
4187
1926
0.659
0.0216
0.433 
 103
1.110 
 105
2.75
1.00
0.548 
 103
70
31.19
977.5
0.1983
2334
4190
1936
0.663
0.0221
0.404 
 103
1.126 
 105
2.55
1.00
0.578 
 103
75
38.58
974.7
0.2421
2321
4193
1948
0.667
0.0225
0.378 
 103
1.142 
 105
2.38
1.00
0.607 
 103
80
47.39
971.8
0.2935
2309
4197
1962
0.670
0.0230
0.355 
 103
1.159 
 105
2.22
1.00
0.653 
 103
85
57.83
968.1
0.3536
2296
4201
1977
0.673
0.0235
0.333 
 103
1.176 
 105
2.08
1.00
0.670 
 103
90
70.14
965.3
0.4235
2283
4206
1993
0.675
0.0240
0.315 
 103
1.193 
 105
1.96
1.00
0.702 
 103
95
84.55
961.5
0.5045
2270
4212
2010
0.677
0.0246
0.297 
 103
1.210 
 105
1.85
1.00
0.716 
 103
100
101.33
957.9
0.5978
2257
4217
2029
0.679
0.0251
0.282 
 103
1.227 
 105
1.75
1.00
0.750 
 103
110
143.27
950.6
0.8263
2230
4229
2071
0.682
0.0262
0.255 
 103
1.261 
 105
1.58
1.00
0.798 
 103
120
198.53
943.4
1.121
2203
4244
2120
0.683
0.0275
0.232 
 103
1.296 
 105
1.44
1.00
0.858 
 103
130
270.1
934.6
1.496
2174
4263
2177
0.684
0.0288
0.213 
 103
1.330 
 105
1.33
1.01
0.913 
 103
140
361.3
921.7
1.965
2145
4286
2244
0.683
0.0301
0.197 
 103
1.365 
 105
1.24
1.02
0.970 
 103
150
475.8
916.6
2.546
2114
4311
2314
0.682
0.0316
0.183 
 103
1.399 
 105
1.16
1.02
1.025 
 103
160
617.8
907.4
3.256
2083
4340
2420
0.680
0.0331
0.170 
 103
1.434 
 105
1.09
1.05
1.145 
 103
170
791.7
897.7
4.119
2050
4370
2490
0.677
0.0347
0.160 
 103
1.468 
 105
1.03
1.05
1.178 
 103
180
1,002.1
887.3
5.153
2015
4410
2590
0.673
0.0364
0.150 
 103
1.502 
 105
0.983
1.07
1.210 
 103
190
1,254.4
876.4
6.388
1979
4460
2710
0.669
0.0382
0.142 
 103
1.537 
 105
0.947
1.09
1.280 
 103
200
1,553.8
864.3
7.852
1941
4500
2840
0.663
0.0401
0.134 
 103
1.571 
 105
0.910
1.11
1.350 
 103
220
2,318
840.3
11.60
1859
4610
3110
0.650
0.0442
0.122 
 103
1.641 
 105
0.865
1.15
1.520 
 103
240
3,344
813.7
16.73
1767
4760
3520
0.632
0.0487
0.111 
 103
1.712 
 105
0.836
1.24
1.720 
 103
260
4,688
783.7
23.69
1663
4970
4070
0.609
0.0540
0.102 
 103
1.788 
 105
0.832
1.35
2.000 
 103
280
6,412
750.8
33.15
1544
5280
4835
0.581
0.0605
0.094 
 103
1.870 
 105
0.854
1.49
2.380 
 103
300
8,581
713.8
46.15
1405
5750
5980
0.548
0.0695
0.086 
 103
1.965 
 105
0.902
1.69
2.950 
 103
320
11,274
667.1
64.57
1239
6540
7900
0.509
0.0836
0.078 
 103
2.084 
 105
1.00
1.97
340
14,586
610.5
92.62
1028
8240
11,870
0.469
0.110
0.070 
 103
2.255 
 105
1.23
2.43
360
18,651
528.3 144.0
720
14,690
25,800
0.427
0.178
0.060 
 103
2.571 
 105
2.06
3.73
374.14
22,090
317.0 317.0
0
—
—
—
—
0.043 
 103
4.313 
 105
Note 1: Kinematic viscosity n and thermal diffusivity a can be calculated from their definitions, n  m/r and a  k/rcp  n/Pr. The temperatures 0.01C, 100C,
and 374.14C are the triple-, boiling-, and critical-point temperatures of water, respectively. The properties listed above (except the vapor density) can be used at
any pressure with negligible error except at temperatures near the critical-point value.
Note 2: The unit kJ/kg · C for specific heat is equivalent to kJ/kg · K, and the unit W/m · C for thermal conductivity is equivalent to W/m · K.
Source: Viscosity and thermal conductivity data are from J. V. Sengers and J. T. R. Watson, Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 15 (1986), 
pp. 1291–1322. Other data are obtained from various sources or calculated.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
793
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
791
TABLE A–16
Properties of saturated refrigerant-134a
Volume
Enthalpy
Specific
Thermal
Prandtl
Expansion
Saturation
Density
of
Heat
Conductivity
Dynamic Viscosity
Number
Coefficient Surface
Temp. Pressure
r, kg/m3
Vaporization
cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · K
m, kg/m · s
Pr
b, l/K
Tension,
T, C
P, kPa
Liquid
Vapor
hfg, kJ/kg
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
N/m
40
51.2
1418
2.773
225.9
1254
748.6
0.1101
0.00811
4.878 
 104
2.550 
 106
5.558
0.235
0.00205
0.01760
35
66.2
1403
3.524
222.7
1264
764.1
0.1084
0.00862
4.509 
 104
3.003 
 106
5.257
0.266
0.00209
0.01682
30
84.4
1389
4.429
219.5
1273
780.2
0.1066
0.00913
4.178 
 104
3.504 
 106
4.992
0.299
0.00215
0.01604
25
106.5
1374
5.509
216.3
1283
797.2
0.1047
0.00963
3.882 
 104
4.054 
 106
4.757
0.335
0.00220
0.01527
20
132.8
1359
6.787
213.0
1294
814.9
0.1028
0.01013
3.614 
 104
4.651 
 106
4.548
0.374
0.00227
0.01451
15
164.0
1343
8.288
209.5
1306
833.5
0.1009
0.01063
3.371 
 104
5.295 
 106
4.363
0.415
0.00233
0.01376
10
200.7
1327
10.04
206.0
1318
853.1
0.0989
0.01112
3.150 
 104
5.982 
 106
4.198
0.459
0.00241
0.01302
5
243.5
1311
12.07
202.4
1330
873.8
0.0968
0.01161
2.947 
 104
6.709 
 106
4.051
0.505
0.00249
0.01229
0
293.0
1295
14.42
198.7
1344
895.6
0.0947
0.01210
2.761 
 104
7.471 
 106
3.919
0.553
0.00258
0.01156
5
349.9
1278
17.12
194.8
1358
918.7
0.0925
0.01259
2.589 
 104
8.264 
 106
3.802
0.603
0.00269
0.01084
10
414.9
1261
20.22
190.8
1374
943.2
0.0903
0.01308
2.430 
 104
9.081 
 106
3.697
0.655
0.00280
0.01014
15
488.7
1244
23.75
186.6
1390
969.4
0.0880
0.01357
2.281 
 104
9.915 
 106
3.604
0.708
0.00293
0.00944
20
572.1
1226
27.77
182.3
1408
997.6
0.0856
0.01406
2.142 
 104
1.075 
 105
3.521
0.763
0.00307
0.00876
25
665.8
1207
32.34
177.8
1427 1028
0.0833
0.01456
2.012 
 104
1.160 
 105
3.448
0.819
0.00324
0.00808
30
770.6
1188
37.53
173.1
1448 1061
0.0808
0.01507
1.888 
 104
1.244 
 105
3.383
0.877
0.00342
0.00742
35
887.5
1168
43.41
168.2
1471 1098
0.0783
0.01558
1.772 
 104
1.327 
 105
3.328
0.935
0.00364
0.00677
40
1017.1
1147
50.08
163.0
1498 1138
0.0757
0.01610
1.660 
 104
1.408 
 105
3.285
0.995
0.00390
0.00613
45
1160.5
1125
57.66
157.6
1529 1184
0.0731
0.01664
1.554 
 104
1.486 
 105
3.253
1.058
0.00420
0.00550
50
1318.6
1102
66.27
151.8
1566 1237
0.0704
0.01720
1.453 
 104
1.562 
 105
3.231
1.123
0.00455
0.00489
55
1492.3
1078
76.11
145.7
1608 1298
0.0676
0.01777
1.355 
 104
1.634 
 105
3.223
1.193
0.00500
0.00429
60
1682.8
1053
87.38
139.1
1659 1372
0.0647
0.01838
1.260 
 104
1.704 
 105
3.229
1.272
0.00554
0.00372
65
1891.0
1026
100.4
132.1
1722 1462
0.0618
0.01902
1.167 
 104
1.771 
 105
3.255
1.362
0.00624
0.00315
70
2118.2
996.2
115.6
124.4
1801 1577
0.0587
0.01972
1.077 
 104
1.839 
 105
3.307
1.471
0.00716
0.00261
75
2365.8
964
133.6
115.9
1907 1731
0.0555
0.02048
9.891 
 105
1.908 
 105
3.400
1.612
0.00843
0.00209
80
2635.2
928.2
155.3
106.4
2056 1948
0.0521
0.02133
9.011 
 105
1.982 
 105
3.558
1.810
0.01031
0.00160
85
2928.2
887.1
182.3
95.4
2287 2281
0.0484
0.02233
8.124 
 105
2.071 
 105
3.837
2.116
0.01336
0.00114
90
3246.9
837.7
217.8
82.2
2701 2865
0.0444
0.02357
7.203 
 105
2.187 
 105
4.385
2.658
0.01911
0.00071
95
3594.1
772.5
269.3
64.9
3675 4144
0.0396
0.02544
6.190 
 105
2.370 
 105
5.746
3.862
0.03343
0.00033
100
3975.1
651.7
376.3
33.9
7959 8785
0.0322
0.02989
4.765 
 105
2.833 
 105 11.77
8.326
0.10047
0.00004
Note 1: Kinematic viscosity n and thermal diffusivity a can be calculated from their definitions, n  m/r and a  k/rcp  n/Pr. The properties listed here (except
the vapor density) can be used at any pressures with negligible error except at temperatures near the critical-point value.
Note 2: The unit kJ/kg · C for specific heat is equivalent to kJ/kg · K, and the unit W/m · C for thermal conductivity is equivalent to W/m · K.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Original sources: R. Tillner-Roth and H. D. Baehr, “An International
Standard Formulation for the Thermodynamic Properties of 1,1,1,2-Tetrafluoroethane (HFC-134a) for Temperatures from 170 K to 455 K and Pressures up to
70 MPa,” J. Phys. Chem, Ref. Data, Vol. 23, No. 5, 1994; M.J. Assael, N. K. Dalaouti, A. A. Griva, and J. H. Dymond, “Viscosity and Thermal Conductivity of
Halogenated Methane and Ethane Refrigerants,” IJR, Vol. 22, pp. 525–535, 1999; NIST REFPROP 6 program (M. O. McLinden, S. A. Klein, E. W. Lemmon,
and A. P. Peskin, Physical and Chemical Properties Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, CO 80303, 1995).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
794
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
792
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–17
Properties of saturated ammonia
Volume
Enthalpy
Specific
Thermal
Prandtl
Expansion
Saturation
Density
of
Heat
Conductivity
Dynamic Viscosity
Number
Coefficient
Surface
Temp. Pressure
r, kg/m3
Vaporization cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · K
m, kg/m · s
Pr
b, l/K
Tension,
T, C
P, kPa
Liquid
Vapor
hfg, kJ/kg
Liquid Vapor Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
N/m
40
71.66 690.2
0.6435
1389
4414
2242
—
0.01792
2.926 
 104
7.957 
 106
—
0.9955
0.00176
0.03565
30
119.4
677.8
1.037
1360
4465
2322
—
0.01898
2.630 
 104
8.311 
 106
—
1.017
0.00185
0.03341
25
151.5
671.5
1.296
1345
4489
2369 0.5968 0.01957
2.492 
 104
8.490 
 106
1.875
1.028
0.00190
0.03229
20
190.1
665.1
1.603
1329
4514
2420 0.5853 0.02015
2.361 
 104
8.669 
 106
1.821
1.041
0.00194
0.03118
15
236.2
658.6
1.966
1313
4538
2476 0.5737 0.02075
2.236 
 104
8.851 
 106
1.769
1.056
0.00199
0.03007
10
290.8
652.1
2.391
1297
4564
2536 0.5621 0.02138
2.117 
 104
9.034 
 106
1.718
1.072
0.00205
0.02896
5
354.9
645.4
2.886
1280
4589
2601 0.5505 0.02203
2.003 
 104
9.218 
 106
1.670
1.089
0.00210
0.02786
0
429.6
638.6
3.458
1262
4617
2672 0.5390 0.02270
1.896 
 104
9.405 
 106
1.624
1.107
0.00216
0.02676
5
516
631.7
4.116
1244
4645
2749 0.5274 0.02341
1.794 
 104
9.593 
 106
1.580
1.126
0.00223
0.02566
10
615.3
624.6
4.870
1226
4676
2831 0.5158 0.02415
1.697 
 104
9.784 
 106
1.539
1.147
0.00230
0.02457
15
728.8
617.5
5.729
1206
4709
2920 0.5042 0.02492
1.606 
 104
9.978 
 106
1.500
1.169
0.00237
0.02348
20
857.8
610.2
6.705
1186
4745
3016 0.4927 0.02573
1.519 
 104
1.017 
 105
1.463
1.193
0.00245
0.02240
25 1003
602.8
7.809
1166
4784
3120 0.4811 0.02658
1.438 
 104
1.037 
 105
1.430
1.218
0.00254
0.02132
30 1167
595.2
9.055
1144
4828
3232 0.4695 0.02748
1.361 
 104
1.057 
 105
1.399
1.244
0.00264
0.02024
35 1351
587.4
10.46
1122
4877
3354 0.4579 0.02843
1.288 
 104
1.078 
 105
1.372
1.272
0.00275
0.01917
40 1555
579.4
12.03
1099
4932
3486 0.4464 0.02943
1.219 
 104
1.099 
 105
1.347
1.303
0.00287
0.01810
45 1782
571.3
13.8
1075
4993
3631 0.4348 0.03049
1.155 
 104
1.121 
 105
1.327
1.335
0.00301
0.01704
50 2033
562.9
15.78
1051
5063
3790 0.4232 0.03162
1.094 
 104
1.143 
 105
1.310
1.371
0.00316
0.01598
55 2310
554.2
18.00
1025
5143
3967 0.4116 0.03283
1.037 
 104
1.166 
 105
1.297
1.409
0.00334
0.01493
60 2614
545.2
20.48
997.4
5234
4163 0.4001 0.03412
9.846 
 105
1.189 
 105
1.288
1.452
0.00354
0.01389
65 2948
536.0
23.26
968.9
5340
4384 0.3885 0.03550
9.347 
 105
1.213 
 105
1.285
1.499
0.00377
0.01285
70 3312
526.3
26.39
939.0
5463
4634 0.3769 0.03700
8.879 
 105
1.238 
 105
1.287
1.551
0.00404
0.01181
75 3709
516.2
29.90
907.5
5608
4923 0.3653 0.03862
8.440 
 105
1.264 
 105
1.296
1.612
0.00436
0.01079
80 4141
505.7
33.87
874.1
5780
5260 0.3538 0.04038
8.030 
 105
1.292 
 105
1.312
1.683
0.00474
0.00977
85 4609
494.5
38.36
838.6
5988
5659 0.3422 0.04232
7.646 
 105
1.322 
 105
1.338
1.768
0.00521
0.00876
90 5116
482.8
43.48
800.6
6242
6142 0.3306 0.04447
7.284 
 105
1.354 
 105
1.375
1.871
0.00579
0.00776
95 5665
470.2
49.35
759.8
6561
6740 0.3190 0.04687
6.946 
 105
1.389 
 105
1.429
1.999
0.00652
0.00677
100 6257
456.6
56.15
715.5
6972
7503 0.3075 0.04958
6.628 
 105
1.429 
 105
1.503
2.163
0.00749
0.00579
Note 1: Kinematic viscosity n and thermal diffusivity a can be calculated from their definitions, n  m/r and a  k/rcp  n/Pr. The properties listed here
(except the vapor density) can be used at any pressures with negligible error except at temperatures near the critical-point value.
Note 2: The unit kJ/kg · C for specific heat is equivalent to kJ/kg · K, and the unit W/m · C for thermal conductivity is equivalent to W/m · K.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Original sources: Tillner-Roth, Harms-Watzenberg, and Baehr,
“Eine neue Fundamentalgleichung fur Ammoniak,” DKV-Tagungsbericht 20:167–181, 1993; Liley and Desai, “Thermophysical Properties of Refrigerants,”
ASHRAE, 1993, ISBN 1-1883413-10-9.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
795
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
793
TABLE A–18
Properties of saturated propane
Volume
Enthalpy
Specific
Thermal
Prandtl
Expansion
Saturation
Density
of
Heat
Conductivity 
Dynamic Viscosity
Number
Coefficient
Surface
Temp. Pressure
r, kg/m3
Vaporization
cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · K
m, kg/m · s
Pr
b, l/K
Tension,
T, C
P, kPa
Liquid
Vapor
hfg, kJ/kg
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
N/m
120
0.4053 664.7
0.01408
498.3
2003
1115
0.1802
0.00589
6.136 
 104
4.372 
 106
6.820
0.827
0.00153
0.02630
110
1.157
654.5
0.03776
489.3
2021
1148
0.1738
0.00645
5.054 
 104
4.625 
 106
5.878
0.822
0.00157
0.02486
100
2.881
644.2
0.08872
480.4
2044
1183
0.1672
0.00705
4.252 
 104
4.881 
 106
5.195
0.819
0.00161
0.02344
90
6.406
633.8
0.1870
471.5
2070
1221
0.1606
0.00769
3.635 
 104
5.143 
 106
4.686
0.817
0.00166
0.02202
80
12.97
623.2
0.3602
462.4
2100
1263
0.1539
0.00836
3.149 
 104
5.409 
 106
4.297
0.817
0.00171
0.02062
70
24.26
612.5
0.6439
453.1
2134
1308
0.1472
0.00908
2.755 
 104
5.680 
 106
3.994
0.818
0.00177
0.01923
60
42.46
601.5
1.081
443.5
2173
1358
0.1407
0.00985
2.430 
 104
5.956 
 106
3.755
0.821
0.00184
0.01785
50
70.24
590.3
1.724
433.6
2217
1412
0.1343
0.01067
2.158 
 104
6.239 
 106
3.563
0.825
0.00192
0.01649
40
110.7
578.8
2.629
423.1
2258
1471
0.1281
0.01155
1.926 
 104
6.529 
 106
3.395
0.831
0.00201
0.01515
30
167.3
567.0
3.864
412.1
2310
1535
0.1221
0.01250
1.726 
 104
6.827 
 106
3.266
0.839
0.00213
0.01382
20
243.8
554.7
5.503
400.3
2368
1605
0.1163
0.01351
1.551 
 104
7.136 
 106
3.158
0.848
0.00226
0.01251
10
344.4
542.0
7.635
387.8
2433
1682
0.1107
0.01459
1.397 
 104
7.457 
 106
3.069
0.860
0.00242
0.01122
0
473.3
528.7
10.36
374.2
2507
1768
0.1054
0.01576
1.259 
 104
7.794 
 106
2.996
0.875
0.00262
0.00996
5
549.8
521.8
11.99
367.0
2547
1814
0.1028
0.01637
1.195 
 104
7.970 
 106
2.964
0.883
0.00273
0.00934
10
635.1
514.7
13.81
359.5
2590
1864
0.1002
0.01701
1.135 
 104
8.151 
 106
2.935
0.893
0.00286
0.00872
15
729.8
507.5
15.85
351.7
2637
1917
0.0977
0.01767
1.077 
 104
8.339 
 106
2.909
0.905
0.00301
0.00811
20
834.4
500.0
18.13
343.4
2688
1974
0.0952
0.01836
1.022 
 104
8.534 
 106
2.886
0.918
0.00318
0.00751
25
949.7
492.2
20.68
334.8
2742
2036
0.0928
0.01908
9.702 
 105
8.738 
 106
2.866
0.933
0.00337
0.00691
30
1076
484.2
23.53
325.8
2802
2104
0.0904
0.01982
9.197 
 105
8.952 
 106
2.850
0.950
0.00358
0.00633
35
1215
475.8
26.72
316.2
2869
2179
0.0881
0.02061
8.710 
 105
9.178 
 106
2.837
0.971
0.00384
0.00575
40
1366
467.1
30.29
306.1
2943
2264
0.0857
0.02142
8.240 
 105
9.417 
 106
2.828
0.995
0.00413
0.00518
45
1530
458.0
34.29
295.3
3026
2361
0.0834
0.02228
7.785 
 105
9.674 
 106
2.824
1.025
0.00448
0.00463
50
1708
448.5
38.79
283.9
3122
2473
0.0811
0.02319
7.343 
 105
9.950 
 105
2.826
1.061
0.00491
0.00408
60
2110
427.5
49.66
258.4
3283
2769
0.0765
0.02517
6.487 
 105
1.058 
 105
2.784
1.164
0.00609
0.00303
70
2580
403.2
64.02
228.0
3595
3241
0.0717
0.02746
5.649 
 105
1.138 
 105
2.834
1.343
0.00811
0.00204
80
3127
373.0
84.28
189.7
4501
4173
0.0663
0.03029
4.790 
 105
1.249 
 105
3.251
1.722
0.01248
0.00114
90
3769
329.1 118.6
133.2
6977
7239
0.0595
0.03441
3.807 
 105
1.448 
 105
4.465
3.047
0.02847
0.00037
Note 1: Kinematic viscosity n and thermal diffusivity a can be calculated from their definitions, n  m/r and a  k/mcp  n/Pr. The properties listed here (except
the vapor density) can be used at any pressures with negligible error except at temperatures near the critical-point value.
Note 2: The unit kJ/kg · C for specific heat is equivalent to kJ/kg · K, and the unit W/m · C for thermal conductivity is equivalent to W/m · K.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Original sources: Reiner Tillner-Roth, “Fundamental Equations of
State,” Shaker, Verlag, Aachan, 1998; B. A. Younglove and J. F. Ely, “Thermophysical Properties of Fluids. II Methane, Ethane, Propane, Isobutane, and Normal
Butane,” J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 16, No. 4, 1987; G.R. Somayajulu, “A Generalized Equation for Surface Tension from the Triple-Point to the Critical-
Point,” International Journal of Thermophysics, Vol. 9, No. 4, 1988.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
796
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
794
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–19
Properties of liquids
Volume
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Expansion
Temp.
Density
Heat 
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
Coeff.
T, C
r, kg/m3
cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · K
a, m2/s
m, kg/m · s
n, m2/s
Pr
b, 1/K
Methane [CH4]
160
420.2
3492
0.1863
1.270 
 107
1.133 
 104
2.699 
 107
2.126
0.00352
150
405.0
3580
0.1703
1.174 
 107
9.169 
 105
2.264 
 107
1.927
0.00391
140
388.8
3700
0.1550
1.077 
 107
7.551 
 105
1.942 
 107
1.803
0.00444
130
371.1
3875
0.1402
9.749 
 108
6.288 
 105
1.694 
 107
1.738
0.00520
120
351.4
4146
0.1258
8.634 
 108
5.257 
 105
1.496 
 107
1.732
0.00637
110
328.8
4611
0.1115
7.356 
 108
4.377 
 105
1.331 
 107
1.810
0.00841
100
301.0
5578
0.0967
5.761 
 108
3.577 
 105
1.188 
 107
2.063
0.01282
90
261.7
8902
0.0797
3.423 
 108
2.761 
 105
1.055 
 107
3.082
0.02922
Methanol [CH3(OH)]
20
788.4
2515
0.1987
1.002 
 107
5.857 
 104
7.429 
 107
7.414
0.00118
30
779.1
2577
0.1980
9.862 
 108
5.088 
 104
6.531 
 107
6.622
0.00120
40
769.6
2644
0.1972
9.690 
 108
4.460 
 104
5.795 
 107
5.980
0.00123
50
760.1
2718
0.1965
9.509 
 108
3.942 
 104
5.185 
 107
5.453
0.00127
60
750.4
2798
0.1957
9.320 
 108
3.510 
 104
4.677 
 107
5.018
0.00132
70
740.4
2885
0.1950
9.128 
 108
3.146 
 104
4.250 
 107
4.655
0.00137
Isobutane (R600a)
100
683.8
1881
0.1383
1.075 
 107
9.305 
 104
1.360 
 106
12.65
0.00142
75
659.3
1970
0.1357
1.044 
 107
5.624 
 104
8.531 
 107
8.167
0.00150
50
634.3
2069
0.1283
9.773 
 108
3.769 
 104
5.942 
 107
6.079
0.00161
25
608.2
2180
0.1181
8.906 
 108
2.688 
 104
4.420 
 107
4.963
0.00177
0
580.6
2306
0.1068
7.974 
 108
1.993 
 104
3.432 
 107
4.304
0.00199
25
550.7
2455
0.0956
7.069 
 108
1.510 
 104
2.743 
 107
3.880
0.00232
50
517.3
2640
0.0851
6.233 
 108
1.155 
 104
2.233 
 107
3.582
0.00286
75
478.5
2896
0.0757
5.460 
 108
8.785 
 105
1.836 
 107
3.363
0.00385
100
429.6
3361
0.0669
4.634 
 108
6.483 
 105
1.509 
 107
3.256
0.00628
Glycerin
0
1276
2262
0.2820
9.773 
 108
10.49
8.219 
 103
84,101
5
1273
2288
0.2835
9.732 
 108
6.730
5.287 
 103
54,327
10
1270
2320
0.2846
9.662 
 108
4.241
3.339 
 103
34,561
15
1267
2354
0.2856
9.576 
 108
2.496
1.970 
 103
20,570
20
1264
2386
0.2860
9.484 
 108
1.519
1.201 
 103
12,671
25
1261
2416
0.2860
9.388 
 108
0.9934
7.878 
 104
8,392
30
1258
2447
0.2860
9.291 
 108
0.6582
5.232 
 104
5,631
35
1255
2478
0.2860
9.195 
 108
0.4347
3.464 
 104
3,767
40
1252
2513
0.2863
9.101 
 108
0.3073
2.455 
 104
2,697
Engine Oil (unused)
0
899.0
1797
0.1469
9.097 
 108
3.814
4.242 
 103
46,636
0.00070
20
888.1
1881
0.1450
8.680 
 108
0.8374
9.429 
 104
10,863
0.00070
40
876.0
1964
0.1444
8.391 
 108
0.2177
2.485 
 104
2,962
0.00070
60
863.9
2048
0.1404
7.934 
 108
0.07399
8.565 
 105
1,080
0.00070
80
852.0
2132
0.1380
7.599 
 108
0.03232
3.794 
 105
499.3
0.00070
100
840.0
2220
0.1367
7.330 
 108
0.01718
2.046 
 105
279.1
0.00070
120
828.9
2308
0.1347
7.042 
 108
0.01029
1.241 
 105
176.3
0.00070
140
816.8
2395
0.1330
6.798 
 108
0.006558
8.029 
 106
118.1
0.00070
150
810.3
2441
0.1327
6.708 
 108
0.005344
6.595 
 106
98.31
0.00070
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Originally based on various sources.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
797
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
795
TABLE A–20
Properties of liquid metals
Volume
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Expansion
Temp.
Density
Heat
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
Coeff.
T, C
r, kg/m3
cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · K
a, m2/s
m, kg/m · s
n, m2/s
Pr
b, 1/K
Mercury (Hg) Melting Point: 39C
0
13595
140.4
8.18200
4.287 
 106
1.687 
 103
1.241 
 107
0.0289
1.810 
 104
25
13534
139.4
8.51533
4.514 
 106
1.534 
 103
1.133 
 107
0.0251
1.810 
 104
50
13473
138.6
8.83632
4.734 
 106
1.423 
 103
1.056 
 107
0.0223
1.810 
 104
75
13412
137.8
9.15632
4.956 
 106
1.316 
 103
9.819 
 108
0.0198
1.810 
 104
100
13351
137.1
9.46706
5.170 
 106
1.245 
 103
9.326 
 108
0.0180
1.810 
 104
150
13231
136.1
10.07780
5.595 
 106
1.126 
 103
8.514 
 108
0.0152
1.810 
 104
200
13112
135.5
10.65465
5.996 
 106
1.043 
 103
7.959 
 108
0.0133
1.815 
 104
250
12993
135.3
11.18150
6.363 
 106
9.820 
 104
7.558 
 108
0.0119
1.829 
 104
300
12873
135.3
11.68150
6.705 
 106
9.336 
 104
7.252 
 108
0.0108
1.854 
 104
Bismuth (Bi) Melting Point: 271C
350
9969
146.0
16.28
1.118 
 105
1.540 
 103
1.545 
 107
0.01381
400
9908
148.2
16.10
1.096 
 105
1.422 
 103
1.436 
 107
0.01310
500
9785
152.8
15.74
1.052 
 105
1.188 
 103
1.215 
 107
0.01154
600
9663
157.3
15.60
1.026 
 105
1.013 
 103
1.048 
 107
0.01022
700
9540
161.8
15.60
1.010 
 105
8.736 
 104
9.157 
 108
0.00906
Lead (Pb) Melting Point: 327C
400
10506
158
15.97
9.623 
 106
2.277 
 103
2.167 
 107
0.02252
450
10449
156
15.74
9.649 
 106
2.065 
 103
1.976 
 107
0.02048
500
10390
155
15.54
9.651 
 106
1.884 
 103
1.814 
 107
0.01879
550
10329
155
15.39
9.610 
 106
1.758 
 103
1.702 
 107
0.01771
600
10267
155
15.23
9.568 
 106
1.632 
 103
1.589 
 107
0.01661
650
10206
155
15.07
9.526 
 106
1.505 
 103
1.475 
 107
0.01549
700
10145
155
14.91
9.483 
 106
1.379 
 103
1.360 
 107
0.01434
Sodium (Na) Melting Point: 98C
100
927.3
1378
85.84
6.718 
 105
6.892 
 104
7.432 
 107
0.01106
200
902.5
1349
80.84
6.639 
 105
5.385 
 104
5.967 
 107
0.008987
300
877.8
1320
75.84
6.544 
 105
3.878 
 104
4.418 
 107
0.006751
400
853.0
1296
71.20
6.437 
 105
2.720 
 104
3.188 
 107
0.004953
500
828.5
1284
67.41
6.335 
 105
2.411 
 104
2.909 
 107
0.004593
600
804.0
1272
63.63
6.220 
 105
2.101 
 104
2.614 
 107
0.004202
Potassium (K) Melting Point: 64C
200
795.2
790.8
43.99
6.995 
 105
3.350 
 104
4.213 
 107
0.006023
300
771.6
772.8
42.01
7.045 
 105
2.667 
 104
3.456 
 107
0.004906
400
748.0
754.8
40.03
7.090 
 105
1.984 
 104
2.652 
 107
0.00374
500
723.9
750.0
37.81
6.964 
 105
1.668 
 104
2.304 
 107
0.003309
600
699.6
750.0
35.50
6.765 
 105
1.487 
 104
2.126 
 107
0.003143
Sodium-Potassium (%22Na-%78K) Melting Point: 11C
100
847.3
944.4
25.64
3.205 
 105
5.707 
 104
6.736 
 107
0.02102
200
823.2
922.5
26.27
3.459 
 105
4.587 
 104
5.572 
 107
0.01611
300
799.1
900.6
26.89
3.736 
 105
3.467 
 104
4.339 
 107
0.01161
400
775.0
879.0
27.50
4.037 
 105
2.357 
 104
3.041 
 107
0.00753
500
751.5
880.1
27.89
4.217 
 105
2.108 
 104
2.805 
 107
0.00665
600
728.0
881.2
28.28
4.408 
 105
1.859 
 104
2.553 
 107
0.00579
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Originally based on various sources.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
798
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
796
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–21
Ideal-gas properties of air
T
h
u
s°
T
h
u
s°
K
kJ/kg
Pr
kJ/kg
vr
kJ/kg · K
K
kJ/kg
Pr
kJ/kg
vr
kJ/kg · K
200
199.97
0.3363
142.56
1707.0
1.29559
580
586.04
14.38
419.55
115.7
2.37348
210
209.97
0.3987
149.69
1512.0
1.34444
590
596.52
15.31
427.15
110.6
2.39140
220
219.97
0.4690
156.82
1346.0
1.39105
600
607.02
16.28
434.78
105.8
2.40902
230
230.02
0.5477
164.00
1205.0
1.43557
610
617.53
17.30
442.42
101.2
2.42644
240
240.02
0.6355
171.13
1084.0
1.47824
620
628.07
18.36
450.09
96.92
2.44356
250
250.05
0.7329
178.28
979.0
1.51917
630
638.63
19.84
457.78
92.84
2.46048
260
260.09
0.8405
185.45
887.8
1.55848
640
649.22
20.64
465.50
88.99
2.47716
270
270.11
0.9590
192.60
808.0
1.59634
650
659.84
21.86
473.25
85.34
2.49364
280
280.13
1.0889
199.75
738.0
1.63279
660
670.47
23.13
481.01
81.89
2.50985
285
285.14
1.1584
203.33
706.1
1.65055
670
681.14
24.46
488.81
78.61
2.52589
290
290.16
1.2311
206.91
676.1
1.66802
680
691.82
25.85
496.62
75.50
2.54175
295
295.17
1.3068
210.49
647.9
1.68515
690
702.52
27.29
504.45
72.56
2.55731
298
298.18
1.3543
212.64
631.9
1.69528
700
713.27
28.80
512.33
69.76
2.57277
300
300.19
1.3860
214.07
621.2
1.70203
710
724.04
30.38
520.23
67.07
2.58810
305
305.22
1.4686
217.67
596.0
1.71865
720
734.82
32.02
528.14
64.53
2.60319
310
310.24
1.5546
221.25
572.3
1.73498
730
745.62
33.72
536.07
62.13
2.61803
315
315.27
1.6442
224.85
549.8
1.75106
740
756.44
35.50
544.02
59.82
2.63280
320
320.29
1.7375
228.42
528.6
1.76690
750
767.29
37.35
551.99
57.63
2.64737
325
325.31
1.8345
232.02
508.4
1.78249
760
778.18
39.27
560.01
55.54
2.66176
330
330.34
1.9352
235.61
489.4
1.79783
780
800.03
43.35
576.12
51.64
2.69013
340
340.42
2.149
242.82
454.1
1.82790
800
821.95
47.75
592.30
48.08
2.71787
350
350.49
2.379
250.02
422.2
1.85708
820
843.98
52.59
608.59
44.84
2.74504
360
360.58
2.626
257.24
393.4
1.88543
840
866.08
57.60
624.95
41.85
2.77170
370
370.67
2.892
264.46
367.2
1.91313
860
888.27
63.09
641.40
39.12
2.79783
380
380.77
3.176
271.69
343.4
1.94001
880
910.56
68.98
657.95
36.61
2.82344
390
390.88
3.481
278.93
321.5
1.96633
900
932.93
75.29
674.58
34.31
2.84856
400
400.98
3.806
286.16
301.6
1.99194
920
955.38
82.05
691.28
32.18
2.87324
410
411.12
4.153
293.43
283.3
2.01699
940
977.92
89.28
708.08
30.22
2.89748
420
421.26
4.522
300.69
266.6
2.04142
960
1000.55
97.00
725.02
28.40
2.92128
430
431.43
4.915
307.99
251.1
2.06533
980
1023.25
105.2
741.98
26.73
2.94468
440
441.61
5.332
315.30
236.8
2.08870
1000
1046.04
114.0
758.94
25.17
2.96770
450
451.80
5.775
322.62
223.6
2.11161
1020
1068.89
123.4
776.10
23.72
2.99034
460
462.02
6.245
329.97
211.4
2.13407
1040
1091.85
133.3
793.36
23.29
3.01260
470
472.24
6.742
337.32
200.1
2.15604
1060
1114.86
143.9
810.62
21.14
3.03449
480
482.49
7.268
344.70
189.5
2.17760
1080
1137.89
155.2
827.88
19.98
3.05608
490
492.74
7.824
352.08
179.7
2.19876
1100
1161.07
167.1
845.33
18.896
3.07732
500
503.02
8.411
359.49
170.6
2.21952
1120
1184.28
179.7
862.79
17.886
3.09825
510
513.32
9.031
366.92
162.1
2.23993
1140
1207.57
193.1
880.35
16.946
3.11883
520
523.63
9.684
374.36
154.1
2.25997
1160
1230.92
207.2
897.91
16.064
3.13916
530
533.98
10.37
381.84
146.7
2.27967
1180
1254.34
222.2
915.57
15.241
3.15916
540
544.35
11.10
389.34
139.7
2.29906
1200
1277.79
238.0
933.33
14.470
3.17888
550
555.74
11.86
396.86
133.1
2.31809
1220
1301.31
254.7
951.09
13.747
3.19834
560
565.17
12.66
404.42
127.0
2.33685
1240
1324.93
272.3
968.95
13.069
3.21751
570
575.59
13.50
411.97
121.2
2.35531
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
799
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
797
TABLE A–21
Ideal-gas properties of air (Concluded)
T
h
u
s°
T
h
u
s°
K
kJ/kg
Pr
kJ/kg
vr
kJ/kg · K
K
kJ/kg
Pr
kJ/kg
vr
kJ/kg · K
1260
1348.55
290.8
986.90
12.435 3.23638
1600 1757.57
791.2 1298.30
5.804
3.52364
1280
1372.24
310.4
1004.76
11.835 3.25510
1620 1782.00
834.1 1316.96
5.574
3.53879
1300
1395.97
330.9
1022.82
11.275 3.27345
1640 1806.46
878.9 1335.72
5.355
3.55381
1320
1419.76
352.5
1040.88
10.747 3.29160
1660 1830.96
925.6 1354.48
5.147
3.56867
1340
1443.60
375.3
1058.94
10.247 3.30959
1680 1855.50
974.2 1373.24
4.949
3.58335
1360
1467.49
399.1
1077.10
9.780 3.32724
1700 1880.1
1025
1392.7
4.761
3.5979
1380
1491.44
424.2
1095.26
9.337 3.34474
1750 1941.6
1161
1439.8
4.328
3.6336
1400
1515.42
450.5
1113.52
8.919 3.36200
1800 2003.3
1310
1487.2
3.994
3.6684
1420
1539.44
478.0
1131.77
8.526 3.37901
1850 2065.3
1475
1534.9
3.601
3.7023
1440
1563.51
506.9
1150.13
8.153 3.39586
1900 2127.4
1655
1582.6
3.295
3.7354
1460
1587.63
537.1
1168.49
7.801 3.41247
1950 2189.7
1852
1630.6
3.022
3.7677
1480
1611.79
568.8
1186.95
7.468 3.42892
2000 2252.1
2068
1678.7
2.776
3.7994
1500
1635.97
601.9
1205.41
7.152 3.44516
2050 2314.6
2303
1726.8
2.555
3.8303
1520
1660.23
636.5
1223.87
6.854 3.46120
2100 2377.7
2559
1775.3
2.356
3.8605
1540
1684.51
672.8
1242.43
6.569 3.47712
2150 2440.3
2837
1823.8
2.175
3.8901
1560
1708.82
710.5
1260.99
6.301 3.49276
2200 2503.2
3138
1872.4
2.012
3.9191
1580
1733.17
750.0
1279.65
6.046 3.50829
2250 2566.4
3464
1921.3
1.864
3.9474
Note: The properties Pr (relative pressure) and vr (relative specific volume) are dimensionless quantities used in the analysis of isentropic processes, and
should not be confused with the properties pressure and specific volume.
Source: Kenneth Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983), pp. 785–86, table A–5. Originally published in J. H. Keenan and 
J. Kaye, Gas Tables (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1948).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
800
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
798
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–22
Properties of air at 1 atm pressure
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Temp.
Density
Heat
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
T, C
r, kg/m3
cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · K
a, m2/s
m, kg/m · s
n, m2/s
Pr
150
2.866
983
0.01171
4.158 
 106
8.636 
 106
3.013 
 106
0.7246
100
2.038
966
0.01582
8.036 
 106
1.189 
 106
5.837 
 106
0.7263
50
1.582
999
0.01979
1.252 
 105
1.474 
 105
9.319 
 106
0.7440
40
1.514
1002
0.02057
1.356 
 105
1.527 
 105
1.008 
 105
0.7436
30
1.451
1004
0.02134
1.465 
 105
1.579 
 105
1.087 
 105
0.7425
20
1.394
1005
0.02211
1.578 
 105
1.630 
 105
1.169 
 105
0.7408
10
1.341
1006
0.02288
1.696 
 105
1.680 
 105
1.252 
 105
0.7387
0
1.292
1006
0.02364
1.818 
 105
1.729 
 105
1.338 
 105
0.7362
5
1.269
1006
0.02401
1.880 
 105
1.754 
 105
1.382 
 105
0.7350
10
1.246
1006
0.02439
1.944 
 105
1.778 
 105
1.426 
 105
0.7336
15
1.225
1007
0.02476
2.009 
 105
1.802 
 105
1.470 
 105
0.7323
20
1.204
1007
0.02514
2.074 
 105
1.825 
 105
1.516 
 105
0.7309
25
1.184
1007
0.02551
2.141 
 105
1.849 
 105
1.562 
 105
0.7296
30
1.164
1007
0.02588
2.208 
 105
1.872 
 105
1.608 
 105
0.7282
35
1.145
1007
0.02625
2.277 
 105
1.895 
 105
1.655 
 105
0.7268
40
1.127
1007
0.02662
2.346 
 105
1.918 
 105
1.702 
 105
0.7255
45
1.109
1007
0.02699
2.416 
 105
1.941 
 105
1.750 
 105
0.7241
50
1.092
1007
0.02735
2.487 
 105
1.963 
 105
1.798 
 105
0.7228
60
1.059
1007
0.02808
2.632 
 105
2.008 
 105
1.896 
 105
0.7202
70
1.028
1007
0.02881
2.780 
 105
2.052 
 105
1.995 
 105
0.7177
80
0.9994
1008
0.02953
2.931 
 105
2.096 
 105
2.097 
 105
0.7154
90
0.9718
1008
0.03024
3.086 
 105
2.139 
 105
2.201 
 105
0.7132
100
0.9458
1009
0.03095
3.243 
 105
2.181 
 105
2.306 
 105
0.7111
120
0.8977
1011
0.03235
3.565 
 105
2.264 
 105
2.522 
 105
0.7073
140
0.8542
1013
0.03374
3.898 
 105
2.345 
 105
2.745 
 105
0.7041
160
0.8148
1016
0.03511
4.241 
 105
2.420 
 105
2.975 
 105
0.7014
180
0.7788
1019
0.03646
4.593 
 105
2.504 
 105
3.212 
 105
0.6992
200
0.7459
1023
0.03779
4.954 
 105
2.577 
 105
3.455 
 105
0.6974
250
0.6746
1033
0.04104
5.890 
 105
2.760 
 105
4.091 
 105
0.6946
300
0.6158
1044
0.04418
6.871 
 105
2.934 
 105
4.765 
 105
0.6935
350
0.5664
1056
0.04721
7.892 
 105
3.101 
 105
5.475 
 105
0.6937
400
0.5243
1069
0.05015
8.951 
 105
3.261 
 105
6.219 
 105
0.6948
450
0.4880
1081
0.05298
1.004 
 104
3.415 
 105
6.997 
 105
0.6965
500
0.4565
1093
0.05572
1.117 
 104
3.563 
 105
7.806 
 105
0.6986
600
0.4042
1115
0.06093
1.352 
 104
3.846 
 105
9.515 
 105
0.7037
700
0.3627
1135
0.06581
1.598 
 104
4.111 
 105
1.133 
 104
0.7092
800
0.3289
1153
0.07037
1.855 
 104
4.362 
 105
1.326 
 104
0.7149
900
0.3008
1169
0.07465
2.122 
 104
4.600 
 105
1.529 
 104
0.7206
1000
0.2772
1184
0.07868
2.398 
 104
4.826 
 105
1.741 
 104
0.7260
1500
0.1990
1234
0.09599
3.908 
 104
5.817 
 105
2.922 
 104
0.7478
2000
0.1553
1264
0.11113
5.664 
 104
6.630 
 105
4.270 
 104
0.7539
Note: For ideal gases, the properties cp, k, m, and Pr are independent of pressure. The properties r, n, and a at a pressure P (in atm) other than 1 atm are
determined by multiplying the values of r at the given temperature by P and by dividing n and a by P.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Original sources: Keenan, Chao, Keyes, Gas Tables, Wiley, 1984;
and Thermophysical Properties of Matter. Vol. 3: Thermal Conductivity, Y. S. Touloukian, P. E. Liley, S. C. Saxena, Vol. 11: Viscosity, Y. S. Touloukian, S. C.
Saxena, and P. Hestermans, IFI/Plenun, NY, 1970, ISBN 0-306067020-8.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
801
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
799
TABLE A–23
Properties of gases at 1 atm pressure
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Temp.
Density
Heat 
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
T, C
r, kg/m3
cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · K
a, m2/s
m, kg/m · s
n, m2/s
Pr
Carbon Dioxide, CO2
50
2.4035
746
0.01051
5.860 
 106
1.129 
 105
4.699 
 106
0.8019
0
1.9635
811
0.01456
9.141 
 106
1.375 
 105
7.003 
 106
0.7661
50
1.6597
866.6
0.01858
1.291 
 105
1.612 
 105
9.714 
 106
0.7520
100
1.4373
914.8
0.02257
1.716 
 105
1.841 
 105
1.281 
 105
0.7464
150
1.2675
957.4
0.02652
2.186 
 105
2.063 
 105
1.627 
 105
0.7445
200
1.1336
995.2
0.03044
2.698 
 105
2.276 
 105
2.008 
 105
0.7442
300
0.9358
1060
0.03814
3.847 
 105
2.682 
 105
2.866 
 105
0.7450
400
0.7968
1112
0.04565
5.151 
 105
3.061 
 105
3.842 
 105
0.7458
500
0.6937
1156
0.05293
6.600 
 105
3.416 
 105
4.924 
 105
0.7460
1000
0.4213
1292
0.08491
1.560 
 104
4.898 
 105
1.162 
 104
0.7455
1500
0.3025
1356
0.10688
2.606 
 104
6.106 
 105
2.019 
 104
0.7745
2000
0.2359
1387
0.11522
3.521 
 104
7.322 
 105
3.103 
 104
0.8815
Carbon Monoxide, CO
50
1.5297
1081
0.01901
1.149 
 105
1.378 
 105
9.012 
 106
0.7840
0
1.2497
1048
0.02278
1.739 
 105
1.629 
 105
1.303 
 105
0.7499
50
1.0563
1039
0.02641
2.407 
 105
1.863 
 105
1.764 
 105
0.7328
100
0.9148
1041
0.02992
3.142 
 105
2.080 
 105
2.274 
 105
0.7239
150
0.8067
1049
0.03330
3.936 
 105
2.283 
 105
2.830 
 105
0.7191
200
0.7214
1060
0.03656
4.782 
 105
2.472 
 105
3.426 
 105
0.7164
300
0.5956
1085
0.04277
6.619 
 105
2.812 
 105
4.722 
 105
0.7134
400
0.5071
1111
0.04860
8.628 
 105
3.111 
 105
6.136 
 105
0.7111
500
0.4415
1135
0.05412
1.079 
 104
3.379 
 105
7.653 
 105
0.7087
1000
0.2681
1226
0.07894
2.401 
 104
4.557 
 105
1.700 
 104
0.7080
1500
0.1925
1279
0.10458
4.246 
 104
6.321 
 105
3.284 
 104
0.7733
2000
0.1502
1309
0.13833
7.034 
 104
9.826 
 105
6.543 
 104
0.9302
Methane, CH4
50
0.8761
2243
0.02367
1.204 
 105
8.564 
 106
9.774 
 106
0.8116
0
0.7158
2217
0.03042
1.917 
 105
1.028 
 105
1.436 
 105
0.7494
50
0.6050
2302
0.03766
2.704 
 105
1.191 
 105
1.969 
 105
0.7282
100
0.5240
2443
0.04534
3.543 
 105
1.345 
 105
2.567 
 105
0.7247
150
0.4620
2611
0.05344
4.431 
 105
1.491 
 105
3.227 
 105
0.7284
200
0.4132
2791
0.06194
5.370 
 105
1.630 
 105
3.944 
 105
0.7344
300
0.3411
3158
0.07996
7.422 
 105
1.886 
 105
5.529 
 105
0.7450
400
0.2904
3510
0.09918
9.727 
 105
2.119 
 105
7.297 
 105
0.7501
500
0.2529
3836
0.11933
1.230 
 104
2.334 
 105
9.228 
 105
0.7502
1000
0.1536
5042
0.22562
2.914 
 104
3.281 
 105
2.136 
 104
0.7331
1500
0.1103
5701
0.31857
5.068 
 104
4.434 
 105
4.022 
 104
0.7936
2000
0.0860
6001
0.36750
7.120 
 104
6.360 
 105
7.395 
 104
1.0386
Hydrogen, H2
50
0.11010
12635
0.1404
1.009 
 104
7.293 
 106
6.624 
 105
0.6562
0
0.08995
13920
0.1652
1.319 
 104
8.391 
 106
9.329 
 105
0.7071
50
0.07603
14349
0.1881
1.724 
 104
9.427 
 106
1.240 
 104
0.7191
100
0.06584
14473
0.2095
2.199 
 104
1.041 
 105
1.582 
 104
0.7196
150
0.05806
14492
0.2296
2.729 
 104
1.136 
 105
1.957 
 104
0.7174
200
0.05193
14482
0.2486
3.306 
 104
1.228 
 105
2.365 
 104
0.7155
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
802
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
800
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
300
0.04287
14481
0.2843
4.580 
 104
1.403 
 105
3.274 
 104
0.7149
400
0.03650
14540
0.3180
5.992 
 104
1.570 
 105
4.302 
 104
0.7179
500
0.03178
14653
0.3509
7.535 
 104
1.730 
 105
5.443 
 104
0.7224
1000
0.01930
15577
0.5206
1.732 
 103
2.455 
 105
1.272 
 103
0.7345
1500
0.01386
16553
0.6581
2.869 
 103
3.099 
 105
2.237 
 103
0.7795
2000
0.01081
17400
0.5480
2.914 
 103
3.690 
 105
3.414 
 103
1.1717
Nitrogen, N2
50
1.5299
957.3
0.02001
1.366 
 105
1.390 
 105
9.091 
 106
0.6655
0
1.2498
1035
0.02384
1.843 
 105
1.640 
 105
1.312 
 105
0.7121
50
1.0564
1042
0.02746
2.494 
 105
1.874 
 105
1.774 
 105
0.7114
100
0.9149
1041
0.03090
3.244 
 105
2.094 
 105
2.289 
 105
0.7056
150
0.8068
1043
0.03416
4.058 
 105
2.300 
 105
2.851 
 105
0.7025
200
0.7215
1050
0.03727
4.921 
 105
2.494 
 105
3.457 
 105
0.7025
300
0.5956
1070
0.04309
6.758 
 105
2.849 
 105
4.783 
 105
0.7078
400
0.5072
1095
0.04848
8.727 
 105
3.166 
 105
6.242 
 105
0.7153
500
0.4416
1120
0.05358
1.083 
 104
3.451 
 105
7.816 
 105
0.7215
1000
0.2681
1213
0.07938
2.440 
 104
4.594 
 105
1.713 
 104
0.7022
1500
0.1925
1266
0.11793
4.839 
 104
5.562 
 105
2.889 
 104
0.5969
2000
0.1502
1297
0.18590
9.543 
 104
6.426 
 105
4.278 
 104
0.4483
Oxygen, O2
50
1.7475
984.4
0.02067
1.201 
 105
1.616 
 105
9.246 
 106
0.7694
0
1.4277
928.7
0.02472
1.865 
 105
1.916 
 105
1.342 
 105
0.7198
50
1.2068
921.7
0.02867
2.577 
 105
2.194 
 105
1.818 
 105
0.7053
100
1.0451
931.8
0.03254
3.342 
 105
2.451 
 105
2.346 
 105
0.7019
150
0.9216
947.6
0.03637
4.164 
 105
2.694 
 105
2.923 
 105
0.7019
200
0.8242
964.7
0.04014
5.048 
 105
2.923 
 105
3.546 
 105
0.7025
300
0.6804
997.1
0.04751
7.003 
 105
3.350 
 105
4.923 
 105
0.7030
400
0.5793
1025
0.05463
9.204 
 105
3.744 
 105
6.463 
 105
0.7023
500
0.5044
1048
0.06148
1.163 
 104
4.114 
 105
8.156 
 105
0.7010
1000
0.3063
1121
0.09198
2.678 
 104
5.732 
 105
1.871 
 104
0.6986
1500
0.2199
1165
0.11901
4.643 
 104
7.133 
 105
3.243 
 104
0.6985
2000
0.1716
1201
0.14705
7.139 
 104
8.417 
 105
4.907 
 104
0.6873
Water Vapor, H2O
50
0.9839
1892
0.01353
7.271 
 106
7.187 
 106
7.305 
 106
1.0047
0
0.8038
1874
0.01673
1.110 
 105
8.956 
 106
1.114 
 105
1.0033
50
0.6794
1874
0.02032
1.596 
 105
1.078 
 105
1.587 
 105
0.9944
100
0.5884
1887
0.02429
2.187 
 105
1.265 
 105
2.150 
 105
0.9830
150
0.5189
1908
0.02861
2.890 
 105
1.456 
 105
2.806 
 105
0.9712
200
0.4640
1935
0.03326
3.705 
 105
1.650 
 105
3.556 
 105
0.9599
300
0.3831
1997
0.04345
5.680 
 105
2.045 
 105
5.340 
 105
0.9401
400
0.3262
2066
0.05467
8.114 
 105
2.446 
 105
7.498 
 105
0.9240
500
0.2840
2137
0.06677
1.100 
 104
2.847 
 105
1.002 
 104
0.9108
1000
0.1725
2471
0.13623
3.196 
 104
4.762 
 105
2.761 
 104
0.8639
1500
0.1238
2736
0.21301
6.288 
 104
6.411 
 105
5.177 
 104
0.8233
2000
0.0966
2928
0.29183
1.032 
 103
7.808 
 105
8.084 
 104
0.7833
Note: For ideal gases, the properties cp, k, m, and Pr are independent of pressure. The properties r, n, and a at a pressure P (in atm) other than 1 atm are
determined by multiplying the values of p at the given temperature by r and by dividing n and a by P.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Originally based on various sources.
TABLE A–23
Properties of gases at 1 atm pressure (Concluded)
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Temp.
Density
Heat 
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
T, C
r, kg/m3
cp, J/kg · K
k, W/m · K
a, m2/s
m, kg/m · s
n, m2/s
Pr

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
803
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
801
TABLE A–24
Properties of solid metals
Properties at Various Temperatures (K),
Melting
Properties at 300 K
k(W/m · K)/cp(J/kg · K)
Point,
r
cp
k
a 
 106
Composition
K
kg/m3
J/kg · K W/m · K
m2/s
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Aluminum:
Pure
933
2702
903
237
97.1
302
237
240
231
218
482
798
949
1033
1146
Alloy 2024-T6
775
2770
875
177
73.0
65
163
186
186
(4.5% Cu, 1.5% Mg,
0.6% Mn)
473
787
925
1042
Alloy 195, Cast 
(4.5% Cu)
2790
883
168
68.2
174
185
Beryllium
1550
1850
1825
200
59.2
990
301
161
126
106
90.8
203
1114
2191
2604
2823
3018
Bismuth
545
9780
122
7.86
6.59
16.5
9.69
7.04
112
120
127
Boron
2573
2500
1107
27.0
9.76
190
55.5
16.8
10.6
9.60
9.85
128
600
1463
1892
2160
2338
Cadmium
594
8650
231
96.8
48.4
203
99.3
94.7
198
222
242
Chromium
2118
7160
449
93.7
29.1
159
111
90.9
80.7
71.3
65.4
192
384
484
542
581
616
Cobalt
1769
8862
421
99.2
26.6
167
122
85.4
67.4
58.2
52.1
236
379
450
503
550
628
Copper:
Pure
1358
8933
385
401
117
482
413
393
379
366
352
252
356
397
417
433
451
Commercial bronze
1293
8800
420
52
14
42
52
59
(90% Cu, 10% Al)
785
160
545
Phosphor gear bronze
1104
8780
355
54
17
41
65
74
(89% Cu, 11% Sn)
—
—
—
Cartridge brass
1188
8530
380
110
33.9
75
95
137
149
(70% Cu, 30% Zn)
360
395
425
Constantan
1493
8920
384
23
6.71
17
19
(55% Cu, 45% Ni)
237
362
Germanium
1211
5360
322
59.9
34.7
232
96.8
43.2
27.3
19.8
17.4
190
290
337
348
357
375
Gold
1336
19,300
129
317
127
327
323
311
298
284
270
109
124
131
135
140
145
Iridium
2720
22,500
130
147
50.3
172
153
144
138
132
126
90
122
133
138
144
153
Iron:
Pure
1810
7870
447
80.2
23.1
134
94.0
69.5
54.7
43.3
32.8
216
384
490
574
680
975
Armco
(99.75% pure)
7870
447
72.7
20.7
95.6
80.6
65.7
53.1
42.2
32.3
215
384
490
574
680
975
Carbon steels:
Plain carbon (Mn  1%
7854
434
60.5
17.7
56.7
48.0
39.2
30.0
Si  0.1%)
487
559
685
1169
AISI 1010
7832
434
63.9
18.8
58.7
48.8
39.2
31.3
487
559
685
1168
Carbon–silicon (Mn  1%
7817
446
51.9
14.9
49.8
44.0
37.4
29.3
0.1%  Si  0.6%)
501
582
699
971
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
804
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
802
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–24
Properties of solid metals (Continued)
Properties at Various Temperatures (K),
Melting
Properties at 300 K
k(W/m · K)/cp(J/kg · K)
Point,
r
cp
k
a 
 106
Composition
K
kg/m3
J/kg · K W/m · K
m2/s
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Carbon–manganese–silicon
8131
434
41.0
11.6
42.2
39.7
35.0
27.6
(1%  Mn  1.65%
487
559
685
1090
0.1%  Si  0.6%)
Chromium (low) steels:
1
2 Cr– 1
4 Mo–Si (0.18% C,
7822
444
37.7
10.9
38.2
36.7
33.3
26.9
0.65% Cr, 0.23% Mo,
0.6% Si)
492
575
688
969
1 Cr– 1
2 Mo
7858
442
42.3
12.2
42.0
39.1
34.5
27.4
(0.16% C, 1% Cr,
0.54% Mo,
0.39% Si)
492
575
688
969
1 Cr–V
7836
443
48.9
14.1
46.8
42.1
36.3
28.2
(0.2% C, 1.02% Cr,
0.15% V)
492
575
688
969
Stainless steels:
AISI 302
8055
480
15.1
3.91
17.3
20.0
22.8
25.4
512
559
585
606
AISI 304
1670
7900
477
14.9
3.95
9.2
12.6
16.6
19.8
22.6
25.4
272
402
515
557
582
611
AISI 316
8238
468
13.4
3.48
15.2
18.3
21.3
24.2
504
550
576
602
AISI 347
7978
480
14.2
3.71
15.8
18.9
21.9
24.7
513
559
585
606
Lead
601
11,340
129
35.3
24.1
39.7
36.7
34.0
31.4
118
125
132
142
Magnesium
923
1740
1024
156
87.6
169
159
153
149
146
649
934
1074
1170
1267
Molybdenum
2894
10,240
251
138
53.7
179
143
134
126
118
112
141
224
261
275
285
295
Nickel:
Pure
1728
8900
444
90.7
23.0
164
107
80.2
65.6
67.6
71.8
232
383
485
592
530
562
Nichrome
1672
8400
420
12
3.4
14
16
21
(80% Ni, 20% Cr)
480
525
545
Inconel X-750
1665
8510
439
11.7
3.1
8.7
10.3
13.5
17.0
20.5
24.0
(73% Ni, 15% Cr,
6.7% Fe)
—
372
473
510
546
626
Niobium
2741
8570
265
53.7
23.6
55.2
52.6
55.2
58.2
61.3
64.4
188
249
274
283
292
301
Palladium
1827
12,020
244
71.8
24.5
76.5
71.6
73.6
79.7
86.9
94.2
168
227
251
261
271
281
Platinum:
Pure
2045
21,450
133
71.6
25.1
77.5
72.6
71.8
73.2
75.6
78.7
100
125
136
141
146
152
Alloy 60Pt–40Rh
1800
16,630
162
47
17.4
52
59
65
69
(60% Pt, 40% Rh)
—
—
—
—
Rhenium
3453
21,100
136
47.9
16.7
58.9
51.0
46.1
44.2
44.1
44.6
97
127
139
145
151
156
Rhodium
2236
12,450
243
150
49.6
186
154
146
136
127
121
147
220
253
274
293
311
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
805
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
803
TABLE A–24
Properties of solid metals (Concluded)
Properties at Various Temperatures (K),
Melting
Properties at 300 K
k(W/m · K)/cp(J/kg · K)
Point,
r
cp
k
a 
 106
Composition
K
kg/m3
J/kg · K W/m · K
m2/s
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Silicon
1685
2330
712
148
89.2
884
264
98.9
61.9
42.4
31.2
259
556
790
867
913
946
Silver
1235
10,500
235
429
174
444
430
425
412
396
379
187
225
239
250
262
277
Tantalum
3269
16,600
140
57.5
24.7
59.2
57.5
57.8
58.6
59.4
60.2
110
133
144
146
149
152
Thorium
2023
11,700
118
54.0
39.1
59.8
54.6
54.5
55.8
56.9
56.9
99
112
124
134
145
156
Tin
505
7310
227
66.6
40.1
85.2
73.3
62.2
188
215
243
Titanium
1953
4500
522
21.9
9.32
30.5
24.5
20.4
19.4
19.7
20.7
300
465
551
591
633
675
Tungsten
3660
19,300
132
174
68.3
208
186
159
137
125
118
87
122
137
142
146
148
Uranium
1406
19,070
116
27.6
12.5
21.7
25.1
29.6
34.0
38.8
43.9
94
108
125
146
176
180
Vanadium
2192
6100
489
30.7
10.3
35.8
31.3
31.3
33.3
35.7
38.2
258
430
515
540
563
597
Zinc
693
7140
389
116
41.8
117
118
111
103
297
367
402
436
Zirconium
2125
6570
278
22.7
12.4
33.2
25.2
21.6
20.7
21.6
23.7
205
264
300
332
342
362
From Frank P. Incropera and David P. DeWitt, Fundamentals of Heat and Mass Transfer, 3rd ed., 1990. This material is used by permission of John Wiley &
Sons, Inc.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
806
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
804
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–25
Properties of solid non-metals
Properties at Various Temperatures (K),
Melting
Properties at 300 K
k (W/m · K)/cp(J/kg · K)
Point,
r
cp
k
a 
 106
Composition
K
kg/m3 J/kg · KW/m · K
m2/s
100
200
400
600
800
1000
Aluminum oxide,
2323
3970
765
46
15.1
450
82
32.4
18.9
13.0
10.5
sapphire
—
—
940
1110
1180
1225
Aluminum oxide,
2323
3970
765
36.0
11.9
133
55
26.4
15.8
10.4
7.85
polycrystalline
—
—
940
1110
1180
1225
Beryllium oxide
2725
3000
1030
272
88.0
196
111
70
47
1350
1690
1865
1975
Boron
2573
2500
1105
27.6
9.99
190
52.5
18.7
11.3
8.1
6.3
—
—
1490
1880
2135
2350
Boron fiber epoxy
590
2080
(30% vol.) composite
k, || to fibers
2.29
2.10
2.23
2.28
k,  to fibers
0.59
0.37
0.49
0.60
cp
1122
364
757
1431
Carbon
Amorphous
1500
1950
—
1.60
—
0.67
1.18
1.89
21.9
2.37
2.53
—
—
—
—
—
—
Diamond,
type lla
—
3500
509 2300
10,000
4000
1540
insulator
21
194
853
Graphite, pyrolytic
2273
2210
k, || to layers
1950
4970
3230
1390
892
667
534
k,  to layers
5.70
16.8
9.23
4.09
2.68
2.01
1.60
cp
709
136
411
992
1406
1650
1793
Graphite fiber
450
1400
epoxy (25% vol.)
composite
k, heat flow || to fibers
11.1
5.7
8.7
13.0
k, heat flow  to fibers
0.87
0.46
0.68
1.1
cp
935
337
642
1216
Pyroceram,
1623
2600
808
3.98
1.89
5.25
4.78
3.64
3.28
3.08
2.96
Corning 9606
—
—
908
1038
1122
1197
Silicon carbide
3100
3160
675
490
230
—
—
—
87
880
1050
1135
1195
Silicon dioxide,
1883
2650
crystalline (quartz)
k, || to c-axis
10.4
39
16.4
7.6
5.0
4.2
k, to c-axis
6.21
20.8
9.5
4.70
3.4
3.1
cp
745
—
—
885
1075
1250
Silicon dioxide,
1883
2220
745
1.38
0.834
0.69
1.14
1.51
1.75
2.17
2.87
polycrystalline
(fused silica)
—
—
905
1040
1105
1155
Silicon nitride
2173
2400
691
16.0
9.65
—
—
13.9
11.3
9.88
8.76
—
578
778
937
1063
1155
Sulfur
392
2070
708
0.206
0.141
0.165
0.185
403
606
Thorium dioxide
3573
9110
235
13
6.1
10.2
6.6
4.7
3.68
255
274
285
295
Titanium dioxide,
2133
4157
710
8.4
2.8
7.01
5.02
8.94
3.46
polycrystalline
805
880
910
930

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
807
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
805
TABLE A–26
Emissivities of surfaces
(a) Metals
Temperature,
Emissivity,
Material
K
e
Aluminum
Polished
300–900
0.04–0.06
Commercial sheet
400
0.09
Heavily oxidized
400–800
0.20–0.33
Anodized
300
0.8
Bismuth, bright
350
0.34
Brass
Highly polished
500–650
0.03–0.04
Polished
350
0.09
Dull plate
300–600
0.22
Oxidized
450–800
0.6
Chromium, polished
300–1400
0.08–0.40
Copper
Highly polished
300
0.02
Polished
300–500
0.04–0.05
Commercial sheet
300
0.15
Oxidized
600–1000
0.5–0.8
Black oxidized
300
0.78
Gold
Highly polished
300–1000
0.03–0.06
Bright foil
300
0.07
Iron
Highly polished
300–500
0.05–0.07
Case iron
300
0.44
Wrought iron
300–500
0.28
Rusted
300
0.61
Oxidized
500–900
0.64–0.78
Lead
Polished
300–500
0.06–0.08
Unoxidized, rough
300
0.43
Oxidized
300
0.63
Temperature,
Emissivity,
Material
K
e
Magnesium, polished
300–500
0.07–0.13
Mercury
300–400
0.09–0.12
Molybdenum
Polished
300–2000
0.05–0.21
Oxidized
600–800
0.80–0.82
Nickel
Polished
500–1200
0.07–0.17
Oxidized
450–1000
0.37–0.57
Platinum, polished
500–1500
0.06–0.18
Silver, polished
300–1000
0.02–0.07
Stainless steel
Polished
300–1000
0.17–0.30
Lightly oxidized
600–1000
0.30–0.40
Highly oxidized
600–1000
0.70–0.80
Steel
Polished sheet
300–500
0.08–0.14
Commercial sheet
500–1200
0.20–0.32
Heavily oxidized
300
0.81
Tin, polished
300
0.05
Tungsten
Polished
300–2500
0.03–0.29
Filament
3500
0.39
Zinc
Polished
300–800
0.02–0.05
Oxidized
300
0.25

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
808
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
806
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–26
Emissivities of surfaces (Concluded)
(b) Nonmetals
Temperature,
Emissivity,
Material
K
e
Alumina
800–1400
0.65–0.45
Aluminum oxide
600–1500
0.69–0.41
Asbestos
300
0.96
Asphalt pavement
300
0.85–0.93
Brick
Common
300
0.93–0.96
Fireclay
1200
0.75
Carbon filament
2000
0.53
Cloth
300
0.75–0.90
Concrete
300
0.88–0.94
Glass
Window
300
0.90–0.95
Pyrex
300–1200
0.82–0.62
Pyroceram
300–1500
0.85–0.57
Ice
273
0.95–0.99
Magnesium oxide
400–800
0.69–0.55
Masonry
300
0.80
Paints
Aluminum
300
0.40–0.50
Black, lacquer, shiny
300
0.88
Oils, all colors
300
0.92–0.96
Red primer
300
0.93
White acrylic
300
0.90
White enamel
300
0.90
Temperature,
Emissivity,
Material
K
e
Paper, white
300
0.90
Plaster, white
300
0.93
Porcelain, glazed
300
0.92
Quartz, rough, fused
300
0.93
Rubber
Hard
300
0.93
Soft
300
0.86
Sand
300
0.90
Silicon carbide
600–1500
0.87–0.85
Skin, human
300
0.95
Snow
273
0.80–0.90
Soil, earth
300
0.93–0.96
Soot
300–500
0.95
Teflon
300–500
0.85–0.92
Water, deep
273–373
0.95–0.96
Wood
Beech
300
0.94
Oak
300
0.90

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
809
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 1
|
807
0.1
0.09
0.08
0.07
0.06
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.025
0.02
0.01
0.015
0.009
0.008
103
2(103) 3
4 5 6
8 104
2(104) 3 4 5 6
8 105
Reynolds number, Re
2(105) 3 4 5 6
8 106
2(106) 3 4 5 6
8 107
108
2(107) 3 4 5 6
8
0.05
0.04
0.03
0.02
0.015
0.01
0.008
0.006
0.004
0.002
0.001
0.0008
0.0006
0.0004
0.0002
0.0001
0.00005
0.00001
Relative roughness, e/D
Darcy friction factor, f
e/D = 0.000001
e/D = 0.000005
Smooth pipes
e/D = 0
Laminar flow, f = 64/Re
Glass, plastic
Concrete
Wood stave
Rubber, smoothed
Copper or brass tubing
Cast iron
Galvanized iron
Wrought iron
Stainless steel
Commercial steel
Material
0
0.003–0.03
0.0016
0.000033
0.000005
0.00085
0.0005
0.00015
0.000007
0.00015
0
0.9–9
0.5
0.01
0.0015
0.26
0.15
0.046
0.002
0.045
ft
mm
Laminar
flow
Transitional
flow
Fully rough turbulent flow ( f levels off)
Turbulent
flow
Roughness, e
FIGURE A–27
The Moody chart for the friction factor for fully developed flow in circular pipes for use in the head loss relation 
Friction factors in the
turbulent flow are evaluated from the Colebrook equation 1
1f  2 log10 ae/D
3.7  2.51
Re 1fb.
hL  f L
D
V 2
2g.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 1: Property 
Tables and Charts (SI 
Units)
810
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
808
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
1.00
Pv
—–
RT
COMPRESSIBILITY FACTOR,  Z =
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
(a) 0 < Pr < 1.0
0.6
0.6
Tr =
1.0
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.60
2.00
3.00
0.9
0.90
0.85
0.8
0.7
.07
Tr = 5.00
5.00
0.6
0.6
Tr =
1.0
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.60
2.00
3.00
0.9
0.90
0.85
0.8
0.7
.07
Tr = 5.00
1.80
1.60
1.50
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.80
vr = 0.07
2.00
2.20
2.40
2.60
3.00
3.50
4.00
5.00
6.0
0
8.0
0
1.80
1.60
1.50
1.40
1.30
1.20
1.10
1.00
0.90
0.80
vr = 0.07
2.00
2.20
2.40
2.60
3.00
3.50
4.00
5.00
6.0
0
8.0
0
2.00
1.60
1.40
1.20
1.05
1.10
1.00
0.95
0.90
0.85
0.80
0.75
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.90
0.95
Z
Pr
0.70
0.6
0.6
30
20
15
12
10
vr
0.70
0.6
0.6
30
20
15
12
10
vr
NELSON — OBERT
GENERALIZED
COMPRESSIBILITY CHARTS
CHART
NO.
1
PSEUDO REDUCED VOLUME,
P
—–
Pcr
REDUCED PRESSURE, Pr =
Tr = 2.5    Z ≈1.00
Tr = 15 ≈Tr = 3.00
REDUCED TEMPERATURE,
T
—–
Tcr
Tr =
v
—–
RTcr / Pcr
vr =
1953
NOTE
---DEVIATION > 1.0%
FIGURE A–28
Nelson–Obert generalized compressibility chart.
Used with permission of Dr. Edward E. Obert, University of Wisconsin.
NELSON — OBERT
GENERALIZED
COMPRESSIBILITY CHARTS
CHART
No.
2
PSEUDO REDUCED VOLUME,
P
—–
Pcr
REDUCED PRESSURE, Pr =
REDUCED TEMPERATURE,
T
—–
Tcr
Tr =
v
—–
RTcr / Pcr
vr =
1953
Tr = 1.00
= 1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
1.80
2.00
3.50
2.50
Tr = 5.00
= 5.00
Tr = 1.00
1.05
1.10
1.15
1.20
1.30
1.40
1.50
1.60
1.80
2.00
3.50
2.50
Tr = 5.00
vr = 0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
vr = 0
.50
0.60
0.70
0.8
0
0.9
0
1.0
0
1.
20
1.
40
1.
60
3
.
0
0
2
.
0
0
vr = 0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45
vr = 0
.50
0.60
0.70
0.8
0
0.9
0
1.0
0
1.
20
1.
40
1.
60
3
.
0
0
3
.
0
0
5
.
0
0
2
.
0
0
REDUCED PRESSURE, Pr
(b) 0 < Pr < 7
0.0
0.5
1.5
2.5
3.5
4.5
5.5
6.5
1.0
2.0
3.0
4.0
5.0
6.0
7.0
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
00
10

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
811
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2 
PROPERTY TABLES AND CHARTS (ENGLISH UNITS)
|
809
Table A–1E
Molar mass, gas constant, and
critical-point properties
810
Table A–2E
Ideal-gas specific heats of various 
common gases
811
Table A–3E
Properties of common liquids, solids,
and foods
814
Table A–4E
Saturated water—Temperature
table
816
Table A–5E
Saturated water—Pressure table
818
Table A–6E
Superheated water
820
Table A–7E
Compressed liquid water
824
Table A–8E
Saturated ice—water vapor
825
Figure A–9E
T-s diagram for water
826
Figure A–10E Mollier diagram for water
827
Table A–11E
Saturated refrigerant-134a—
Temperature table
828
Table A–12E
Saturated refrigerant-134a—
Pressure table
829
Table A–13E
Superheated refrigerant-134a
830
Figure A–14E P-h diagram for refrigerant-134a
832
Table A–15E
Properties of saturated water
833
Table A–16E
Properties of saturated 
refrigerant-134a
834
Table A–17E
Properties of saturated ammonia
835
Table A–18E
Properties of saturated propane
836
Table A–19E
Properties of liquids
837
Table A–20E
Properties of liquid metals
838
Table A–21E
Ideal-gas properties of air
839
Table A–22E
Properties of air at 1 atm 
pressure
841
Table A–23E
Properties of gases at 1 atm 
pressure
842
Table A–24E
Properties of solid metals
844
Table A–25E
Properties of solid non-metals
846

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
812
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–1E
Molar mass, gas constant, and critical-point properties
Molar
Gas constant, R
Critical-point properties
mass, M
Btu/
psia · ft3/
Temperature,
Pressure,
Volume,
Substance
Formula
lbm/lbmol
lbm · R*
lbm · R*
R
psia
ft3/lbmol
Air
—
28.97
0.06855
0.3704
238.5
547
1.41
Ammonia
NH3
17.03
0.1166
0.6301
729.8
1636
1.16
Argon
Ar
39.948
0.04971
0.2686
272
705
1.20
Benzene
C6H6
78.115
0.02542
0.1374
1012
714
4.17
Bromine
Br2
159.808
0.01243
0.06714
1052
1500
2.17
n-Butane
C4H10
58.124
0.03417
0.1846
765.2
551
4.08
Carbon dioxide
CO2
44.01
0.04513
0.2438
547.5
1071
1.51
Carbon monoxide
CO
28.011
0.07090
0.3831
240
507
1.49
Carbon tetrachloride
CCl4
153.82
0.01291
0.06976
1001.5
661
4.42
Chlorine
Cl2
70.906
0.02801
0.1517
751
1120
1.99
Chloroform
CHCl3
119.38
0.01664
0.08988
965.8
794
3.85
Dichlorodifluoromethane (R-12)
CCl2F2
120.91
0.01643
0.08874
692.4
582
3.49
Dichlorofluoromethane (R-21)
CHCl2F
102.92
0.01930
0.1043
813.0
749
3.16
Ethane
C2H6
30.020
0.06616
0.3574
549.8
708
2.37
Ethyl alcohol
C2H5OH
46.07
0.04311
0.2329
929.0
926
2.68
Ethylene
C2H4
28.054
0.07079
0.3825
508.3
742
1.99
Helium
He
4.003
0.4961
2.6809
9.5
33.2
0.926
n-Hexane
C6H14
86.178
0.02305
0.1245
914.2
439
5.89
Hydrogen (normal)
H2
2.016
0.9851
5.3224
59.9
188.1
1.04
Krypton
Kr
83.80
0.02370
0.1280
376.9
798
1.48
Methane
CH4
16.043
0.1238
0.6688
343.9
673
1.59
Methyl alcohol
CH3OH
32.042
0.06198
0.3349
923.7
1154
1.89
Methyl chloride
CH3Cl
50.488
0.03934
0.2125
749.3
968
2.29
Neon
Ne
20.183
0.09840
0.5316
80.1
395
0.668
Nitrogen
N2
28.013
0.07090
0.3830
227.1
492
1.44
Nitrous oxide
N2O
44.013
0.04512
0.2438
557.4
1054
1.54
Oxygen
O2
31.999
0.06206
0.3353
278.6
736
1.25
Propane
C3H8
44.097
0.04504
0.2433
665.9
617
3.20
Propylene
C3H6
42.081
0.04719
0.2550
656.9
670
2.90
Sulfur dioxide
SO2
64.063
0.03100
1.1675
775.2
1143
1.95
Tetrafluoroethane (R-134a)
CF3CH2F 102.03
0.01946
0.1052
673.6
588.7
3.19
Trichlorofluoromethane (R-11)
CCl3F
137.37
0.01446
0.07811
848.1
635
3.97
Water
H2O
18.015
0.1102
0.5956
1164.8
3200
0.90
Xenon
Xe
131.30
0.01513
0.08172
521.55
852
1.90
*Calculated from R  Ru /M, where Ru  1.98588 Btu/lbmol · R  10.7316 psia · ft3/lbmol · R and M is the molar mass.
Source: K. A. Kobe and R. E. Lynn, Jr., Chemical Review 52 (1953), pp. 117–236, and ASHRAE, Handbook of Fundamentals (Atlanta, GA: American 
Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993), pp. 16.4 and 36.1.
810
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
813
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–2E
Ideal-gas specific heats of various common gases
(a) At 80°F
Gas constant, R
cp
cv
Gas
Formula
Btu/lbm · R
Btu/lbm · R
Btu/lbm · R
k
Air
—
0.06855
0.240
0.171
1.400
Argon
Ar
0.04971
0.1253
0.0756
1.667
Butane
C4H10
0.03424
0.415
0.381
1.09
Carbon dioxide
CO2
0.04513
0.203
0.158
1.285
Carbon monoxide
CO
0.07090
0.249
0.178
1.399
Ethane
C2H6
0.06616
0.427
0.361
1.183
Ethylene
C2H4
0.07079
0.411
0.340
1.208
Helium
He
0.4961
1.25
0.753
1.667
Hydrogen
H2
0.9851
3.43
2.44
1.404
Methane
CH4
0.1238
0.532
0.403
1.32
Neon
Ne
0.09840
0.246
0.1477
1.667
Nitrogen
N2
0.07090
0.248
0.177
1.400
Octane
C8H18
0.01742
0.409
0.392
1.044
Oxygen
O2
0.06206
0.219
0.157
1.395
Propane
C3H8
0.04504
0.407
0.362
1.124
Steam
H2O
0.1102
0.445
0.335
1.329
Source: Gordon J. Van Wylen and Richard E. Sonntag, Fundamentals of Classical Thermodynamics, English/SI Version, 3rd ed. 
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1986), p. 687, Table A–8E.
Appendix 2
|
811

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
814
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–2E
Ideal-gas specific heats of various common gases (Continued)
(b) At various temperatures
Temp.,
cp
cv
cp
cv
cp
cv
°F
Btu/lbm · R
Btu/lbm · R
k
Btu/lbm · R
Btu/lbm · R
k
Btu/lbm · R
Btu/lbm · R k
Air
Carbon dioxide, C02
Carbon monoxide, CO
40
0.240
0.171
1.401
0.195
0.150
1.300
0.248
0.177
1.400
100
0.240
0.172
1.400
0.205
0.160
1.283
0.249
0.178
1.399
200
0.241
0.173
1.397
0.217
0.172
1.262
0.249
0.179
1.397
300
0.243
0.174
1.394
0.229
0.184
1.246
0.251
0.180
1.394
400
0.245
0.176
1.389
0.239
0.193
1.233
0.253
0.182
1.389
500
0.248
0.179
1.383
0.247
0.202
1.223
0.256
0.185
1.384
600
0.250
0.182
1.377
0.255
0.210
1.215
0.259
0.188
1.377
700
0.254
0.185
1.371
0.262
0.217
1.208
0.262
0.191
1.371
800
0.257
0.188
1.365
0.269
0.224
1.202
0.266
0.195
1.364
900
0.259
0.191
1.358
0.275
0.230
1.197
0.269
0.198
1.357
1000
0.263
0.195
1.353
0.280
0.235
1.192
0.273
0.202
1.351
1500
0.276
0.208
1.330
0.298
0.253
1.178
0.287
0.216
1.328
2000
0.286
0.217
1.312
0.312
0.267
1.169
0.297
0.226
1.314
Hydrogen, H2
Nitrogen, N2
Oxygen, O2
40
3.397
2.412
1.409
0.248
0.177
1.400
0.219
0.156
1.397
100
3.426
2.441
1.404
0.248
0.178
1.399
0.220
0.158
1.394
200
3.451
2.466
1.399
0.249
0.178
1.398
0.223
0.161
1.387
300
3.461
2.476
1.398
0.250
0.179
1.396
0.226
0.164
1.378
400
3.466
2.480
1.397
0.251
0.180
1.393
0.230
0.168
1.368
500
3.469
2.484
1.397
0.254
0.183
1.388
0.235
0.173
1.360
600
3.473
2.488
1.396
0.256
0.185
1.383
0.239
0.177
1.352
700
3.477
2.492
1.395
0.260
0.189
1.377
0.242
0.181
1.344
800
3.494
2.509
1.393
0.262
0.191
1.371
0.246
0.184
1.337
900
3.502
2.519
1.392
0.265
0.194
1.364
0.249
0.187
1.331
1000
3.513
2.528
1.390
0.269
0.198
1.359
0.252
0.190
1.326
1500
3.618
2.633
1.374
0.283
0.212
1.334
0.263
0.201
1.309
2000
3.758
2.773
1.355
0.293
0.222
1.319
0.270
0.208
1.298
Note: The unit Btu/lbm · R is equivalent to Btu/lbm · °F.
Source: Kenneth Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983), p. 830, Table A–4. Originally published in Tables of Properties of
Gases, NBS Circular 564, 1955.
812
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
815
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–2E
Ideal-gas specific heats of various common gases (Concluded)
(c) As a function of temperature
(T in R, cp in Btu/lbmol · R)
Temperature
% error
Substance
Formula
a
b
c
d
range, R
Max.
Avg.
Nitrogen
N2
6.903
0.02085 
 102
0.05957

 105
0.1176

 109
491-3240
0.59
0.34
Oxygen
O2
6.085
0.2017

 102
0.05275

 105
0.05372 
 109
491-3240
1.19
0.28
Air
—
6.713
0.02609 
 102
0.03540

 105
0.08052 
 109
491-3240
0.72
0.33
Hydrogen
H2
6.952
0.02542 
 102
0.02952

 105
0.03565 
 109
491-3240
1.02
0.26
Carbon monoxide
CO
6.726
0.02222 
 102
0.03960

 105
0.09100 
 109
491-3240
0.89
0.37
Carbon dioxide
CO2
5.316
0.79361 
 102
0.2581

 105
0.3059

 109
491-3240
0.67
0.22
Water vapor
H2O
7.700
0.02552 
 102
0.07781

 105
0.1472

 109
491-3240
0.53
0.24
Nitric oxide
NO
7.008
0.01247 
 102
0.07185

 105
0.1715

 109
491-2700
0.97
0.36
Nitrous oxide
N2O
5.758
0.7780

 102
0.2596

 105
0.4331

 109
491-2700
0.59
0.26
Nitrogen dioxide
NO2
5.48
0.7583

 102
0.260

 105
0.322

 109
491-2700
0.46
0.18
Ammonia
NH3
6.5846
0.34028 
 102
0.073034 
 105
0.27402 
 109
491-2700
0.91
0.36
Sulfur
S2
6.499
0.2943

 102
0.1200

 105
0.1632

 109
491-3240
0.99
0.38
Sulfur dioxide
SO2
6.157
0.7689

 102
0.2810

 105
0.3527

 109
491-3240
0.45
0.24
Sulfur trioxide
SO3
3.918
1.935

 102
0.8256

 105
1.328

 109
491-2340
0.29
0.13
Acetylene
C2H2
5.21
1.2227

 102
0.4812

 105
0.7457

 109
491-2700
1.46
0.59
Benzene
C6H6
8.650
6.4322

 102
2.327

 105
3.179

 109
491-2700
0.34
0.20
Methanol
CH4O
4.55
1.214

 102
0.0898

 105
0.329

 109
491-1800
0.18
0.08
Ethanol
C2H6O
4.75
2.781

 102
0.7651

 105
0.821

 109
491-2700
0.40
0.22
Hydrogen chloride
HCl
7.244
0.1011

 102
0.09783

 105
0.1776

 109
491-2740
0.22
0.08
Methane
CH4
4.750
0.6666

 102
0.09352

 105
0.4510

 109
491-2740
1.33
0.57
Ethane
C2H6
1.648
2.291

 102
0.4722

 105
0.2984

 109
491-2740
0.83
0.28
Propane
C3H8
0.966
4.044

 102
1.159

 105
1.300

 109
491-2740
0.40
0.12
n-Butane
C4H10
0.945
4.929

 102
1.352

 105
1.433

 109
491-2740
0.54
0.24
i-Butane
C4H10
1.890
5.520

 102
1.696

 105
2.044

 109
491-2740
0.25
0.13
n-Pentane
C5H12
1.618
6.028

 102
1.656

 105
1.732

 109
491-2740
0.56
0.21
n-Hexane
C6H14
1.657
7.328

 102
2.112

 105
2.363

 109
491-2740
0.72
0.20
Ethylene
C2H4
0.944
2.075

 102
0.6151

 105
0.7326

 109
491-2740
0.54
0.13
Propylene
C3H6
0.753
3.162

 102
0.8981

 105
1.008

 109
491-2740
0.73
0.17
Source: Chemical and Process Thermodynamics 3/E by Kyle, B. G., © 2000. Adapted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ.
c
p  a  bT  cT 2  dT 3
Appendix 2
|
813

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
816
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–3E
Properties of common liquids, solids, and foods (Continued)
(a) Liquids
Boiling data at 1 atm
Freezing data
Liquid properties
Normal
Latent heat of
Latent heat
Specific 
boiling
vaporization,
Freezing
of fusion,
Temperature,
Density,
heat, cp
Substance
point, °F
hfg Btu/lbm
point, °F
hif Btu/lbm
°F
r lbm/ft3
Btu/lbm · R
Ammonia
27.9
24.54
107.9
138.6
27.9
42.6
1.06
0
41.3
1.083
40
39.5
1.103
80
37.5
1.135
Argon
302.6
69.5
308.7
12.0
302.6
87.0
0.272
Benzene
176.4
169.4
41.9
54.2
68
54.9
0.411
Brine (20% 
sodium chloride 
by mass)
219.0
—
0.7
—
68
71.8
0.743
n-Butane
31.1
165.6
217.3
34.5
31.1
37.5
0.552
Carbon dioxide
109.2*
99.6 (at 32°F)
69.8
—
32
57.8
0.583
Ethanol
172.8
360.5
173.6
46.9
77
48.9
0.588
Ethyl alcohol
173.5
368
248.8
46.4
68
49.3
0.678
Ethylene glycol
388.6
344.0
12.6
77.9
68
69.2
0.678
Glycerine
355.8
419
66.0
86.3
68
78.7
0.554
Helium
452.1
9.80
—
—
452.1
9.13
5.45
Hydrogen
423.0
191.7
434.5
25.6
423.0
4.41
2.39
Isobutane
10.9
157.8
255.5
45.5
10.9
37.1
0.545
Kerosene
399–559
108
12.8
—
68
51.2
0.478
Mercury
674.1
126.7
38.0
4.90
77
847
0.033
Methane
258.7
219.6
296.0
25.1
258.7
26.4
0.834
160
20.0
1.074
Methanol
148.1
473
143.9
42.7
77
49.1
0.609
Nitrogen
320.4
85.4
346.0
10.9
320.4
50.5
0.492
260
38.2
0.643
Octane
256.6
131.7
71.5
77.9
68
43.9
0.502
Oil (light)
—
—
77
56.8
0.430
Oxygen
297.3
91.5
361.8
5.9
297.3
71.2
0.408
Petroleum
—
99–165
68
40.0
0.478
Propane
43.7
184.0
305.8
34.4
43.7
36.3
0.538
32
33.0
0.604
100
29.4
0.673
Refrigerant-134a
15.0
93.3
141.9
—
40
88.5
0.283
15
86.0
0.294
32
80.9
0.318
90
73.6
0.348
Water
212
970.1
32
143.5
32
62.4
1.01
90
62.1
1.00
150
61.2
1.00
212
59.8
1.01
*Sublimation temperature. (At pressures below the triple-point pressure of 75.1 psia, carbon dioxide exists as a solid or gas. Also, the freezing-point
temperature of carbon dioxide is the triple-point temperature of 69.8°F.)
814
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
817
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–3E
Properties of common liquids, solids, and foods (Concluded)
(b) Solids (values are for room temperature unless indicated otherwise)
Specific
Specific
Density,
heat, cp
Density,
heat, cp
Substance
r lbm/ft3
Btu/lbm · R
Substance
r lbm/ft3
Btu/lbm · R
Metals
Nonmetals
Aluminum
Asphalt
132
0.220
100°F
0.192
Brick, common
120
0.189
32°F
0.212
Brick, fireclay (500°C)
144
0.229
100°F
170
0.218
Concrete
144
0.156
200°F
0.224
Clay
62.4
0.220
300°F
0.229
Diamond
151
0.147
400°F
0.235
Glass, window
169
0.191
500°F
0.240
Glass, pyrex
139
0.200
Bronze (76% Cu, 2% Zn,
517
0.0955
Graphite
156
0.170
2% Al)
Granite
169
0.243
Brass, yellow (65% Cu,
519
0.0955
Gypsum or plaster board
50
0.260
35% Zn)
Ice
Copper
50°F
0.424
60°F
0.0862
0°F
0.471
0°F
0.0893
20°F
0.491
100°F
555
0.0925
32°F
57.5
0.502
200°F
0.0938
Limestone
103
0.217
390°F
0.0963
Marble
162
0.210
Iron
490
0.107
Plywood (Douglas fir)
34.0
Lead
705
0.030
Rubber (soft)
68.7
Magnesium
108
0.239
Rubber (hard)
71.8
Nickel
555
0.105
Sand
94.9
Silver
655
0.056
Stone
93.6
Steel, mild
489
0.119
Woods, hard (maple, oak, etc.)
45.0
Tungsten
1211
0.031
Woods, soft (fir, pine, etc.)
32.0
(c) Foods
Specific heat,
Latent
Water
Specific heat,
Latent
Water
Freezing
Btu/lbm · R
heat of
content,
Freezing
Btu/lbm · R
heat of
content,
point,
Above
Below
fusion,
% 
point,
Above
Below
fusion,
Food
% (mass)
°F
freezing
freezing
Btu/lbm
Food
(mass)
°F
freezing
freezing
Btu/lbm
Apples
84
30
0.873
0.453
121
Lettuce
95
32
0.961
0.487
136
Bananas
75
31
0.801
0.426
108
Milk, whole
88
31
0.905
0.465
126
Beef round
67
—
0.737
0.402
96
Oranges
87
31
0.897
0.462
125
Broccoli
90
31
0.921
0.471
129
Potatoes
78
31
0.825
0.435
112
Butter
16
—
—
0.249
23
Salmon fish
64
28
0.713
0.393
92
Cheese, Swiss
39
14
0.513
0.318
56
Shrimp
83
28
0.865
0.450
119
Cherries
80
29
0.841
0.441
115
Spinach
93
31
0.945
0.481
134
Chicken
74
27
0.793
0.423
106
Strawberries
90
31
0.921
0.471
129
Corn, sweet
74
31
0.793
0.423
106
Tomatoes, ripe
94
31
0.953
0.484
135
Eggs, whole
74
31
0.793
0.423
106
Turkey
64
—
0.713
0.393
92
Ice cream
63
22
0.705
0.390
90
Watermelon
93
31
0.945
0.481
134
Source: Values are obtained from various handbooks and other sources or are calculated. Water content and freezing-point data of foods are from
ASHRAE, Handbook of Fundamentals, I-P version (Atlanta, GA: American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., 1993),
Chap. 30, Table 1. Freezing point is the temperature at which freezing starts for fruits and vegetables, and the average freezing temperature for other
foods.
Appendix 2
|
815

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
818
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–4E
Saturated water—Temperature table
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm · R
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp.,
press.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
T °F
Psat psia
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
32.018
0.08871
0.01602
3299.9
0.000
1021.0
1021.0
0.000 1075.2
1075.2
0.00000
2.18672
2.1867
35
0.09998
0.01602
2945.7
3.004
1019.0
1022.0
3.004 1073.5
1076.5
0.00609
2.17011
2.1762
40
0.12173
0.01602
2443.6
8.032
1015.6
1023.7
8.032 1070.7
1078.7
0.01620
2.14271
2.1589
45
0.14756
0.01602
2035.8
13.05
1012.2
1025.3
13.05
1067.8
1080.9
0.02620
2.11587
2.1421
50
0.17812
0.01602
1703.1
18.07
1008.9
1026.9
18.07
1065.0
1083.1
0.03609
2.08956
2.1256
55
0.21413
0.01603
1430.4
23.07
1005.5
1028.6
23.07
1062.2
1085.3
0.04586
2.06377
2.1096
60
0.25638
0.01604
1206.1
28.08
1002.1
1030.2
28.08
1059.4
1087.4
0.05554
2.03847
2.0940
65
0.30578
0.01604
1020.8
33.08
998.76
1031.8
33.08
1056.5
1089.6
0.06511
2.01366
2.0788
70
0.36334
0.01605
867.18
38.08
995.39
1033.5
38.08
1053.7
1091.8
0.07459
1.98931
2.0639
75
0.43016
0.01606
739.27
43.07
992.02
1035.1
43.07
1050.9
1093.9
0.08398
1.96541
2.0494
80
0.50745
0.01607
632.41
48.06
988.65
1036.7
48.07
1048.0
1096.1
0.09328
1.94196
2.0352
85
0.59659
0.01609
542.80
53.06
985.28
1038.3
53.06
1045.2
1098.3
0.10248
1.91892
2.0214
90
0.69904
0.01610
467.40
58.05
981.90
1040.0
58.05
1042.4
1100.4
0.11161
1.89630
2.0079
95
0.81643
0.01612
403.74
63.04
978.52
1041.6
63.04
1039.5
1102.6
0.12065
1.87408
1.9947
100
0.95052
0.01613
349.83
68.03
975.14
1043.2
68.03
1036.7
1104.7
0.12961
1.85225
1.9819
110
1.2767
0.01617
264.96
78.01
968.36
1046.4
78.02
1031.0
1109.0
0.14728
1.80970
1.9570
120
1.6951
0.01620
202.94
88.00
961.56
1049.6
88.00
1025.2
1113.2
0.16466
1.76856
1.9332
130
2.2260
0.01625
157.09
97.99
954.73
1052.7
97.99
1019.4
1117.4
0.18174
1.72877
1.9105
140
2.8931
0.01629
122.81
107.98
947.87
1055.9
107.99
1013.6
1121.6
0.19855
1.69024
1.8888
150
3.7234
0.01634
96.929
117.98
940.98
1059.0
117.99
1007.8
1125.7
0.21508
1.65291
1.8680
160
4.7474
0.01639
77.185
127.98
934.05
1062.0
128.00
1001.8
1129.8
0.23136
1.61670
1.8481
170
5.9999
0.01645
61.982
138.00
927.08
1065.1
138.02
995.88 1133.9
0.24739
1.58155
1.8289
180
7.5197
0.01651
50.172
148.02
920.06
1068.1
148.04
989.85 1137.9
0.26318
1.54741
1.8106
190
9.3497
0.01657
40.920
158.05
912.99
1071.0
158.08
983.76 1141.8
0.27874
1.51421
1.7930
200
11.538
0.01663
33.613
168.10
905.87
1074.0
168.13
977.60 1145.7
0.29409
1.48191
1.7760
210
14.136
0.01670
27.798
178.15
898.68
1076.8
178.20
971.35 1149.5
0.30922
1.45046
1.7597
212
14.709
0.01671
26.782
180.16
897.24
1077.4
180.21
970.09 1150.3
0.31222
1.44427
1.7565
220
17.201
0.01677
23.136
188.22
891.43
1079.6
188.28
965.02 1153.3
0.32414
1.41980
1.7439
230
20.795
0.01684
19.374
198.31
884.10
1082.4
198.37
958.59 1157.0
0.33887
1.38989
1.7288
240
24.985
0.01692
16.316
208.41
876.70
1085.1
208.49
952.06 1160.5
0.35342
1.36069
1.7141
250
29.844
0.01700
13.816
218.54
869.21
1087.7
218.63
945.41 1164.0
0.36779
1.33216
1.6999
260
35.447
0.01708
11.760
228.68
861.62
1090.3
228.79
938.65 1167.4
0.38198
1.30425
1.6862
270
41.877
0.01717
10.059
238.85
853.94
1092.8
238.98
931.76 1170.7
0.39601
1.27694
1.6730
280
49.222
0.01726
8.6439
249.04
846.16
1095.2
249.20
924.74 1173.9
0.40989
1.25018
1.6601
290
57.573
0.01735
7.4607
259.26
838.27
1097.5
259.45
917.57 1177.0
0.42361
1.22393
1.6475
300
67.028
0.01745
6.4663
269.51
830.25
1099.8
269.73
910.24 1180.0
0.43720
1.19818
1.6354
310
77.691
0.01755
5.6266
279.79
822.11
1101.9
280.05
902.75 1182.8
0.45065
1.17289
1.6235
320
89.667
0.01765
4.9144
290.11
813.84
1104.0
290.40
895.09 1185.5
0.46396
1.14802
1.6120
330
103.07
0.01776
4.3076
300.46
805.43
1105.9
300.80
887.25 1188.1
0.47716
1.12355
1.6007
340
118.02
0.01787
3.7885
310.85
796.87
1107.7
311.24
879.22 1190.5
0.49024
1.09945
1.5897
350
134.63
0.01799
3.3425
321.29
788.16
1109.4
321.73
870.98 1192.7
0.50321
1.07570
1.5789
360
153.03
0.01811
2.9580
331.76
779.28
1111.0
332.28
862.53 1194.8
0.51607
1.05227
1.5683
370
173.36
0.01823
2.6252
342.29
770.23
1112.5
342.88
853.86 1196.7
0.52884
1.02914
1.5580
380
195.74
0.01836
2.3361
352.87
761.00
1113.9
353.53
844.96 1198.5
0.54152
1.00628
1.5478
390
220.33
0.01850
2.0842
363.50
751.58
1115.1
364.25
835.81 1200.1
0.55411
0.98366
1.5378
816
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
819
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
817
TABLE A–4E
Saturated water—Temperature table (Concluded)
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm · R
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp.,
press.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
T °F
Psat psia
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
400
247.26
0.01864
1.8639
374.19
741.97
1116.2
375.04
826.39
1201.4
0.56663
0.96127
1.5279
410
276.69
0.01878
1.6706
384.94
732.14
1117.1
385.90
816.71
1202.6
0.57907
0.93908
1.5182
420
308.76
0.01894
1.5006
395.76
722.08
1117.8
396.84
806.74
1203.6
0.59145
0.91707
1.5085
430
343.64
0.01910
1.3505
406.65
711.80
1118.4
407.86
796.46
1204.3
0.60377
0.89522
1.4990
440
381.49
0.01926
1.2178
417.61
701.26
1118.9
418.97
785.87
1204.8
0.61603
0.87349
1.4895
450
422.47
0.01944
1.0999
428.66
690.47
1119.1
430.18
774.94
1205.1
0.62826
0.85187
1.4801
460
466.75
0.01962
0.99510 439.79
679.39
1119.2
441.48
763.65
1205.1
0.64044
0.83033
1.4708
470
514.52
0.01981
0.90158 451.01
668.02
1119.0
452.90
751.98
1204.9
0.65260
0.80885
1.4615
480
565.96
0.02001
0.81794 462.34
656.34
1118.7
464.43
739.91
1204.3
0.66474
0.78739
1.4521
490
621.24
0.02022
0.74296 473.77
644.32
1118.1
476.09
727.40
1203.5
0.67686
0.76594
1.4428
500
680.56
0.02044
0.67558 485.32
631.94
1117.3
487.89
714.44
1202.3
0.68899
0.74445
1.4334
510
744.11
0.02067
0.61489 496.99
619.17
1116.2
499.84
700.99
1200.8
0.70112
0.72290
1.4240
520
812.11
0.02092
0.56009 508.80
605.99
1114.8
511.94
687.01
1199.0
0.71327
0.70126
1.4145
530
884.74
0.02118
0.51051 520.76
592.35
1113.1
524.23
672.47
1196.7
0.72546
0.67947
1.4049
540
962.24
0.02146
0.46553 532.88
578.23
1111.1
536.70
657.31
1194.0
0.73770
0.65751
1.3952
550
1044.8
0.02176
0.42465 545.18
563.58
1108.8
549.39
641.47
1190.9
0.75000
0.63532
1.3853
560
1132.7
0.02207
0.38740 557.68
548.33
1106.0
562.31
624.91
1187.2
0.76238
0.61284
1.3752
570
1226.2
0.02242
0.35339 570.40
532.45
1102.8
575.49
607.55
1183.0
0.77486
0.59003
1.3649
580
1325.5
0.02279
0.32225 583.37
515.84
1099.2
588.95
589.29
1178.2
0.78748
0.56679
1.3543
590
1430.8
0.02319
0.29367 596.61
498.43
1095.0
602.75
570.04
1172.8
0.80026
0.54306
1.3433
600
1542.5
0.02362
0.26737 610.18
480.10
1090.3
616.92
549.67
1166.6
0.81323
0.51871
1.3319
610
1660.9
0.02411
0.24309 624.11
460.73
1084.8
631.52
528.03
1159.5
0.82645
0.49363
1.3201
620
1786.2
0.02464
0.22061 638.47
440.14
1078.6
646.62
504.92
1151.5
0.83998
0.46765
1.3076
630
1918.9
0.02524
0.19972 653.35
418.12
1071.5
662.32
480.07
1142.4
0.85389
0.44056
1.2944
640
2059.3
0.02593
0.18019 668.86
394.36
1063.2
678.74
453.14
1131.9
0.86828
0.41206
1.2803
650
2207.8
0.02673
0.16184 685.16
368.44
1053.6
696.08
423.65
1119.7
0.88332
0.38177
1.2651
660
2364.9
0.02767
0.14444 702.48
339.74
1042.2
714.59
390.84
1105.4
0.89922
0.34906
1.2483
670
2531.2
0.02884
0.12774 721.23
307.22
1028.5
734.74
353.54
1088.3
0.91636
0.31296
1.2293
680
2707.3
0.03035
0.11134 742.11
269.00
1011.1
757.32
309.57
1066.9
0.93541
0.27163
1.2070
690
2894.1
0.03255
0.09451 766.81
220.77
987.6
784.24
253.96
1038.2
0.95797
0.22089
1.1789
700
3093.0
0.03670
0.07482 801.75
146.50
948.3
822.76
168.32
991.1
0.99023
0.14514
1.1354
705.10
3200.1
0.04975
0.04975 866.61
0
866.6
896.07
0
896.1
1.05257
0
1.0526
Source: Tables A–4E through A–8E are generated using the Engineering Equation Solver (EES) software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. The 
routine used in calculations is the highly accurate Steam_IAPWS, which incorporates the 1995 Formulation for the Thermodynamic Properties of Ordinary
Water Substance for General and Scientific Use, issued by The International Association for the Properties of Water and Steam (IAPWS). This formulation
replaces the 1984 formulation of Haar, Gallagher, and Kell (NBS/NRC Steam Tables, Hemisphere Publishing Co., 1984), which is also available in EES
as the routine STEAM. The new formulation is based on the correlations of Saul and Wagner (J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 16, 893, 1987) with modifica-
tions to adjust to the International Temperature Scale of 1990. The modifications are described by Wagner and Pruss (J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 22,
783, 1993). The properties of ice are based on Hyland and Wexler, “Formulations for the Thermodynamic Properties of the Saturated Phases of H2O
from 173.15 K to 473.15 K,” ASHRAE Trans., Part 2A, Paper 2793, 1983.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
820
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–5E
Saturated water—Pressure table
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm · R
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Press.,
temp.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
P psia
Tsat °F
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
1
101.69
0.01614
333.49
69.72
973.99
1043.7
69.72
1035.7
1105.4
0.13262
1.84495
1.9776
2
126.02
0.01623
173.71
94.02
957.45
1051.5
94.02
1021.7
1115.8
0.17499
1.74444
1.9194
3
141.41
0.01630
118.70
109.39
946.90
1056.3
109.40
1012.8
1122.2
0.20090
1.68489
1.8858
4
152.91
0.01636
90.629
120.89
938.97
1059.9
120.90
1006.0
1126.9
0.21985
1.64225
1.8621
5
162.18
0.01641
73.525
130.17
932.53
1062.7
130.18
1000.5
1130.7
0.23488
1.60894
1.8438
6
170.00
0.01645
61.982
138.00
927.08
1065.1
138.02
995.88
1133.9
0.24739
1.58155
1.8289
8
182.81
0.01652
47.347
150.83
918.08
1068.9
150.86
988.15
1139.0
0.26757
1.53800
1.8056
10
193.16
0.01659
38.425
161.22
910.75
1072.0
161.25
981.82
1143.1
0.28362
1.50391
1.7875
14.696
211.95
0.01671
26.805
180.12
897.27
1077.4
180.16
970.12
1150.3
0.31215
1.44441
1.7566
15
212.99
0.01672
26.297
181.16
896.52
1077.7
181.21
969.47
1150.7
0.31370
1.44441
1.7549
20
227.92
0.01683
20.093
196.21
885.63
1081.8
196.27
959.93
1156.2
0.33582
1.39606
1.7319
25
240.03
0.01692
16.307
208.45
876.67
1085.1
208.52
952.03
1160.6
0.35347
1.36060
1.7141
30
250.30
0.01700
13.749
218.84
868.98
1087.8
218.93
945.21
1164.1
0.36821
1.33132
1.6995
35
259.25
0.01708
11.901
227.92
862.19
1090.1
228.03
939.16
1167.2
0.38093
1.30632
1.6872
40
267.22
0.01715
10.501
236.02
856.09
1092.1
236.14
933.69
1169.8
0.39213
1.28448
1.6766
45
274.41
0.01721
9.4028
243.34
850.52
1093.9
243.49
928.68
1172.2
0.40216
1.26506
1.6672
50
280.99
0.01727
8.5175
250.05
845.39
1095.4
250.21
924.03
1174.2
0.41125
1.24756
1.6588
55
287.05
0.01732
7.7882
256.25
840.61
1096.9
256.42
919.70
1176.1
0.41958
1.23162
1.6512
60
292.69
0.01738
7.1766
262.01
836.13
1098.1
262.20
915.61
1177.8
0.42728
1.21697
1.6442
65
297.95
0.01743
6.6560
267.41
831.90
1099.3
267.62
911.75
1179.4
0.43443
1.20341
1.6378
70
302.91
0.01748
6.2075
272.50
827.90
1100.4
272.72
908.08
1180.8
0.44112
1.19078
1.6319
75
307.59
0.01752
5.8167
277.31
824.09
1101.4
277.55
904.58
1182.1
0.44741
1.17895
1.6264
80
312.02
0.01757
5.4733
281.87
820.45
1102.3
282.13
901.22
1183.4
0.45335
1.16783
1.6212
85
316.24
0.01761
5.1689
286.22
816.97
1103.2
286.50
898.00
1184.5
0.45897
1.15732
1.6163
90
320.26
0.01765
4.8972
290.38
813.62
1104.0
290.67
894.89
1185.6
0.46431
1.14737
1.6117
95
324.11
0.01770
4.6532
294.36
810.40
1104.8
294.67
891.89
1186.6
0.46941
1.13791
1.6073
100
327.81
0.01774
4.4327
298.19
807.29
1105.5
298.51
888.99
1187.5
0.47427
1.12888
1.6032
110
334.77
0.01781
4.0410
305.41
801.37
1106.8
305.78
883.44
1189.2
0.48341
1.11201
1.5954
120
341.25
0.01789
3.7289
312.16
795.79
1107.9
312.55
878.20
1190.8
0.49187
1.09646
1.5883
130
347.32
0.01796
3.4557
318.48
790.51
1109.0
318.92
873.21
1192.1
0.49974
1.08204
1.5818
140
353.03
0.01802
3.2202
324.45
785.49
1109.9
324.92
868.45
1193.4
0.50711
1.06858
1.5757
150
358.42
0.01809
3.0150
330.11
780.69
1110.8
330.61
863.88
1194.5
0.51405
1.05595
1.5700
160
363.54
0.01815
2.8347
335.49
776.10
1111.6
336.02
859.49
1195.5
0.52061
1.04405
1.5647
170
368.41
0.01821
2.6749
340.62
771.68
1112.3
341.19
855.25
1196.4
0.52682
1.03279
1.5596
180
373.07
0.01827
2.5322
345.53
767.42
1113.0
346.14
851.16
1197.3
0.53274
1.02210
1.5548
190
377.52
0.01833
2.4040
350.24
763.31
1113.6
350.89
847.19
1198.1
0.53839
1.01191
1.5503
200
381.80
0.01839
2.2882
354.78
759.32
1114.1
355.46
843.33
1198.8
0.54379
1.00219
1.5460
250
400.97
0.01865
1.8440
375.23
741.02
1116.3
376.09
825.47
1201.6
0.56784
0.95912
1.5270
300
417.35
0.01890
1.5435
392.89
724.77
1117.7
393.94
809.41
1203.3
0.58818
0.92289
1.5111
350
431.74
0.01912
1.3263
408.55
709.98
1118.5
409.79
794.65
1204.4
0.60590
0.89143
1.4973
400
444.62
0.01934
1.1617
422.70
696.31
1119.0
424.13
780.87
1205.0
0.62168
0.86350
1.4852
450
456.31
0.01955
1.0324
435.67
683.52
1119.2
437.30
767.86
1205.2
0.63595
0.83828
1.4742
500
467.04
0.01975
0.92819 447.68
671.42
1119.1
449.51
755.48
1205.0
0.64900
0.81521
1.4642
550
476.97
0.01995
0.84228 458.90
659.91
1118.8
460.93
743.60
1204.5
0.66107
0.79388
1.4550
600
486.24
0.02014
0.77020 469.46
648.88
1118.3
471.70
732.15
1203.9
0.67231
0.77400
1.4463
818
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
821
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
819
TABLE A–5E
Saturated water—Pressure table (Concluded)
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm · R
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Press.,
temp.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
P psia
Tsat °F
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
700
503.13
0.02051
0.65589
488.96
627.98
1116.9
491.62
710.29
1201.9
0.69279
0.73771
1.4305
800
518.27
0.02087
0.56920
506.74
608.30
1115.0
509.83
689.48
1199.3
0.71117
0.70502
1.4162
900
532.02
0.02124
0.50107
523.19
589.54
1112.7
526.73
669.46
1196.2
0.72793
0.67505
1.4030
1000
544.65
0.02159
0.44604
538.58
571.49
1110.1
542.57
650.03
1192.6
0.74341
0.64722
1.3906
1200
567.26
0.02232
0.36241
566.89
536.87
1103.8
571.85
612.39
1184.2
0.77143
0.59632
1.3677
1400
587.14
0.02307
0.30161
592.79
503.50
1096.3
598.76
575.66
1174.4
0.79658
0.54991
1.3465
1600
604.93
0.02386
0.25516
616.99
470.69
1087.7
624.06
539.18
1163.2
0.81972
0.50645
1.3262
1800
621.07
0.02470
0.21831
640.03
437.86
1077.9
648.26
502.35
1150.6
0.84144
0.46482
1.3063
2000
635.85
0.02563
0.18815
662.33
404.46
1066.8
671.82
464.60
1136.4
0.86224
0.42409
1.2863
2500
668.17
0.02860
0.13076
717.67
313.53
1031.2
730.90
360.79
1091.7
0.91311
0.31988
1.2330
3000
695.41
0.03433
0.08460
783.39
186.41
969.8
802.45
214.32
1016.8
0.97321
0.18554
1.1587
3200.1
705.10
0.04975
0.04975
866.61
0
866.6
896.07
0
896.1
1.05257
0
1.0526

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
822
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–6E
Superheated water
s
s
s
T
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
°F
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm lbm · R
P  1.0 psia (101.69°F)*
P  5.0 psia (162.18°F)
P  10 psia (193.16°F)
Sat.†
333.49
1043.7
1105.4
1.9776
73.525
1062.7
1130.7
1.8438
38.425
1072.0
1143.1
1.7875
200
392.53
1077.5
1150.1
2.0509
78.153
1076.2
1148.5
1.8716
38.849
1074.5
1146.4
1.7926
240
416.44
1091.2
1168.3
2.0777
83.009
1090.3
1167.1
1.8989
41.326
1089.1
1165.5
1.8207
280
440.33
1105.0
1186.5
2.1030
87.838
1104.3
1185.6
1.9246
43.774
1103.4
1184.4
1.8469
320
464.20
1118.9
1204.8
2.1271
92.650
1118.4
1204.1
1.9490
46.205
1117.6
1203.1
1.8716
360
488.07
1132.9
1223.3
2.1502
97.452
1132.5
1222.6
1.9722
48.624
1131.9
1221.8
1.8950
400
511.92
1147.1
1241.8
2.1722
102.25
1146.7
1241.3
1.9944
51.035
1146.2
1240.6
1.9174
440
535.77
1161.3
1260.4
2.1934
107.03
1160.9
1260.0
2.0156
53.441
1160.5
1259.4
1.9388
500
571.54
1182.8
1288.6
2.2237
114.21
1182.6
1288.2
2.0461
57.041
1182.2
1287.8
1.9693
600
631.14
1219.4
1336.2
2.2709
126.15
1219.2
1335.9
2.0933
63.029
1219.0
1335.6
2.0167
700
690.73
1256.8
1384.6
2.3146
138.09
1256.7
1384.4
2.1371
69.007
1256.5
1384.2
2.0605
800
750.31
1295.1
1433.9
2.3553
150.02
1294.9
1433.7
2.1778
74.980
1294.8
1433.5
2.1013
1000
869.47
1374.2
1535.1
2.4299
173.86
1374.2
1535.0
2.2524
86.913
1374.1
1534.9
2.1760
1200
988.62
1457.1
1640.0
2.4972
197.70
1457.0
1640.0
2.3198
98.840
1457.0
1639.9
2.2433
1400 1107.8
1543.7
1748.7
2.5590
221.54
1543.7
1748.7
2.3816
110.762
1543.6
1748.6
2.3052
P  15 psia (212.99°F)
P  20 psia (227.92°F)
P  40 psia (267.22°F)
Sat.
26.297
1077.7
1150.7
1.7549
20.093
1081.8
1156.2
1.7319
10.501
1092.1
1169.8
1.6766
240
27.429
1087.8
1163.9
1.7742
20.478
1086.5
1162.3
1.7406
280
29.085
1102.4
1183.2
1.8010
21.739
1101.4
1181.9
1.7679
10.713
1097.3
1176.6
1.6858
320
30.722
1116.9
1202.2
1.8260
22.980
1116.1
1201.2
1.7933
11.363
1112.9
1197.1
1.7128
360
32.348
1131.3
1221.1
1.8496
24.209
1130.7
1220.2
1.8171
11.999
1128.1
1216.9
1.7376
400
33.965
1145.7
1239.9
1.8721
25.429
1145.1
1239.3
1.8398
12.625
1143.1
1236.5
1.7610
440
35.576
1160.1
1258.8
1.8936
26.644
1159.7
1258.3
1.8614
13.244
1157.9
1256.0
1.7831
500
37.986
1181.9
1287.3
1.9243
28.458
1181.6
1286.9
1.8922
14.165
1180.2
1285.0
1.8143
600
41.988
1218.7
1335.3
1.9718
31.467
1218.5
1334.9
1.9398
15.686
1217.5
1333.6
1.8625
700
45.981
1256.3
1383.9
2.0156
34.467
1256.1
1383.7
1.9837
17.197
1255.3
1382.6
1.9067
800
49.967
1294.6
1433.3
2.0565
37.461
1294.5
1433.1
2.0247
18.702
1293.9
1432.3
1.9478
1000
57.930
1374.0
1534.8
2.1312
43.438
1373.8
1534.6
2.0994
21.700
1373.4
1534.1
2.0227
1200
65.885
1456.9
1639.8
2.1986
49.407
1456.8
1639.7
2.1668
24.691
1456.5
1639.3
2.0902
1400
73.836
1543.6
1748.5
2.2604
55.373
1543.5
1748.4
2.2287
27.678
1543.3
1748.1
2.1522
1600
81.784
1634.0
1861.0
2.3178
61.335
1633.9
1860.9
2.2861
30.662
1633.7
1860.7
2.2096
P  60 psia (292.69°F)
P  80 psia (312.02°F)
P  100 psia (327.81°F)
Sat.
7.1766 1098.1
1177.8
1.6442
5.4733 1102.3
1183.4
1.6212
4.4327 1105.5
1187.5
1.6032
320
7.4863 1109.6
1192.7
1.6636
5.5440 1105.9
1187.9
1.6271
360
7.9259 1125.5
1213.5
1.6897
5.8876 1122.7
1209.9
1.6545
4.6628 1119.8
1206.1
1.6263
400
8.3548 1140.9
1233.7
1.7138
6.2187 1138.7
1230.8
1.6794
4.9359 1136.4
1227.8
1.6521
440
8.7766 1156.1
1253.6
1.7364
6.5420 1154.3
1251.2
1.7026
5.2006 1152.4
1248.7
1.6759
500
9.4005 1178.8
1283.1
1.7682
7.0177 1177.3
1281.2
1.7350
5.5876 1175.9
1279.3
1.7088
600
10.4256 1216.5
1332.2
1.8168
7.7951 1215.4
1330.8
1.7841
6.2167 1214.4
1329.4
1.7586
700
11.4401 1254.5
1381.6
1.8613
8.5616 1253.8
1380.5
1.8289
6.8344 1253.0
1379.5
1.8037
800
12.4484 1293.3
1431.5
1.9026
9.3218 1292.6
1430.6
1.8704
7.4457 1292.0
1429.8
1.8453
1000
14.4543 1373.0
1533.5
1.9777
10.8313 1372.6
1532.9
1.9457
8.6575 1372.2
1532.4
1.9208
1200
16.4525 1456.2
1638.9
2.0454
12.3331 1455.9
1638.5
2.0135
9.8615 1455.6
1638.1
1.9887
1400
18.4464 1543.0
1747.8
2.1073
13.8306 1542.8
1747.5
2.0755
11.0612 1542.6
1747.2
2.0508
1600
20.438
1633.5
1860.5
2.1648
15.3257 1633.3
1860.2
2.1330
12.2584 1633.2
1860.0
2.1083
1800
22.428
1727.6
1976.6
2.2187
16.8192 1727.5
1976.5
2.1869
13.4541 1727.3
1976.3
2.1622
2000
24.417
1825.2
2096.3
2.2694
18.3117 1825.0
2096.1
2.2376
14.6487 1824.9
2096.0
2.2130
*The temperature in parentheses is the saturation temperature at the specified pressure.
† Properties of saturated vapor at the specified pressure.
820
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
823
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
821
TABLE A–6E
Superheated water (Continued)
s
s
s
T
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
°F
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
P  120 psia (341.25°F)
P  140 psia (353.03°F)
P  160 psia (363.54°F)
Sat.
3.7289
1107.9
1190.8
1.5883
3.2202
1109.9
1193.4
1.5757
2.8347
1111.6
1195.5
1.5647
360
3.8446
1116.7
1202.1
1.6023
3.2584
1113.4
1197.8
1.5811
400
4.0799
1134.0
1224.6
1.6292
3.4676
1131.5
1221.4
1.6092
3.0076
1129.0
1218.0
1.5914
450
4.3613
1154.5
1251.4
1.6594
3.7147
1152.6
1248.9
1.6403
3.2293
1150.7
1246.3
1.6234
500
4.6340
1174.4
1277.3
1.6872
3.9525
1172.9
1275.3
1.6686
3.4412
1171.4
1273.2
1.6522
550
4.9010
1193.9
1302.8
1.7131
4.1845
1192.7
1301.1
1.6948
3.6469
1191.4
1299.4
1.6788
600
5.1642
1213.4
1328.0
1.7375
4.4124
1212.3
1326.6
1.7195
3.8484
1211.3
1325.2
1.7037
700
5.6829
1252.2
1378.4
1.7829
4.8604
1251.4
1377.3
1.7652
4.2434
1250.6
1376.3
1.7498
800
6.1950
1291.4
1429.0
1.8247
5.3017
1290.8
1428.1
1.8072
4.6316
1290.2
1427.3
1.7920
1000
7.2083
1371.7
1531.8
1.9005
6.1732
1371.3
1531.3
1.8832
5.3968
1370.9
1530.7
1.8682
1200
8.2137
1455.3
1637.7
1.9684
7.0367
1455.0
1637.3
1.9512
6.1540
1454.7
1636.9
1.9363
1400
9.2149
1542.3
1746.9
2.0305
7.8961
1542.1
1746.6
2.0134
6.9070
1541.8
1746.3
1.9986
1600
10.2135
1633.0
1859.8
2.0881
8.7529
1632.8
1859.5
2.0711
7.6574
1632.6
1859.3
2.0563
1800
11.2106
1727.2
1976.1
2.1420
9.6082
1727.0
1975.9
2.1250
8.4063
1726.9
1975.7
2.1102
2000
12.2067
1824.8
2095.8
2.1928
10.4624
1824.6
2095.7
2.1758
9.1542
1824.5
2095.5
2.1610
P  180 psia (373.07°F)
P  200 psia (381.80°F)
P  225 psia (391.80°F)
Sat.
2.5322
1113.0
1197.3
1.5548
2.2882
1114.1
1198.8
1.5460
2.0423
1115.3
1200.3
1.5360
400
2.6490
1126.3
1214.5
1.5752
2.3615
1123.5
1210.9
1.5602
2.0728
1119.7
1206.0
1.5427
450
2.8514
1148.7
1243.7
1.6082
2.5488
1146.7
1241.0
1.5943
2.2457
1144.1
1237.6
1.5783
500
3.0433
1169.8
1271.2
1.6376
2.7247
1168.2
1269.0
1.6243
2.4059
1166.2
1266.3
1.6091
550
3.2286
1190.2
1297.7
1.6646
2.8939
1188.9
1296.0
1.6516
2.5590
1187.2
1293.8
1.6370
600
3.4097
1210.2
1323.8
1.6897
3.0586
1209.1
1322.3
1.6771
2.7075
1207.7
1320.5
1.6628
700
3.7635
1249.8
1375.2
1.7361
3.3796
1249.0
1374.1
1.7238
2.9956
1248.0
1372.7
1.7099
800
4.1104
1289.5
1426.5
1.7785
3.6934
1288.9
1425.6
1.7664
3.2765
1288.1
1424.5
1.7528
900
4.4531
1329.7
1478.0
1.8179
4.0031
1329.2
1477.3
1.8059
3.5530
1328.5
1476.5
1.7925
1000
4.7929
1370.5
1530.1
1.8549
4.3099
1370.1
1529.6
1.8430
3.8268
1369.5
1528.9
1.8296
1200
5.4674
1454.3
1636.5
1.9231
4.9182
1454.0
1636.1
1.9113
4.3689
1453.6
1635.6
1.8981
1400
6.1377
1541.6
1746.0
1.9855
5.5222
1541.4
1745.7
1.9737
4.9068
1541.1
1745.4
1.9606
1600
6.8054
1632.4
1859.1
2.0432
6.1238
1632.2
1858.8
2.0315
5.4422
1632.0
1858.6
2.0184
1800
7.4716
1726.7
1975.6
2.0971
6.7238
1726.5
1975.4
2.0855
5.9760
1726.4
1975.2
2.0724
2000
8.1367
1824.4
2095.4
2.1479
7.3227
1824.3
2095.3
2.1363
6.5087
1824.1
2095.1
2.1232
P  250 psia (400.97°F)
P  275 psia (409.45°F)
P  300 psia (417.35°F)
Sat.
1.8440
1116.3
1201.6
1.5270
1.6806
1117.0
1202.6
1.5187
1.5435
1117.7
1203.3
1.5111
450
2.0027
1141.3
1234.0
1.5636
1.8034
1138.5
1230.3
1.5499
1.6369
1135.6
1226.4
1.5369
500
2.1506
1164.1
1263.6
1.5953
1.9415
1162.0
1260.8
1.5825
1.7670
1159.8
1257.9
1.5706
550
2.2910
1185.6
1291.5
1.6237
2.0715
1183.9
1289.3
1.6115
1.8885
1182.1
1287.0
1.6001
600
2.4264
1206.3
1318.6
1.6499
2.1964
1204.9
1316.7
1.6380
2.0046
1203.5
1314.8
1.6270
650
2.5586
1226.8
1345.1
1.6743
2.3179
1225.6
1343.5
1.6627
2.1172
1224.4
1341.9
1.6520
700
2.6883
1247.0
1371.4
1.6974
2.4369
1246.0
1370.0
1.6860
2.2273
1244.9
1368.6
1.6755
800
2.9429
1287.3
1423.5
1.7406
2.6699
1286.5
1422.4
1.7294
2.4424
1285.7
1421.3
1.7192
900
3.1930
1327.9
1475.6
1.7804
2.8984
1327.3
1474.8
1.7694
2.6529
1326.6
1473.9
1.7593
1000
3.4403
1369.0
1528.2
1.8177
3.1241
1368.5
1527.4
1.8068
2.8605
1367.9
1526.7
1.7968
1200
3.9295
1453.3
1635.0
1.8863
3.5700
1452.9
1634.5
1.8755
3.2704
1452.5
1634.0
1.8657
1400
4.4144
1540.8
1745.0
1.9488
4.0116
1540.5
1744.6
1.9381
3.6759
1540.2
1744.2
1.9284
1600
4.8969
1631.7
1858.3
2.0066
4.4507
1631.5
1858.0
1.9960
4.0789
1631.3
1857.7
1.9863
1800
5.3777
1726.2
1974.9
2.0607
4.8882
1726.0
1974.7
2.0501
4.4803
1725.8
1974.5
2.0404
2000
5.8575
1823.9
2094.9
2.1116
5.3247
1823.8
2094.7
2.1010
4.8807
1823.6
2094.6
2.0913

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
824
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–6E
Superheated water (Continued)
s
s
s
T
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
°F
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
P  350 psia (431.74°F)
P  400 psia (444.62°F)
P  450 psia (456.31°F)
Sat.
1.3263
1118.5
1204.4
1.4973
1.1617
1119.0
1205.0
1.4852
1.0324
1119.2
1205.2
1.4742
450
1.3739
1129.3
1218.3
1.5128
1.1747
1122.5
1209.4
1.4901
500
1.4921
1155.2
1251.9
1.5487
1.2851
1150.4
1245.6
1.5288
1.1233
1145.4
1238.9
1.5103
550
1.6004
1178.6
1282.2
1.5795
1.3840
1174.9
1277.3
1.5610
1.2152
1171.1
1272.3
1.5441
600
1.7030
1200.6
1310.9
1.6073
1.4765
1197.6
1306.9
1.5897
1.3001
1194.6
1302.8
1.5737
650
1.8018
1221.9
1338.6
1.6328
1.5650
1219.4
1335.3
1.6158
1.3807
1216.9
1331.9
1.6005
700
1.8979
1242.8
1365.8
1.6567
1.6507
1240.7
1362.9
1.6401
1.4584
1238.5
1360.0
1.6253
800
2.0848
1284.1
1419.1
1.7009
1.8166
1282.5
1417.0
1.6849
1.6080
1280.8
1414.7
1.6706
900
2.2671
1325.3
1472.2
1.7414
1.9777
1324.0
1470.4
1.7257
1.7526
1322.7
1468.6
1.7117
1000
2.4464
1366.9
1525.3
1.7791
2.1358
1365.8
1523.9
1.7636
1.8942
1364.7
1522.4
1.7499
1200
2.7996
1451.7
1633.0
1.8483
2.4465
1450.9
1632.0
1.8331
2.1718
1450.1
1631.0
1.8196
1400
3.1484
1539.6
1743.5
1.9111
2.7527
1539.0
1742.7
1.8960
2.4450
1538.4
1742.0
1.8827
1600
3.4947
1630.8
1857.1
1.9691
3.0565
1630.3
1856.5
1.9541
2.7157
1629.8
1856.0
1.9409
1800
3.8394
1725.4
1974.0
2.0233
3.3586
1725.0
1973.6
2.0084
2.9847
1724.6
1973.2
1.9952
2000
4.1830
1823.3
2094.2
2.0742
3.6597
1823.0
2093.9
2.0594
3.2527
1822.6
2093.5
2.0462
P  500 psia (467.04°F)
P  600 psia (486.24°F)
P  700 psia (503.13°F)
Sat.
0.92815
1119.1
1205.0
1.4642
0.77020
1118.3
1203.9
1.4463
0.65589
1116.9
1201.9
1.4305
500
0.99304
1140.1
1231.9
1.4928
0.79526
1128.2
1216.5
1.4596
550
1.07974
1167.1
1267.0
1.5284
0.87542
1158.7
1255.9
1.4996
0.72799
1149.5
1243.8
1.4730
600
1.15876
1191.4
1298.6
1.5590
0.94605
1184.9
1289.9
1.5325
0.79332
1177.9
1280.7
1.5087
650
1.23312
1214.3
1328.4
1.5865
1.01133
1209.0
1321.3
1.5614
0.85242
1203.4
1313.8
1.5393
700
1.30440
1236.4
1357.0
1.6117
1.07316
1231.9
1351.0
1.5877
0.90769
1227.2
1344.8
1.5666
800
1.44097
1279.2
1412.5
1.6576
1.19038
1275.8
1408.0
1.6348
1.01125
1272.4
1403.4
1.6150
900
1.57252
1321.4
1466.9
1.6992
1.30230
1318.7
1463.3
1.6771
1.10921
1316.0
1459.7
1.6581
1000
1.70094
1363.6
1521.0
1.7376
1.41097
1361.4
1518.1
1.7160
1.20381
1359.2
1515.2
1.6974
1100
1.82726
1406.2
1575.3
1.7735
1.51749
1404.4
1572.9
1.7522
1.29621
1402.5
1570.4
1.7341
1200
1.95211
1449.4
1630.0
1.8075
1.62252
1447.8
1627.9
1.7865
1.38709
1446.2
1625.9
1.7685
1400
2.1988
1537.8
1741.2
1.8708
1.82957
1536.6
1739.7
1.8501
1.56580
1535.4
1738.2
1.8324
1600
2.4430
1629.4
1855.4
1.9291
2.0340
1628.4
1854.2
1.9085
1.74192
1627.5
1853.1
1.8911
1800
2.6856
1724.2
1972.7
1.9834
2.2369
1723.4
1971.8
1.9630
1.91643
1722.7
1970.9
1.9457
2000
2.9271
1822.3
2093.1
2.0345
2.4387
1821.7
2092.4
2.0141
2.08987
1821.0
2091.7
1.9969
P  800 psia (518.27°F)
P  1000 psia (544.65°F)
P  1250 psia (572.45°F)
Sat.
0.56920
1115.0
1199.3
1.4162
0.44604
1110.1
1192.6
1.3906
0.34549
1102.0
1181.9
1.3623
550
0.61586
1139.4
1230.5
1.4476
0.45375
1115.2
1199.2
1.3972
600
0.67799
1170.5
1270.9
1.4866
0.51431
1154.1
1249.3
1.4457
0.37894
1129.5
1217.2
1.3961
650
0.73279
1197.6
1306.0
1.5191
0.56411
1185.1
1289.5
1.4827
0.42703
1167.5
1266.3
1.4414
700
0.78330
1222.4
1338.4
1.5476
0.60844
1212.4
1325.0
1.5140
0.46735
1198.7
1306.8
1.4771
750
0.83102
1246.0
1369.1
1.5735
0.64944
1237.6
1357.8
1.5418
0.50344
1226.4
1342.9
1.5076
800
0.87678
1268.9
1398.7
1.5975
0.68821
1261.7
1389.0
1.5670
0.53687
1252.2
1376.4
1.5347
900
0.96434
1313.3
1456.0
1.6413
0.76136
1307.7
1448.6
1.6126
0.59876
1300.5
1439.0
1.5826
1000
1.04841
1357.0
1512.2
1.6812
0.83078
1352.5
1506.2
1.6535
0.65656
1346.7
1498.6
1.6249
1100
1.13024
1400.7
1568.0
1.7181
0.89783
1396.9
1563.1
1.6911
0.71184
1392.2
1556.8
1.6635
1200
1.21051
1444.6
1623.8
1.7528
0.96327
1441.4
1619.7
1.7263
0.76545
1437.4
1614.5
1.6993
1400
1.36797
1534.2
1736.7
1.8170
1.09101
1531.8
1733.7
1.7911
0.86944
1528.7
1729.8
1.7649
1600
1.52283
1626.5
1851.9
1.8759
1.21610
1624.6
1849.6
1.8504
0.97072
1622.2
1846.7
1.8246
1800
1.67606
1721.9
1970.0
1.9306
1.33956
1720.3
1968.2
1.9053
1.07036
1718.4
1966.0
1.8799
2000
1.82823
1820.4
2091.0
1.9819
1.46194
1819.1
2089.6
1.9568
1.16892
1817.5
2087.9
1.9315
822
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
825
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
823
TABLE A–6E
Superheated water (Concluded)
s
s
s
T
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
°F
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm·R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm·R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm·R
P  1500 psia (596.26°F)
P  1750 psia (617.17°F)
P  2000 psia (635.85°F)
Sat.
0.27695
1092.1
1169.0
1.3362
0.22681
1080.5
1153.9
1.3112
0.18815
1066.8
1136.4
1.2863
600
0.28189
1097.2
1175.4
1.3423
650
0.33310
1147.2
1239.7
1.4016
0.26292
1122.8
1207.9
1.3607
0.20586
1091.4
1167.6
1.3146
700
0.37198
1183.6
1286.9
1.4433
0.30252
1166.8
1264.7
1.4108
0.24894
1147.6
1239.8
1.3783
750
0.40535
1214.4
1326.9
1.4771
0.33455
1201.5
1309.8
1.4489
0.28074
1187.4
1291.3
1.4218
800
0.43550
1242.2
1363.1
1.5064
0.36266
1231.7
1349.1
1.4807
0.30763
1220.5
1334.3
1.4567
850
0.46356
1268.2
1396.9
1.5328
0.38835
1259.3
1385.1
1.5088
0.33169
1250.0
1372.8
1.4867
900
0.49015
1293.1
1429.2
1.5569
0.41238
1285.4
1419.0
1.5341
0.35390
1277.5
1408.5
1.5134
1000
0.54031
1340.9
1490.8
1.6007
0.45719
1334.9
1482.9
1.5796
0.39479
1328.7
1474.9
1.5606
1100
0.58781
1387.3
1550.5
1.6402
0.49917
1382.4
1544.1
1.6201
0.43266
1377.5
1537.6
1.6021
1200
0.63355
1433.3
1609.2
1.6767
0.53932
1429.2
1603.9
1.6572
0.46864
1425.1
1598.5
1.6400
1400
0.72172
1525.7
1726.0
1.7432
0.61621
1522.6
1722.1
1.7245
0.53708
1519.5
1718.3
1.7081
1600
0.80714
1619.8
1843.8
1.8033
0.69031
1617.4
1840.9
1.7852
0.60269
1615.0
1838.0
1.7693
1800
0.89090
1716.4
1963.7
1.8589
0.76273
1714.5
1961.5
1.8410
0.66660
1712.5
1959.2
1.8255
2000
0.97358
1815.9
2086.1
1.9108
0.83406
1814.2
2084.3
1.8931
0.72942
1812.6
2082.6
1.8778
P  2500 psia (668.17°F)
P  3000 psia (695.41°F)
P  3500 psia
Sat.
0.13076
1031.2
1091.7
1.2330
0.08460
969.8
1016.8
1.1587
650
0.02492
663.7
679.9
0.8632
700
0.16849
1098.4
1176.3
1.3072
0.09838
1005.3
1059.9
1.1960
0.03065
760.0
779.9
0.9511
750
0.20327
1154.9
1249.0
1.3686
0.14840
1114.1
1196.5
1.3118
0.10460
1057.6
1125.4
1.2434
800
0.22949
1195.9
1302.0
1.4116
0.17601
1167.5
1265.3
1.3676
0.13639
1134.3
1222.6
1.3224
850
0.25174
1230.1
1346.6
1.4463
0.19771
1208.2
1317.9
1.4086
0.15847
1183.8
1286.5
1.3721
900
0.27165
1260.7
1386.4
1.4761
0.21640
1242.8
1362.9
1.4423
0.17659
1223.4
1337.8
1.4106
950
0.29001
1289.1
1423.3
1.5028
0.23321
1273.9
1403.3
1.4716
0.19245
1257.8
1382.4
1.4428
1000
0.30726
1316.1
1458.2
1.5271
0.24876
1302.8
1440.9
1.4978
0.20687
1289.0
1423.0
1.4711
1100
0.33949
1367.3
1524.4
1.5710
0.27732
1356.8
1510.8
1.5441
0.23289
1346.1
1496.9
1.5201
1200
0.36966
1416.6
1587.6
1.6103
0.30367
1408.0
1576.6
1.5850
0.25654
1399.3
1565.4
1.5627
1400
0.42631
1513.3
1710.5
1.6802
0.35249
1507.0
1702.7
1.6567
0.29978
1500.7
1694.8
1.6364
1600
0.48004
1610.1
1832.2
1.7424
0.39830
1605.3
1826.4
1.7199
0.33994
1600.4
1820.5
1.7006
1800
0.53205
1708.6
1954.8
1.7991
0.44237
1704.7
1950.3
1.7773
0.37833
1700.8
1945.8
1.7586
2000
0.58295
1809.4
2079.1
1.8518
0.48532
1806.1
2075.6
1.8304
0.41561
1802.9
2072.1
1.8121
P  4000 psia
P  5000 psia
P  6000 psia
650
0.02448
657.9
676.1
0.8577
0.02379
648.3
670.3
0.8485
0.02325
640.3
666.1
0.8408
700
0.02871
742.3
763.6
0.9347
0.02678
721.8
746.6
0.9156
0.02564
708.1
736.5
0.9028
750
0.06370
962.1
1009.2
1.1410
0.03373
821.8
853.0
1.0054
0.02981
788.7
821.8
0.9747
800
0.10520
1094.2
1172.1
1.2734
0.05937
986.9
1041.8
1.1581
0.03949
897.1
941.0
1.0711
850
0.12848
1156.7
1251.8
1.3355
0.08551
1092.4
1171.5
1.2593
0.05815
1018.6
1083.1
1.1819
900
0.14647
1202.5
1310.9
1.3799
0.10390
1155.9
1252.1
1.3198
0.07584
1103.5
1187.7
1.2603
950
0.16176
1240.7
1360.5
1.4157
0.11863
1203.9
1313.6
1.3643
0.09010
1163.7
1263.7
1.3153
1000
0.17538
1274.6
1404.4
1.4463
0.13128
1244.0
1365.5
1.4004
0.10208
1211.4
1324.7
1.3578
1100
0.19957
1335.1
1482.8
1.4983
0.15298
1312.2
1453.8
1.4590
0.12211
1288.4
1424.0
1.4237
1200
0.22121
1390.3
1554.1
1.5426
0.17185
1372.1
1531.1
1.5070
0.13911
1353.4
1507.8
1.4758
1300
0.24128
1443.0
1621.6
1.5821
0.18902
1427.8
1602.7
1.5490
0.15434
1412.5
1583.8
1.5203
1400
0.26028
1494.3
1687.0
1.6182
0.20508
1481.4
1671.1
1.5868
0.16841
1468.4
1655.4
1.5598
1600
0.29620
1595.5
1814.7
1.6835
0.23505
1585.6
1803.1
1.6542
0.19438
1575.7
1791.5
1.6294
1800
0.33033
1696.8
1941.4
1.7422
0.26320
1689.0
1932.5
1.7142
0.21853
1681.1
1923.7
1.6907
2000
0.36335
1799.7
2068.6
1.7961
0.29023
1793.2
2061.7
1.7689
0.24155
1786.7
2054.9
1.7463

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
826
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–7E
Compressed liquid water
T
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
v
u
h
s
°F
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm·R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm·R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm Btu/lbm·R
P  500 psia (467.04°F)
P  1000 psia (544.65°F)
P  1500 psia (596.26°F)
Sat.
0.019750 447.68
449.51
0.64900
0.021595
538.58 542.57
0.74341
0.023456
605.07
611.58
0.80836
32 0.015994
0.01
1.49
0.00001
0.015966
0.03
2.99
0.00005
0.015939
0.05
4.48
0.00008
50 0.015998
18.03
19.51
0.03601
0.015972
17.99
20.95
0.03593
0.015946
17.95
22.38
0.03584
100 0.016107
67.86
69.35
0.12930
0.016083
67.69
70.67
0.12899
0.016059
67.53
71.98
0.12869
150 0.016317 117.70
119.21
0.21462
0.016292
117.42 120.43
0.21416
0.016267
117.14
121.66
0.21369
200 0.016607 167.70
169.24
0.29349
0.016580
167.31 170.38
0.29289
0.016553
166.92
171.52
0.29229
250 0.016972 218.04
219.61
0.36708
0.016941
217.51 220.65
0.36634
0.016911
217.00
221.69
0.36560
300 0.017417 268.92
270.53
0.43641
0.017380
268.24 271.46
0.43551
0.017345
267.57
272.39
0.43463
350 0.017954 320.64
322.30
0.50240
0.017910
319.77 323.08
0.50132
0.017866
318.91
323.87
0.50025
400 0.018609 373.61
375.33
0.56595
0.018552
372.48 375.91
0.56463
0.018496
371.37
376.51
0.56333
450 0.019425 428.44
430.24
0.62802
0.019347
426.93 430.51
0.62635
0.019271
425.47
430.82
0.62472
500
0.020368
484.03 487.80
0.68764
0.020258
482.01
487.63
0.68550
550
0.021595
542.50
548.50
0.74731
P  2000 psia (635.85°F)
P  3000 psia (695.41°F)
P  5000 psia
Sat.
0.025634 662.33
671.82
0.86224
0.034335
783.39 802.45
0.97321
32 0.015912
0.07
5.96
0.00010
0.015859
0.10
8.90
0.00011
0.015756
0.13
14.71
0.00002
50 0.015921
17.91
23.80
0.03574
0.015870
17.83
26.64
0.03554
0.015773
17.65
32.25
0.03505
100 0.016035
67.36
73.30
0.12838
0.015988
67.04
75.91
0.12776
0.015897
66.41
81.12
0.12652
200 0.016527 166.54
172.66
0.29170
0.016475
165.79 174.94
0.29053
0.016375
164.36
179.51
0.28824
300 0.017310 266.92
273.33
0.43376
0.017242
265.65 275.22
0.43204
0.017112
263.24
279.07
0.42874
400 0.018442 370.30
377.12
0.56205
0.018338
368.22 378.41
0.55959
0.018145
364.35
381.14
0.55492
450 0.019199 424.06
431.16
0.62314
0.019062
421.36 431.94
0.62010
0.018812
416.40
433.80
0.61445
500 0.020154 480.08
487.54
0.68346
0.019960
476.45 487.53
0.67958
0.019620
469.94
488.10
0.67254
560 0.021739 552.21
560.26
0.75692
0.021405
546.59 558.47
0.75126
0.020862
537.08
556.38
0.74154
600 0.023317 605.77
614.40
0.80898
0.022759
597.42 610.06
0.80086
0.021943
584.42
604.72
0.78803
640
0.024765
654.52 668.27
0.85476
0.023358
634.95
656.56
0.83603
680
0.028821
728.63 744.64
0.92288
0.025366
690.67
714.14
0.88745
700
0.026777
721.78
746.56
0.91564
824
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
827
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
825
TABLE A–8E
Saturated ice—water vapor
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
Sat.
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/Ibm · R
press.,
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp.,
Psat
ice,
vapor,
ice,
Subl.,
vapor,
ice,
Subl.,
vapor,
ice,
Subl.,
vapor,
T °F
psia
vi
vg
ui
uig
ug
hi
hig
hg
si
sig
sg
32.018 0.08871
0.01747
3299.6
143.34
1164.2
1020.9
143.34
1218.3
1075.0
0.29146
2.4779
2.1864
32
0.08864
0.01747
3302.6
143.35
1164.2
1020.9
143.35
1218.4
1075.0
0.29148
2.4779
2.1865
30
0.08086
0.01747
3605.8
144.35
1164.6
1020.2
144.35
1218.5
1074.2
0.29353
2.4883
2.1948
25
0.06405
0.01746
4505.8
146.85
1165.4
1018.6
146.85
1218.8
1072.0
0.29865
2.5146
2.2160
20
0.05049
0.01746
5657.6
149.32
1166.2
1016.9
149.32
1219.1
1069.8
0.30377
2.5414
2.2376
15
0.03960
0.01745
7138.9
151.76
1167.0
1015.2
151.76
1219.3
1067.6
0.30889
2.5687
2.2598
10
0.03089
0.01744
9054.0
154.18
1167.8
1013.6
154.18
1219.5
1065.4
0.31401
2.5965
2.2825
5
0.02397
0.01743
11,543
156.57
1168.5
1011.9
156.57
1219.7
1063.1
0.31913
2.6248
2.3057
0
0.01850
0.01743
14,797
158.94
1169.2
1010.3
158.94
1219.9
1060.9
0.32426
2.6537
2.3295
5
0.01420
0.01742
19,075
161.28
1169.9
1008.6
161.28
1220.0
1058.7
0.32938
2.6832
2.3538
10
0.01083
0.01741
24,731
163.60
1170.6
1007.0
163.60
1220.1
1056.5
0.33451
2.7133
2.3788
15
0.00821
0.01740
32,257
165.90
1171.2
1005.3
165.90
1220.2
1054.3
0.33964
2.7440
2.4044
20
0.00619
0.01740
42,335
168.16
1171.8
1003.6
168.16
1220.3
1052.1
0.34478
2.7754
2.4306
25
0.00463
0.01739
55,917
170.41
1172.4
1002.0
170.41
1220.3
1049.9
0.34991
2.8074
2.4575
30
0.00344
0.01738
74,345
172.63
1173.0
1000.3
172.63
1220.3
1047.7
0.35505
2.8401
2.4850
35
0.00254
0.01738
99,526
174.83
1173.5
998.7
174.83
1220.3
1045.5
0.36019
2.8735
2.5133
40
0.00186
0.01737 134,182
177.00
1174.0
997.0
177.00
1220.3
1043.3
0.36534
2.9076
2.5423

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
828
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
826
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
100
60
32
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
2.4
2.0
1.5
1.0
0.5
0.0
12
40
1
22
0
1
2
0
0
1160
1140
1120
1100
12
60
12
80
130
0
Constant Enthalpy Btu/lbm
132
0
1340
1360
1380
1400
1420
1440
1460
1480
1500
1520
1540
1560
1580
1600
1620
1640
1660
1680
1700
1720
1740
1760
1780
1220
1200
1180
12
40
1
22
0
1
2
0
0
1160
1140
1120
1100
12
60
12
80
130
0
Constant Enthalpy Btu/lbm
132
0
1340
1360
1380
1400
1420
1440
1460
1480
1500
1520
1540
1560
1580
1600
1620
1640
1660
1680
1700
1720
1740
1760
1780
1800
1800
1220
1200
1180
100
60
30
14.696
10
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.2
0.1
200
300
400
600
10
00
15
00
2
5
0
0
100
600
30
14.696
10
6
4
2
200
300
400
600
Connstant Pressure lbf/in
2
1000
15000
20
00
40
0
0
50
0
0
60
0
0
80
00
10000
3
0
0
0
32
04
4000
5000
6000
8000
10000
3000
322004
15000
2500
100
60
30
14.696
10
6
4
2
1
0.5
0.2
0.1
200
300
400
600
10
00
15
00
2
5
0
0
100
60
30
14.696
10
6
4
2
200
300
400
600
Constant Pressure lbf/in
2
1000
15000
20
00
40
0
0
50
0
0
60
0
0
80
00
10000
3
0
0
0
32
04
4000
5000
6000
8000
10000
3000
3204
15000
2500
45
40
35
30
25
20
Constant Quality, Percent
15
10
5
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
45
40
35
30
25
20
Constant Quality, Percent
15
10
5
95
90
85
80
75
70
65
60
55
50
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
1000
1050
1100
1150
1200
1250
1300
Constant Superh
eat °F
50
100
150
200
250
300
350
400
450
500
550
600
650
700
750
800
850
900
950
1000
1050
1100
1150
1200
1250
1300
Constant Superh
eat °F
1100 
1050 
1000 
950 
900 
850 
750
 
700
 
650
 
600 
550 
500 
450 
400
 
350 
300
 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
1100 
1050 
1000 
950 
900 
850 
800 
Consta
nt Enth
alpy B
tu/lbm
700 
650
 
600 
550 
500 
450 
400 
350 
300
 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
1150
400
400
500
600
700
800
800
900
1000
1000
1100
1100
1200
1200
1300
1300
1400
1400
1500
1500
1100 
1050 
1000 
950 
900 
850 
750
 
700
 
650
 
600 
550 
500 
450 
400
 
350 
300
 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
1100 
1050 
1000 
950 
900 
850 
800 
Consta
nt Enth
alpy B
tu/lbm
700 
650
 
600 
550 
500 
450 
400 
350 
300
 
250 
200 
150 
100 
50 
1150
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
1100
1200
1300
1400
1500
20
50
100
200
500
1000
10
5
Constant
Volume ft3/lbm
2
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.06053
0.03
20
50
100
200
500
1000
10
5
Constant
Volume ft3/lbm
2
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.05053
0.03
100
50
20
5
Constant Volume ft3/lbm
2
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.05053
200
500
1000
2000
100
50
20
10
5
Constant Volume ft3/lbm
2
1
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.1
0.05053
200
500
1000
2000
2000
2000
Entropy, Btu/lbm·R
Temperature, ºF
FIGURE A–9E
T-s diagram for water.
Source: Joseph H. Keenan, Frederick G. Keyes, Philip G. Hill, and Joan G. Moore, Steam Tables (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1969).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
829
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
827
1600
1550
1500
1450
1400
1350
1300
1250
1200
1150
1100
1050
1000
950
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.8
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
0.2
0.2
0.5
0.5
1.0
1.0
2 psia
2 psia
3
4
5
6
8
10
10
20
20
50 psia
50 psia
100
100
200
200
300
300
500
500
1000
1000
2000
2000
3204
3204
5000
5000
10,000 psia
10,000 psia
x = 0.98
= 0.98
saturation
saturation
line
line
0.96
0.96
0.94
0.94
0.92
0.92
0.90
0.90
0.88
0.88
0.86
0.86
0.84
0.84
0.82
0.82
0.80
0.80
100
100
200
200°F
300
300
400
400
500
500
600
600
700
700°F
800
800
900
900
1000
1000
1100
1100°F
0.2
0.5
1.0
2 psia
3
4
5
6
8
10
20
50 psia
100
200
300
500
1000
2000
3204
5000
10,000 psia
x = 0.98
saturation
line
0.96
0.94
0.92
0.90
0.88
0.86
0.84
0.82
0.80
100
200°F
300
400
500
600
700°F
800
900
1000
1100°F
Entropy, Btu/lbm · R
Entropy, Btu/lbm · R
Enthalpy, Btu / lbm
FIGURE A–10E
Mollier diagram for water.
Source: Joseph H. Keenan, Frederick G. Keyes,
Philip G. Hill, and Joan G. Moore, Steam Tables
(New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1969).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
830
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–11E
Saturated refrigerant-134a—Temperature table
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm·R
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Temp., press.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
T °F
Psat psia
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
40
7.432
0.01130
5.7796
0.016
89.167
89.15
0.000
97.100
97.10
0.00000
0.23135
0.23135
35
8.581
0.01136
5.0509
1.484
88.352
89.84
1.502
96.354
97.86
0.00355
0.22687
0.23043
30
9.869
0.01143
4.4300
2.990
87.532
90.52
3.011
95.601
98.61
0.00708
0.22248
0.22956
25
11.306
0.01150
3.8988
4.502
86.706
91.21
4.526
94.839
99.36
0.01058
0.21817
0.22875
20
12.906
0.01156
3.4426
6.019
85.874
91.89
6.047
94.068 100.12
0.01405
0.21394
0.22798
15
14.680
0.01163
3.0494
7.543
85.036
92.58
7.574
93.288 100.86
0.01749
0.20978
0.22727
10
16.642
0.01171
2.7091
9.073
84.191
93.26
9.109
92.498 101.61
0.02092
0.20569
0.22660
5
18.806
0.01178
2.4137
10.609
83.339
93.95
10.650
91.698 102.35
0.02431
0.20166
0.22598
0
21.185
0.01185
2.1564
12.152
82.479
94.63
12.199
90.886 103.08
0.02769
0.19770
0.22539
5
23.793
0.01193
1.9316
13.702
81.610
95.31
13.755
90.062 103.82
0.03104
0.19380
0.22485
10
26.646
0.01201
1.7345
15.259
80.733
95.99
15.318
89.226 104.54
0.03438
0.18996
0.22434
15
29.759
0.01209
1.5612
16.823
79.846
96.67
16.889
88.377 105.27
0.03769
0.18617
0.22386
20
33.147
0.01217
1.4084
18.394
78.950
97.34
18.469
87.514 105.98
0.04098
0.18243
0.22341
25
36.826
0.01225
1.2732
19.973
78.043
98.02
20.056
86.636 106.69
0.04426
0.17874
0.22300
30
40.813
0.01234
1.1534
21.560
77.124
98.68
21.653
85.742 107.40
0.04752
0.17509
0.22260
35
45.124
0.01242
1.0470
23.154
76.195
99.35
23.258
84.833 108.09
0.05076
0.17148
0.22224
40
49.776
0.01251
0.95205
24.757
75.253
100.01
24.873
83.907 108.78
0.05398
0.16791
0.22189
45
54.787
0.01261
0.86727
26.369
74.298
100.67
26.497
82.963 109.46
0.05720
0.16437
0.22157
50
60.175
0.01270
0.79136
27.990
73.329
101.32
28.131
82.000 110.13
0.06039
0.16087
0.22127
55
65.957
0.01280
0.72323
29.619
72.346
101.97
29.775
81.017 110.79
0.06358
0.15740
0.22098
60
72.152
0.01290
0.66195
31.258
71.347
102.61
31.431
80.013 111.44
0.06675
0.15396
0.22070
65
78.780
0.01301
0.60671
32.908
70.333
103.24
33.097
78.988 112.09
0.06991
0.15053
0.22044
70
85.858
0.01312
0.55681
34.567
69.301
103.87
34.776
77.939 112.71
0.07306
0.14713
0.22019
75
93.408
0.01323
0.51165
36.237
68.251
104.49
36.466
76.866 113.33
0.07620
0.14375
0.21995
80
101.45
0.01334
0.47069
37.919
67.181
105.10
38.169
75.767 113.94
0.07934
0.14038
0.21972
85
110.00
0.01347
0.43348
39.612
66.091
105.70
39.886
74.641 114.53
0.08246
0.13703
0.21949
90
119.08
0.01359
0.39959
41.317
64.979
106.30
41.617
73.485 115.10
0.08559
0.13368
0.21926
95
128.72
0.01372
0.36869
43.036
63.844
106.88
43.363
72.299 115.66
0.08870
0.13033
0.21904
100
138.93
0.01386
0.34045
44.768
62.683
107.45
45.124
71.080 116.20
0.09182
0.12699
0.21881
105
149.73
0.01400
0.31460
46.514
61.496
108.01
46.902
69.825 116.73
0.09493
0.12365
0.21858
110
161.16
0.01415
0.29090
48.276
60.279
108.56
48.698
68.533 117.23
0.09804
0.12029
0.21834
115
173.23
0.01430
0.26913
50.054
59.031
109.08
50.512
67.200 117.71
0.10116
0.11693
0.21809
120
185.96
0.01446
0.24909
51.849
57.749
109.60
52.346
65.823 118.17
0.10428
0.11354
0.21782
130
213.53
0.01482
0.21356
55.495
55.071
110.57
56.080
62.924 119.00
0.11054
0.10670
0.21724
140
244.06
0.01521
0.18315
59.226
52.216
111.44
59.913
59.801 119.71
0.11684
0.09971
0.21655
150
277.79
0.01567
0.15692
63.059
49.144
112.20
63.864
56.405 120.27
0.12321
0.09251
0.21572
160
314.94
0.01619
0.13410
67.014
45.799
112.81
67.958
52.671 120.63
0.12970
0.08499
0.21469
170
355.80
0.01681
0.11405
71.126
42.097
113.22
72.233
48.499 120.73
0.13634
0.07701
0.21335
180
400.66
0.01759
0.09618
75.448
37.899
113.35
76.752
43.726 120.48
0.14323
0.06835
0.21158
190
449.90
0.01860
0.07990
80.082
32.950
113.03
81.631
38.053 119.68
0.15055
0.05857
0.20911
200
504.00
0.02009
0.06441
85.267
26.651
111.92
87.140
30.785 117.93
0.15867
0.04666
0.20533
210
563.76
0.02309
0.04722
91.986
16.498
108.48
94.395
19.015 113.41
0.16922
0.02839
0.19761
Source: Tables A–11E through A–13E are generated using the Engineering Equation Solver (EES) software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. 
The routine used in calculations is the R134a, which is based on the fundamental equation of state developed by R. Tillner-Roth and H.D. Baehr, 
“An International Standard Formulation for the Thermodynamic Properties of 1,1,1,2-Tetrafluoroethane (HFC-134a) for Temperatures from 170 K to 
455 K and Pressures up to 70 MPa,” J. Phys. Chem, Ref. Data, Vol. 23, No. 5, 1994. The enthalpy and entropy values of saturated liquid are set to zero
at 40°C (and 40°F).
828
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
831
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
829
TABLE A–12E
Saturated refrigerant-134a—Pressure table
Specific volume,
Internal energy,
Enthalpy,
Entropy,
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm · R
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Sat.
Press.,
temp.,
liquid,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
liquid,
Evap.,
vapor,
P psia
T °F
vf
vg
uf
ufg
ug
hf
hfg
hg
sf
sfg
sg
5
53.09
0.01113
8.3785
3.918
91.280
87.36
3.907
99.022
95.11
0.00945
0.24353
0.23408
10
29.52
0.01144
4.3753
3.135
87.453
90.59
3.156
95.528
98.68
0.00742
0.22206
0.22948
15
14.15
0.01165
2.9880
7.803
84.893
92.70
7.835
93.155
100.99
0.01808
0.20908
0.22715
20
2.43
0.01182
2.2772
11.401
82.898
94.30
11.445
91.282
102.73
0.02605
0.19962
0.22567
25
7.17
0.01196
1.8429
14.377
81.231
95.61
14.432
89.701
104.13
0.03249
0.19213
0.22462
30
15.37
0.01209
1.5492
16.939
79.780
96.72
17.006
88.313
105.32
0.03793
0.18589
0.22383
35
22.57
0.01221
1.3369
19.205
78.485
97.69
19.284
87.064
106.35
0.04267
0.18053
0.22319
40
29.01
0.01232
1.1760
21.246
77.307
98.55
21.337
85.920
107.26
0.04688
0.17580
0.22268
45
34.86
0.01242
1.0497
23.110
76.221
99.33
23.214
84.858
108.07
0.05067
0.17158
0.22225
50
40.23
0.01252
0.94791
24.832
75.209
100.04
24.948
83.863
108.81
0.05413
0.16774
0.22188
55
45.20
0.01261
0.86400
26.435
74.258
100.69
26.564
82.924
109.49
0.05733
0.16423
0.22156
60
49.84
0.01270
0.79361
27.939
73.360
101.30
28.080
82.030
110.11
0.06029
0.16098
0.22127
65
54.20
0.01279
0.73370
29.357
72.505
101.86
29.510
81.176
110.69
0.06307
0.15796
0.22102
70
58.30
0.01287
0.68205
30.700
71.688
102.39
30.867
80.357
111.22
0.06567
0.15512
0.22080
75
62.19
0.01295
0.63706
31.979
70.905
102.88
32.159
79.567
111.73
0.06813
0.15245
0.22059
80
65.89
0.01303
0.59750
33.201
70.151
103.35
33.394
78.804
112.20
0.07047
0.14993
0.22040
85
69.41
0.01310
0.56244
34.371
69.424
103.79
34.577
78.064
112.64
0.07269
0.14753
0.22022
90
72.78
0.01318
0.53113
35.495
68.719
104.21
35.715
77.345
113.06
0.07481
0.14525
0.22006
95
76.02
0.01325
0.50301
36.578
68.035
104.61
36.811
76.645
113.46
0.07684
0.14307
0.21991
100
79.12
0.01332
0.47760
37.623
67.371
104.99
37.869
75.962
113.83
0.07879
0.14097
0.21976
110
85.00
0.01347
0.43347
39.612
66.091
105.70
39.886
74.641
114.53
0.08246
0.13703
0.21949
120
90.49
0.01360
0.39644
41.485
64.869
106.35
41.787
73.371
115.16
0.08589
0.13335
0.21924
130
95.64
0.01374
0.36491
43.258
63.696
106.95
43.589
72.144
115.73
0.08911
0.12990
0.21901
140
100.51
0.01387
0.33771
44.945
62.564
107.51
45.304
70.954
116.26
0.09214
0.12665
0.21879
150
105.12
0.01400
0.31401
46.556
61.467
108.02
46.945
69.795
116.74
0.09501
0.12357
0.21857
160
109.50
0.01413
0.29316
48.101
60.401
108.50
48.519
68.662
117.18
0.09774
0.12062
0.21836
170
113.69
0.01426
0.27466
49.586
59.362
108.95
50.035
67.553
117.59
0.10034
0.11781
0.21815
180
117.69
0.01439
0.25813
51.018
58.345
109.36
51.497
66.464
117.96
0.10284
0.11511
0.21795
190
121.53
0.01452
0.24327
52.402
57.349
109.75
52.912
65.392
118.30
0.10524
0.11250
0.21774
200
125.22
0.01464
0.22983
53.743
56.371
110.11
54.285
64.335
118.62
0.10754
0.10998
0.21753
220
132.21
0.01490
0.20645
56.310
54.458
110.77
56.917
62.256
119.17
0.11192
0.10517
0.21710
240
138.73
0.01516
0.18677
58.746
52.591
111.34
59.419
60.213
119.63
0.11603
0.10061
0.21665
260
144.85
0.01543
0.16996
61.071
50.757
111.83
61.813
58.192
120.00
0.11992
0.09625
0.21617
280
150.62
0.01570
0.15541
63.301
48.945
112.25
64.115
56.184
120.30
0.12362
0.09205
0.21567
300
156.09
0.01598
0.14266
65.452
47.143
112.60
66.339
54.176
120.52
0.12715
0.08797
0.21512
350
168.64
0.01672
0.11664
70.554
42.627
113.18
71.638
49.099
120.74
0.13542
0.07814
0.21356
400
179.86
0.01757
0.09642
75.385
37.963
113.35
76.686
43.798
120.48
0.14314
0.06848
0.21161
450
190.02
0.01860
0.07987
80.092
32.939
113.03
81.641
38.041
119.68
0.15056
0.05854
0.20911
500
199.29
0.01995
0.06551
84.871
27.168
112.04
86.718
31.382
118.10
0.15805
0.04762
0.20566

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
832
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–13E
Superheated refrigerant-134a
s
s
s
T
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
°F
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm Btu/lbm
lbm·R
P  10 psia (Tsat  29.52°F)
P  15 psia (Tsat  14.15°F)
P  20 psia (Tsat  2.43°F)
Sat.
4.3753
90.59
98.68
0.22948
2.9880
92.70
100.99
0.22715
2.2772
94.30
102.73
0.22567
20
4.4856
92.13
100.43
0.23350
0
4.7135
95.41
104.14
0.24174
3.1001
95.08
103.68
0.23310
2.2922
94.72
103.20
0.22671
20
4.9380
98.77
107.91
0.24976
3.2551
98.48
107.52
0.24127
2.4130
98.19
107.12
0.23504
40
5.1600
102.20
111.75
0.25761
3.4074
101.95
111.41
0.24922
2.5306
101.70
111.07
0.24311
60
5.3802
105.72
115.67
0.26531
3.5577
105.50
115.38
0.25700
2.6461
105.28
115.07
0.25097
80
5.5989
109.32
119.68
0.27288
3.7064
109.13
119.42
0.26463
2.7600
108.93
119.15
0.25866
100
5.8165
113.01
123.78
0.28033
3.8540
112.84
123.54
0.27212
2.8726
112.66
123.29
0.26621
120
6.0331
116.79
127.96
0.28767
4.0006
116.63
127.74
0.27950
2.9842
116.47
127.52
0.27363
140
6.2490
120.66
132.22
0.29490
4.1464
120.51
132.02
0.28677
3.0950
120.37
131.82
0.28093
160
6.4642
124.61
136.57
0.30203
4.2915
124.48
136.39
0.29393
3.2051
124.35
136.21
0.28812
180
6.6789
128.65
141.01
0.30908
4.4361
128.53
140.84
0.30100
3.3146
128.41
140.67
0.29521
200
6.8930
132.77
145.53
0.31604
4.5802
132.66
145.37
0.30798
3.4237
132.55
145.22
0.30221
220
7.1068
136.98
150.13
0.32292
4.7239
136.88
149.99
0.31487
3.5324
136.78
149.85
0.30912
P  30 psia (Tsat  15.37°F)
P  40 psia (Tsat  29.01°F)
P  50 psia (Tsat  40.23°F)
Sat.
1.5492
96.72
105.32
0.22383
1.1760
98.55
107.26
0.22268
0.9479
100.04
108.81
0.22188
20
1.5691
97.56
106.27
0.22581
40
1.6528
101.17
110.35
0.23414
1.2126
100.61
109.58
0.22738
60
1.7338
104.82
114.45
0.24219
1.2768
104.34
113.79
0.23565
1.0019
103.84
113.11
0.23031
80
1.8130
108.53
118.59
0.25002
1.3389
108.11
118.02
0.24363
1.0540
107.68
117.43
0.23847
100
1.8908
112.30
122.80
0.25767
1.3995
111.93
122.29
0.25140
1.1043
111.55
121.77
0.24637
120
1.9675
116.15
127.07
0.26517
1.4588
115.82
126.62
0.25900
1.1534
115.48
126.16
0.25406
140
2.0434
120.08
131.42
0.27254
1.5173
119.78
131.01
0.26644
1.2015
119.47
130.59
0.26159
160
2.1185
124.08
135.84
0.27979
1.5750
123.81
135.47
0.27375
1.2488
123.53
135.09
0.26896
180
2.1931
128.16
140.34
0.28693
1.6321
127.91
140.00
0.28095
1.2955
127.66
139.65
0.27621
200
2.2671
132.32
144.91
0.29398
1.6887
132.10
144.60
0.28803
1.3416
131.87
144.28
0.28333
220
2.3408
136.57
149.56
0.30092
1.7449
136.36
149.27
0.29501
1.3873
136.15
148.98
0.29036
240
2.4141
140.89
154.29
0.30778
1.8007
140.70
154.03
0.30190
1.4326
140.50
153.76
0.29728
260
2.4871
145.30
159.10
0.31456
1.8562
145.12
158.86
0.30871
1.4776
144.93
158.60
0.30411
280
2.5598
149.78
163.99
0.32126
1.9114
149.61
163.76
0.31543
1.5223
149.44
163.53
0.31086
P  60 psia (Tsat  49.84°F)
P  70 psia (Tsat  58.30°F)
P  80 psia (Tsat  65.89°F)
Sat.
0.7936
101.30
110.11
0.22127
0.6821
102.39
111.22
0.22080
0.59750
103.35
112.20
0.22040
60
0.8179
103.31
112.39
0.22570
0.6857
102.73
111.62
0.22155
80
0.8636
107.23
116.82
0.23407
0.7271
106.76
116.18
0.23016
0.62430
106.26
115.51
0.22661
100
0.9072
111.16
121.24
0.24211
0.7662
110.76
120.68
0.23836
0.66009
110.34
120.11
0.23499
120
0.9495
115.14
125.68
0.24991
0.8037
114.78
125.19
0.24628
0.69415
114.42
124.69
0.24304
140
0.9908
119.16
130.16
0.25751
0.8401
118.85
129.73
0.25398
0.72698
118.52
129.29
0.25083
160
1.0312
123.25
134.70
0.26496
0.8756
122.97
134.31
0.26149
0.75888
122.68
133.91
0.25841
180
1.0709
127.41
139.30
0.27226
0.9105
127.15
138.94
0.26885
0.79003
126.89
138.58
0.26583
200
1.1101
131.63
143.96
0.27943
0.9447
131.40
143.63
0.27607
0.82059
131.16
143.31
0.27310
220
1.1489
135.93
148.69
0.28649
0.9785
135.71
148.39
0.28317
0.85065
135.49
148.09
0.28024
240
1.1872
140.30
153.48
0.29344
1.0118
140.10
153.21
0.29015
0.88030
139.90
152.93
0.28726
260
1.2252
144.75
158.35
0.30030
1.0449
144.56
158.10
0.29704
0.90961
144.37
157.84
0.29418
280
1.2629
149.27
163.29
0.30707
1.0776
149.10
163.06
0.30384
0.93861
148.92
162.82
0.30100
300
1.3004
153.87
168.31
0.31376
1.1101
153.71
168.09
0.31055
0.96737
153.54
167.86
0.30773
320
1.3377
158.54
173.39
0.32037
1.1424
158.39
173.19
0.31718
0.99590
158.24
172.98
0.31438
830
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
833
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
831
TABLE A–13E
Superheated refrigerant-134a (Concluded)
s
s
s
T
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
v
u
h
Btu/
°F
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm
Btu/lbm
lbm · R
ft3/lbm
Btu/lbm Btu/lbm
lbm · R
P  90 psia (Tsat  72.78°F)
P  100 psia (Tsat  79.12°F)
P  120 psia (Tsat  90.49°F)
Sat.
0.53113
104.21
113.06
0.22006
0.47760
104.99
113.83
0.21976 0.39644
106.35
115.16 0.21924
80
0.54388
105.74
114.80
0.22330
0.47906
105.18
114.05
0.22016
100
0.57729
109.91
119.52
0.23189
0.51076
109.45
118.90
0.22900 0.41013
108.48
117.59 0.22362
120
0.60874
114.04
124.18
0.24008
0.54022
113.66
123.65
0.23733 0.43692
112.84
122.54 0.23232
140
0.63885
118.19
128.83
0.24797
0.56821
117.86
128.37
0.24534 0.46190
117.15
127.41 0.24058
160
0.66796
122.38
133.51
0.25563
0.59513
122.08
133.09
0.25309 0.48563
121.46
132.25 0.24851
180
0.69629
126.62
138.22
0.26311
0.62122
126.35
137.85
0.26063 0.50844
125.79
137.09 0.25619
200
0.72399
130.92
142.97
0.27043
0.64667
130.67
142.64
0.26801 0.53054
130.17
141.95 0.26368
220
0.75119
135.27
147.78
0.27762
0.67158
135.05
147.47
0.27523 0.55206
134.59
146.85 0.27100
240
0.77796
139.69
152.65
0.28468
0.69605
139.49
152.37
0.28233 0.57312
139.07
151.80 0.27817
260
0.80437
144.19
157.58
0.29162
0.72016
143.99
157.32
0.28931 0.59379
143.61
156.79 0.28521
280
0.83048
148.75
162.58
0.29847
0.74396
148.57
162.34
0.29618 0.61413
148.21
161.85 0.29214
300
0.85633
153.38
167.64
0.30522
0.76749
153.21
167.42
0.30296 0.63420
152.88
166.96 0.29896
320
0.88195
158.08
172.77
0.31189
0.79079
157.93
172.56
0.30964 0.65402
157.62
172.14 0.30569
P  140 psia (Tsat  100.50°F)
P  160 psia (Tsat  109.50°F)
P  180 psia (Tsat  117.69°F)
Sat.
0.33771
107.51
116.26
0.21879
0.29316
108.50
117.18
0.21836 0.25813
109.36
117.96 0.21795
120
0.36243
111.96
121.35
0.22773
0.30578
111.01
120.06
0.22337 0.26083
109.94
118.63 0.21910
140
0.38551
116.41
126.40
0.23628
0.32774
115.62
125.32
0.23230 0.28231
114.77
124.17 0.22850
160
0.40711
120.81
131.36
0.24443
0.34790
120.13
130.43
0.24069 0.30154
119.42
129.46 0.23718
180
0.42766
125.22
136.30
0.25227
0.36686
124.62
135.49
0.24871 0.31936
124.00
134.64 0.24540
200
0.44743
129.65
141.24
0.25988
0.38494
129.12
140.52
0.25645 0.33619
128.57
139.77 0.25330
220
0.46657
134.12
146.21
0.26730
0.40234
133.64
145.55
0.26397 0.35228
133.15
144.88 0.26094
240
0.48522
138.64
151.21
0.27455
0.41921
138.20
150.62
0.27131 0.36779
137.76
150.01 0.26837
260
0.50345
143.21
156.26
0.28166
0.43564
142.81
155.71
0.27849 0.38284
142.40
155.16 0.27562
280
0.52134
147.85
161.35
0.28864
0.45171
147.48
160.85
0.28554 0.39751
147.10
160.34 0.28273
300
0.53895
152.54
166.50
0.29551
0.46748
152.20
166.04
0.29246 0.41186
151.85
165.57 0.28970
320
0.55630
157.30
171.71
0.30228
0.48299
156.98
171.28
0.29927 0.42594
156.66
170.85 0.29656
340
0.57345
162.13
176.98
0.30896
0.49828
161.83
176.58
0.30598 0.43980
161.53
176.18 0.30331
360
0.59041
167.02
182.32
0.31555
0.51338
166.74
181.94
0.31260 0.45347
166.46
181.56 0.30996
P  200 psia (Tsat  125.22°F)
P  300 psia (Tsat  156.09°F)
P  400 psia (Tsat  179.86°F)
Sat.
0.22983
110.11
118.62
0.21753
0.14266
112.60
120.52
0.21512 0.09642
113.35
120.48 0.21161
140
0.24541
113.85
122.93
0.22481
160
0.26412
118.66
128.44
0.23384
0.14656
113.82
121.95
0.21745
180
0.28115
123.35
133.76
0.24229
0.16355
119.52
128.60
0.22802 0.09658
113.41
120.56 0.21173
200
0.29704
128.00
138.99
0.25035
0.17776
124.78
134.65
0.23733 0.11440
120.52
128.99 0.22471
220
0.31212
132.64
144.19
0.25812
0.19044
129.85
140.42
0.24594 0.12746
126.44
135.88 0.23500
240
0.32658
137.30
149.38
0.26565
0.20211
134.83
146.05
0.25410 0.13853
131.95
142.20 0.24418
260
0.34054
141.99
154.59
0.27298
0.21306
139.77
151.59
0.26192 0.14844
137.26
148.25 0.25270
280
0.35410
146.72
159.82
0.28015
0.22347
144.70
157.11
0.26947 0.15756
142.48
154.14 0.26077
300
0.36733
151.50
165.09
0.28718
0.23346
149.65
162.61
0.27681 0.16611
147.65
159.94 0.26851
320
0.38029
156.33
170.40
0.29408
0.24310
154.63
168.12
0.28398 0.17423
152.80
165.70 0.27599
340
0.39300
161.22
175.77
0.30087
0.25246
159.64
173.66
0.29098 0.18201
157.97
171.44 0.28326
360
0.40552
166.17
181.18
0.30756
0.26159
164.70
179.22
0.29786 0.18951
163.15
177.18 0.29035

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
834
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
832
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
620
580 
540
500
460
420
380
340
T = 300° F
260
220
180
140
100
60
20
-20
-60
2
2
0
18
0
140
T = 100°F
60
20
-20
-60
620
580 
540
500
460
420
380
340
T = 300° F
260
220
180
140
100
60
20
-20
-60
2
2
0
18
0
140
T = 100°F
60
20
-20
-60
95
95
24
30
35
40
90
85
80
75 lbm/ft
3
70
6
5
60
55
50
45
Density = 18 lb
m/ft3
0.012
0.018
0.024
0.072
0.096
0.12
0.18
0.24
0.36
0.48
0.72
0.96
1.2
1.8
2.4
3.6
4.8
7.2
9.6
12
95
24
30
35
40
90
85
80
75 lbm/ft
3
70
6
5
60
55
50
45
Density = 18 lb
m/ft3
0.012
0.018
0.024
0.036
0.048
0.036
0.048
0.072
0.096
0.12
0.18
0.24
0.36
0.48
0.72
0.96
1.2
1.8
2.4
3.6
4.8
7.2
9.6
12
0.32
s = 0.30 Btu/lbm·R
0.28
0.26
0.24
0.22
0.20
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.04
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.46
s = 0.42
0.32
s = 0.30 Btu/lbm·R
0.28
0.26
0.24
0.22
0.20
0.18
0.16
0.14
0.12
0.10
0.08
0.06
0.04
0.02
0.00
-0.02
-0.04
0.34
0.36
0.38
0.40
0.42
0.44
0.46
s = 0.42
saturated
liquid
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
saturated vvapour
saturated
liquid
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
saturated vapour
–20
20
140
60
100
180
220
260
–20
20
140
60
100
180
220
260
Enthalpy, Btu/lbm
1
2
4
10
20
40
100
200
400
1000
2000
3000
1
2
4
10
20
40
100
200
400
1000
2000
3000
Pressure, psia
R-134a
R-134a
T = -100°F 
T = -100°F
T = -100°F
FIGURE A–14E
P-h diagram for refrigerant-134a.
Reprinted by permission of American Society of Heating, Refrigerating, and Air-Conditioning Engineers, Inc., Atlanta, GA.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
835
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
833
TABLE A–15E
Properties of saturated water
Volume
Enthalpy
Specific
Thermal
Prandil
Expansion
Saturation
Density
of
Heat
Conductivity
Dynamic Viscosity
Number
Coefficient
Temp.
Pressure
r, lbm/ft3
Vaporization
cr, Btu/Ibm · R
k, Btu/h · ft· R
m, Ibm/ft · s
Pr
b, 1/R
T, F
Psat, psia
Liquid
Vapor
hfg, Btu/lbm Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
32.02
0.0887
62.41
0.00030
1075
1.010
0.446
0.324
0.0099
1.204 
 103
6.194 
 106
13.5
1.00
0.038 
 103
40
0.1217
62.42
0.00034
1071
1.004
0.447
0.329
0.0100
1.308 
 103
6.278 
 106
11.4
1.01
A0.003 
 103
50
0.1780
62.41
0.00059
1065
1.000
0.448
0.335
0.0102
8.781 
 104
6.361 
 106
9.44
1.01
0.047 
 103
60
0.2563
62.36
0.00083
1060
0.999
0.449
0.341
0.0104
7.536 
 104
6.444 
 106
7.95
1.00
0.080 
 103
70
0.3632
62.30
0.00115
1054
0.999
0.450
0.347
0.0106
6.556 
 104
6.556 
 106
6.79
1.00
0.115 
 103
80
0.5073
62.22
0.00158
1048
0.999
0.451
0.352
0.0108
5.764 
 104
6.667 
 106
5.89
1.00
0.145 
 103
90
0.6988
62.12
0.00214
1043
0.999
0.453
0.358
0.0110
5.117 
 104
6.778 
 106
5.14
1.00
0.174 
 103
100
0.9503
62.00
0.00286
1037
0.999
0.454
0.363
0.0112
4.578 
 104
6.889 
 106
4.54
1.01
0.200 
 103
110
1.2763
61.86
0.00377
1031
0.999
0.456
0.367
0.0115
4.128 
 104
7.000 
 106
4.05
1.00
0.224 
 103
120
1.6945
61.71
0.00493
1026
0.999
0.458
0.371
0.0117
3.744 
 104
7.111 
 106
3.63
1.00
0246 
 103
130
2.225
61.55
0.00636
1020
0.999
0.460
0.375
0.0120
3.417 
 104
7.222 
 106
3.28
1.00
0.267 
 103
140
2.892
61.38
0.00814
1014
0.999
0.463
0.378
0.0122
3.136 
 104
7.333 
 106
2.98
1.00
0.287 
 103
150
3.722
61.19
0.0103
1008
1.000
0.465
0.381
0.0125
2.889 
 104
7.472 
 106
2.73
1.00
0.306 
 103
160
4.745
60.99
0.0129
1002
1.000
0.468
0.384
0.0128
2.675 
 104
7.583 
 106
2.51
1.00
0.325 
 103
170
5.996
60.79
0.0161
996
1.001
0.472
0.386
0.0131
2.483 
 104
7.722 
 106
2.90
1.00
0.346 
 103
180
7.515
60.57
0.0199
990
1.002
0.475
0.388
0.0134
2.317 
 104
7.833 
 106
2.15
1.00
0.367 
 103
190
9.343
60.35
0.0244
984
1.004
0.479
0.390
0.0137
2.169 
 104
7.972 
 106
2.01
1.00
0.382 
 103
200
11.53
60.12
0.0297
978
1.005
0.483
0.391
0.0141
2.036 
 104
8.083 
 106
1.88
1.00
0.395 
 103
210
14.125
59.87
0.0359
972
1.007
0.487
0.392
0.0144
1.917 
 104
8.222 
 106
1.77
1.00
0.412 
 103
212
14.698
59.82
0.0373
970
1.007
0.488
0.392
0.0145
1.894 
 104
8.250 
 106
1.75
1.00
0.417 
 103
220
17.19
59.62
0.0432
965
1.009
0.492
0.393
0.0148
1808 
 104
8.333 
 106
1.67
1.00
0.429 
 103
230
20.78
59.36
0.0516
959
1.011
0.497
0.394
0.0152
1.711 
 104
8.472 
 106
1.58
1.00
0.443 
 103
240
24.97
59.09
0.0612
952
1.013
0.503
0.394
0.0156
1.625 
 104
8.611 
 106
1.50
1.00
0.462 
 103
250
29.82
58.82
0.0723
946
1.015
0.509
0.395
0.0160
1.544 
 104
8.611 
 106
1.43
1.00
0.480 
 103
260
35.42
58.53
0.0850
939
1.018
0.516
0.395
0.0164
1.472 
 104
8.861 
 106
1.37
1.00
0.497 
 103
270
41.85
58.24
0.0993
932
1.020
0.523
0.395
0.0168
1.406 
 104
9.000 
 106
1.31
1.01
0.514 
 103
280
49.18
57.94
0.1156
926
1.023
0.530
0.395
0.0172
1.344 
 104
9.111 
 106
1.25
1.01
0.532 
 103
290
57–53
57.63
0.3390
918
1.026
0.538
0.395
0.0177
1.289 
 104
9.250 
 106
1.21
1.01
0.549 
 103
300
66.98
57.31
0.1545
910
1.029
0.547
0.394
0.0182
1.236 
 104
9.389 
 106
1.16
1.02
0.566 
 103
320
89.60
56.65
0.2033
895
1.036
0.567
0.393
0.0191
1.144 
 104
9.639 
 106
1.09
1.03
0.636 
 103
340
117.93
55.95
0.2637
880
1.044
0.590
0.391
0.0202
1.063 
 104
9.889 
 106
1.02
1.04
0.656 
 103
360
152.92
56.22
0.3377
863
1.054
0.617
0.389
0.0213
9.972 
 105
1.013 
 105
0.973
1.06
0.681 
 103
380
195.60
54.46
0.4275
845
1.065
0.647
0.385
0.0224
9.361 
 105
1.041 
 105
0.932
1.08
0.720 
 103
400
241.1
53.65
0.5359
827
1.078
0.683
0.382
0.0237
8.833 
 105
1.066 
 105
0.893
1.11
0.771 
 103
450
422.1
51.46
0.9082
775
1.121
0.799
0.370
0.0271
7.722 
 105
1.130 
 105
0.842
1.20
0.912 
 103
500
680.0
48.95
1.479
715
1.188
0.972
0.352
0.0312
6.833 
 105
1.200 
 10–5
0.830
1.35
1.111 
 103
550
1046.7
45.96
4.268
641
1.298
1.247
0.329
0.0368
6.083 
 105
1.280 
 105
0.864
1.56
1.445 
 103
600
1541
42.32
3.736
550
1.509
1.759
0.299
0.0461
5.389 
 105
1.380 
 105
0.979
1.90
1.883 
 103
650
2210
37.31
6.152
422
2.086
3.103
0.267
0.0677
4.639 
 105
1.542 
 105
1.30
2.54
700
3090
27.28
13.44
168
13.80
25.90
0.254
0.1964
3.417 
 105
2.044 
 105
6.68
9.71
705.44 3204
19.79
19.79
0




2.897 
 105
2.897 
 105
Note 1: Kinematic viscosity n and thermal diffusivity a can be calculated from their definitions, n  m/r and a  k/rcr  n/Pr. The temperatures 32.02F,
212F, and 705.44F are the triple-, boiling-, and critical-point temperatures of water, respectively. All properties listed above (except the vapor density) can be
used at any pressures with negligible error except at temperatures near the critical-point value.
Note 2: The unit Btu/lbm·F for specific heat is equivalent to Btu/lbm·R, and the unit Btu/h·ft·F for thermal conductivity is equivalent to Btu/h·ft·R.
Source: Viscosity and thermal conductivity data are from J. V. Sengers and J. T. T. Watson, Journal of Physical and Chemical Reference Data 15 (1986),
pp. 1291–1322. Other data are obtained from various sources or calculated.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
836
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
834
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–16E
Properties of saturated refrigerant-134a
Volume
Enthalpy
Specific
Thermal
Prandil
Expansion
Saturation
Density
of
Heat
Conductivity 
Dynamic Viscosity
Number
Coefficient
Surface
Temp.
Pressure
r, lbm/ft3
Vaporization
cp, Btu/Ibm·R
k, Btu/h·ft·R
m, Ibm/ft·s
Pr
b, 1/R
Tension
T, F
Psat, psia
Liquid
Vapor
hfg, Btu/lbm Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
lbf/ft
40
7.4
88.51
0.1731
97.1
0.2996
0.1788
0.0636
0.00466
3.278 
 104
1.714 
 106
5.558
0.237
0.00114
0.001206
30
9.9
87.5
0.2258
95.6
0.3021
0.1829
0.0626
0.00497
3.004 
 104
2.053 
 106
5.226
0.272
0.00117
0.001146
20
12.9
86.48
0.2905
94.1
0.3046
0.1872
0.0613
0.00529
2.762 
 104
2.433 
 106
4.937
0.310
0.00120
0.001087
10
16.6
85.44
0.3691
92.5
0.3074
0.1918
0.0602
0.00559
2.546 
 104
2.856 
 106
4.684
0.352
0.00124
0.001029
0
21.2
84.38
0.4635
90.9
0.3103
0.1966
0.0589
0.00589
2.345 
 104
3.314 
 106
4.463
0.398
0.00128
0.000972
10
26.6
83.31
0.5761
89.3
0.3134
0.2017
0.0576
0.00619
2.181 
 104
3.811 
 104
4.269
0.447
0.00132
0.000915
20
33.1
82.2
0.7094
87.5
0.3167
0.2070
0.0563
0.00648
2.024 
 104
4.342 
 106
4.098
0.500
0.00132
O.000859
30
40.8
81.08
0.866
85.8
0.3203
0.2127
0.0550
0.00676
1.883 
 104
4.906 
 106
3.947
0.555
0.00142
0.000803
40
49.8
79.92
1.049
83.9
0.3240
0.2188
0.0536
0.00704
1.752 
 104
5.494 
 106
3.814
0.614
0.00149
0.000749
50
60.2
78.73
1.262
82.0
0.3281
0.2253
0.0522
0.00732
1.633 
 104
6.103 
 106
3.697
0.677
0.00156
0.000695
60
72.2
77.51
1.509
80.0
0.3325
0.2323
0.0507
0.00758
1.522 
 104
6.725 
 106
3.594
0.742
0.00163
0.000642
70
85.9
76.25
1.794
78.0
0.3372
0.2398
0.0492
0.00785
1.420 
 104
7.356 
 106
3.504
0.810
0.00173
0.000590
80
101.4
74.94
2.122
75.8
0.3424
0.2481
0.0476
0.00810
1.324 
 104
7.986 
 106
3.425
0.880
0.00183
0.000538
90
119.1
73.59
2.5
73.5
0.3481
0.2572
0.0460
0.00835
1.234 
 104
8.611 
 106
3.357
0.955
0.00195
0.000488
100
138.9
72.17
2.935
71.1
0.3548
0.2674
0.0444
0.00860
1.149 
 104
9.222 
 106
3.303
1.032
0.00210
0.000439
110
161.2
70.69
3.435
68.5
0.3627
0.2790
0.0427
0.00884
1.068 
 104
9.814 
 106
3.262
1.115
0.00227
0.000391
120
186.0
69.13
4.012
65.8
0.3719
0.2925
0.0410
0.00908
9.911 
 105
1.038 
 105
3.235
1.204
0.00248
0.000344
130
213.5
67.48
4.679
62.9
0.3829
0.3083
0.0392
0.00931
9.175 
 105
1.092 
 105
3.223
1.303
0.00275
0.000299
140
244.1
65.72
5.455
59.8
0.3963
0.3276
0.0374
0.00954
8.464 
 105
1.144 
 105
3.229
1.416
0.00308
0.000255
150
277.8
63.83
6.367
56.4
0.4131
0.3520
0.0355
0.00976
7.778 
 105
1.195 
 105
3.259
1.551
0.00351
0.000212
160
314.9
61.76
7.45
52.7
0.4352
0.3839
0.0335
0.00998
7.108 
 105
1.245 
 105
3.324
1.725
0.00411
0.000171
170
355.8
59.47
8.762
48.5
0.4659
0.4286
0.0314
0.01020
6.450 
 105
1.298 
 105
3.443
1.963
0.00498
0.000132
180
400.7
56.85
10.4
43.7
0.5123
0.4960
0.0292
0.01041
5.792 
 105
1.366 
 105
3.661
2.327
0.00637
0.000095
190
449.9
53.75
12.53
38.0
0.5929
0.6112
0.0267
0.01063
5.119 
 105
1.431 
 105
4.090
2.964
0.00891
0.000061
200
504.0
49.75
15.57
30.7
0.7717
0.8544
0.0239
0.01085
4.397 
 105
1.544 
 105
5.119
4.376
0.01490
0.000031
210
563.8
43.19
21.18
18.9
1.4786
1.6683
0.0199
0.01110
3.483 
 105
1.787 
 105
9.311
9.669
0.04021
0.000006
Note 1: Klnematic viscosity n and thermal diffusivity a can be calculated from their definitions, n  m/r and a  k/rcp  n/Pr. The properties listed here
(except the vapor density) can be used at any pressures with negligible error except at temperatures near the critical-point value.
Note 2: The unit Btu/lbm . F for specific heat is equivalent to Btu/lbm·R, and the unit Btu/h·ft·F for thermal conductivity is equivalent to Btu/h·ft·R.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Original sources: R. Tilner-Roth and H. D. Baehr, “An International
Standard Formulation for the Thermodynamic Properties of 1,1,1,2-Tetrafluorethane (HFC-134a) for Temperatures from 170 K to 455 K and Pressures up to
70 Mpa,” J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 23, No.5, 1994: M. J. Assael, N. K. Dalaouti, A. A. Griva, and J. H. Dymond, “Viscosity and Thermal Conductivity of
Halogenated Methane and Ethane Refrigerants,” IJR, Vol. 22, pp. 525–535, 1999: NIST REPROP 6 program (M. O. McLinden, S. A. Klein, E. W. Lemmon,
and A. P. Peskin, Physicial and Chemical Properties Division, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Boulder, CO 80303. 1995).

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
837
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
835
TABLE A–17E
Properties of saturated ammonia
Volume
Enthalpy
Specific
Thermal
Prandil
Expansion
Saturation
Density
of
Heat
Conductivity
Dynamic Viscosity
Number
Coefficient
Surface
Temp.
Pressure
r, lbm/ft3
Vaporization
cr, Btu/Ibm·R
k, Btu/h·ft·R
m, Ibm/ft·s
Pr
b, 1/R
Tension
T, F
Psat, psia
Liquid
Vapor
hfg, Btu/lbm Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
lbf/ft
40
10.4
43.08
0.0402
597.0
1.0542
0.5354
–
0.01026
1.966 
 104
5.342 
 106
–
1.003
0.00098
0.002443
30
13.9
42.66
0.0527
590.2
1.0610
0.5457
–
0.01057
1.853 
 104
5.472 
 106
–
1.017
0.00101
0.002357
20
18.3
42.33
0.0681
583.2
1.0677
0.5571
0.3501
0.01089
1.746 
 104
5.600 
 106
1.917
1.031
0.00103
0.002272
10
23.7
41.79
0.0869
575.9
1.0742
0.5698
0.3426
0.01121
1.645 
 104
5.731 
 106
1.856
1.048
0.00106
0.002187
0
30–4
41.34
0.1097
568.4
1.0807
0.5838
0.3352
0.01154
1.549 
 104
5.861 
 106
1.797
1.068
0.00109
0.002103
10
38.5
40.89
0.1370
560.7
1.0873
0.5992
0.3278
0.01187
1.458 
 104
5.994 
 106
1.740
1.089
0.00112
0.002018
20
48.2
40.43
0.1694
552.6
1.0941
0.6160
0.3203
0.01220
1.371 
 104
6.125 
 106
1.686
1.113
0.00116
0.001934
30
59.8
39.96
0.2075
544.4
1.1012
0.6344
0.3129
0.01254
1290 
 104
6.256 
 106
1.634
1.140
0.00119
0.001850
40
73.4
39.48
0.2521
535.8
1.1087
0.6544
0.3055
0.01288
1.213 
 104
6.389 
 106
1.585
1.168
0.00123
0.001767
50
89.2
38.99
0.3040
526.9
1.1168
0.6762
0.2980
0.01323
1.140 
 104
6.522 
 106
1.539
1.200
0.00128
0.001684
60
107.7
38.50
0.3641
517.7
1.1256
0.6999
0.2906
0.01358
1.072 
 104
6.656 
 106
1.495
1.234
0.00132
0.001601
70
128.9
37.99
0.4332
508.1
1.1353
0.7257
0.2832
0.01394
1.008 
 104
6.786 
 106
1.456
1.272
0.00137
0.001518
80
153.2
37.47
0.5124
498.2
1.1461
0.7539
0.2757
0.01431
9.486 
 105
6.922 
 106
1.419
1.313
0.00143
0.001436
90
180.8
36.94
0.6029
487.8
1.1582
0.7846
0.2683
0.01468
8.922 
 105
7.056 
 106
1.387
1.358
0.00149
0.001354
100
212.0
36.40
0.7060
477.0
1.1719
0.8183
0.2609
0.01505
8.397 
 105
7.189 
 106
1.358
1.407
0.00156
0.001273
110
247.2
35.83
0.8233
465.8
1.1875
0.8554
0.2535
0.01543
7.903 
 105
7.325 
 106
1.333
1.461
0.00164
0.001192
120
286.5
35.26
0.9564
454.1
1.2054
0.8965
0.2460
0.01582
7.444 
 105
7.458 
 106
1.313
1.522
0.00174
0.001111
130
330.4
34.66
1.1074
441.7
1.2261
0.9425
0.2386
0.01621
7.017 
 105
7.594 
 106
1.298
1.589
0.00184
0.001031
140
379.4
34.04
1.2786
428.8
1.2502
0.9943
0.2312
0.01661
6.617 
 105
7.731 
 106
1.288
1.666
0.00196
0.000951
150
433.2
33.39
1.4730
415.2
1.2785
1.0533
0.2237
0.01702
6.244 
 105
7.867 
 104
1.285
1.753
0.00211
0.000872
160
492.7
32.72
1.6940
400.8
1.3120
1.1214
0.2163
0.01744
5.900 
 105
8.006 
 106
1.288
1.853
0.00228
0.000794
170
558.2
32.01
1.9460
385.4
1.3523
1.2012
0.2089
0.01786
5.578 
 105
8.142 
 106
1.300
1.971
0.00249
0.000716
180
630.1
31.26
2.2346
369.1
1.4015
1.2965
0.2014
0.01829
5.278 
 105
8.281 
 106
1.322
2.113
0.00274
0.000638
190
708.5
30.47
2.5670
351.6
1.4624
1.4128
0.1940
0.01874
5.000 
 105
8.419 
 106
1.357
2.286
0.00306
0.000562
200
794.4
29.62
2.9527
332.7
1.5397
1.5586
0.1866
0.01919
4.742 
 105
8.561 
 106
1.409
2.503
0.00348
0.000486
210
887.9
28.70
3.4053
312.0
1.6411
1.7473
0.1791
0.01966
4500 
 105
8.703 
 106
1.484
2.784
0.00403
0.000411
220
989.5
27.69
3.9440
289.2
1.7798
2.0022
0.1717
0.02015
4.275 
 105
8.844 
 106
1.595
3.164
0.00480
0.000338
230
1099.0
25.57
4.5987
263.5
1.9824
2.3659
0.1643
0.02065
4.064 
 105
8.989 
 106
1.765
3.707
0.00594
0.000265
240
1219.4
25.28
5.4197
234.0
2.3100
2.9264
0.1568
0.02119
3.864 
 105
9.136 
 106
2.049
4.542
0.00784
0.000194
Note 1: Kinematic viscosity n and thermal diffusivity a can be calculated from their definitions, n  m/p and a  k/rcp  n/Pr. The properties listed here
(except the vapor density) can be used at any pressures with negligible error except at temperatures near the critical-point value.
Note 2: The unit Btu/lbm·F for specific heat is equivalent to Btu/lbm·R, and the unit Btu/h·ft·F for thermal conductivity is equivalent to Btu/h·ft·R.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Orginal sources: Tillner-Roth, Harms-Watzenterg, and Baehr, “Eine
neue Fundamentalgleichung fur Ammoniak,” DKV-Tagungsbericht 20: 167–181, 1993; Liley and Desai, “Thermophysical Properties of Refrigerants,”
ASHRAE, 1993, ISBN 1-1883413-10-9.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
838
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
836
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–18E
Properties of saturated propane
Volume
Enthalpy
Specific
Thermal
Prandil
Expansion
Saturation
Density
of
Heat
Conductivity
Dynamic Viscosity
Number
Coefficient
Surface
Temp.
Pressure
r, lbm/ft3
Vaporization
cr, Btu/Ibm·R
k, Btu/h·ft·R
m, Ibm/ft·s
Pr
b, 1/R
Tension
T, F
Psat, psia
Liquid
Vapor
hig, Btu/lbm Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
Vapor
Liquid
lbf/ft
200
0.0201
42.06
0.0003
217.7
0.4750
0.2595
0.1073
0.00313
5.012 
 104
2.789 
 106
7.991
0.833
0.00083
0.001890
180
0.0752
41.36
0.0011
213.4
0.4793
0.2680
0.1033
0.00347
3.941 
 104
2.975 
 106
6.582
0.826
0.00086
0.001780
160
0.2307
40.65
0.0032
209.1
0.4845
0.2769
0.0992
0.00384
3.199 
 104
3.164 
 106
5.626
0.821
0.00088
0.001671
140
0.6037
39.93
0.0078
204.8
0.4907
0.2866
0.0949
0.00423
2.660 
 104
3.358 
 106
4.951
0.818
0.00091
0.001563
120
1.389
39.20
0.0170
200.5
0.4982
0.2971
0.0906
0.00465
2.252 
 104
3.556 
 106
4.457
0.817
0.00094
0.001455
100
2.878
38.46
0.0334
196.1
0.5069
0.3087
0.0863
0.00511
1.934 
 104
3.756 
 106
4.087
0.817
0.00097
0.001349
90
4.006
38.08
0.0453
193.9
0.5117
0.3150
0.0842
0.00534
1.799 
 104
3.858 
 106
3.936
0.819
0.00099
0.001297
80
5.467
37.70
0.0605
191.6
0.5169
0.3215
0.0821
0.00559
1.678 
 104
3.961 
 106
3.803
0.820
0.00101
0.001244
70
7.327
37.32
0.0793
189.3
0.5224
0.3284
0.0800
0.00585
1.569 
 104
4.067 
 106
3.686
0.822
0.00104
0.001192
60
9.657
36.93
0.1024
186.9
0.5283
0.3357
0.0780
0.00611
1.469 
 104
4.172 
 106
3.582
0.825
0.00106
0.001140
50
12.54
36.54
0.1305
184.4
0.5345
0.3433
0.0760
0.00639
1.378 
 104
4.278 
 106
3.490
0.828
0.00109
0.001089
40
16.05
36.13
0.1641
181.9
0.5392
0.3513
0.0740
0.00568
1.294 
 104
4.386 
 106
3.395
0.831
0.00112
0.001038
30
20.29
35.73
0.2041
179.3
0.5460
0.3596
0.0721
0.00697
1.217 
 104
4.497 
 106
3.320
0.835
0.00115
0.000987
20
25.34
35.31
0.2512
176.6
0.5531
0.3684
0.0702
0.00728
1.146 
 104
4.611 
 106
3.253
0.840
0.00119
0.000937
10
31.3
34.89
0.3063
173.8
0.5607
0.3776
0.0683
0.00761
1.079 
 104
4.725 
 106
3.192
0.845
0.00123
0.000887
0
38.28
34.46
0.3703
170.9
0.5689
0.3874
0.0665
0.00794
1.018 
 104
4.842 
 106
3.137
0.850
0.00127
0.000838
10
46.38
34.02
0.4441
167.9
0.5775
0.3976
0.0647
0.00829
9.606 
 105
4.961 
 106
3.088
0.857
0.00132
0.000789
20
55.7
33.56
0.5289
164.8
0.5867
0.4084
0.0629
0.00865
9.067 
 105
5.086 
 106
3.043
0.864
0.00138
0.000740
30
66.35
33.10
0.6259
161.6
0.5966
0.4199
0.0512
0.00903
8.561 
 105
5.211 
 106
3.003
0.873
0.00144
0.000692
40
78.45
32.62
0.7365
158.1
0.6072
0.4321
0.0595
0.00942
8.081 
 105
5.342 
 106
2.967
0.882
0.00151
0.000644
50
92.12
32.13
0.8621
154.6
0.6187
0.4452
0.0579
0.00983
7.631 
 105
5.478 
 106
2.935
0.893
0.00159
0.000597
60
107.5
31.63
1.0046
150.8
0.6311
0.4593
0.0563
0.01025
7.200 
 105
5.617 
 106
2.906
0.906
0.00168
0.000551
70
124.6
31.11
1.1659
146.8
0.6447
0.4746
0.0547
0.01070
6.794 
 105
5.764 
 106
2.881
0.921
0.00179
0.000505
80
143.7
30.56
1.3484
142.7
0.6596
0.4915
0.0532
0.01116
6.406 
 105
5.919 
 106
2.860
0.938
0.00191
0.000460
90
164.8
30.00
1.5549
138.2
0.6762
0.5103
0.0517
0.01165
6.033 
 105
6.081 
 106
2.843
0.959
0.00205
0.000416
100
188.1
29.41
1.7887
133.6
0.6947
0.5315
0.0501
0.01217
5.675 
 105
6.256 
 106
2.831
0.984
0.00222
0.000372
120
241.8
28.13
2.3562
123.2
0.7403
0.5844
0.0472
0.01328
5.000 
 106
6.644 
 106
2.825
1.052
0.00267
0.000288
140
306.1
26.69
3.1003
111.1
0.7841
0.6613
0.0442
0.01454
4.358 
 105
7.111 
 106
2.784
1.164
0.00338
0.000208
160
382.4
24.98
4.1145
96.4
0.8696
0.7911
0.0411
0.01603
3.733 
 105
7.719 
 106
2.845
1.371
0.00459
0.000133
180
472.9
22.79
5.6265
77.1
1.1436
1.0813
0.0376
0.01793
3.083 
 105
8.617 
 106
3.380
1.870
0.00791
0.000065
Note 1: Kinematic viscosity n and thermal diffusivity a can be calculated from their definitions, n  m/r and a  k/rcp  n/Pr. The properties listed here
(except the vapor density) can be used at any pressures with negligible error at temperatures near the critical-point value.
Note 2: The unit Btu/lbm·F for specific heat is equivalent to Btu/lbm·R, and the unit Btu/h·ft·F for thermal conductivity is equivalent to Btu/h·ft·R.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Original sources: Reiner Tillner-Roth, “Fundamental Equations of
State,” Shaker, Verlag, Aachan, 1998; B. A. Younglove and J. F. Ely. “Thermophysical Properties of Fluids. II Methane, Ethane, Propane, Isobutane, and
Normal Butane,” J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, Vol. 16, No. 4, 1987; G. R. Somayajulu, “A Generalized Equation for Surface Tension from the Triple-Point to the
Critical-Point,” International Journal of Thermophysics, Vol. 9, No. 4, 1988.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
839
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
837
TABLE A–19E
Properties of liquids
Volume
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Expansion
Temp.
Density
Heat 
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
Coeff. b,
T, F
r, Ibm/ft3 cp, Btu/Ibm·R k, Btu/h·ft·R
a, ft2/s
m, Ibm/ft·s
n, ft2/s
Pr
1/R
Methane (CH4)
280
27.41
0.8152
0.1205
1.497 
 106
1.057 
 104
3.857 
 106
2.575
0.00175
260
26.43
0.8301
0.1097
1.389 
 106
8.014 
 105
3.032 
 106
2.183
0.00192
240
25.39
0.8523
0.0994
1.276 
 106
6.303 
 105
2.482 
 106
1.945
0.00215
220
24.27
0.8838
0.0896
1.159 
 106
5.075 
 105
2.091 
 106
1.803
0.00247
200
23.04
0.9314
0.0801
1.036 
 106
4.142 
 105
1.798 
 106
1.734
0.00295
180
21.64
1.010
0.0709
9.008 
 107
3.394 
 105
1.568 
 106
1.741
0.00374
160
19.99
1.158
0.0616
7.397 
 107
2.758 
 105
1.379 
 106
1.865
0.00526
140
17.84
1.542
0.0518
5.234 
 107
2.168 
 105
1.215 
 106
2.322
0.00943
Methanol [CH3(OH)]
70
49.15
0.6024
0.1148
1.076 
 106
3.872 
 104
7.879 
 106
7.317
0.000656
90
48.50
0.6189
0.1143
1.057 
 106
3.317 
 104
6.840 
 106
6.468
0.000671
110
47.85
0.6373
0.1138
1.036 
 106
2.872 
 104
6.005 
 106
5.793
0.000691
130
47.18
0.6576
0.1133
1.014 
 106
2.513 
 104
5.326 
 106
5.250
0.000716
150
46.50
0.6796
0.1128
9.918 
 107
2.218 
 104
4.769 
 106
4.808
0.000749
170
45.80
0.7035
0.1124
9.687 
 107
1.973 
 104
4.308 
 106
4.447
0.000789
Isobutane (R600a)
150
42.75
0.4483
0.0799
1.157 
 106
6.417 
 104
1.500 
 105
12.96
0.000785
100
41.06
0.4721
0.0782
1.120 
 106
3.669 
 104
8.939 
 106
7.977
0.000836
50
39.31
0.4986
0.0731
1.036 
 106
2.376 
 104
6.043 
 106
5.830
0.000908
0
37.48
0.5289
0.0664
9.299 
 107
1.651 
 104
4.406 
 106
4.738
0.001012
50
35.52
0.5643
0.0591
8.187 
 107
1.196 
 104
3.368 
 106
4.114
0.001169
100
33.35
0.6075
0.0521
7.139 
 107
8.847 
 105
2.653 
 106
3.716
0.001421
150
30.84
0.6656
0.0457
6.188 
 107
6.558 
 105
2.127 
 106
3.437
0.001883
200
27.73
0.7635
0.0400
5.249 
 107
4.750 
 105
1.713 
 106
3.264
0.002970
Glycerin
32
79.65
0.5402
0.163
1.052 
 106
7.047
0.08847
84101
40
79.49
0.5458
0.1637
1.048 
 106
4.803
0.06042
57655
50
79.28
0.5541
0.1645
1.040 
 106
2.850
0.03594
34561
60
79.07
0.5632
0.1651
1.029 
 106
1.547
0.01956
18995
70
78.86
0.5715
0.1652
1.018 
 106
0.9422
0.01195
11730
80
78.66
0.5794
0.1652
1.007 
 106
0.5497
0.00699
6941
90
78.45
0.5878
0.1652
9.955 
 107
0.3756
0.004787
4809
100
78.24
0.5964
0.1653
9.841 
 107
0.2277
0.00291
2957
Engine Oil (unused)
32
56.12
0.4291
0.0849
9.792 
 107
2.563
4.566 
 102
46636
0.000389
50
55.79
0.4395
0.08338
9.448 
 107
1.210
2.169 
 102
22963
0.000389
75
55.3
0.4531
0.08378
9.288 
 107
0.4286
7.751 
 103
8345
0.000389
100
54.77
0.4669
0.08367
9.089 
 107
0.1630
2.977 
 103
3275
0.000389
125
54.24
0.4809
0.08207
8.740 
 107
7.617 
 102
1.404 
 103
1607
0.000389
150
53.73
0.4946
0.08046
8.411 
 107
3.833 
 102
7.135 
 104
848.3
0.000389
200
52.68
0.5231
0.07936
7.999 
 107
1.405 
 102
2.668 
 104
333.6
0.000389
250
51.71
0.5523
0.07776
7.563 
 107
6.744 
 103
1.304 
 104
172.5
0.000389
300
50.63
0.5818
0.07673
7.236 
 107
3.661 
 103
7.232 
 105
99.94
0.000389
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Originally based on various sources.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
840
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
838
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–20E
Properties of liquid metals
Volume
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Expansion
Temp.
Density
Heat 
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
Coeff. b,
T, F
r, Ibm/ft3 cp, Btu/Ibm·R k, Btu/h·ft·R
a, ft2/s
m, Ibm/ft·s
n, ft2/s
Pr
1/R
Mercury (Hg) Melting Point: 38 F
32
848.7
0.03353
4.727
4.614 
 105
1.133 
 103
1.335 
 106
0.02895
1.005 
 104
50
847.2
0.03344
4.805
4.712 
 105
1.092 
 103
1.289 
 106
0.02737
1.005 
 104
100
842.9
0.03319
5.015
4.980 
 105
9.919 
 104
1.176 
 106
0.02363
1.005 
 104
150
838.7
0.03298
5.221
5.244 
 105
9.122 
 104
1.087 
 106
0.02074
1.005 
 104
200
834.5
0.03279
5.422
5.504 
 105
8.492 
 104
1.017 
 106
0.01849
1.005 
 104
300
826.2
0.03252
5.815
6.013 
 105
7.583 
 104
9.180 
 107
0.01527
1.005 
 104
400
817.9
0.03236
6.184
6.491 
 105
6.972 
 104
8.524 
 107
0.01313
1.008 
 104
500
809.6
0.03230
6.518
6.924 
 105
6.525 
 104
8.061 
 107
0.01164
1.018 
 104
600
801.3
0.03235
6.839
7.329 
 105
6.186 
 104
7.719 
 107
0.01053
1.035 
 104
Bismuth (Bi) Melting Point: 520F
700
620.7
0.03509
9.361
1.193 
 104
1.001 
 103
1.614 
 106
0.01352
800
616.5
0.03569
9.245
1.167 
 104
9.142 
 104
1.482 
 106
0.01271
900
612.2
0.0363
9.129
1.141 
 104
8.267 
 104
1.350 
 106
0.01183
1000
608.0
0.0369
9.014
1.116 
 104
7.392 
 104
1.215 
 106
0.0109
1100
603.7
0.0375
9.014
1.105 
 104
6.872 
 104
1.138 
 106
0.01029
Lead (Pb) Melting Point: 621F
700
658
0.03797
9.302
1.034 
 104
1.612 
 103
2.450 
 106
0.02369
800
654
0.03750
9.157
1.037 
 104
1.453 
 103
2.223 
 106
0.02143
900
650
0.03702
9.013
1.040 
 104
1.296 
 103
1.994 
 106
0.01917
1000
645.7
0.03702
8.912
1.035 
 104
1.202 
 103
1.862 
 106
0.01798
1100
641.5
0.03702
8.810
1.030 
 104
1.108 
 103
1.727 
 106
0.01676
1200
637.2
0.03702
8.709
1.025 
 104
1.013 
 103
1.590 
 106
0.01551
Sodium (Na) Melting Point: 208F
300
57.13
0.3258
48.19
7.192 
 104
4.136 
 104
7.239 
 106
0.01007
400
56.28
0.3219
46.58
7.142 
 104
3.572 
 104
6.350 
 106
0.008891
500
55.42
0.3181
44.98
7.087 
 104
3.011 
 104
5.433 
 106
0.007667
600
54.56
0.3143
43.37
7.026 
 104
2.448 
 104
4.488 
 106
0.006387
800
52.85
0.3089
40.55
6.901 
 104
1.772 
 104
3.354 
 106
0.004860
1000
51.14
0.3057
38.12
6.773 
 104
1.541 
 104
3.014 
 106
0.004449
Potassium (K) Melting Point: 147F
300
50.40
0.1911
26.00
7.500 
 104
2.486 
 104
4.933 
 106
0.006577
400
49.58
0.1887
25.37
7.532 
 104
2.231 
 104
4.500 
 106
0.005975
500
48.76
0.1863
24.73
7.562 
 104
1.976 
 104
4.052 
 106
0.005359
600
47.94
0.1839
24.09
7.591 
 104
1.721 
 104
3.589 
 106
0.004728
800
46.31
0.1791
22.82
7.643 
 104
1.210 
 104
2.614 
 106
0.003420
1000
44.62
0.1791
21.34
7.417 
 104
1.075 
 104
2.409 
 106
0.003248
Sodium-Potassium (%22Na-%78K) Melting Point: 12F
200
52.99
0.2259
14.79
3.432 
 104
3.886 
 104
7.331 
 106
0.02136
300
52.16
0.2230
14.99
3.580 
 104
3.467 
 104
6.647 
 106
0.01857
400
51.32
0.2201
15.19
3.735 
 104
3.050 
 104
5.940 
 106
0.0159
600
49.65
0.2143
15.59
4.070 
 104
2.213 
 104
4.456 
 106
0.01095
800
47.99
0.2100
15.95
4.396 
 104
1.539 
 104
3.207 
 106
0.007296
1000
46.36
0.2103
16.20
4.615 
 104
1.353 
 104
2.919 
 106
0.006324
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Originally based on various sources.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
841
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
839
TABLE A–21E
Ideal-gas properties of air
T
h
u
s°
T
h
u
s°
R
Btu/lbm
Pr
Btu/lbm
vr
Btu/lbm · R R
Btu/lbm
Pr
Btu/lbm
vr
Btu/lbm · R
360
85.97
0.3363
61.29
396.6
0.50369
1600
395.74
71.13
286.06
8.263
0.87130
380
90.75
0.4061
64.70
346.6
0.51663
1650
409.13
80.89
296.03
7.556
0.87954
400
95.53
0.4858
68.11
305.0
0.52890
1700
422.59
90.95
306.06
6.924
0.88758
420
100.32
0.5760
71.52
270.1
0.54058
1750
436.12
101.98
316.16
6.357
0.89542
440
105.11
0.6776
74.93
240.6
0.55172
1800
449.71
114.0
326.32
5.847
0.90308
460
109.90
0.7913
78.36
215.33
0.56235
1850
463.37
127.2
336.55
5.388
0.91056
480
114.69
0.9182
81.77
193.65
0.57255
1900
477.09
141.5
346.85
4.974
0.91788
500
119.48
1.0590
85.20
174.90
0.58233
1950
490.88
157.1
357.20
4.598
0.92504
520
124.27
1.2147
88.62
158.58
0.59173
2000
504.71
174.0
367.61
4.258
0.93205
537
128.10
1.3593
91.53
146.34
0.59945
2050
518.71
192.3
378.08
3.949
0.93891
540
129.06
1.3860
92.04
144.32
0.60078
2100
532.55
212.1
388.60
3.667
0.94564
560
133.86
1.5742
95.47
131.78
0.60950
2150
546.54
223.5
399.17
3.410
0.95222
580
138.66
1.7800
98.90
120.70
0.61793
2200
560.59
256.6
409.78
3.176
0.95919
600
143.47
2.005
102.34
110.88
0.62607
2250
574.69
281.4
420.46
2.961
0.96501
620
148.28
2.249
105.78
102.12
0.63395
2300
588.82
308.1
431.16
2.765
0.97123
640
153.09
2.514
109.21
94.30
0.64159
2350
603.00
336.8
441.91
2.585
0.97732
660
157.92
2.801
112.67
87.27
0.64902
2400
617.22
367.6
452.70
2.419
0.98331
680
162.73
3.111
116.12
80.96
0.65621
2450
631.48
400.5
463.54
2.266
0.98919
700
167.56
3.446
119.58
75.25
0.66321
2500
645.78
435.7
474.40
2.125
0.99497
720
172.39
3.806
123.04
70.07
0.67002
2550
660.12
473.3
485.31
1.996
1.00064
740
177.23
4.193
126.51
65.38
0.67665
2600
674.49
513.5
496.26
1.876
1.00623
760
182.08
4.607
129.99
61.10
0.68312
2650
688.90
556.3
507.25
1.765
1.01172
780
186.94
5.051
133.47
57.20
0.68942
2700
703.35
601.9
518.26
1.662
1.01712
800
191.81
5.526
136.97
53.63
0.69558
2750
717.83
650.4
529.31
1.566
1.02244
820
196.69
6.033
140.47
50.35
0.70160
2800
732.33
702.0
540.40
1.478
1.02767
840
201.56
6.573
143.98
47.34
0.70747
2850
746.88
756.7
551.52
1.395
1.03282
860
206.46
7.149
147.50
44.57
0.71323
2900
761.45
814.8
562.66
1.318
1.03788
880
211.35
7.761
151.02
42.01
0.71886
2950
776.05
876.4
573.84
1.247
1.04288
900
216.26
8.411
154.57
39.64
0.72438
3000
790.68
941.4
585.04
1.180
1.04779
920
221.18
9.102
158.12
37.44
0.72979
3050
805.34
1011
596.28
1.118
1.05264
940
226.11
9.834
161.68
35.41
0.73509
3100
820.03
1083
607.53
1.060
1.05741
960
231.06
10.61
165.26
33.52
0.74030
3150
834.75
1161
618.82
1.006
1.06212
980
236.02
11.43
168.83
31.76
0.74540
3200
849.48
1242
630.12
0.955
1.06676
1000 240.98
12.30
172.43
30.12
0.75042
3250
864.24
1328
641.46
0.907
1.07134
1040 250.95
14.18
179.66
27.17
0.76019
3300
879.02
1418
652.81
0.8621 1.07585
1080 260.97
16.28
186.93
24.58
0.76964
3350
893.83
1513
664.20
0.8202 1.08031
1120 271.03
18.60
194.25
22.30
0.77880
3400
908.66
1613
675.60
0.7807 1.08470
1160 281.14
21.18
201.63
20.29
0.78767
3450
923.52
1719
687.04
0.7436 1.08904
1200 291.30
24.01
209.05
18.51
0.79628
3500
938.40
1829
698.48
0.7087 1.09332
1240 301.52
27.13
216.53
16.93
0.80466
3550
953.30
1946
709.95
0.6759 1.09755
1280 311.79
30.55
224.05
15.52
0.81280
3600
968.21
2068
721.44
0.6449 1.10172
1320 322.11
34.31
231.63
14.25
0.82075
3650
983.15
2196
732.95
0.6157 1.10584
1360 332.48
38.41
239.25
13.12
0.82848
3700
998.11
2330
744.48
0.5882 1.10991
1400 342.90
42.88
246.93
12.10
0.83604
3750 1013.1
2471
756.04
0.5621 1.11393
1440 353.37
47.75
254.66
11.17
0.84341
3800 1028.1
2618
767.60
0.5376 1.11791
1480 363.89
53.04
262.44
10.34
0.85062
3850 1043.1
2773
779.19
0.5143 1.12183
1520 374.47
58.78
270.26
9.578
0.85767
3900 1058.1
2934
790.80
0.4923 1.12571
1560
385.08
65.00
278.13
8.890
0.86456
3950 1073.2
3103
802.43
0.4715 1.12955
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
842
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
TABLE A–21E
Ideal-gas properties of air (Concluded)
T
h
u
s°
T
h
u
s°
R
Btu/lbm
Pr
Btu/lbm
vr
Btu/lbm · R
R
Btu/lbm
Pr
Btu/lbm
vr
Btu/lbm · R
4000
1088.3
3280
814.06
0.4518
1.13334
4600
1270.4
6089
955.04
0.2799
1.17575
4050
1103.4
3464
825.72
0.4331
1.13709
4700
1300.9
6701
978.73
0.2598
1.18232
4100
1118.5
3656
837.40
0.4154
1.14079
4800
1331.5
7362
1002.5
0.2415
1.18876
4150
1133.6
3858
849.09
0.3985
1.14446
4900
1362.2
8073
1026.3
0.2248
1.19508
4200
1148.7
4067
860.81
0.3826
1.14809
5000
1392.9
8837
1050.1
0.2096
1.20129
4300
1179.0
4513
884.28
0.3529
1.15522
5100
1423.6
9658
1074.0
0.1956
1.20738
4400
1209.4
4997
907.81
0.3262
1.16221
5200
1454.4
10,539
1098.0
0.1828
1.21336
4500
1239.9
5521
931.39
0.3019
1.16905
5300
1485.3
11,481
1122.0
0.1710
1.21923
Note: The properties Pr (relative pressure) and vr (relative specific volume) are dimensionless quantities used in the analysis of isentropic processes, and
should not be confused with the properties pressure and specific volume.
Source: Kenneth Wark, Thermodynamics, 4th ed. (New York: McGraw-Hill, 1983), pp. 832–33, Table A–5. Originally published in J. H. Keenan and
J. Kaye, Gas Tables (New York: John Wiley & Sons, 1948).
840
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
843
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
841
TABLE A–22E
Properties of air at 1 atm pressure
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Temp.
Density
Heat 
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
T, F
r, Ibm/ft3
cp, Btu/Ibm·R
k, Btu/h·ft·R
a, ft2/s
m, Ibm/ft·s
n, ft2/s
Pr
300
0.24844
0.5072
0.00508
1.119 
 105
4.039 
 106
1.625 
 105
1.4501
200
0.15276
0.2247
0.00778
6.294 
 105
6.772 
 106
4.433 
 105
0.7042
100
0.11029
0.2360
0.01037
1.106 
 104
9.042 
 106
8.197 
 105
0.7404
50
0.09683
0.2389
0.01164
1.397 
 104
1.006 
 105
1.039 
 104
0.7439
0
0.08630
0.2401
0.01288
1.726 
 104
1.102 
 105
1.278 
 104
0.7403
10
0.08446
0.2402
0.01312
1.797 
 104
1.121 
 105
1.328 
 104
0.7391
20
0.08270
0.2403
0.01336
1.868 
 104
1.140 
 105
1.379 
 104
0.7378
30
0.08101
0.2403
0.01361
1.942 
 104
1.158 
 105
1.430 
 104
0.7365
40
0.07939
0.2404
0.01385
2.016 
 104
1.176 
 105
1.482 
 104
0.7350
50
0.07783
0.2404
0.01409
2.092 
 104
1.194 
 105
1.535 
 104
0.7336
60
0.07633
0.2404
0.01433
2.169 
 104
1.212 
 105
1.588 
 104
0.7321
70
0.07489
0.2404
0.01457
2.248 
 104
1.230 
 105
1.643 
 104
0.7306
80
0.07350
0.2404
0.01481
2.328 
 104
1.247 
 105
1.697 
 104
0.7290
90
0.07217
0.2404
0.01505
2.409 
 104
1.265 
 105
1.753 
 104
0.7275
100
0.07088
0.2405
0.01529
2.491 
 104
1.281 
 105
1.809 
 104
0.7260
110
0.06963
0.2405
0.01552
2.575 
 104
1.299 
 105
1.866 
 104
0.7245
120
0.06843
0.2405
0.01576
2.660 
 104
1.316 
 105
1.923 
 104
0.7230
130
0.06727
0.2405
0.01599
2.746 
 104
1.332 
 105
1.981 
 104
0.7216
140
0.06615
0.2406
0.01623
2.833 
 104
1.349 
 105
2.040 
 104
0.7202
150
0.06507
0.2406
0.01646
2.921 
 104
1.365 
 105
2.099 
 104
0.7188
160
0.06402
0.2406
0.01669
3.010 
 104
1.382 
 105
2.159 
 104
0.7174
170
0.06300
0.2407
0.01692
3.100 
 104
1.398 
 105
2.220 
 104
0.7161
180
0.06201
0.2408
0.01715
3.191 
 104
1.414 
 105
2.281 
 104
0.7148
190
0.06106
0.2408
0.01738
3.284 
 104
1.430 
 105
2.343 
 104
0.7136
200
0.06013
0.2409
0.01761
3.377 
 104
1.446 
 105
2.406 
 104
0.7124
250
0.05590
0.2415
0.01874
3.857 
 104
1.524 
 105
2.727 
 104
0.7071
300
0.05222
0.2423
0.01985
4.358 
 104
1.599 
 105
3.063 
 104
0.7028
350
0.04899
0.2433
0.02094
4.879 
 104
1.672 
 105
3.413 
 104
0.6995
400
0.04614
0.2445
0.02200
5.419 
 104
1.743 
 105
3.777 
 104
0.6971
450
0.04361
0.2458
0.02305
5.974 
 104
1.812 
 105
4.154 
 104
0.6953
500
0.04134
0.2472
0.02408
6.546 
 104
1.878 
 105
4.544 
 104
0.6942
600
0.03743
0.2503
0.02608
7.732 
 104
2.007 
 105
5.361 
 104
0.6934
700
0.03421
0.2535
0.02800
8.970 
 104
2.129 
 105
6.225 
 104
0.6940
800
0.03149
0.2568
0.02986
1.025 
 103
2.247 
 105
7.134 
 104
0.6956
900
0.02917
0.2599
0.03164
1.158 
 103
2.359 
 105
8.087 
 104
0.6978
1000
0.02718
0.2630
0.03336
1.296 
 103
2.467 
 105
9.080 
 104
0.7004
1500
0.02024
0.2761
0.04106
2.041 
 103
2.957 
 105
1.460 
 103
0.7158
2000
0.01613
0.2855
0.04752
2.867 
 103
3.379 
 105
2.095 
 103
0.7308
2500
0.01340
0.2922
0.05309
3.765 
 103
3.750 
 105
2.798 
 103
0.7432
3000
0.01147
0.2972
0.05811
4.737 
 103
4.082 
 105
3.560 
 103
0.7516
3500
0.01002
0.3010
0.06293
5.797 
 103
4.381 
 105
4.373 
 103
0.7543
4000
0.00889
0.3040
0.06789
6.975 
 103
4.651 
 105
5.229 
 103
0.7497
Note: For ideal gases, the properties cp, k, m, and Pr are independent of pressure. The properties r, n, and a at a pressure P (in atm) other than 1 atm are
determined by multiplying the values of r at the given temperature by P and by dividing n and a by P.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Original sources: Keenan, Chao, Keyes, Gas Tables, Wiley, 1984;
and Thermophysical Properties of Matter, Vol. 3: Thermal Conductivity, Y. S. Touloukian, P. E. Liley, S. C. Saxena, Vol. 11: Viscosity, Y. S. Touloukian,
S. C. Saxena, and P. Hestermans, IFI/Plenun, NY, 1970, ISBN 0-306067020-8.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
844
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
842
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
(Continued)
TABLE A–23E
Properties of gases at 1 atm pressure
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Temp.
Density
Heat
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
T, F
r, Ibm/ft3
cp, Btu/Ibm·R
k, Btu/h·ft·R
a, ft2/s
m, Ibm/ft·s
n, ft2/s
Pr
Carbon Dioxide, CO2
50
0.14712
0.1797
0.00628
6.600 
 105
7.739 
 106
5.261 
 105
0.7970
0
0.13111
0.1885
0.00758
8.522 
 105
8.661 
 106
6.606 
 105
0.7751
50
0.11825
0.1965
0.00888
1.061 
 104
9.564 
 106
8.086 
 105
0.7621
100
0.10769
0.2039
0.01017
1.286 
 104
1.045 
 105
9.703 
 105
0.7543
200
0.09136
0.2171
0.01273
1.784 
 104
1.217 
 105
1.332 
 104
0.7469
300
0.07934
0.2284
0.01528
2.341 
 104
1.382 
 105
1.743 
 104
0.7445
500
0.06280
0.2473
0.02027
3.626 
 104
1.696 
 105
2.700 
 104
0.7446
1000
0.04129
0.2796
0.03213
7.733 
 104
2.381 
 105
5.767 
 104
0.7458
1500
0.03075
0.2995
0.04281
1.290 
 103
2.956 
 105
9.610 
 104
0.7445
2000
0.02450
0.3124
0.05193
1.885 
 103
3.451 
 105
1.408 
 103
0.7474
Carbon Monoxide, CO
50
0.09363
0.2571
0.01118
1.290 
 104
9.419 
 106
1.005 
 104
0.7798
0
0.08345
0.2523
0.01240
1.636 
 104
1.036 
 105
1.242 
 104
0.7593
50
0.07526
0.2496
0.01359
2.009 
 104
1.127 
 105
1.498 
 104
0.7454
100
0.06854
0.2484
0.01476
2.408 
 104
1.214 
 105
1.772 
 104
0.7359
200
0.05815
0.2485
0.01702
3.273 
 104
1.379 
 105
2.372 
 104
0.7247
300
0.05049
0.2505
0.01920
4.217 
 104
1.531 
 105
3.032 
 104
0.7191
500
0.03997
0.2567
0.02331
6.311 
 104
1.802 
 105
4.508 
 104
0.7143
1000
0.02628
0.2732
0.03243
1.254 
 103
2.334 
 105
8.881 
 104
0.7078
1500
0.01957
0.2862
0.04049
2.008 
 103
2.766 
 105
1.413 
 103
0.7038
2000
0.01559
0.2958
0.04822
2.903 
 103
3.231 
 105
2.072 
 103
0.7136
Methane, CH4
50
0.05363
0.5335
0.01401
1.360 
 104
5.861 
 106
1.092 
 104
0.8033
0
0.04779
0.5277
0.01616
1.780 
 104
6.506 
 106
1.361 
 104
0.7649
50
0.04311
0.5320
0.01839
2.228 
 104
7.133 
 106
1.655 
 104
0.7428
100
0.03925
0.5433
0.02071
2.698 
 104
7.742 
 106
1.972 
 104
0.7311
200
0.03330
0.5784
0.02559
3.690 
 104
8.906 
 106
2.674 
 104
0.7245
300
0.02892
0.6226
0.03077
4.748 
 104
1.000 
 105
3.457 
 104
0.7283
500
0.02289
0.7194
0.04195
7.075 
 104
1.200 
 105
5.244 
 104
0.7412
1000
0.01505
0.9438
0.07346
1.436 
 103
1.620 
 105
1.076 
 103
0.7491
1500
0.01121
1.1162
0.10766
2.390 
 103
1.974 
 105
1.760 
 103
0.7366
2000
0.00893
1.2419
0.14151
3.544 
 103
2.327 
 105
2.605 
 103
0.7353
Hydrogen, H2
50
0.00674
3.0603
0.08246
1.110 
 103
4.969 
 106
7.373 
 104
0.6638
0
0.00601
3.2508
0.09049
1.287 
 103
5.381 
 106
8.960 
 104
0.6960
50
0.00542
3.3553
0.09818
1.500 
 103
5.781 
 106
1.067 
 103
0.7112
100
0.00493
3.4118
0.10555
1.742 
 103
6.167 
 106
1.250 
 103
0.7177
200
0.00419
3.4549
0.11946
2.295 
 103
6.911 
 106
1.652 
 103
0.7197
300
0.00363
3.4613
0.13241
2.924 
 103
7.622 
 106
2.098 
 103
0.7174
500
0.00288
3.4572
0.15620
4.363 
 103
8.967 
 106
3.117 
 103
0.7146
1000
0.00189
3.5127
0.20989
8.776 
 103
1.201 
 105
6.354 
 103
0.7241
1500
0.00141
3.6317
0.26381
1.432 
 102
1.477 
 105
1.048 
 102
0.7323
2000
0.00112
3.7656
0.31923
2.098 
 102
1.734 
 105
1.544 
 102
0.7362

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
845
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
843
TABLE A–23E
Properties of gases at 1 atm pressure (Concluded)
Specific
Thermal
Thermal
Dynamic
Kinematic
Prandtl
Temp.
Density
Heat 
Conductivity
Diffusivity
Viscosity
Viscosity
Number
T, F
r, Ibm/ft3
cp, Btu/Ibm·R
k, Btu/h·ft·R
a, ft2/s
m, Ibm/ft·s
n, ft2/s
Pr
Nitrogen, N2
50
0.09364
0.2320
0.01176
1.504 
 104
9.500 
 106
1.014 
 104
0.6746
0
0.08346
0.2441
0.01300
1.773 
 104
1.043 
 105
1.251 
 104
0.7056
50
0.07527
0.2480
0.01420
2.113 
 104
1.134 
 105
1.507 
 104
0.7133
100
0.06854
0.2489
0.01537
2.502 
 104
1.221 
 105
1.783 
 104
0.7126
200
0.05815
0.2487
0.01760
3.379 
 104
1.388 
 105
2.387 
 104
0.7062
300
0.05050
0.2492
0.01970
4.349 
 104
1.543 
 105
3.055 
 104
0.7025
500
0.03997
0.2535
0.02359
6.466 
 104
1.823 
 105
4.559 
 104
0.7051
1000
0.02628
0.2697
0.03204
1.255 
 103
2.387 
 105
9.083 
 104
0.7232
1500
0.01958
0.2831
0.04002
2.006 
 103
2.829 
 105
1.445 
 103
0.7202
2000
0.01560
0.2927
0.04918
2.992 
 103
3.212 
 105
2.059 
 103
0.6882
Oxygen, O2
50
0.10697
0.2331
0.01216
1.355 
 104
1.104 
 105
1.032 
 104
0.7622
0
0.09533
0.2245
0.01346
1.747 
 104
1.218 
 105
1.277 
 104
0.7312
50
0.08598
0.2209
0.01475
2.157 
 104
1.326 
 105
1.543 
 104
0.7152
100
0.07830
0.2200
0.01601
2.582 
 104
1.429 
 105
1.826 
 104
0.7072
200
0.06643
0.2221
0.01851
3.484 
 104
1.625 
 105
2.446 
 104
0.7020
300
0.05768
0.2262
0.02096
4.463 
 104
1.806 
 105
3.132 
 104
0.7018
500
0.04566
0.2352
0.02577
6.665 
 104
2.139 
 105
4.685 
 104
0.7029
1000
0.03002
0.2520
0.03698
1.357 
 103
2.855 
 105
9.509 
 104
0.7005
1500
0.02236
0.2626
0.04701
2.224 
 103
3.474 
 105
1.553 
 103
0.6985
2000
0.01782
0.2701
0.05614
3.241 
 103
4.035 
 105
2.265 
 103
0.6988
Water Vapor, H2O
50
0.06022
0.4512
0.00797
8.153 
 105
4.933 
 106
8.192 
 105
1.0050
0
0.05367
0.4484
0.00898
1.036 
 104
5.592 
 106
1.041 
 104
1.0049
50
0.04841
0.4472
0.01006
1.291 
 104
6.261 
 106
1.293 
 104
1.0018
100
0.04408
0.4473
0.01121
1.579 
 104
6.942 
 106
1.574 
 104
0.9969
200
0.03740
0.4503
0.01372
2.263 
 104
8.333 
 106
2.228 
 104
0.9845
300
0.03248
0.4557
0.01648
3.093 
 104
9.756 
 106
3.004 
 104
0.9713
500
0.02571
0.4707
0.02267
5.204 
 104
1.267 
 105
4.931 
 104
0.9475
1000
0.01690
0.5167
0.04134
1.314 
 103
2.014 
 105
1.191 
 103
0.9063
1500
0.01259
0.5625
0.06315
2.477 
 103
2.742 
 105
2.178 
 103
0.8793
2000
0.01003
0.6034
0.08681
3.984 
 103
3.422 
 105
3.411 
 103
0.8563
Note: For ideal gases, the properties cp, k, m, and Pr are independent of pressure. The properties r, n, and a at a pressure P (in atm) other than 1 atm are
determined by multiplying the values of r at the given temperature by P and by dividing n and a by P.
Source: Data generated from the EES software developed by S. A. Klein and F. L. Alvarado. Originally based on various sources.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
846
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
844
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–24E
Properties of solid metals
Properties at 540 R
Properties at Various Temperatures (R),
Melting
k (Btu/h · ft · R)/cp(Btu/lbm · R)
Point,
r
cp (Btu/
k (Btu/
a 
 106
Composition
R
Ibm/ft3
Ibm · R) h · ft · R)
ft2/s
180
360
720
1080
1440
1800
Aluminum
1679
168
0.216
137
1045
174.5
137
138.6
133.4
126
Pure
0.115
0.191
0.226
0.246
0.273
Alloy 2024-T6
1395
173
0.209
102.3
785.8
37.6
94.2
107.5
107.5
(4.5% Cu, 1.5% Mg,
0.6% Mn)
0.113
0.188
0.22
0.249
Alloy 195, cast (4.5% Cu)
174.2
0.211
97
734
100.5
106.9
Beryllium
2790
115.5
0.436
115.6
637.2
572
174
93
72.8
61.3
52.5
0.048
0.266
0.523
0.621
0.624
0.72
Bismuth
981
610.5
0.029
4.6
71
9.5
5.6
4.06
0.026
0.028
0.03
Boron
4631
156
0.264
15.6
105
109.7
32.06
9.7
6.1
5.5
5.7
0.03
0.143
0.349
0.451
0.515
0.558
Cadmium
1069
540
0.055
55.6
521
117.3
57.4
54.7
0.047
0.053
0.057
Chromium
3812
447
0.107
54.1
313.2
91.9
64.1
52.5
46.6
41.2
37.8
0.045
0.091
0.115
0.129
0.138
0.147
Cobalt
3184
553.2
0.101
57.3
286.3
96.5
70.5
49.3
39
33.6
80.1
0.056
0.09
0.107
0.12
0.131
0.145
Copper
2445
559
0.092
231.7
1259.3
278.5
238.6
227.07
219
212
203.4
Pure
0.06
0.085
0.094
0.01
0.103
0.107
Commercial bronze
2328
550
0.1
30
150.7
24.3
30
34
(90% Cu, 10% Al)
0.187
0.109
0.130
Phosphor gear bronze
1987
548.1
0.084
31.2
183
23.7
37.6
42.8
(89% Cu, 11% Sn)
—
—
—
Cartridge brass
2139
532.5
0.09
63.6
364.9
43.3
54.9
79.2
86.0
(70% Cu, 30% Zn)
0.09
0.09
0.101
Constantan
2687
557
0.092
13.3
72.3
9.8
1.1
(55% Cu, 45% Ni)
0.06
0.09
Germanium
2180
334.6
0.08
34.6
373.5
134
56
25
15.7
11.4
10.05
0.045
0.069
0.08
0.083
0.085
0.089
Gold
2405
1205
0.03
183.2
1367
189
186.6
179.7
172.2
164.09
156
0.026
0.029
0.031
0.032
0.033
0.034
Iridium
4896
1404.6
0.031
85
541.4
99.4
88.4
83.2
79.7
76.3
72.8
0.021
0.029
0.031
0.032
0.034
0.036
Iron:
3258
491.3
0.106
46.4
248.6
77.4
54.3
40.2
31.6
25.01
19
Pure
0.051
0.091
0.117
0.137
0.162
0.232
Armco
491.3
0.106
42
222.8
55.2
46.6
38
30.7
24.4
18.7
(99.75% pure)
0.051
0.091
0.117
0.137
0.162
0.233
Carbon steels
490.3
0.103
35
190.6
32.8
27.7
22.7
17.4
Plain carbon (Mn  1%,
Si  0.1%)
0.116
0.113
0.163
0.279
AISI 1010
489
0.103
37
202.4
33.9
28.2
22.7
18
0.116
0.133
0.163
0.278
Carbon-silicon
488
0.106
30
160.4
28.8
25.4
21.6
17
(Mn  1%,
0.1%  Si  0.6%)
0.119
0.139
0.166
0.231
Carbon-manganese-silicon
508
0.104
23.7
125
24.4
23
20.2
16
(1%  Mn  1.65%,
0.116
0.133
0.163
0.260
0.1%  Si  0.6%)
Chromium (low) steels:
488.3
0.106
21.8
117.4
22
21.2
19.3
15.6
1
2 Cr–1
4 Mo–Si
0.117
0.137
0.164
0.23
(0.18% C, 0.65% Cr,
0.23% Mo, 0.6% Si)1
1 Cr1
2 Mo (0.16% C, 
490.6
0.106
24.5
131.3
24.3
22.6
20
15.8
1% Cr, 0.54% Mo, 0.39% Si)
0.117
0.137
0.164
0.231
1 Cr–V
489.2
0.106
28.3
151.8
27.0
24.3
21
16.3
(0.2% C, 1.02% Cr, 0.15% V)
0.117
0.137
0.164
0.231
(Continued)

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
847
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Appendix 2
|
845
TABLE A–24E
Properties of solid metals (Continued)
Properties at 540 R
Properties at Various Temperatures (R),
Melting
k (Btu/h · ft · R)/cp(Btu/lbm · R)
Point,
r
cp(Btu/
k (Btu/
a 
 106
Composition
R
Ibm/ft3
Ibm · R) h · ft · R)
ft2/s
180
360
720
1080
1440
1800
Stainless steels:
503
0.114
8.7
42
10
11.6
13.2
14.7
AISI 302
0.122
0.133
0.140
0.144
AISI 304
3006
493.2
0.114
8.6
42.5
5.31
7.3
9.6
11.5
13
14.7
0.064
0.096
0.123
0.133
0.139
0.145
AISI 316
514.3
0.111
7.8
37.5
8.8
10.6
12.3
14
0.12
0.131
0.137
0.143
AISI 347
498
0.114
8.2
40
9.1
1.1
12.7
14.3
0.122
0.133
0.14
0.144
Lead
1082
708
0.03
20.4
259.4
23
21.2
19.7
18.1
0.028
0.029
0.031
0.034
Magnesium
1661
109
0.245
90.2
943
87.9
91.9
88.4
86.0
84.4
0.155
0.223
0.256
0.279
0.302
Molybdenum
5209
639.3
0.06
79.7
578
1034
82.6
77.4
72.8
68.2
64.7
0.038
0.053
0.062
0.065
0.068
0.070
Nickel:
3110
555.6
0.106
52.4
247.6
94.8
61.8
46.3
37.9
39
41.4
Pure
0.055
0.091
0.115
0.141
0.126
0.134
Nichrome
3010
524.4
0.1
6.9
36.6
8.0
9.3
12.2
(80% Ni, 20% Cr)
0.114
0.125
0.130
Inconel X-750
2997
531.3
0.104
6.8
33.4
5
5.9
7.8
9.8
11.8
13.9
(73% Ni, 15% Cr,
6.7% Fe)
—
0.088
0.112
0.121
0.13
0.149
Niobium
4934
535
0.063
31
254
31.9
30.4
32
33.6
35.4
32.2
0.044
0.059
0.065
0.067
0.069
0.071
Palladium
3289
750.4
0.058
41.5
263.7
44.2
41.4
42.5
46
50
54.4
0.04
0.054
0.059
0.062
0.064
0.067
Platinum:
3681
1339
0.031
41.4
270
44.7
42
41.5
42.3
43.7
45.5
Pure
0.024
0.03
0.032
0.034
0.035
0.036
Alloy 60Pt-40Rh
3240
1038.2
0.038
27.2
187.3
30
34
37.5
40
(60% Pt, 40% Rh)
—
—
—
Rhenium
6215
1317.2
0.032
27.7
180
34
30
26.6
25.5
25.4
25.8
0.023
0.03
0.033
0.034
0.036
0.037
Rhodium
4025
777.2
0.058
86.7
534
107.5
89
84.3
78.5
73.4
70
0.035
0.052
0.06
0.065
0.069
0.074
Silicon
3033
145.5
0.17
85.5
960.2
510.8
152.5
57.2
35.8
24.4
18.0
0.061
0.132
0.189
0.207
0.218
0.226
Silver
2223
656
0.056
248
1873
257
248.4
245.5
238
228.8
219
0.044
0.053
0.057
0.059
0.062
0.066
Tantalum
5884
1036.3
0.033
33.2
266
34.2
33.2
33.4
34
34.3
34.8
0.026
0.031
0.034
0.035
0.036
0.036
Thorium
3641
730.4
0.028
31.2
420.9
34.6
31.5
31.4
32.2
32.9
32.9
0.024
0.027
0.029
0.032
0.035
0.037
Tin
909
456.3
0.054
38.5
431.6
49.2
42.4
35.9
0.044
0.051
0.058
Titanium
3515
281
0.013
12.7
100.3
17.6
14.2
11.8
11.2
11.4
12
0.071
0.111
0.131
0.141
0.151
0.161
Tungsten
6588
1204.9
0.031
100.5
735.2
120.2
107.5
92
79.2
72.2
68.2
0.020
0.029
0.032
0.033
0.034
0.035
Uranium
2531
1190.5
0.027
16
134.5
12.5
14.5
17.1
19.6
22.4
25.4
0.022
0.026
0.029
0.035
0.042
0.043
Vanadium
3946
381
0.117
17.7
110.9
20.7
18
18
19.3
20.6
22.0
0.061
0.102
0.123
0.128
0.134
0.142
Zinc
1247
445.7
0.093
67
450
67.6
68.2
64.1
59.5
0.07
0.087
0.096
0.104
Zirconium
3825
410.2
0.067
13.1
133.5
19.2
14.6
12.5
12
12.5
13.7
0.049
0.063
0.072
0.77
0.082
0.087
Source: Tables A–24E and A–25E are obtained from the respective tables in SI units in Appendix 1 using proper conversion factors.

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Appendix 2: Property 
Tables and Charts (English 
Units)
848
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
846
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer
TABLE A–25E
Properties of solid non-metals
Properties at 540 R
Properties at Various Temperatures (R),
Melting
k (Btu/h · ft · R)/cp(Btu/lbm · R)
Point,
r
cp(Btu/
k (Btu/
a 
 106
Composition
R
Ibm/ft3
Ibm · R)
h · ft · R)
ft2/s
180
360
720
1080
1440
1800
Aluminum oxide,
4181
247.8
0.182
26.6
162.5
260
47.4
18.7
11
7.5
6
sapphire
—
—
0.224
0.265
0.281
0.293
Aluminum oxide
4181
247.8
0.182
20.8
128
76.8
31.7
15.3
9.3
6
4.5
polycrystalline
0.244
0.265
0.281
0.293
Beryilium oxide
4905
187.3
0.246
157.2
947.3
113.2
64.2
40.4
27.2
0.322
0.40
0.44
0.459
Boron
4631
156
0.264
16
107.5
109.8
30.3
10.8
6.5
4.6
3.6
0.355
0.445
0.509
0.561
Boron fiber epoxy
1062
130
(30% vol.) composite
k, || to fibers
1.3
1.2
1.3
1.31
k,  to fibers
0.34
0.21
0.28
0.34
cp
0.268
0.086
0.18
0.34
Carbon
2700
121.7
—
0.92
—
0.38
0.68
1.09
1.26
1.36
1.46
Amorphous Diamond,
type lla
—
219
0.121
1329
—
5778
2311.2
889.8
insulator
0.005
0.046
0.203
Graphite, pyrolytic
4091
138
k, || to layers
1126.7
2871.6
1866.3
803.2
515.4
385.4
308.5
k,  to layers
3.3
9.7
5.3
2.4
1.5
1.16
0.92
cp
0.169
0.32
0.098
0.236
0.335
0.394
0.428
Graphite fiber epoxy
810
87.4
(25% vol.) composite
k, heat flow || to fibers
6.4
3.3
5.0
7.5
k, heat flow  to fibers
0.5
5
0.4
0.63
cp
0.223
0.08
0.153
0.29
Pyroceram, Corning 9606
2921
162.3
0.193
2.3
20.3
3.0
2.3
2.1
1.9
1.7
1.7
Silicon carbide,
5580
197.3
0.161
283.1
2475.7
—
—
—
50.3
0.210
0.25
0.27
0.285
Silicon dioxide,
crystalline (quartz)
3389
165.4
k, || to c-axis
6
22.5
9.5
4.4
2.9
2.4
k,  to c-axis
3.6
12.0
5.9
2.7
2
1.8
cp
0.177
0.211
0.256
0.298
Silicon dioxide,
3389
138.6
0.177
0.79
9
0.4
0.65
0.87
1.01
1.25
1.65
polycrystalline (fused silica)
—
—
0.216
0.248
0.264
0.276
Silicon nitride
3911
150
0.165
9.2
104
—
—
8.0
6.5
5.7
5.0
—
0.138
0.185
0.223
0.253
0.275
Sulfur
706
130
0.169
0.1
1.51
0.095
0.1
0.962
0.144
Thorium dioxide
6431
568.7
0.561
7.5
65.7
5.9
3.8
2.7
2.12
0.609
0.654
0.680
0.704
Titanium dioxide,
3840
259.5
0.170
4.9
30.1
4.0
2.9
2.3
2
polycrystalline
0.192
0.210
0.217
0.222

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
849
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
I N D E X
A
Absolute entropy, 311
Absolute gas temperature scale, 30
Absolute pressure, 33–34
Absolute temperatures, 276, 277
Absorptivity (a), 384, 668–670
Acceleration of a body, work by, 74–75
Acid rain, 94–95
Adiabatic process, 67, 272–273, 334–341
efficiency, 334–341
energy transfer by, 67
reversible compression, 273
reversible expansion, 272
steady-flow devices, efficiency of,
334–341
Adiabatic fin tip, 433
Air, properties of, 796–800, 839–841
Air conditioners, 262
Ampere (A), unit of, 6
Annual fuel utilization (AFUE), 85–86
Annulus, turbulent flow in an, 597
Approach velocity, 537
Approximate analysis of ideal gas, 319–320,
322
Aspect ratio of enclosures, 631–632
Average (mean) temperature, 573–574
Average (mean) velocity, 201, 573–574
B
Baffles, shell-and-pass heat exchangers, 715
Bar (bar), unit of, 33
Barometer, pressure measurement using,
37–39
Beattie-Bridgeman equation of state, 143,
144
Benedict-Webb-Rubin equation of state, 143,
144
Bessel functions (modified) for fin efficiency,
436
Biot number (Bi), 474–475, 480–481
Blackbody radiation, 384, 657–663
emissive power, 657–658
functions, 661–663
Planck’s law, 658
spectral emissive power, 658
Stefan–Boltzmann law, 384, 657,
660–661
Wein’s displacement law, 659
Boltzmann constant, 311
Boundaries, 22, 72, 158–165, 479–499
movement of for mechanical work, 72
semi-infinite solids, 497–499
system, 22
work, 158–165
Boundary layers, 527–528, 532–536,
541–542, 575–578
buffer, 536
convection and, 527–528
entrance region, 575
external forced convection and, 532–536,
541–542
friction coefficient for, 534, 541–542
hydrodynamic entrance region, 575
internal forced convection and, 575–578
irrotational (core) flow region, 575
Newtonian fluids and, 533
overlap, 536
Prandtl number for, 535
surface shear stress, 533
thermal, 534–535, 575–577
turbulent, 536
velocity, 527–528, 532–534, 575
viscosity, 527, 533–534
viscous sublayer, 536
Bourdon tube, pressure measurement using,
41–42
British thermal unit (Btu), 9
Buffer layer, 536
Buoyancy force, 612–614, 627–628 
C
Caloric theory, 67–68
Calorie (cal), unit of, 9
Candela (cd), unit of, 6
Capacity ratio (c) for heat exchangers, 740,
742–743
Carnot cycle, 271–273, 277–283
absolute temperatures of, 277
coefficient of performance (COP),
281–282
heat engine, 272, 277–281
heat pump, 281–283
refrigerator, 281–283
reversed, 273
reversible processes of, 272–273
Carnot principles, 273–275
Celsius scale (C), 29–31
Centigrade scale, see Celsius scale
Characteristic equation (eigenfunction), 482
Characteristic length for lumped system
analysis, 474
Characteristic values (eigenvalue), 482
Chemical energy, 61
Chemical equilibrium, 26
Classical thermodynamics, 4
Clausius inequality, 296–297
Clausius statement, 264
Clean Air Act, 93, 94
Closed systems, 22, 157–196, 345
energy analysis of, 157–196
energy balance for, 165–170
enthalpy (h), 172–184
entropy (S) balance of, 345
incompressible substances, 181–184
internal energy (u), 172–184
moving boundary work, 158–165
specific heats, 170–184
Coefficient of performance (COP), 260–262,
281–282
Colebrook equation, 595, 596
Combined heat transfer coefficient, 385, 404
Combustion efficiency, 85
Compact heat exchanger, 714–715
Complementary error function, 496–497
Compressed (subcooled) liquid, 112,
118–119, 131–132, 780, 824
phase-change processes of, 112, 118–119,
131–132
property diagrams, region of, 118–119
property tables for, 131–132
tables for, 780, 824
Compressibility (Z) factor, 137–142
Compressibility chart, 140–142, 808
Compressible flow, 530
Compressive force, pressure as a, 35
Compressors, 216–218, 330–334, 337–339
entropy (S) and, 330–334
intercooling for, 331–332
isentropic efficiency of, 337–339
multistage compression with 
intercooling, 331–332
steady flow and, 216–218, 330–334
work, minimization by entropy, 330–334
Conduction, 68, 374–381, 401–470, 471–524
energy transfer by, 68
Fourier’s law of, 375
heat capacity, 379
heat transfer (Q) by, 374–381
steady heat, 401–470
temperature gradient for, 375
thermal conductivity and, 374–379
thermal diffusivity, 379–381
thermal resistance, 403–407, 412–419
transient heat, 471–524
Conservation of energy principle, see First
law of thermodynamics
Conservation of mass, 200–206
average velocity, 201
incompressible flow and, 204
847

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
850
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
mass balance, 202–204
Conservation of mass—Cont.
mass flow rate, 200–201
principle, 202–203
steady-flow processes and, 203–204
volume flow rate, 201, 204
Constant pressure and volume, 170–172,
174–175, 181–182
ideal gases, 174–175
liquids, 181–182
solids, 181–182
specific heat at, 170–171, 174–175,
181–182
Contact of two semi-infinite solid, 499–502
Continuum, 24
Control volumes, 22–23, 60, 199–250,
345–346
conservation of mass, 200–206
energy analysis of, 199–250
entropy (S) balance of, 345–346
flow work, 206–209
flowing fluids, 206–232
mass balance for, 202–204, 210, 226–227
open systems as, 22–23
steady flow, 203–204, 210–226
time rate of change for, 60
unsteady flow, 226–232
Convection, 68, 382–383, 433–434, 525–654
boundary layers, 527–528, 532–535
energy transfer by, 68
external forced, 525–570
fin tip, from, 433–434
fluid flows, classification of for, 529–532,
535–537
fluid motion and, 382–383
forced, 382, 525–610
heat transfer coefficient, 527, 542–544,
553–555
internal forced, 571–610
natural (free), 382, 611–654
Newton’s law of cooling, 382, 526–527
no-slip condition, 527–528
Nusselt number for, 528–529, 554–555
physical mechanisms of, 526–529
Prandtl number for, 535
Reynolds number for, 536–537
Cooking appliances, efficiency of, 86–88
Corrected length, finned surfaces, 433–434
Correction factor (F) for heat exchangers,
729–730
Counter-flow heat exchanger, 714, 728,
740–741
Critical point, 117–118, 766, 810
Critical radius of insulation, 426–429
Critical Reynolds number, 536
Cross-flow heat exchanger, 715, 729–730,
740–741
Cross-strings method for view factors,
683–685
Current, electrical power and, 71
Cycle of a system, 27, 80, 165
Cylinders, 420–426, 478–494, 549–558,
619–622, 632–633
concentric enclosures, 632–633
external forced convection over, 549–570
flow across, 549–558
heat transfer coefficient of, 553–555
Heisler charts for, 485–490
horizontal, 621–622
multilayer, 422–426
natural convection and, 619–622, 632–633
Nusselt numbers for, 554–555, 619
one-term approximation of, 484–485,
489–490
steady heat conduction in, 420–426
surface roughness, effect of on, 551–553
transient heat conduction in, 478–494
vertical, 620
D
Darcy friction factor for, 585–586
Density (r), 24–25
Depth, variation of pressure with, 35–37
Diffuse reflection, 669
Diffusers, steady flow and, 213–216
Dimensional homogeneity, 9–10
Dimensions, 6–11
homogeneity of, 9–10
primary, 6–9
secondary, 6, 10–11
SI units and, 6–7
units and, 6–7
unity conversion ratios, 10–11
Direction, sign convention for, 69
Double-pipe heat exchanger, 714, 740
Drag, 527, 537–540
coefficient, 538
film temperature, 540
heat transfer and, 540
lift, 538 
pressure, 538
separated region, 539
skin friction, 538–539
surface, 527
velocity and, 537, 538
wake, 539
Ducts, steady flow and, 224–226
Dynamic-type regenerative heat 
exchanger, 717
Dynamic viscosity, 533–534
E
Eddies in turbulent flow, 57
Effective thermal conductivity of enclosures,
630–631
Effectiveness, 436–439, 724, 735–745
effectiveness-NTU method, 724, 735–745
finned surfaces, 436–439
heat exchangers, 724, 735–745
heat transfer (e), 736
Effectiveness-NTU method, 724, 735–745
Efficiency, 84–92, 255–259, 269, 277–278,
334–341, 434–436
adiabatic, 334–341
annual fuel utilization (AFUE), 85–86
Carnot, 277–278
combustion, 85
compressors, 337–339
cooking appliances, 86–88
electrical devices, 88–92
energy conversion and, 84–92
environmental impact from, 87
finned surfaces, 434–436
fuel, heating value of, 85
generator, 86, 89–90
heat engines, 255–259, 277–278
heat transfer, saving output of,
257–259
heating value, 85
hot water heater, example of, 84–85
isentropic, 334–341
Kelvin–Planck statement, 259
lighting efficacy, 86
mechanical devices, 88–92
mechanical, 89
modified Bessel functions for, 436
motor, 89–90
nozzles, 339–341
overall (combined), 86, 90
pump, 89, 337–339
second-law, 269
steady-flow devices, of, 334–341
thermal, 255–259, 277–278
turbine, 89, 335–336
useful pumping power, 89
Elastic solid bars, work on, 73–74
Electric polarization work, 76
Electrical work, 71, 76, 88–92
Electromagnetic spectrum, 655–656
Electromagnetic waves and radiation,
383–384, 654–655
Emissivity (e), 384–385, 664–668, 805
blackbody power, 657–658
blackbody spectral power, 658
spectral hemispherical, 664
surfaces of common materials, 665–667,
805
total hemispherical, 664–665
Enclosures, 629–638, 691–700
aspect ratio of, 631–632
combined natural convection and
radiation, 633–634
concentric cylinders as, 632–633
concentric spheres as, 633
effective thermal conductivity of,
630–631
horizontal rectangular, 631
inclined rectangular, 631–632
848
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
851
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
natural convection inside, 629–638
radiation heat transfer in, 691–700
three-surface, 693–700
two-surface, 691–693
vertical rectangular, 632
Energy, 3–5, 57–108, 252–294. See also
Heat transfer; Work
analysis, 76–92
balance, 77–78, 80
change of a system, 78–79
chemical, 61
conservation of, 58, 76–77
conversion, 84–97
efficiency and, 84–92
environment and, 92–97
first law of thermodynamics and, 4,
76–84
flow (work), 64–65
forms of, 59–65
heat transfer, 5, 62, 66–69, 79
internal (U), 59, 61–62
introduction to, 58–59
kinetic, (KE), 59–60
latent, 61
mass flow (m) rate, 60, 79
mechanical, 64–65
nuclear, 61–64
potential (PE), 60
quality of, 252–253, 279–281
reservoirs, 253
second law of thermodynamics and, 4, 5,
251–294
sensible, 61
sink, 253
source, 253
stationary systems, 60, 78–79
thermal, 62, 66, 253
thermodynamic systems and, 59–60,
78–79
thermodynamics as, 3–4, 57–108
time rate of change for, 60
total (E), 59, 78
transfer, 62, 68–76
transfer, 66–76, 79–80, 342–343
work (W), transfer, 62, 68–76, 79
Energy analysis, 76–92, 157–196, 199–250
closed systems, 157–196
conservation of mass and, 200–206
control volumes, 199–250
cycle, work output during, 80, 165
energy balance, 77–78, 80, 165–170
enthalpy (h), 172–180, 181–184
first law of thermodynamics for, 76–84
flow work, 206–209
incompressible substances, 181–184, 204
internal energy (u), 172–184
mechanisms of energy transfer, 69,
79–80
mass balance, 202–204, 210, 226–227
moving boundary work, 158–165
per unit mass, 80, 165
polytropic process, 163–165
quasi-equilibrium process, 158–162
rate form of heat transfer, 80, 165
specific heats, 170–184
steady flow, of, 203–204, 210–226
unsteady flow, of, 226–232
Energy balance, 77–78, 80, 165–170
closed systems, 165–170
cycle, work output during, 80, 165
energy transfer and, 77–78, 80
first law of thermodynamics and, 77–78,
80
net heat input, 166
net work output, 166
per unit mass, 80, 165
rate form of energy transfer, 80, 165
Energy conversion, 84–97
Energy efficiency rating (EER), 262
Energy transfer, 66–76, 77–80, 342–343
energy balance and, 77–78, 80
heat (Q), 5, 66–69, 79
mass flow (m), 79
mechanisms of, 79–80
rate of heat transfer for, 67, 80
work (W), 62, 68–76, 79
Engineering equation solver (EES), 14–15
English system of units, 6–9
dimensional constant for, 8
energy and, 9
force and, 7–9
fundamental dimensions of, 7–9
use of, 6
Enthalpy (h), 124–125, 172–184
closed systems, 172–184
energy analysis and, 172–184
ideal gases, of, 172–180
liquids, changes of, 181–184
property of, 124–125
solids, changes of, 181–184
vaporization, of, 125
Entrance region, 575–578, 590, 596
boundary layer, 575
entry lengths, 576, 577–578
fully developed, 575–576
hydrodynamic, 575
irrotational (core) flow region, 575
laminar flow development in, 590
Nusselt numbers for, 577–578, 590
thermal, 575–577
turbulent flow development in, 596
velocity boundary layer, 575
Entropy (S) and, 124, 252, 295–369
absolute, 311
balance, 341–352
Boltzmann constant, 311
Clausius inequality, 296–297
compressor work, minimization by,
330–334
daily life and, 312–314
generation, 300, 302–303, 312–314,
342–348
ideal gases, change of, 318–326
incompressible substances, change of,
315–318
increase of principle, 299–303
internally reversible process, as a,
298–299
isentropic efficiencies of steady-flow
devices by, 334–341
isentropic processes and, 307–308,
322–326
isothermal heat transfer change from,
298–299
liquids, change of, 315–318
molecular disorder of, 310–312
property diagrams involving, 308–310
property tables and, 124 
pure substances, change of, 303–307
quality of energy from, 312
reversible process, as a, 296–299,
326–330
second law of thermodynamics and, 252,
296–299
solids, change of, 315–318
steady-flow work and, 326–330
T ds relations and, 314–315
third law of thermodynamics and, 311
total, 298
transfer, mechanisms of, 342–348
Entropy balance, 341–352
closed systems, 345
control volumes, 345–346
entropy generation and, 344–352
entropy transfer, mechanisms of, 342–348
heat transfer and, 342–343
mass flow and, 343
steady-flow process, for a, 346–348
systems, entropy change of, 342
Environment, 87, 92–97
acid rain, 94–95
Clean Air Act, 93–94
energy conversion and, 92–97
energy efficiency, impact on, 87
global warming (climate change), 95–97
greenhouse effect, 95–97
ozone, 93–94
pollution and, 92–93
smog, 93–94
Equations of state, 135–137, 142–146
Beattie-Bridgeman, 143–144
Benedict-Webb-Rubin, 143–144
ideal-gas, 135–137
van der Waals, 142–143
virial, 143–145
Equilibrium, 25–28
chemical, 26
mechanical, 26
phase, 26
processes and, 26–28
Index
|
849

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
852
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Equilibrium—Cont.
state of systems and, 25–26
thermal, 25–26
Error function, 496
Exact analysis of ideal gas, 320–321, 323
Exact differentials, 69
Extensive properties, 23–24
External flow, 529
External forced convection, 525–570
cylinders, flow across, 549–558
drag in, 537–540
flat plates and, 540–549
friction coefficient for, 534, 541–542
friction drag, 538–539
heat transfer coefficient for, 542–544,
553–555
laminar flows, 535–537
Nusselt number for, 528–529, 554–555
parallel flow, 540–549
pressure drag, 538–554
Reynolds number for, 536–537
spheres, flow across, 549–558
surface roughness, effect of on, 551–553
turbulent flows, 535–537
uniform heat flux, 545
velocity in, 537
F
Fahrenheit scale (F), 29, 31
Film temperature, 540
Finned surfaces, 429–443, 625–629
adiabatic (negligible heat loss) fin tip, 433
Bessel functions (modified) for, 436
convection from fin tip, 433–434
cooling by natural convection, 625–626
corrected length of, 433–434
effectiveness of, 436–439
efficiency of, 434–436
equations for, 430–434
heat transfer from, 429–443
infinitely long, 432–433
length of fins for, 439–441
mass flow rate between spaces of,
627–628
natural convection and, 625–629
steady heat conduction, for, 429–443
First law of thermodynamics, 4, 5, 58,
76–84
conservation of energy, 58, 76–77
energy analysis using, 76–84
energy balance and, 77–78, 80
energy change of a system, 78–79
energy transfer and, 76–84
heat transfer (Q) and, 5, 79
mass flow (m) and, 79
mechanisms of energy transfer, 79–80
thermodynamics and, 4
total energy (E), 76–77
work (W) and, 79
Flow work, 64–65, 206–209
energy as, 64–65, 207
flowing fluids and, 206–209
mass, energy transport by, 208–209
total energy (E) and, 207–208
Flowing fluids, 206–232, 326–330, 334–340.
See also Fluid flow;
Incompressible flow; Steady flow; 
Unsteady flow
flow work and, 206–232
total energy (E) of, 207–208
mass, energy transport by, 208–209
steady flow and, 210–226
Fluid flow, 529–532, 535–537, 540–558. See
also Flowing Fluids;
Incompressible flow; Steady flow;
Unsteady flow
classification of, 529–532, 535–537
compressible, 530
convection and, 529–532, 535–537,
540–558
cylinders and spheres, across, 549–558
external, 529
flat plates, over, 540–549
forced, 530
incompressible, 530
internal, 529
inviscid, 529
laminar, 530, 535–537
natural (unforced), 530
one-, two-, and three-dimensional,
531–532
open-channel, 529
parallel, 540–549
periodic, 531
Reynolds number for, 536–537
steady, 531
surface roughness, effect of on, 551–553
transient, 531
transition from laminar to turbulent,
535–537
transitional, 530
turbulent, 530, 535–537
uniform, 531
unsteady, 531
viscous, 529
Foot (ft), unit of, 7
Force, 6, 8–9, 35, 72–76, 612–614, 627–628
buoyancy, 612–614, 627–628
compressive, pressure as a, 35
friction, 614
gravity (g), 8–9
mechanical work and, 72–75
nonmechanical work and, 75–76
units of, 6, 8–9
volume expansion coefficient, 613–614
weight (W) as, 8
Forced convection, 382, 525–610
external, 525–570
internal, 571–610
Forced flow, 530
Fouling factor, 719–721
Fourier number (Fo), 480–481, 490
Fourier’s law of heat conduction, 375
Free convection, see Natural convection
Free-stream velocity, 537
Friction, 269–270, 534, 537–539, 541–542,
614
coefficient, 534, 541–542
drag, 538–539
force, 614
irreversible process of, 269–270
Fuel, heating value of, 85
Fusion, latent heat of, 114
G
Gage pressure, 33–34
Gas constant (R), 135, 766, 810
Gases, 111, 135–142, 174, 270, 766,
799–800, 810, 842–843. See also
Ideal gas
compressibility (Z) factor, 137–142
constant (R), 135, 766, 810
expansion, irreversible process of
unrestrained, 270
ideal gas, 135–137
molar mass (M), 135–136, 766, 810
molecular phase of, 111
monatomic, 174
tables for, 766, 799–800, 810, 842–843
universal constant, 135–136
General Conference on Weights and
Measures (CGPM), 6–7,
276–277
Generator efficiency, 86, 89–90
Global warming (climate change), 95–97
Grashof number, 617–618
Gravity force (g), 8–9
Greenhouse effect, 95–97, 671
H
h-s diagram, 308–309
Head loss, 586
Headers, shell-and-pass heat exchangers, 715
Heat, see Heat transfer; Thermal energy 
Heat capacity, 379, 725 
Heat engines, 254–259, 275–281
Carnot, 277–281
Kelvin–Planck statement, 259
quality of energy from, 279
thermal efficiency of, 255–259, 277–278
thermodynamic temperature scales and,
275–277
waste energy, 257–258
working fluid for, 254
Heat exchangers, 222–224, 713–763
analysis of, 724–726
baffles, 715
850
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
853
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
boilers as, 716, 726
capacity ratio (c) for, 740, 742–743
compact, 714–715
condensers as, 716, 726
correction factor (F) for, 729–730
counter-flow, 714, 728, 740–741
cross-flow, 715, 729–730, 740–741
double-pipe, 714, 740
effectiveness-NTU method, 724, 735–745
fouling factor for, 719–721
headers, 715
heat capacity rate, 725
heat transfer and, 713–763
heat transfer effectiveness (e), 736
log mean temperature difference (LMTD)
method, 724, 726–735
number of transfer units (NTU), 740–743
overall heat transfer coefficient for,
716–724
parallel-flow, 714, 741
plate and frame, 716
regenerative, 716
selection of, 746–749
shell-and-tube, 715–716, 729–730, 741
space radiators as, 716
steady flow and, 222–224
Heat flow, 66
Heat flux, 579–580, 587–588
Heat pumps, 259–265, 281–283
air conditioners, 262
air-source, 262
Carnot, 281–282
Clausius statement, 264
coefficient of performance (COP),
261–262, 281–282
energy efficiency rating (EER), 262
refrigerators and, 259–265, 281–283
Heat reservoirs, 253
Heat transfer (Q), 1, 2, 5–6, 62, 66–69,
76–84, 257–259, 270, 342–343,
371–763. See also Energy; Heat
Exchangers; Thermal sciences
adiabatic process and no, 67
caloric theory, 67–68
conduction, 68, 374–381, 401–524
convection, 68, 382–383, 525–654
energy and, 5, 62, 66–68
energy transfer mechanisms, as, 69, 79
entropy (S) balance and, 342–343
exchangers for, 222–224, 713–763
finned surfaces for, 429–443
first law of thermodynamics and, 5,
76–84
introduction to, 374
irreversible process of, 270
kinetic theory, 67
lumped systems, in, 475–478
mechanisms of, 373–400, 386–391
per unit mass, 67, 80
radiation, 68, 383–386, 653–712
rate of, 67, 80
saving output of for efficiency, 257–259
second law of thermodynamics and, 5
shape factor (S) for conduction, 444–449
sign convention for, 69
simultaneous mechanisms of, 386–391
temperature difference and, 5–6
temperature gradient for, 6, 375
thermal resistance, 403–407, 412–419
thermal science, as a, 1–2, 5–6
Heat transfer coefficients, 385, 404, 406, 527,
542–544, 553–555, 716–724
combined, 385, 404
convection, 527, 542–544, 553–555
flow over cylinders and spheres, 553–555
fouling factor and, 719–721
heat exchangers, for, 716–724
overall, 406, 716–724
parallel flow over a flat plate, 542–544
radiation, 404
Heat transfer effectiveness (e), 736
Heating value, 85
Heisler charts, 485–489
Higher heating value (HHV), 85
Hot water heater, efficiency example of,
84–85
Hydraulic diameter, 574
Hydrodynamic entrance region, 575
I
Ice point, 29, 31
Ideal gas, 135–137, 172–180, 318–326,
767–769, 796, 808, 811–813, 839
approximate analysis of, 319–320, 322
compressibility (Z) factor, 137–142
compressibility chart for, 140–142, 808
corresponding states, principle of, 139
energy analysis of closed systems of,
172–180
enthalpy (h) of, 172–180
entropy (S) change of, 318–326
equation of state, 135–137
exact analysis of, 320–321, 323
gas constant (R), 135
internal energy (u) of, 172–180
isentropic properties of, 322–326
molar mass (M), 135–136
monatomic gases as, 174
pseudo-reduced specific volume, 141
reduced pressure, 139–140
reduces temperature, 139–140
specific heats of, 172–180, 319–323,
767–769, 811–813
tables for, 767–769, 796, 808, 811–813,
839
universal gas constant, 135–136
water vapor as a, 137
Incompressible flow, 530
Incompressible substances, 181–184, 204,
315–318
energy analysis of, 181–184, 204
entropy (S) change of, 315–318
steady flow of, 204
volume flow rate for, 204
Increase of entropy principle, 299–303
Independent properties, 26
Inexact differentials, 69
Infrared region of radiation, 656
Insulation, 413–414, 426–429, 448–449
critical radius of, 426–429
steady heat conduction and, 448–449
thermal resistance and, 413–414
Intensive properties, 23–24
Intercooling, multistage compression with,
331–332
Internal energy (U), 59, 61–62, 172–184
binding forces of, 61
energy analysis of closed systems,
172–184
ideal gases, of, 172–180
kinetic energy and, 61–62
liquids, changes of, 181–184
microscopic forms of, 59, 61–62
molecular level of, 61
solids, changes of, 181–184
Internal flow, 529
Internal forced convection, 571–610
average (mean) temperature of,
573–574
average (mean) velocity of, 573–574
constant surface heat flux, 579–580,
587–588
constant surface temperature, 580–582,
588–589
entrance region, 575–578, 590, 596
introduction to, 572–610
laminar flow, 574, 583–593
Nusselt numbers for, 577–578, 587,
589–590, 593–595
thermal analysis of, 578–583
tubes, flow in, 574, 583–602
turbulent flow, 574, 593–602
International System (SI) of units, 6–9
energy and, 9
force and, 7–9
fundamental dimensions and, 6–7
prefixes for, 7
International Temperature Scale of 1990
(ITS-90), 31–33
Inviscid flow, 529
Irradiation (G), 668
Irreversible processes, 268–270
friction, 269–270
gas, unrestrained expansion of, 270
heat transfer, 270
irreversibilities of, 269
second law of thermodynamics and,
268–270
Index
|
851

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
854
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Irrotational (core) flow region, 533, 575
Isentropic processes, 307–308, 322–326,
334–341
constant specific heats and, 322
efficiency, 334–341
entropy and, 307–308, 322–326
ideal gases, 322–326
relative pressure and, 323
relative specific volume and, 323–324
steady-flow devices, efficiency of,
334–341
variable specific heats and, 323
Isobaric process, 27
Isochoric (isometric) process, 27
Isothermal process, 27, 272–273, 298–299
entropy, internally reversible change
from, 298–299
reversible compression, 273
reversible expansion, 272–273
temperature constant of, 27
J
Joule (J), unit of, 9
K
Kelvin (K) scale, 6, 29, 31, 276–277
Kelvin–Planck statement, 259, 264–265
Kilogram (k), unit of, 6–7
Kilogram-force (kgf), units of, 8, 33
Kilopascal (kPA), unit of, 33
Kinematic viscosity, 533
Kinetic energy (KE), 59–62
Kinetic theory, 67
Kirchoff’s law, 384, 670–671
L
Laminar flow, 530, 535–537, 574, 583–593
boundary layers of, 536
constant surface heat flux of, 587–588
constant surface temperature of, 588–589
entrance region, development of in, 590
external forced convection and, 535–537
internal forced convection and, 574,
583–593
noncircular tubes, in, 589
Nusselt number for, 587, 589–590
pressure drop, 585–587
Reynolds number, 536–537
temperature profile for, 587
transition to turbulent, 535–537
tubes, in, 574, 583–593
turbulent versus, 530
Latent energy, 61
Latent heat, 114
Lift, 538 
Lighting efficacy, 86
Liquid film, work by stretching, 74
Liquid–vapor saturation, 112–114, 118–119,
127–130
curve, 114
mixture region, 118–119
property diagrams of, 118–119
property tables of, 127–130
pure substances, property of, 112–113
quality (x) of, 127
Liquids, 111–116, 118–119, 125–127,
131–132, 181–184, 315–318,
770–771, 794–795, 814–815,
837–838. See also Liquid–vapor
saturation
compressed (subcooled), 112, 118–119,
131–132
energy analysis of closed systems of,
181–184
enthalpy (h) changes of, 181–184
entropy (S) change of, 315–318
incompressible substances, as, 181–184
internal energy changes of, 181–184
molecular phase of, 111
package icing, 116
phase-change processes of, 111–116
property diagram lines and regions of,
118–119
property tables of, 125–127, 131–132
saturated, 112, 118–119, 125–127
saturation pressure of, 113–116
saturation temperature of, 113–116
specific heats of, 181–184
tables for, 770–771, 794–795, 814–815,
837–838
vacuum cooling, 115–116
vacuum freezing, 116
Log mean temperature difference (LMTD)
method, 724, 726–735
Logarithmic mean temperature difference,
582
Lower heating value (LHV), 85
Lumped system analysis, 472–478
Biot number (Bi) for, 474–475
characteristic length for, 474
criteria for, 473–475
heat transfer and, 475–478
time constant for, 473
transient heat conduction and, 472–478
M
Mach-Zehnder interferometer, 614–615
Macroscopic forms of energy, 59, 62
Magnetic work, 76 
Magnitude, sign convention for, 69
Manometer, pressure measurement using,
39–41
Mass (m), 8, 60, 79, 200–206, 208–210,
226–227, 343, 627–628
balance, 202–204, 210, 226–227
conservation of, 200–206
entropy (S) balance and, 343
flow, 60, 79, 200–201, 343, 627–628
flowing fluids, energy transport of by,
208–209
steady-flow and, 203–204, 210
unit of, 8
unsteady flow and, 226–227
Mass flow rate, 60, 79, 200–201, 627–628
conservation of mass and, 200–201
energy and, 60, 79
finned surfaces and, 627–628
plates, through space between, 627–628
Mechanical efficiency, 89
Mechanical energy, 64–65
Mechanical equilibrium, 26
Mechanical work, 72–75, 88–92
acceleration of a body, 74–75
boundary movement and, 72
efficiency of devices, 88–92
elastic, 73–74
energy transfer and, 72–75
force and, 72
liquid film, 74
shaft, 72–73, 88–89
solid bars, 73–74
spring, 73
stretching, 74
surface tension and, 74
Megapascal (Mpa), unit of, 33
Metals, properties of, 795, 801–804, 838,
844–846
Meter (m), unit of, 6–7
Metric, see International System (SI) of units
Metric Convention Treaty, 6
Microscopic forms of energy, 59, 61–62
Microwaves, 656
Mixing chambers, steady flow and, 220–221
Molar mass (M), 135–136, 766, 810
Mole (mol), unit of, 6
Molecules, 4, 24, 61–62, 110–111, 310–312
entropy (S), disorder of, 310–312
internal energy, levels of, 61–62
phases of pure substances, 110–111
thermodynamics and, 4, 24
Mollier diagram, 309, 783, 827
Monatomic gases, specific heats of, 174
Moody chart, 595–596, 807
Motion, equation of, 615–618
Motor efficiency, 89–90
Moving boundary work, 158–165
energy analysis of, 158–165
polytropic process, 163–165
quasi-equilibrium process, 158–162
Multidimensional systems, 502–510
N
Natural convection, 382, 611–654
buoyancy force, 612–614, 627–628
cooling by, 625–627
852
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
855
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
current, 612
cylinders and, 619, 620–622, 632–633
enclosures, inside, 629–638
equation of motion for, 615–618
friction force, 614
Grashof number for, 617–618
heat transfer, 612
Mach-Zehnder interferometer, 614–615
mass flow rate, 627–628
Nusselt number for, 618–619
physical mechanisms of, 612–615
plates and, 620–621, 627–628
printed circuit boards (PCBs) and,
625–629
radiation combined with in enclosures,
633–634
Rayleigh number for, 618
spheres and, 621–622, 633
surfaces, over, 618–629
volume expansion coefficient, 613–614
Natural (unforced) flow, 530
Net heat input, 166
Net radiation heat transfer, 688–690
Net work output, 166
Newton (N), unit of, 6, 8
Newtonian fluids, 533
Newton’s law of cooling, 382, 526–527
Newton’s second law, 8
Noncircular tubes, fluid flow in, 589, 596
Nondimensionalized one-dimensional
transient heat conduction problem,
479–494
Nonmechanical work, 75–76
Normal stress, 33
No-slip condition, 527–528
Nozzles, 89, 213–216, 339–341
efficiency, 89
isentropic efficiency of, 339–341
steady flow and, 213–216
Nuclear energy, 61–64
Number of transfer units (NTU), 740–743
Nusselt numbers, 528–529, 554–555,
577–578, 587, 589, 590, 618–619
convection and, 528–529
cylinders, for flow in, 554–555
entrance region entry lengths, for,
577–578, 590
external forced convection, 554–555
internal forced convection, 577–578, 587,
589, 590
laminar flow, for, 587–589, 590
natural convection, 618–619
surfaces, for, 618–619
O
One-, two-, and three-dimensional flow,
531–532
One-term approximation, 484–485, 489–490
Open-channel flow, 529
Open system, see Control volumes
Overall (combined) efficiency, 86, 90
Overall heat transfer coefficient, 406,
716–724
Overlap layer, 536
Ozone, 93–94
P
P-T diagram, 122
P-v diagram, 118–122
P-v-T surface diagram, 123–125
Package icing, 116
Parallel flow, external forced convection and,
540–549
Parallel-flow heat exchanger, 714, 741
Pascal (Pa), unit of, 33
Pascal’s law, 37
Path functions, 69
Path of the process, 26–27
Per unit mass of heat transfer, 67, 80, 165
Performance, see Efficiency
Periodic flow, 531
Perpetual-motion machines, 265–267
first kind (PMM1), 265–266
history of patents of, 267
second kind (PMM2), 265–267
Phase diagram, 122
Phase equilibrium, 26
Phase-change processes, 111–135
compressed (subcooled) liquid, 112,
118–119, 131–132
consequences of saturation temperature
and pressure dependence, 115–116
latent heat, 114
liquid–vapor saturation, 112–114,
118–119, 127–130
liquids, 111–116, 118–119, 125–127,
131–132
package icing, 116
pressure, 113–116
property diagrams for, 116–124
property tables for, 124–135
saturation, 112–116, 118–119, 125–130
superheated vapor, 112–113, 118–119,
130–131
temperature, 113–116
vacuum cooling, 115–116
vacuum freezing, 116
vapor, 112–113, 118–119, 121, 125–127,
130–131
Photons (quanta), 383, 655
Piezoelectric transducers, pressure
measurement using, 43
Pipes, steady flow and, 224–226. See also
Tubes
Planck’s law, 658
Plane walls, 402–411, 478–494
Heisler charts for, 485–490
multilayer, 407–411
one-term approximation of, 484–485,
489–490
steady heat conduction in, 402–411
thermal resistance, 403–407
transient heat conduction in, 478–494
Plate and frame heat exchanger, 716
Plates, 540–549, 620–621, 625–629
external forced convection over,
540–549
finned surfaces and, 625–629
flat, 540–549
friction coefficient for, 541–542
heat transfer coefficient for, 542–544
horizontal, 621
inclined, 620–621
mass flow rate through space between,
627–628
natural convection over, 620–621,
625–629
parallel flow over, 540–549
unheated starting length, 544–545
uniform heat flux, 545
vertical, 620
Point functions, 69
Poiseuille’s law, 586–587
Pollution and the environment, 92–93
Polytropic process, 163–165
Potential energy (PE), 60
Pound-force (lbf), units of, 8, 33
Pound-mass (lbm), unit of, 7
Power, work and, 68, 71
Prandtl number, 535
Pressure (P), 33–45, 113–116, 139–140,
170–172, 174–175, 181–182,
323–324, 538, 585–587, 774–775,
786, 798–799, 818–819, 829,
841–842
absolute, 33–34
atmospheric, 798–799, 841–842
barometer for, 37–39
compressibility (Z) factor and, 139–140
compressive force, as a, 35
constant, 170–172, 174–175, 181–182
Darcy friction factor for, 585–586
depth, variation of with, 35–37
drag, 538
drop, 585–587
gage, 33–34
head, 35
head loss, 586
isentropic processes of ideal gases and,
323–324
laminar flow in tubes and, 585–586
loss, 585
manometer for, 39–41
measurement devices for, 37–45
normal stress and, 33
Pascal’s law, 37
point, at a, 35
Poiseuille’s law, 586–587
Index
|
853

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
856
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Pressure (P)—Cont.
reduced, 139–140
relative, 323–324
saturation, 113–116
specific heat and, 170–172, 174–175,
181–182
tables for, 774–775, 786, 798–799,
818–819, 829, 841–842
transducers, 42–45
units of, 33, 37–38
vacuum, 34
Printed circuit boards (PCBs), 625–629
cooling by natural convection,
626–627
mass flow rate between spaces of,
627–628
natural convection and, 625–629
Problem solving technique for thermal
sciences, 1, 11–16
Processes, 26–28, 67, 158–162, 203–204,
268–273, 298–299, 307–308. 
See also Phase-change
processes
adiabatic, 67, 272–273
Carnot cycles and, 272–273
equilibrium changes and, 26–28
irreversible, 268–270
isentropic, 307–308
isobaric, 27
isochoric (isometric), 27
isothermal, 27, 272–273
moving boundary work, for analysis of,
158–165
path of, 26–27
polytropic process, 163–165
quasi-static (quasi-equilibrium), 27,
158–162
reversible processes, 268–269, 270–273,
298–299
steady-flow, 28, 203–204
thermodynamic systems, of, 26–28
Product solution method, 503–505
Properties of systems, 23–26
extensive, 23–24
independent, 26
intensive, 23–24
specific, 24, 25
state postulate for, 26
Property diagrams, 116–124, 308–310
compressed liquid region, 118–119
critical point, 117–118
entropy (S), involving, 308–310
h-s, 308–309
Mollier, 309
P-T, 122
P-v, 118–122
P-v-T surface, 123–125
saturated liquid line, 118
saturated liquid–vapor region, 118
saturated vapor line, 118
solid phases, including, 119–122 
sublimation, 122
superheated vapor region, 118
triple line, 121
triple point, 121–122
T-S, 308–310
T-v, 116–118, 120–122
wet region, 118
Property tables, 124–135
compressed liquid, 131–132
enthalpy (h), 124–125
entropy (s), 124
liquid–vapor mixture, saturated,
127–130
liquids, saturated, 125–127
quality (x) of saturation, 127
reference state and values for, 133–135
superheated vapor, 130–131
vapors, saturated, 125–127
Pseudo-reduced specific volume, 141
Pumps, 89, 337–339
Pure substances, 109–156, 303–307
compressed liquids, 112, 118–119,
131–132
compressibility (Z) factor, 137–142
enthalpy (h), 124–125
entropy (s), 124, 303–307
equations of state, 135–137, 142–146
gases, 111, 135–142
ideal-gas equation of state, 135–137
liquids, 111–116, 118–119, 125–127,
131–132
liquid–vapor mixture, saturation of,
112–114, 118–119, 127–130
molecules and, 110–111
phase-change processes, 111–135
phases of, 110–111
properties of, 109–156
property diagrams for, 116–124
property tables for, 124–135
reference state and values for, 133–135
saturation of, 112–116, 118–119,
125–130
solids, 110–111, 119–122
superheated vapor, 112–113, 118–119,
130–131
vapor, 112–113, 118–119, 121, 125–127,
130–131
Q
Quality (x) of saturation, 127
Quality of energy, 252–253, 279–281, 312
Carnot cycle and, 279
entropy and, 312
quantity versus, 280–281
second law of thermodynamics and,
252–253, 279–281
Quasi-static (quasi-equilibrium) process, 27,
158–162
R
Radiation, 68, 383–386, 633–634, 653–712
absorptivity (a), 384, 668–670
black surfaces, heat transfer of,
685–687
blackbody, 384, 657–663
combined heat transfer coefficient, 385
diffuse gray surfaces, heat transfer of,
687–700
electromagnetic spectrum, 655–656
electromagnetic waves and, 383–384,
654–655
emissivity (e), 384–385, 664–668
energy transfer by, 68
greenhouse effect and, 671
infrared region of, 656
introduction to, 654–655
irradiation (G), 668
Kirchoff’s law, 384, 670–671
light and, 655–656
microwaves, 656
natural convection combined with in
enclosures, 633–634
properties of, 663–671
reflectivity (r), 668–670
solar, 656
Stefan–Boltzmann law, 384, 657,
660–661
surface phenomenon, as a, 657
surfaces, heat transfer of, 683–700
thermal, 384, 655–657
transmissivity (t), 668–670
ultraviolet, 656
view factor for, 671–685
volumetric phenomenon, as a, 656
Radiosity, 688
Rankine scale (R), 29, 31
Rarified gas law theory, 24
Rate form of heat transfer, 67, 80, 165
Rayleigh number, 618
Reciprocity relation for view factors,
673–674
Reflectivity (r), 668–670
Refrigerants, 259, 784–789, 791, 828–832,
834
P-h diagram for, 789, 832
pressure tables for, 786, 829
saturated 134a, 784–786, 791, 828–829,
834
superheated 134a, 787–788, 830–831
temperature tables for, 784–785, 828
Refrigerators, 259–265, 281–283
air conditioners, 262
Carnot, 281–282
Clausius statement, 264
coefficient of performance (COP),
260–261, 281–282
energy efficiency rating (EER), 262
heat pumps and, 259–265, 281–283
854
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
857
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
refrigerant for, 259
vapor-compression cycle, 259–260
Regenerative heat exchanger, 716
Relative density, see Specific gravity (SG) 
Reversible processes, 268–273, 296–299,
326–330
adiabatic compression, 273
adiabatic expansion, 272
Carnot cycle, 272–273
efficiency and, 269
entropy (S) as, 296–299, 326–330
externally, 270–271
internally, 270–271, 298–299
isothermal compression, 272–273
isothermal expansion, 272
second law of thermodynamics and,
268–271
steady-flow work, 326–330
totally, 271
Reynolds number, 536–537
Roughness, see Surface roughness
S
Saturation, 112–116, 118–119, 125–130,
772–774, 781, 784–786, 790–793,
816–819, 825, 828–829, 833–836
consequences of temperature and pressure
dependence, 115–116
liquid, 112, 118–119, 125–127
liquid–vapor mixture, 112–114, 118–119,
127–130
pressure, 113–116
property diagram lines and regions of,
118–119
property tables of, 125–130
tables for, 772–774, 781, 784–786,
790–793, 816–819, 825, 828–829,
833–836
temperature, 113–116
vapor, 112–113, 118–119, 125–127
Second (s), unit of, 6, 7
Second law of thermodynamics, 4, 5,
251–294, 296–299
Carnot cycle, 271–273, 277–283
Carnot principles, 273–275
Clausius statement, 264–265
entropy (s) and, 252, 296–299
heat engines, 254–259, 277–281
heat pumps, 259–265, 281–283
heat transfer and, 5
introduction to, 252–253
irreversible processes, 268–270
Kelvin–Planck statement, 259,
264–265
perpetual-motion machines, 265–267
quality of energy and, 252–253, 279–281
refrigerators, 259–265, 281–283
reversible processes, 268–273
thermal energy reservoirs, 253
thermodynamic temperature scale,
275–277
thermodynamics and, 4
Semi-infinite solids, 494–502
boundary conditions for, 497–499
complementary error function for,
496–497
contact of two, 499–502
error function for, 496
similarity variable method for, 495–496
transient heat conduction in, 494–502
Sensible energy, 61
Separated region, 539
Separation of variables, method of,
481–482
Shaft work, 72–73, 88–89
Shape factor (S), conduction, 444–449
Shell-and-tube heat exchanger, 715–716,
729–730, 741
Si units, see International System (SI) of
units
Sign convention for energy transfer, 69
Significant digits, 15–16
Similarity variable method, 495–496
Simple compressible system, 26
Sink, thermal energy reservoirs and, 253
Skin friction drag, 538–539
Smog, 93–94
Software packages for engineering, 13–14
Solar radiation, 656
Solid bars, work on elastic, 73–74
Solids, 110–111, 119–122, 181–184,
315–318, 494–502, 770–771,
801–804, 814–815, 844–846
energy analysis of closed systems of,
181–184
enthalpy changes of, 181–184
entropy (S) change of, 315–318
incompressible substances, as, 181–184
internal energy changes of, 181–184
molecular phase of, 110–111
property diagrams including, 119–122
semi-infinite, 494–502
specific heats of, 181–184
sublimation, 122
tables for, 770–771, 801–804, 814–815,
844–846
transient heat conduction in, 494–502
Source, thermal energy reservoirs and, 253
Space resistance, 690
Specific density, see Specific weight (g)
Specific gravity (SG), 25
Specific heats, 170–184, 319–326, 767–769,
811–813
constant (approximate analysis) of ideal
gas, 319–320, 322
constant pressure, at, 170–172, 174–175,
181–182
constant volume, at, 170–171, 174–175,
181–182
energy analysis of closed systems,
170–184
entropy (S) change and, 319–326
ideal gases, of, 172–180, 319–326
isentropic processes of ideal gas and,
322–323
liquids, of, 181–184
monatomic gases, 174
solids, of, 181–184
tables for, 767–769, 811–813
variable (exact analysis) of ideal gas,
320–321, 323
zero-pressure, 173
Specific properties, 24
Specific volume (v), 24, 141, 323–324
Specific weight (g), 8, 25
Spectral hemispherical radiation properties,
664, 669
Specular reflection, 669
Spheres, 420–426, 478–494, 549–558,
621–622, 633
concentric enclosures, 633
external forced convection and, 549–570
flow across, 549–558
heat transfer coefficient of, 553–555
Heisler charts for, 485–490
multilayer, 422–426
natural convection and, 621–622, 633
one-term approximation of, 484–485,
489–490
steady heat conduction in, 420–426
surface roughness, effect of on, 551–553
transient heat conduction in, 478–494
Spring work, 73
Standard atmosphere (atm), unit of, 33,
37–38
State postulate, 26
States of systems, 25–26, 109–156. See also
Equations of states
chemical equilibrium, 26
compressibility factor (Z), 137–142
gases, measure of deviation of,
137–142
mechanical equilibrium, 26
phase equilibrium, 26
principle of corresponding, 139
pure substances and, 109–156
thermal equilibrium, 25–26
Static-type regenerative heat 
exchanger, 717
Stationary systems, 60, 78–79
Statistical thermodynamics, 4
Steady flow, 28, 203–204, 210–226,
326–341, 346–348, 531
Bernoulli equation for, 327
compressor work, minimization by
entropy, 330–334
compressors for, 216–218
convection and, 531
diffusers for, 213–216
Index
|
855

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
858
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Steady flow—Cont.
ducts for, 224–226
energy analysis of, 210–212
engineering devices for, 213–226
entropy (S) and, 326–341
entropy balance for, 346–348
heat exchangers for, 222–224
incompressible substances, 204
isentropic efficiencies of devices for,
334–341
mass balance for, 203–204, 210
mixing chambers for, 220–221
nozzles for, 213–216
pipes for, 224–226
power and, 212
process, 28, 203–204, 346–348
proof of efficiency of, 329–330
reversible work, 326–330
throttling valves for, 219–220
turbines for, 216–218
Steady heat conduction, 401–470
critical radius of insulation, 426–429
cylinders, in, 420–426
finned surfaces for, 429–443
insulation and, 413–414, 426–429,
448–449
multilayers and, 407–411, 422–426
plane walls, in, 402–411
shape factor, 444–449
spheres, in, 420–426
thermal resistance, 403–407, 412–419
Steam point, 29, 31
Stefan–Boltzmann law, 384, 657, 660–661
Strain-gage transducers, pressure
measurement using, 43
Stretching a liquid film, work by, 74
Sublimation, 122
Summation rule for view factors, 674–679
Superheated vapor, 112–113, 118–119,
130–131, 776, 787–788, 820,
830–831
phase change processes of, 112–113,
118–119, 130–131
property diagrams, region of, 118–119
property tables for, 130–131
refrigerant-134a, 787–788, 830–831
water, 776, 820
Superposition rule for view factors,
679–681
Surface drag, 527
Surface roughness, 551–553, 595–596, 807
Colebrook equation for, 595, 596
fluid flow, effect of on, 551–553
Moody chart for, 595–596, 807
relative roughness, 595
turbulent flow and, 595–596
Surface tension, 74
Surfaces, 533, 551–553, 579–582, 587–589,
595–597, 618–629, 683–700. See
also Finned surfaces
black, radiation heat transfer of, 685–687
constant heat flux, 579–580, 587–588
constant temperature, 580–582, 588–589
cross-strings method for infinitely long,
683–685
diffuse gray, radiation heat transfer of,
687–700
heat transfer enhancement of, 597
laminar flow and, 587–589
natural convection over, 618–629
net radiation heat transfer, 688–690
Nusselt number for, 618–619
radiation heat transfer of, 683–700
radiation problem solving methods for,
690–691
radiosity of, 688
Rayleigh number for, 618
shear stress, 533
space resistance, 690
thermal analysis and, 579–580
three-surface enclosures, 693–700
turbulent flow and, 595–597
two-surface enclosures, 691–693
Surroundings of a system, 22
Symmetry rule for view factors, 681–683
Systems, 22–28, 59–60, 78–79. See also
Closed systems; Control 
Volumes
boundary, 22
closed, 22, 60
continuum, 24
control mass, 22
control volumes, 22–23, 60
cycle, 27
energy and, 59–60, 78–79
equilibrium of, 25–28
extensive properties of, 23–24
independent properties of, 26
intensive properties of, 23–24
isolated, 22
open, 22–23
processes of, 26–28
properties of, 23–26
simple compressible, 26
state of, 25–26
stationary, 60, 78–79
surroundings, 22
thermodynamics and, 22–28
T
T ds relations of entropy, 314–315
T-S diagram, 308–310
T-v diagram, 116–118, 120–122
Temperature (T), 5–6, 28–33, 113–116,
139–140, 275–277, 540, 573–574,
580–582, 587–589, 772–773,
784–785, 816–817, 828
absolute, 276
absolute gas scale, 30
average (mean), 573–574
Celsius scale (C), 29–31
compressibility (Z) factor and, 139–140
constant surface, 580–582, 588–589
constant-volume gas thermometer, 30
difference, heat transfer and, 5–6
Fahrenheit scale (F), 29, 31
film, 540
heat engines and, 275–277
ideal-gas scale, 30
International Temperature Scale of 1990
(ITS-90), 31–33
Kelvin scale (K), 29, 31, 276–277
laminar flow, profile for, 587
logarithmic mean difference, 582
Rankine scale (R), 29, 31
reduced, 139–140
saturation, 113–116
tables for, 784–785, 816–817, 828
thermal equilibrium and, 28–29
thermodynamic scales, 29–31, 275–277
zeroth law of thermodynamics, 28–29
Temperature gradient, 6, 375
Thermal analysis, 578–583
constant surface heat flux, 579–580
constant surface temperature, 580–582
internal forced convection and, 578–583
logarithmic mean temperature difference,
582
Thermal boundary layer, 534–535, 575–577
Thermal conductivity, 374–379
Thermal diffusivity, 379–381
Thermal efficiency of heat engines,
255–259
Thermal energy, 62, 66, 253
Thermal equilibrium, 25–26
Thermal radiation, 384, 655–657
Thermal resistance, 403–407, 412–419
combined heat transfer coefficient for,
404
concept of, 403–405
conduction resistance, 403
contact conductance, 413–414
contact resistance, 412–416
convection resistance, 403–404
insulation and, 413–414
metallic surfaces and, 413–415
networks, 405–407, 417–419
overall heat transfer coefficient for, 406
plane walls, 403–407
radiation heat transfer coefficient 
for, 404
radiation resistance, 404
Thermal sciences, 1–18
applications of, 2–3
dimensional homogeneity, 9–10
dimensions for, 6–11
engineering equation solver (EES), 14–15
engineering software packages for, 13–14
heat transfer, 1, 2, 5–6
856
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
859
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
introduction to, 1–18
problem solving techniques, 1, 11–16
significant digits and, 15–16
thermodynamics, 1–4
units of, 6–11
unity conversion ratios, 10–11
Thermodynamics, 1–4, 19–369. See also
Energy; Fluid flow; Heat; Thermal
sciences; Work
Carnot cycle, 271–273, 277–283
Carnot principles, 273–275
classical, 4
closed systems, 22, 157–196, 345
conservation of energy principle, 4
conservation of mass, 200–206
control volumes, 22–23, 60, 199–250,
345–346
energy analysis, 76–92, 157–196,
199–250
energy as, 3–4, 57–108
energy transfer, 68–76, 342–343
enthalpy (h) and, 124–125, 172–180,
181–184
entropy (s) and, 124, 295–369
first law of, 4, 76–84
flowing fluids, 206–232, 326–330,
334–340
heat engines, 254–259, 277–281
heat pumps, 259–265, 281–283
heat transfer (Q), 1–2, 5–6, 62, 66–69, 79
introduction to, 21–55
irreversible processes, 268–270
isentropic processes, 307–308
molecules and, 4
perpetual-motion machines, 265–267
pressure (P), 33–45
property diagrams for, 116–124, 308–310
property tables for, 124–135
pure substances, 109–156, 303–307
refrigerators, 259–265, 281–283
reversible processes, 268–273, 298–299,
326–330
second law of, 4, 251–294
statistical, 4
steady flow and, 203–204, 210–226,
326–330, 334–341
systems, 22–28
temperature (T) and, 28–33, 275–277
thermal science, as a, 1–4
third law of, 311
unsteady flow and, 226–232
work (W), 62, 68–76, 79
zeroth law of, 28–33
Third law of thermodynamics, 311
Throttling valves, steady flow and,
219–220
Time constant for lumped system analysis,
473
Time rate of change, 60
Torr (torr), unit of, 38
Total energy (E), 59, 76–78, 207–208
energy balance and, 78
first law of thermodynamics and, 76–78
flowing fluids, 207–208
system, of a, 59
Total entropy, 298
Transducers, pressure measurement using,
42–45
Transient flow, 531
Transient heat conduction, 471–524
analytical solution for problem of,
483–490
Biot number (Bi) for, 474–475, 480–481
characteristic equation (eigenfunction)
for, 482
characteristic values (eigenvalue) for, 482
cylinders, in, 478–494
exact solution for problem of, 481–483
Fourier number (Fo) for, 480–481, 490
graphical solution for problem of,
485–490
Heisler charts, 485–489
lumped system analysis, 472–478
multidimensional systems, in, 502–510
nondimensionalized one-dimensional
problem, 479–494
one-term approximation for, 484–485,
489–490
plane walls, in, 478–494
semi-infinite solids, in, 494–502
separation of variables for, 481–482
spheres, in, 478–494
Transition from laminar to turbulent flow,
535, 536–537
Transitional flow, 530
Transmissivity (t), 668–670
Triple line, 121
Triple point, 31, 121–122
Tubes, 574, 583–602
annulus, 597
hydraulic diameter of, 574
laminar flow in, 574, 583–593
noncircular, 589, 596
turbulent flow in, 574, 593–602
Turbines, 89, 216–218, 335–337
efficiency, 89
isentropic efficiency of, 335–337
steady flow and, 216–218
Turbulent flow, 530, 535–537, 574,
593–602
annulus, through an, 597
boundary layers of, 536
Colebrook equation for, 595–596
eddies in, 537
entrance region, development of in, 596
external forced convection and, 535–537
heat transfer enhancement, 597
internal forced convection and, 574,
593–602
laminar versus, 530
noncircular tubes, in, 596
Nusselt numbers for, 593–595
Reynolds number, 536–537
surface roughness and, 595–596
transition from laminar, 535–537
tubes, in, 574, 593–602
Turbulent layer, 536
Two-point scales, 29
U
Ultraviolet radiation, 656
Uniform-flow process, 227–228, 531
Uniform heat flux, 545
United States Customary System (USCS),
see English system of units
Units of measurement, 6–11, 29–33, 37–38,
275–278
dimensional homogeneity and, 9–10
English system of, 6–9
General Conference on Weights and
Measures (CGPM), 6–7,
276–277
International System (SI) of, 6–9
International Temperature Scale of 1990
(ITS-90), 31–33
metric, 6
pressure, 33, 37–38
thermodynamic temperature scales,
29–31, 275–278
United States Customary System (USCS)
of, 6
unity conversion ratios, 10–11
Unity conversion ratios, 10–11
Universal gas constant, 135–136
Unsteady flow, 226–232, 531
convection and, 531
energy analysis of, 226–232
mass balance for, 226–227
uniform-flow process for, 227–228
Upstream velocity, 537
Useful pumping power, 89
V
Vacuum cooling, 115–116
Vacuum freezing, 116
Vacuum pressure, 34
Van der Waals equation of state, 142–143
Vapor, 112–113, 118–119, 121, 125–127,
130–131, 137, 781, 825. See also
Liquid–vapor saturation
ideal gas, water vapor as a, 137
property diagram lines and regions of,
118–119
property tables of, 125–127, 130–131
saturated, 112–113, 118–119, 125–127
sublimation, 122
superheated, 112–113, 118, 130–131
water, 137, 781, 825
Index
|
857

Çengel: Introduction to 
Thermodynamics and Heat 
Transfer, Second Edition
Back Matter
Index
860
© The McGraw−Hill 
Companies, 2008
Vapor-compression cycle, 259–260
Vaporization, 114, 125
Velocity, 201, 527–528, 532–534, 537–538,
573–575
approach, 537
average (mean), 201, 573–574
boundary layer region, 533, 575
boundary layer, 532–534
drag and, 537, 538
free-stream, 537
irrotational flow region, 533
no-slip condition and, 527–528
shear stress and, 533
upstream, 537–538
View factor, 671–685
cross-strings method for, 683–685
radiation heat transfer and, 671–673
reciprocity relation, 673–674
summation rule, 674–679
superposition rule, 679–681
symmetry rule, 681–683
Virial equations of state, 143–145
Viscosity, 527, 533–534
boundary layers and, 527, 533–534
dynamic, 533–534
kinematic, 533
no-slip condition and, 527
Viscous flow, 529
Viscous sublayer, 536
Volume (V), 24, 60, 170–171, 174–175,
181–182, 201, 204, 323–324
constant, 170–171, 174–175, 181–182
flow rate, 60, 201, 204
incompressible flow and, 204
isentropic processes of ideal gases and,
323–324
relative specific, 323–324
specific (v), 24, 323–324
specific heats and, 170–171, 174–175,
181–182
Volume expansion coefficient, 613–614
W
Wake from separation flow, 539
Walls, see Plane walls
Waste energy, 257–258
Water, properties of, 722–783, 790,
816–827, 833
Weight (W), 8
Wein’s displacement law, 659
Wet region, 118
Work (W), 62, 68–76, 79, 158–165. 
See also Flow work; Mechanical
work
differentials for, 69
electrical, 71
energy and, 68–76
energy transfer mechanisms, as, 69, 79
mechanical forms of, 72–75 
moving boundary, 158–165
nonmechanical forms of, 75–76
path functions of, 69
per unit time, 68
point functions of, 69
power, 68, 71
sign convention for, 69
Working fluid, 254, 259
Z
Zero-pressure specific heat, 173
Zeroth law of thermodynamics, 28–29
858
|
Introduction to Thermodynamics and Heat Transfer

